Lecture 1:

Okay, folks, let's calm down.

Calm down.

So, uh, we're we typically start at five past and

go to five two.

That's the typical LSS format.

That's really not a lot of time.

So it's 50 minutes today I gave a few extra

minutes to kind of get you guys settled in.

You might not have been here before.

So one thing you might want to be aware of,

there's a kind of theatre kind of mezzanine level here

that you can get to through these doors, um, at

the back, uh, which is directed to those people who

walked in who didn't take any notice of me.

Anyway, um, I said hello, like, uh, okay.

Still not listening.

Um, okay.

Well, you're very welcome.

This is 101 and he h 111.

Okay.

so E-1 11 is the half unit version of 101

and runs till Christmas.

The course is entitled The Internationalisation of Economic Growth.

And my name is Neal.

I'm going to take you through and about half of

this course and today we're going to have an introduction

and then, um, a dance around some uh, uh, topics

that concern before growth began.

So like, one kind of interesting way to think about

the past is to kind of think about any kind

of popular conception of, say, an ancient society and ask

yourself some basic questions about how comfortable was life critically

for the average person in these societies.

So ancient Egypt with the great and mysterious pyramids, um,

you know, they they strike us because they have kind

of ingenuity that is stunning to modern eyes.

And in a way, we can't really still comprehend today.

But if we ask ourselves these questions, and you might

answer these in your mind as we go along, ancient

Egypt, is this a rich society?

Um, on average, do people live long, happy lives here?

And is this an equitable society?

Well, the rich society is kind of hard to kind

of, uh, quantify really, in the sense of it was

rich for its time, but relative to modern economies, it's

extremely poor, meaning that the vast majority of people live

lives that are actually pretty miserable.

Okay.

Um, and is this an equitable society?

Well, the pyramid kind of lands this point that while

the God King pharaohs had maybe a tolerable existence, uh,

all they did, they didn't have modern medicine or modern

kind of technology.

And this was a life where the vast majority of

people live very unequal and grim lives.

So one of the kind of big takeaway lessons from

economic history is that average living standards, okay, length of

life, our experience of mortality, how much food we can

eat, how comfortable we are, how how above like basic

subsistence.

We are like back in ancient Egypt, most humans were

at or below subsistence.

Okay, so hunger was a big part of life.

Children were dying all around you.

There was a role of ignorance.

And, you know, slavery was pervasive.

So these things really affected life experience.

So I'm going to talk about the big picture of

this.

And the big takeaway from today's lecture is that in

the past, human life was nasty, brutish and short okay.

So we're going to talk about where that came from

in a moment.

But let's get some introductions out of the way.

So I'm Neil and I've been here for about a

decade.

So I'm kind of uh, like entering middle age, which

I'm thrilled about.

And it'll happen to you too.

And I couldn't be happier about it.

Um, but also Chris, who's been here a while.

The two of us will be taking care of the

lecturing on one on one this year.

And my background, I'm.

I'm Irish.

If you hadn't worked at all already.

And, um, I'm basically an economic historian, and my research

uses big data to look at these fundamental kind of,

I guess, trivialities of human life, uh, you know, life,

love and death.

Um, and I do a lot of work on inequality

and social mobility over, like, thousands of years.

Um, I can't wait to kind of squeeze as much

of my own research into this as I can get

away with.

And what's really interesting is right now, we live at

a time where all this information is coming online at

a brisk clip from these huge archives that can be

kind of machine read and translated into kind of code

and data, that we can run models and statistical analysis

on, on our laptop.

And one of the exciting kind of takeaways about this

is that it makes, uh, our stylised interpretation of our

history visual.

Okay.

So you can do these nice visualisations of, for example,

something I've been working on recently has been love write

romantic love between spouses.

So what I've got are maybe 100,000 last will and

testament from the English, from their 1250 from London till

about like, say, 1900.

And what you could do is you can read the

full text like, you know, the text you see in

word, but have a computer go through that and look

for a certain words that indicate sentiment.

And then you can look at like how people are

talking about their wives or their husbands.

Like, do they say my dumb so-and-so wife or my

foolish husband?

Well, they actually do.

They're actually quite colourfully expressed.

But you can get a data series on the expression

of love.

All right.

And you might say, well, that's just flowery language and

it doesn't mean anything.

Well, exactly.

But there's kind of clever ways of getting around that.

So that's what I spend my time doing and having

so much fun with that.

But we're going to give you some of the pillars

to understand this field of economic history in this course.

So you're going to get a kind of introduction to

the big takeaways, but also what the core intellectual kind

of giants in the field are what they taught about

comparative economic development, what we think are the causes of

the wealth of nations.

Why are some countries rich and some countries poor?

We're going to do a bit of a dive into

all of this, a nice overview, and if you enjoy

it, you can maybe think about doing a more specialist

course in economic history like my one, two, three, eight

next year, unless you're in general, of course, which is,

you know, good for you.

And so if we think about it, just to emphasise

this point about life being pretty grim for the average

person in the past, if you think about if you

had been born, say, four centuries ago in this country,

half of you would be dead, right?

The hazards of mortality were such that there was huge

mortality within the first year of life, and then quite

heavy mortality up to age five.

Okay, so half you would just be gone, right?

You're you're done.

And you can leave.

Right.

And and then basically for the lucky half that survive

this, okay.

You are the guys that got to experience the nasty,

brutish and short existence of our ancestors.

Okay, so what?

Nasty two brutish and short this of course.

And I'm sure I could see this.

Some people had recognised this.

This was Thomas Hobbes, uh, talking about the condition of

man in his book Leviathan.

Uh, you know, in 1651.

And here we have the second quote, Adam Smith talking

in The Wealth of Nations.

About one half the children born is computed, died before

the age of, of, of adulthood, manhood, whatever.

And, you know, Cantillon, on the French, the children will

come soon to die of starvation with their parents.

Um, and and on the Irish estate of misery, Barbarism

and desolation.

Okay.

And so one thing to kind of like be aware

of is that, like, all of these kind of authors

are becoming aware of the human condition around about the

16th, 17th century in a process that we call the

enlightenment.

And for me, this is a big part of the

behaviour change that creates modern economic growth and lifts us

out of this very poor world in which our ancestors

toiled within.

Okay.

And this world which our ancestors toiled within has actually

been defined, or they kind of principle, kind of forces

have been described by another great thinker around about the

year 1799, and that is the thinker called Thomas Malthus,

who wrote on the principle of population.

Now Malthus is super taboo, super controversial, super brutalist way

of thinking.

So Malthus models of human population were actually borrowed by

Charles Darwin, later, who came upon the Origin of Species

by applying Darwinian thinking to the animal kingdom.

But Malta itself is like such a violently taboo topic.

I think it's been 225 years since the publication of

that first essay, and it's still kind of fizzles with

just, you know, huge kind of emotion and energy, any

kind of mention of Malthus.

And that's why it's so much fun.

Anyway, this Malthusian world is the world of toil and

misery.

And basically what happened in this world was incomes were

kept in a trap, okay?

Incomes would sometimes go up, they would sometimes go down.

But the laws of the multi-agent world meant that incomes

could never sustainably rise.

Okay.

And the reason was a kind of an endogenous feedback

loop, a homeostatic system, in that when incomes went up,

people just had more people.

They got married younger, they rolled around in the hay,

uh, they filled their bellies and they had lots of

more people, you know, uh, by population just expanding.

And that mechanism, which we've lost, you might note in

our modern world, people don't.

Well, they still roll around the hay, but they manage

to do it in a way that doesn't need them

getting pregnant every year.

Right.

So it's it's kind of an interesting kind of transition.

And that's called the demographic transition, the transition of mortality

and fertility to have different relationships to income in our

modern world than in the past.

But the big key takeaway from what I'm trying to

tell you now, I'm getting ahead of myself.

I'm getting too excited, is that our ancestors live in

a world governed by Malthusian forces.

Captain, haematology and track of of just flat incomes over

the long run.

And it was the origin of modern growth during the

Industrial Revolution.

Okay.

That's key idea for today is what took us out

of this Malthusian world and gave us the modern kind

of, uh, Wealth of Nations, which is completely different to

what we had in the past.

Okay.

So this is from Gregory Clark, a great thinker in

economic history, just schematically plotting the idea and just telling

you that basically this is the big event in in

world economic history, even though the world was very poor

in the molten iron Europe, that did not mean that

there weren't some tiny fraction of people who had extraordinary

wealth.

Right?

So we know, you know, aristocrats are pharaohs, kings and

queens.

A Uh, great merchants.

So if you think about the ancient world, you think

of the glories of Venice, you think about, uh, you

know, you've been to kind of Pompeii or Herculaneum as

I was, uh, uh, just at the start of the

month.

And you can see clearly there were great riches concentrated

in some places, these efflorescence, these little bright spots, little

fires of human achievement in life, um, you know, can

be explained by, you know, circumstances.

But the major point for the economic story is, is

that these kind of, um, rises in, say, local income

per capita were never sustained.

They rose and they fell again for crops because of

Malthusian forces.

Civilisations rose, but then fell.

Okay.

There was never a sustained kind of centuries long, incredible

increase of income driven by technology of the kind that

we live in, that, okay, this is historically unique, Okay.

And, um, you know, it could all fade away, and

we're kind of worried about that, you know, uh, the

Four Horsemen of the apocalypse say, you know, war and

so forth.

We live in a world.

Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey.

The door at the back goes upstairs, okay?

Trust me, it doesn't like, lead to, like, a hole

into a dungeon and go up the stairs.

There's seats up here.

Stay still.

Don't trust me.

They think I'm.

I'm kind of setting them up for failure.

Yeah.

Okay, great.

Well done.

Okay.

Uh, okay.

So great riches in the past, great inequality.

And this is something that I think I'm personally very

interested in.

And I'm going to teach you about inequality, uh, later

on.

But if we look across the world today, the major

problem for economics is explaining why some countries are rich

and some countries are poor.

And you see this map of of income.

You know, sub-Saharan Africa is the big issue, right?

But then there's also East Asia, India.

These places are a lot poorer than, say, Western Europe

or the US.

And why is that okay?

Is it like education?

Is it institutions or is there some sort of corruption

issue?

Are there natural resources or disease environments?

We're going to talk about all of this in the

next few weeks.

But what's really interesting is if you look at all

of these places, all this global inequality in a kind

of macro regional level, and we just look at the

trajectory of income per capita within these regions over the

past few centuries.

We get a pattern like this.

Okay.

So there's contemporary global inequality okay.

And I'm just a handful of representative countries plotted here

and this graph from The Economist.

But if we go back to about 1817 hundred and

1600, when these writers, Cantillon, Smith, Mortis were all writing,

what you see is the world is a lot more

equal, right.

So if you like equality this is great right.

It was more equal but it was way poorer.

Right.

So what's the point of that?

Even though the Industrial Revolution, the origin of explosive economic

growth, even though that has, uh, that has kind of

resulted in great inequality and it actually has kind of

increased average incomes a lot.

And also you can see that other places are starting

to catch up.

China in particular, growing at a brisk clip over the

past few decades.

And so this is the kind of takeaway the world

used to be more equal, as I said, but it

was very poor and it was very poor because it

was in this homeostatic equilibrium.

Okay.

Anything that shifted it up or down the system kind

of just brought it back to this flat level of

income that were the forces described by Malthus, which we're

just going to like.

We're not going to go into that.

I teach that another in another places.

But just to be aware of this guy and he

described this system.

Don't need to understand it just yet.

And it was the beast, the kind of of economic

growth unleashed by the industrial revolution.

And that has actually kind of changed the kind of

economic history of humanity.

That's the big moment.

That's the kind of what you call the holy grail

of economic history is trying to explain why did the

Industrial Revolution happen in north western Europe around about 1750

and say, not in China or anywhere else or in

any other part of the world.

And, you know, so so you kind of think about

these other issues as well.

And by way of introduction, like you should be aware

and maybe some of you have been here before, but

London is a fantastically interesting kind of place to be

in, to kind of study economic history, because London has

this very peculiar kind of role to play in British

economic history, in that it's kind of originally a kind

of a Roman colony.

Right.

And you can see kind of some of the old

Roman walls, some of the old Roman temples buried under

places and Spitalfields and so forth, temple and metres and

so forth.

But what happens in London is that London has this

incredibly, you know, explosive population growth in the centuries leading

up to the, say, industrial revolution of the mid-18th century

or so.

And London grows spectacularly, grows faster than Paris, it grows

faster than, uh, you know, uh, like any Italian city.

Um, and it just has this explosive dominance within the

English economy.

And what's really interesting about that is the city grows

and grows, even though you have periodic outbreaks of bubonic

plague, which would kill outright about a quarter of the

population if they didn't get out of the city in

time.

And it's one of those kind of really interesting kind

of aspects and peculiarities and something that the more you,

you look at looks more and more spooky.

So some of my research is actually kind of quantifying

some of these effects.

What's interesting about this area is that this was all

fields, of course, like most of us and London inside

the world.

And this, if you think about this area, has been

Covent Garden, which is like one of the the kind

of the least popular places in London for people who

actually live in London.

It's a touristy area, but actually originally Covent Garden was

like the Covent Garden, and the word got corrupted over

the past while.

So it's just interesting to see how these these streets

are still Holborn, Drury Lane and Saint Martin's Lane.

These, these, these kind of streets are still very much,

um, like I at the street level out there.

But anyway, what's what I'm trying to tell you is

with London, there were dynamics happening within the fusion economy

that seemed to be somehow related to the emergence of

growth.

And that's where economic historians are looking.

They're looking for the kind of predictors, the kind of

little kind of elements within the system that predict this

mysterious economic growth that we try and explain.

And then there's a picture of modern London and just

enjoy taking the view.

Okay.

So we're going to come back to, um, to more

kind of, you know, storytelling, you know, setting the scene

for the course, the key concepts in for today, I've

actually already kind of mentioned most of them, at least

two of them.

And we'll go over them nice and carefully so we

get something from today.

Uh, but most of it's kind of overview before we

go on and let's take a little kind of break

to look at how the course works.

You know, you've got E 101 and EH1 11, so

28 101 an E 211 kind of similar in the

sense that we have our lectures at this time weekly,

and then you're going to have a class or a

seminar.

Use interchangeably mean the same thing here at LSC beginning

next week, and they will follow the lecture will connect

thematically to this, but are kind of more complimentary.

So you might read something that connects to what I

was talking about.

Um, and your seminar leader, Will, will assign a groups

of you to give presentations at the start of class.

And it's, it's really focus on you, uh, talking.

Right.

And you're going to have a nice, you know, uh,

back and forth with your seminar leader who's typically actually

we just had a meeting with them.

They're all PhD students in the Department of Economic History.

Here.

You have formative written work and, you know, involving a

long formative essay.

Formative means that it won't be used to judge you

in your final grade.

Okay.

And it's something called an annotated bibliography.

Now, your seminar leaders will go through what we mean

by this.

But we have made this new policy this year where

you are allowed to use generative AI like GPT and

Co-Pilot to help you work out this complex literature.

But we want you to tell us how you're using

this technology, okay?

And you should think of it again.

Keyword a complement rather than a substitute for thinking.

Right.

So we're actually doing you're kind of our guinea pigs.

We're kind of seeing how this goes and experimenting.

And we can see how the marks go as well

for the course as a whole.

But we're very keen to kind of, you know, we

live in 2024.

We're all using this to kind of facilitate and do

better at work.

That's the idea.

So we want you guys to have access to this

technology as well, because once you get used to using

all these things that are available to you like a

calculator, you know, you can actually, you know, get some

be become stellar scholars as well, and you'll have a

three hour exam on the summer term.

And for each 111, you guys are going to stay

with us till Christmas.

Um, it's the same.

It's the same format as the 101, except you leave

us a Christmas and you have an in-person exam, uh,

in January, and we'll be circulating kind of, um, uh,

mock exams for you to look at in the next

few weeks as well.

So the topics are I'm not going to go too

much about giving you a preview, per se, of the

entire course subject to say that, like, these are these

are just some kind of broad kind of boundaries of

what we're going to talk about.

And also there's an there's a kind of an attempt

here in E 101 to kind of give a global

perspective on what we're talking about.

So it might be kind of surprising to you the

focus on Britain and like that, that is that is

kind of the reason for that is because Britain is

where the Industrial Revolution began, like at least a century,

if not a century and a half before anywhere else.

So before France, before Germany, before the United States, before

China.

It was for some reason the north of England, where

you see this modern growth one and kind of increase

in productivity, perhaps connected to technology, but certainly related to

labour.

Okay.

So we're going to look in the first section on

the emergence of growth, which I grant you will have

a a kind of north east northwest European kind of

bias because that's where it emerged.

But we're going to also expand to look at the

growth experience in other places, look at the kind of

biggest papers in this literature, papers that talk about the

effect of, for example, natural resource endowments, like what are

you have like, you know, sugar crops.

What, what the effect that has on the institutions that

you form later on.

What are the long run effects of kind of indentured

labour and slavery?

For example, we'll look at those as well, but focus

definitely on institutions.

We'll also look at various kind of interesting kind of

periods.

Remember this kind of great diversions, which is the take

off of northwestern Europe and the kind of the rest

of the world still being in this small tution era.

Okay.

We'll look at what's happening in the global economy, 1817

to 1914.

This is a period of relative peace, a time when

people thought that there was no chance of war breaking

out on the eve of the war was it made

no economic sense for Britain and Germany to go to

war.

But yes, here we are.

And then you get this great period of, um, of

natural experiments in economic history, the world wars, the hyper

inflations, the mass unemployment of the 1920s just incredibly dramatic

things that have just basically given us the only kind

of laboratory style experiments for, say, modern macroeconomic policy.

So the massive expansionary policy of the Federal Reserve and

the European Central Bank of the past 10 to 15

years was basically decided because of people's economic historians interpretation

of what happened during the Great Depression.

Okay.

Uh, the Great Depression was 1929, 1930 was thought to

have been very severe because people didn't print enough money.

Okay.

Uh, central banks were too harsh.

And there was a we're going through a period of

inflation.

You know, things cost more.

Well, during this period, things cost less.

And what happens when things cost less?

You stop buying anything because it's just getting cheaper and

cheaper.

So, you know, if I told you like the PlayStation

five Pro is going to be like $700 or whatever

the hell it is, right?

But you know then I told you next week it's

going to be 500.

You say, well, maybe I can wait a couple of

weeks.

You know, with that money in my pocket, I can

do something else because it could be like $100, like

in a month's time, you know?

So, you know, maybe you want it right now and

you're $70.

But on average, people are going to some people are

going to do it.

And that shock to aggregate demand just wreaked havoc and

might have, you know, been responsible for the radicalisation of,

of of, of, of, of European peoples and the Second

World War, etc., you know, anyhow, then we'll look at

growth strategy since 1945, very much like, you know, three,

four and five are going to be Chris is going

to take you through this.

You'll see me later on in the course.

But like, basically I'm going to be reading the guy

at the start and then we'll look at some consequences

of growth since 1945.

So your classes, how many of you have seen Moodle?

Okay.

Good, good.

You're on top of things.

So um Moodle kind of gives you all the resources

that you need to hop right?

Each week there's topics like today's the introduction and these,

uh, these kind of key concepts, if you will.

Um, you're going to see your readings.

Okay.

And your seminar leader will, will take you through how

to approach that.

And it's a good idea to kind of like read

ahead a little bit.

You're going to get a lot more out of it,

but you're going to have the lecture and maybe some

reading going in, and then you can really get the

most out of what is going to be a very

short period of time.

50 minutes.

Um, what what do you think is kind of interesting

to kind of like tell you about is that when

I was in your position, I found reading academic papers

to be actually a little bit challenging, because they're usually

written in a style that is not, uh, friendly, let's

put it like that, and tends to be targeting kind

of what these academics are trying to do, which is

published in elite academic journals.

And the people who decide they get in there are

their colleagues and editors.

And often the style of writing is very heavy, very

jargon fuelled and very dense and full of clauses, which

is not how you're supposed to write, write, and you're

supposed to keep things simple, like Hemingway.

Right?

And so what I find is a good idea is

to kind of come up with a system for basically

trying to skim papers initially, like doing a kind of

a survey of the field.

Right?

You know, like you're Napoleon on the battlefield and you're

just looking at the horizon and seeing where everything is,

instead of just diving into the paper and then getting

your feet immediately stuck in the mud.

Okay.

And I think, like one thing is looking at the

abstract, typically about 100 words, then looking at the visual

elements like the figures and tables, the introduction and conclusion

you should really take in.

Often some of the papers that are assigned have very

detailed econometrics or theoretical components.

You should really be skipping those.

They are not for you, and they're often not for

anyone.

They're often very tacked on, tangential and tangential, particularly empirical

papers that have a complex model at touch.

Just try and distil the intuition, right?

Remember that economists, economic historians at the highest level talk

to each other in research seminars and papers essentially boil

down to stories.

Humans communicate through narratives and stories.

So try and look at a paper and see what

is the story of this paper?

What's the surprise?

Who's the kind of ghost from the past?

Where are these different elements?

And that's just just that's just like going with how

our brains work.

Okay.

And there are equations, you know, again, some of you

are going to be more quantitative than others.

Focus on the intuition, okay.

But at this level it's really about just distilling What's

the takeaway?

And hopefully that can be a skill that you can

kind of take on to other, other places as well.

You should be aware, um, you know, our lectures, I'm

always tweaking the slides up until the last minute, but

we have last year's slides, which are going to be

very predictive of this year's slides, unless there might be

1 or 2 new lectures, particularly for inequality.

Uh, all lectures are recorded, and this is all automated.

That's what that red light means.

And that just goes up on Moodle.

There's a link and you can kind of find it.

Okay.

Um, and that can be useful.

One thing I haven't put on the slides, but you

should be aware of, I have my office hour and

all your seminar leaders will have office hours.

So my office hours are going to be half 3

to 5 today every week.

And you can book them on Student Hub.

And they're usually 50 minute slots.

And if you want, you can come individually or you

can come as a group as well.

If you wanted to go over any aspect of the

lecture or anything connected to economic history.

That's what the Office hour is for.

Okay.

So back to some kind of more intellectual fare for

your perusal.

So we already talked about this, but I wanted to

just read, recenter ourselves back to back where we need

to be and where we need to be is thinking

about the importance of economic growth.

Okay.

And we've solved that, like basically for most of human

history, for most of the species, Homo sapiens history, we

lived in a world where you didn't get growth, sustained

economic growth.

Okay.

What does that mean?

Okay.

And then we saw that we had this industrial revolution,

which was a big deal, which also led to this

great Okay, but what do we mean by economic growth?

Okay, well, to understand what economic growth is, okay.

What we typically do is measure the size of an

economy, okay.

And the size of the economy is typically calculated as

GDP.

Okay.

How many of you have heard of GDP okay.

So it's thrown around.

You're coming to LSC.

You've seen this GDP is gross domestic product okay.

And so you know I used to teach econ 101.

And you know here's the definition a monetary measure of

the market value of all the final goods and services

produced in a specific time period by a country or

country.

So we're thinking about a country.

So for the US you make a you make a

car, okay.

You make a Tesla car or a Ford car.

That's that's income okay.

And and what determines income, which is why national income

is this kind of production function of different factors.

Okay.

So the little f and the brackets that is some

sort of function, some sort of transformation.

Okay.

And the things that really matter for the size and

the economy are going to be population, which we're going

to call L or labour force or K the capital

stock capital okay.

Are things like buildings.

Machinery can also refer to wealth money in the bank.

Gold H is human capital.

That's the kind of wealth or the knowledge that we

embody in or in our mind.

So you might know how to make a car or

a semiconductor or, um, you might have other skills, um,

entrepreneurial, etc..

And n is natural resources.

Look, they're all within this function.

But what you have is a special role for the

factor.

A what is a.

Technology okay.

Technology is really key okay.

Because what you get with technology is that it multiplies

the production function, and what you get with the origin

of growth is huge increases in technology.

So the technology of the Industrial revolution were typically things

like the spinning Jenny.

That meant spinning cotton was more efficient.

Okay.

You also got weaving and you still got the substitution

of, of animal, uh, and animal power for, for human

power, uh, or inanimate power for human power, like, say,

a cotton mill beside a flowing river with a wheel

or burning coal.

Okay.

These were all technological developments.

Okay.

So why did the Industrial Revolution happen?

Because people invented technology that enabled it to happen.

Now the smart people will say that's that's a stupid

thing to say, because where did the technology come from?

It's just a process of, well, what's behind me?

Like it's just an infinite regression where the technology come

from.

And that's kind of the puzzle because we don't really

fully kind of understand it, but we're going to talk

about it a bit in this course.

So economic growth is where this GDP is rising right.

It's just sustained rising incomes okay.

And typically we measure it by GDP.

But for economic history we often proxy it by other

other means okay.

We might proxy it by heights because we might not

have good income data.

We might not have good national accounts data for like

ancient Greece or ancient Rome.

But you can dig up skeletons.

And just by looking at a short section of the

thighbone, you can see how tall people were.

And we think in a rich world, people are going

to be even taller.

When people aren't fed well during childbirth, they end up

being a bit smaller.

I want to average this.

You get these kind of rises and falls that seem

to kind of map onto trends in national income.

So income is kind of the best measure that we

have today.

But it determines everything okay.

Determines basically average living standards.

But there's a crucial distinction.

Here's some oh here's here's just some GDPs in the

world today.

The US as you well know, is the world's largest

economy, followed by China, Germany, Japan, India, the UK is

number six.

And but if you take out, uh, if you take

out London, the UK just shoots way down.

The UK is really driven by the by classes economic

power of London.

You'll notice that in these slides I've, I like to

basically link to everything.

So if you're interested in this this is just from

Wikipedia.

But in all the other slides I do try and

link to data and so forth.

So basically um, this these are just kind of growth

rates of GDP.

Okay.

You can see China has been hitting on average about

10% growth, uh, from 1980 to 2010, 30 years of

growing 10% per annum is spectacular.

Right.

And then you can see that this growth is slowing

down.

And and there's lots of kind of political implications to

this.

But there's a distinction when we think of GDP okay.

GDP could grow.

Okay.

Um, because you have say an increase in inputs now

where the inputs were l k, uh, and, and so

forth.

So the classic one is if there's just more people,

there'll be a larger economy.

That's great.

But it's not really what we're interested in.

What we're interested in is intensive growth okay.

And intensive growth will tell us about productivity in that

you're using the same factors.

Uh but back okay.

And that's kind of what technology is giving us.

Enable you to use the same population, natural resources, the

same kind of inputs, but just better.

Okay.

And what you get when you get an increase in

productivity, that's not just the economy getting bigger through population.

That's when you get this modern economic growth and the

modern economic growth.

That's what starts in the Industrial revolution.

That's what the Industrial Revolution is.

Okay.

It's an historical phrase, but we're really thinking about the

origin of modern economic growth.

Again, that's sustained growth in GDP, okay, driven by productivity.

And our best measure of that is just simply to

divide GDP by population.

That's what we're looking for.

So it's GDP per capita.

Per capita means per population okay.

So GDP divided by population.

And once you do that you get very different patterns.

Like first of all GDP China is very large and

it's been growing spectacularly for, for for decades.

But in terms of per person, it's still way behind

Western Europe on the US, which we often forget, but

the numbers are very thin and this just captures GDP

per capita, 18, 20, 28.

And it's still the case that say that East Asia

is still very much catching up with would say, the

West.

So there you see again from our world data.

Fantastic.

Uh, data, uh, collections, uh, from lots of economic historians

who are friends of us in the department here to

calculate these numbers going back.

So one of the ways in which economic growth can

take off is true specialisation.

And so Adam Smith, during the Scottish Enlightenment, 1776, wrote

The Wealth of Nations and Adam Smith and this book

are generally seen as the kind of birth of economics

as a discipline.

So Adam Smith is the kind of grandfather of all

economics.

And in The Wealth of Nations, he kind of he

kind of did a lot of wonderful things, and it's

still a wonderfully written book and well worth your time

if it's surprisingly so, if you actually get a chance

to read it.

There's many volumes, but there's there's a lot of gold

in there, and I'll talk about it in other contexts

and of course, the pulps.

But basically he saw economic growth from specialisation and specialisation

and margin.

You had to get up and do everything for yourself.

If you wanted eggs, you had to go out and,

you know, collect them from the chicken, you had to

make your own bread, you had to sell your own

clothes.

You wanted some fish for dinner.

You you grab your rods, which you ought to make

yourself, and you go down and on a bike you

made yourself to the river, and that's great.

It sounds idyllic.

Uh, but it's a it's a lot poorer because a

lot of our gains in productivity come from specialisation.

People have careers where they specialise in one thing and

get really, really good at it.

And if you can just specialise in that, there turns

out to be gains from trade.

This is David Ricardo.

If you've heard of him, we'll talk perhaps talk about

that later took advantage.

But as an individual level, if people specialise this can

lead to productivity driven growth.

What's interesting about this, this kind of this this is

not the growth that happened during the revolution.

This is very low level growth.

What happened during the Industrial Revolution is a lot more

mysterious, because we've already had specialisation for thousands of years

before the Industrial Revolution and specialisation in the Roman Empire.

But, you know, you don't see this kind of economic

growth.

Okay.

But it's interesting to think about.

Another key concept when we look at these numbers is

the fact that prices are different in different places and

different times, a fact that I'm sure you're very well

aware of.

If you've come from virtually anywhere else to London, you

know, and how ridiculously, comically expensive it is.

And how it's just getting more and more expensive all

at the time I've noticed, right?

So basically we want to compare places over time and

space, but we want to factor out these price differences.

So wages are higher in London but so is the

cost of everything rents and uh, you know, coffees and

all the things that make life worth living costs money.

Right.

And so we have to adjust income by the cost

of living.

And so basically the GDP per capita numbers are all

adjusted by making them expressed in a kind of base

year.

Okay, typically 1990 Gary Chemist dollars.

This is a type of purchasing power party just constructed

to to factor out the effects of price change.

And so basically, if someone in the year 1000, we

went back to 1820 in this chart.

But I'm going to show you data that goes back

to a thousand.

And these are all Basically, uh, at very constant prices.

These are a 2011 prices, but typically they're sometimes given

in 1990 prices.

And you can just compare these over time.

Okay.

Bear in mind the consumption basket that you could buy.

You know, people couldn't buy antibiotics iPhones or electric toothbrushes

in the year 1000.

But you know that's that's a that's a deep problem

that we have with any comparison over time.

How do you factor in new goods and that data

source that I showed you with the Great Divergence?

It's all coming from a data collection that estimates GDP

in the past, called the Madison Data series.

Okay.

So we see a lot of this in E 201

because these are the kind of best GDP estimates collected

in one place.

And you can kind of there's a link here.

You can click on this if you want to kind

of visualise this on the big fan of R.

And you can kind of just read in the data

and just plot.

And this is the actual estimate.

You can see that these are just kind of gases.

That's why it's a flat line.

Then you're getting some sort of real data around here

and this blip.

We'll talk about this later in the course.

Even though it looks like absolutely nothing right now.

You can look at it for all these different macro

regions and and and so forth.

Okay.

So these are there's there's two more concepts to squeeze

in.

And before, before we kind of before we get going.

There's quite a lot actually that let me kind of

talk about it.

We already talked about maltose malt.

This is the guy who defines this period.

Right.

So basically all of this going back as far as

you can tell, is governed by Malthusian forces, a moult.

This was a mine around about the year 1800.

Who defines these forces in kind of, uh, in a

kind of mathematical way.

But he didn't use equations.

He kind of talked about it.

And so his key insight was that as basically people,

Um, you go through time or as societies get richer,

what you get is a population that doesn't grow in

a kind of linear one plus one plus one plus

one way.

It goes from, say, a couple having four children and

each of those children having four children, and each of

those four children having four children, that's an exponential rate

of increase.

Our species, when fertility is unchecked, increases exponentially or geometric.

We're very familiar with these terms because of our experience

of Covid, right.

You know, we know what exponential growth is, right.

And that's what human population is.

If there's no fertility control and there was no fertility

control, and before modern times there was marriage, okay.

And that was the way that was the only way

it happened.

You have monogamy and but once people got married, they

didn't control their fertility.

Okay.

Which is really, I think, quite interesting.

And when you have uncontrolled fertility, you have, um, you

have mass population expansion when incomes rise.

And this led to, um, a world where everyone was

on the brink of subsistence.

And you particularly have these crises whenever a population would

reach the carrying capacity of the economy, and then you

would have plagues and violence, wars.

So this explains all of you in history, uh, wildly

controversial, though a brutalist way of thinking.

And again, this Malthusian trap is a kind of way

of referring to this system which kept humanity in chains,

if you will.

Okay.

So, uh, one of the kind of evidences that people

point to for this is the low grade, low rate

of population growth over most of human history.

Okay.

And there's just some estimates, although these have been very

severely criticised in the literature.

But it's nice to be aware of what these things

look like.

The other concept that you see a lot in economic

history is part dependency.

And this for me is rather unsatisfying explanation.

It doesn't explain anything, but it's generally the idea that

why is why are some countries rich and some countries

poor?

Well, it's because they were rich and poor 50 years

ago that there's just some sort of stickiness to where

people are in the income ranks, something that we can't

explain and that it seems to be inherited.

But this is the phrase so part dependency.

And the idea is that maybe shocks like a plague

or a war could knock a country out of one

path to another path.

And so like, this is the kind of idea, okay.

So there's kind of things building on each other as

well.

Okay.

The final thing that I'm going to talk about, which

relates to like this idea that we've already spoke about

this kind of great divergence of the west northwest of

Europe, the US, the Western offshoots and the rest of

the world.

This is known as a great divergence.

Okay.

And the interesting kind of part of this is kind

of thinking about why this occurred.

Okay.

We saw this graph again at the start of the

lecture, and it's interesting to come back to it.

And one of the big questions that economic historians ask

is why this happened in England and not somewhere else,

and weren't the places that people can't really work out

why it didn't happen is China, and in particularly the

Yangzi Delta was around the anti delta around the year

1600.

Economic development looks pretty good in terms of incomes.

They look comparable to England.

But what happens what's really interesting.

And you can look at this in your own time.

Uh but here's the best kind of GDP per capita

estimates from Steve Roper.

You can click in the source.

But you can see that like basically China is not

too far behind on average.

But you can see that it declines badly going through

this period, such that by 1840 it's the tiny island

of British that imposed their opium, uh, on, on on

the Chinese population.

Uh, defeated the British navy defeat and the Chinese here.

So it's just a remarkable kind of divergence here.

So we don't we're still trying to understand why the

Industrial Revolution was British.

But it really is interesting to kind of think about,

you know, maybe the the kind of flip of that,

like, why wasn't the Industrial revolution Chinese?

We do have answers and we're going to talk about

them as you go through the course.

In the meantime, I like to stick to time, and

I'll mention these things later on in the course.

Uh, but but for now, welcome to the course.

I hope you have a great year.

And, uh.

Yeah.

Have fun.

Thanks very much.

Yeah.

So like he's a very like hard loss like basically

diet and all of it.

So people have a reaction to the.

Application of these laws.

To human society because they feel that it doesn't recognise

individual human agency sufficiently.

So that's that's my answer.

That's sort of how we think.

Of it.

Oh, I have lots of examples.

Yeah, yeah.

Um, well, you know, you can kind of look at

any of these on any of these.

Yeah.

Some people I guess, interpret as being too mechanical.

Which is a good, good, good reason.

Yeah.

You don't believe.

All of.

This is that.

That's exactly right.

So, like, people think there's more.

Yeah.

No, no.

You're fine.

No.

The frustration is that we didn't go into an.

Insufficient detail to have an educated discussion.

We were just talking on a high level.

So when you say what specifically?

It's difficult to answer.

So like.

So I'm sorry.

My.

Point is, there's an orbiter and.

Yes.

Yes.

Yes.

Are you.

So.

Happy to be away.

Somewhere.

Yes.

Lecture 2: 

Okay, folks, let's begin.

Welcome back to the Hong Kong Theatre.

Um.

It's Tuesday, it's 1:00.

It's time for 101.

Uh, this is lecture two of a 20 lecture series.

And today's lecture is on, uh, the Industrial revolution.

Why did it occur first in England?

And the motivation for this is, as we saw last

week, when we look around the world, we see rich

countries and poor countries.

And one of the fundamental questions of all economics is

why are some countries rich and some countries poor?

This was the question that Adam Smith posed in The

Wealth of Nations in 1776 that really, you know, gave

birth to the discipline of economics.

And what's really interesting about this is that since at

least the Second World War, we've we've addressed this question

with intense intellectual and academic focus on lots, billions and

billions of dollars.

Right.

But what's so interesting about this is that we don't

really have great answers for this, and we're going to

explore some of this mystery today by looking at the

origin of growth in England.

This tiny little dot, you can hardly see it on

this world map, as we saw last week, as we

as we kind of look back in time at these

global macro region areas, we find that the world was

a lot more equal in the past, but it was

also a lot poorer.

Okay.

And and the reason why some countries are rich and

some countries are poor are it looks to me like

one first stage.

Uh, as in not very good answer is that differences

in the timing and the takeoff to modern economic growth

are one reason why some countries are rich and poor.

They're just at different stages of development.

Okay.

That's what the whole developmental model assumes.

So we have this stylised picture of world economic history.

And as we talked about last week, we could think

of most of human history, of mankind, of humankind been

in this molecule, in trucks, almost like a kind of

an ecological system where the food supply is basically determining

how many people there are.

And then you see incomes oscillate, rise and fall over

the long run.

The rise of the Roman Empire, that the decline of

the Dark Ages at the early Renaissance, but then rises

and declines.

Nothing happens to the kind of brutalist economic historians I

until you get to around 1750 and you see the

origin of sustained economic growth.

So that observation that nothing happened is such a kind

of, as I said, brutalist statement that just really winds

people up, particularly people who are kind of scholars of

certain periods.

But from this kind of income per capita, remember, income

per capita last week was our measure of economic growth.

That was the key variable.

And if you just plotted here, you got so much

human achievement.

But for the average person, for the average economy, there's

nothing really happening in terms of what we're looking for.

And that is until you get to this big event

in economic history.

Okay, this is the holy grail of, uh, of economic

history, of the discipline and of economics.

It's the industrial revolution.

Okay.

And when we think about the Industrial revolution, what we're

thinking about is not some historical periodisation, but more from

an economist economists perspective, the the transition to sustained economic

growth from Tunisian stagnation.

Okay.

And it's that puzzle why people's behaviour seems to have

changed.

That's what people are trying to explain.

And the greatest prestige in the field, not only of

economic history but of economics, is are those intellectuals who

converge.

You grind narratives for why this happens.

Okay, so smaller intellects might work on smaller issues, you

know, mere mortals.

But then these big guys come along and women to

be with theories about where this came from.

And, and it's very exciting because they're always wrong.

Right.

So but we can learn a lot from these kind

of wrong theories.

So that's what we're going to think about today.

So it's nice to start from a position of honesty.

Like I'm your honest guide to this kind of field.

What caused the industrial revolution.

We don't really know.

Okay.

For me, I have a kind of work in progress.

Um, you know, I'm sure, like, I'll write this book

and, like, people will point and laugh and say how

stupid and how wrong, but, you know, I'm going to

give it a go.

I see behavioural change has been much more central than,

say, modern economists who look at things like institutions and

the rules of the game.

We're going to serve a few theories today, but I'm

going to give you one of the best ones.

And the point is to kind of give you a

kind of a structure of who you're thinking about this

question.

So we're going to cover a few different things today

to give you a little preview.

First off, we're going to talk about some behaviour change

that happens before the Industrial revolution.

And my motivation with this is to kind of get

you thinking that this isn't just this kind of hockey

stick interpretation, that maybe this process is happening to changes

that are happening within the motivation system itself.

So we're going to look at the kind of like

just before this period, like to see what was happening

culturally in this country.

Okay, a little bit.

And then we're going to look at the core centrality

of the Industrial Revolution and our modern age, which is

technology.

Okay.

Technology is changing.

Okay.

Why did the Industrial Revolution should happen, you know.

Oh, because technological change happens.

That allowed it to happen.

And you're like, well, well done.

Give yourself a pat on the back and see the

gold stars.

But like where did the technological change come from?

Right.

That's what we're trying to get at.

What are the fundamental underlying explanations for this.

So we'll cover some technological advance stuff, and then we'll

think about some kind of theories about what caused the

industrial revolution.

And then the big kind of like, you know, stay

tuned for this, the kind of theory that we're going

to, like, we use to kind of anchor our thinking

is the theory of Robert Allen.

And this is a very kind of a really nice

mix of historical narrative, contingent on events such as the

Black Death and colonisation and international trade, the growth of

London, but also some little economic factors in the background

as well.

So I'm going to finish by telling you this, and

then we're going to critique us as well.

So it's going to be like like so much fun

this lecture.

So.

Well for me anyway.

Um, so, you know, in second year I teach a

course called two three eights, which is the, which is

called The Origins of Growth.

And we basically do 20 years on this stuff.

So, you know, we have 50 minutes to kind of

squeeze a lot of stuff in.

So I kind of was looking at the kind of

the, the intellectual violence I'm doing here by just skimming

over a lot of this material.

So I'll kind of like skim over it.

And I think that's what you need to get at

your stage, who will try and kind of highlight what

are the key kind of features.

Because, you know, it's it's important to be realistic.

Like I'd much rather that you took away a few

things that you just take with you from this course

rather than attempt to squeeze in, like, everything, you know.

Um, okay.

So that's that's that's the goal.

You know that's the note will go here.

So the way I kind of think about some of

this behaviour change is that we can look to sources

other than like boring dry numbers.

And one source is like ours okay.

And so.

Well, maybe it's not art.

Maybe they're just like sketches.

But William Hogarth was 1697 to 1760 or so.

And I did check this for this lecture, and I've

forgotten who it is around that.

And he kind of wrote these kind of very kind

of moralising hand stories in picture folders that would be

kind of often serialised and printed and so forth.

And this came from an exhibition that I saw one

time before teaching years ago.

Because I'm so old, I can't even remember what decade

it was.

But it was definitely it was definitely in this century

for sure.

But anyway, I saw this and anaconda is connected with

me because we have this, this, um, this kind of,

this kind of history of, you know, differences in behaviour

by subgroup and economic history.

And often it's it's kind of been referred to as,

say, the Protestant work.

And so when economic historians of Germany look at Catholic

and Protestants, they always see that the Protestants are richer

than the other things being equal.

And then Max Weber, the famous sociologist, thought this was

something to do about.

Well, you know, Catholics believe that if you are just

good, you know, God will forgive you and you'll get

into heaven.

Whereas Protestants have this idea that you've got to kind

of work hard trying to prove the virtue of yourself.

And this is a source maybe, you know, uh, industry

like and so forth.

But even within, you know, Protestant England, there's a lot

of moralising about what the right thing to do is.

So this set of prints is about like two apprentices.

Okay.

Apprenticeship was a big pre-modern institution to kind of translate

knowledge and specific industries.

So you could be an apprentice watchmaker?

My grandfather actually was an apprentice watchmaker who was treated

brutally.

So he left and worked in, you know, aeroplanes or

whatever.

But, you know, but, you know, and we'll talk about

some watchmaking later on.

But here you have like this, this setup between the

idle and the industrious apprentice.

Now, I love to kind of spend the entire lecture

going over each of these, each of these.

But like, basically you'll get the general picture if you

look at some of some highlights.

The industrious apprentice is like, you know, very Christian and

he's and he's and he's singing in church or whatever

the other one is gambling, you know, at the back,

you know, and basically fast forward, it goes on and

on like this, uh, the idle apprentice ends up being

executed, a Tyburn, which is where marble Marvel Arches right

now is just interesting, you know, London.

And then the industrious Prentice becomes the Lord Mayor of

London.

And I show you this because this is an example

of art reflecting what I think is some sort of

moral kind of vision in this society, that idleness is

associated with, um, poverty and moral weakness, uh, and death

and life or death, you know, whereas industriousness, working hard

is associated with rich, rich richness, you know, and virtue,

but also, um, you know, success.

Right.

And so what I tie this in because in economic

history, people have, have kind of speculated that within this

kind of early modern period, before the Industrial Revolution, you

get something called the Industrial revolution where there's no sustained

modern economic growth.

But it looks like people start working longer hours, but

also more intensely in those hours as well.

Okay.

And people have speculated it's this because of imports from

the New World, you know, cocoa powder, uh, pineapples, bananas,

uh, tobacco, you know, rum and exciting things to do

with your free time there.

You can certainly buy.

But it's really interesting.

And so there's all these kind of things happening.

I think it it shows up in some in the

work particularly associated with John Nevis.

And, um, it's just I think for me, what the

kind of takeaway I would focus on is that this

is an example of changing behaviour within this Malthusian system.

And this behaviour change later gives us the industrial revolution

and the technology change.

But it's really interesting to see how these dynamics, uh,

work.

Okay, so that's the industrial revolution.

But when we think about the Industrial revolution, important to

have that distinction in your mind.

We're really thinking historically as an historical term about the

interrelated succession of technological changes.

Okay.

You might immediately start thinking about like, um, the steam

engine, right?

You know, in fact, the steam engine comes around about

1830s at the latest.

So that's coming like, like way deep into the Industrial

revolution.

If we think about the Industrial Revolution as being about

maybe the 1750s, never really a specific the time period

is actually hard to get right, you know, but we

can talk about that as we go forward.

And you can think you can see the emergence of

mechanical devices and substituting human power for both animal and

inanimate power, like, uh, horse, uh, river power, windmills or

coal power, very famously.

And, um, what you can see is that this happens

across the economy as a whole, but it's very famously

happening in textile production.

So the classic kind of goods of the Industrial Revolution

are cotton textiles and, and then also steel as well.

So cotton, textile, steel.

But actually you can see from a lot of scholars

work that it's really happening across the economy.

You see um, improvements in mining.

In fact, the steam engine is first used to pump

out water from mines.

And you see the huge explosion in mining towns.

And you also see famously, of course, um, happening really

in the north of England, the emergency, the emergence, I'm

sorry, of the factory system.

Now we're going to talk in in maybe next week

or the week after, I, I can't recall it, but

Henry Ford and the factory system and the economic history

of the US.

But like this is happening, um, in, in, in the

UK in the, you know, early 18th century.

So to give you some visuals on what this process

looks like.

This is a spinster at the top.

A spinster is someone who spins cotton, okay, raw cotton

into thread, which then can be woven into like a

shirt or cloth.

Uh, for a tailor, um, and a spinster was, um,

often became associated with single women, either women who had

never married or who had who were, uh, bereaved, uh,

widows.

Um, so it became so synonymous with women that, uh,

an unmarried woman was, is, was, was known until very

recently as a spinster, you know, and you probably have

heard that phrase before, but at the bottom is a

spinning Jenny, a very famous invention of the industrial revolution.

And you can see what they've done there.

Right?

You can see that they've just connected in an array,

a bunch of spindles, uh, and a little mechanism such

that the work of one person can now be done

with it.

In a more elaborate machine, it's got to be said,

it's more elaborate machine.

But you can see that basically this is making labour

efficiency or output per worker to to explode.

Okay, so instead of having one spindle okay.

With one spinning wheel you have one spinning wheel with

like, oh I don't know, 40 spindles I'm guessing.

Okay.

Now this is more capital intensive.

Remember what capital is.

Capital is the machinery involved in the production process.

It can also refer to the the money you mobilise

to invest in factories and machinery.

So what you're seeing here is a preview of the

theory we're going to look at later.

What happens during the Industrial Revolution is that workers or

entrepreneurs substitute labour input for capital input, so everything becomes

more capital intensive, both in terms of machinery, um, investment,

but also, um, say energy use.

Okay.

And an example of this is the loom.

The loom weaving is associated with men.

There's a there's a man.

What a what a what a fetching hat.

In the top panel here, uh, looming away.

And then you can see here that basically the substitution

here, this is going to be the, these kind of,

these kind of bands are going to move the kind

of, uh, the weaving machinery around, uh, presumably moved by

some sort of mechanised power source, particularly perhaps in a

mill beside a river, uh, where this can be moved

around.

And all of these kind of events are happening often

within factories that are massively changing the urban landscape.

So I'm sure some of you have been exposed to

the literature of this period, uh, for example, the work

of Charles Dickens, but also appears in Tolkien as well.

Tolkien's much later.

But Tolkien like talking about the scourging of the Shire,

for example.

I guess some of you got that, uh, you know,

if you've read the books, um, and this is kind

of the scorching of the countryside of the north of

England.

You know, what you have are these, um, belching factories

where people, instead of being agricultural labourers, are now kind

of cogs in the machinery of factory production.

Okay.

And this is the world in which, say, Frederick Engels

observed the condition of the working class, and it seemed

quite brutal at the time.

And if you actually think about it, living standards in

this early period were pretty rough.

If we look at like, skeletons of, uh, English people

over this period, it looks as if people actually might

even get a bit shorter as they move to these

towns.

But eventually this kind of productivity, you know, um, it

does start to show up in terms of wages for

the average worker and also the biological standard of living.

But it's it's quite dramatic.

But there's a huge change in the character of, uh,

of of human life over the period of the Industrial

Revolution.

So that's just an overview, a very skimpy overview of

technology.

And when we think about what caused the Industrial revolution,

as I said before, this style of technological change, you

know, explains the industrial revolution.

And I say explains and comes here because it doesn't

really explain anything.

Right.

Because you've got to think about, well, what explains this

technological change.

So the question is what is the fundamental reason for

the timing and location of the world's first industrial revolution?

To give you a sense of how to think about

this, you might ask yourselves, why didn't the Industrial Revolution

happen in ancient Rome?

Okay, some people think it's all about coal.

You know, Britain had a lot of natural resources, a

lot of coal, but that coal had been in the

ground for literally millions of years, but people didn't think

of using it to make the kinds of machines that

become famous for their kind of mid-nineteenth century style industrial

revolution, with steam engines and so forth.

But let's look at a few candidate explanations.

So last week we talked about economic growth, and we

centred our thinking on this idea that, um, what really

kind of separates us from the past and what separates

poor countries from rich countries, by definition, is the presence

of sustained modern economic growth.

Okay.

And I just gave you guys a quick overview of

the production function as taught in econ 101.

Okay.

So in this production function we don't need to understand

it mathematically.

We just need to be aware of this kind of

intuitively.

Okay.

That's all we're talking about here.

And what we're saying here is that income life is

determined by all of these things on the right hand

side of this equation.

So y equals all of this stuff.

Okay.

So what you have here is labour the size the

number of people you have in your economy okay.

Capital okay.

We talked about capital that already.

That's kind of the machinery that you have available to

make goods.

But it's also the money you have at home to,

to invest in such machinery and lime and so forth.

You have a human capital, which is the knowledge embodied

on average in the people in your labour force.

We think that countries that have better education systems, more

human capital for worker, say, like Norway, tend to perform

better than, say, other countries, say, Senegal, which might have

lower human capital per worker because of the educational system

or whatever.

Right.

And then finding that natural resources okay.

So if you have lots of diamonds in your country,

you might get very rich very fast like Angola.

But But by selling them.

But that can also be a curse as well, in

terms of the type of economic growth it generates, not

generally human capital and economic growth, but rather kind of,

um, you know, natural resource led economic growth.

And you can see that that kind of resource curse

kind of condemns, um, countries like, um, you know, that

are very oil rich in the Middle East or like

have huge kind of, uh, commodity explosions such as Angola

to actually get the kind of a type of economic

growth that doesn't need to the kind of education driven

economic growth that we see in other places.

And we'll touch on that as election develops.

So we have all of these things happening and we

can think about this a okay, this technology, okay, as

actually, you know, being a multiplier of everything that's happening,

that's everything in terms of these factors of production.

Okay.

So when we think about it, we can kind of

just think, use this news, this model to kind of

think of it.

Well, where did this growth come from?

One one thing you might immediately start thinking about is,

well, maybe we just worked at actually okay.

If you give people long enough they can solve problems

and work so fast.

So remember we want to understand why England and why

did the Industrial Revolution happen when and where it did

so was science.

Okay?

Like, um, you know, really a leading sector in England

relative to the rest of the world.

And it turns out that it wasn't really so much

the case.

In fact, it was.

France was the world's leader in science.

But it was definitely the case that science in Britain

had an applied character.

And you also see the emergence around the time in

in its revolution of institutions such as the Royal Society

and these little clubs and societies where these inventors are

starting to talk to each other.

We have a okay, which is the kind of the,

you know, the the technological advance, you know, but, you

know, we can have a very small number of people

come up with, you know, new AI models or mobile

phones that we put in our pocket that have those

AI models running on them.

Very few of us could actually take that apart and

understand how it works, but we can all use them.

Okay.

So we have like an A, which is really the

frontier of technology production.

But hey, is the average level our average ability to,

to, to kind of pull out our phone, to budget,

to message our friends to, to to organise our calendar.

Okay.

And all of these things matter for getting stuff done.

What's interesting about it, perhaps it was that average human

capital which allowed England to have the Industrial Revolution.

So it's worth looking at the history of education.

Okay, so here's a question for you.

Do you want to guess what year?

When was compulsory schooling introduced in England?

Does anybody want to guess a year?

1912.

Okay.

Anybody else?

1890.

1890.

Okay.

Anybody else?

1960s.

1960s.

Okay.

Okay.

Um.

Yes.

Okay.

Yeah.

Okay.

So basically, it's really around the 1870s, 1880s.

And remember, this is like I've actually worked a lot

on this.

These are the Forester Education acts.

And these start bringing in minimum minimum ages that a

child can leave school.

It turns out that like a lot of parents were

like investing in their child's education, like aristocrats would get

educated with private tutors and so forth.

But basically, it's owning the 1870s and the 1880s that

you get an Act of Parliament that says you have

to stay in school till you're 12.

right.

And so I've been looking at that like as a

kind of nice natural experiment in terms of what the

effects of education are in terms of earning more money

or what how it determines your marriage patterns or your

fertility.

But the point for us today is that this happens

way after the Industrial revolution, right?

So these education changes are possible because of the income

growth during the Industrial Revolution.

The bad capitalist industrial revolution allows us to have a

society rich enough that can educate our children to 12

and then later 13, then later 14.

And now it's like 17, 18.

Okay.

So it just really nice to get that clear kind

of takeaway.

And, you know, the big scholar in this area on

kind of and on kind of science and human capital

and technological change is a guy called Joe McGuire who

will see later in the lecture.

And he said if England led the rest of the

world in the Industrial Revolution, it was despite not because

of her formal education system.

So there's all these these kind of things to be

aware of.

And the takeaway is that none of them explain why

the Industrial Revolution was British.

Finally, there's the kind of patent system you could think

that like, well, maybe England had a really strong kind

of incentive structure for an invention.

So if I'm like the, the 18th century, um, you

know, um, you know, Steve Jobs, um, coming up with

all these kind of nice innovations or at least like

I'm leading a team and someone else comes up with

that and I'm able to market it, which is totally

legitimate, but it's basically you can then basically sell that

and your your idea is protected by monopoly monopoly rights.

Okay.

It could be that mechanism.

When it turns out that our friend Greg Clark here

looked at some of those famous inventors of the Industrial

revolution.

So remember we saw the flying shuttle and the spinning

jet.

Oh, sorry.

We saw we saw the power loom and then we

saw the spinning Jenny.

So James Hargreaves was responsible for the spinning Jenny.

You remember that was where all the spindles were connected

together in this array, replacing the spinster.

And so his experience was he had his patent denied

for that famous invention.

Perhaps for me, one of the most famous inventions of

the industrial Revolution happening right at the start in 1769.

He was forced to flee by machine breakers in 1768.

Remember, there was huge social reactions to this invention because

people were being displaced.

Like what will happen with AI?

And that'll be fun to see who loses their job

could be me, you know that.

That'll be fun for me and my family.

And then.

So James Hawkins dies in a workhouse in 1777.

In poverty, obviously.

Was you go to a workhouse if you if you're

too poor to feed yourself.

Um, the power loom guy.

Um, I can't remember his name, Reverend Edmund.

Anyway.

Uh, his patent was worthless and factory burnt down.

Okay, so the point is, is that all of these

things that we should think should be operating through a

if we had a kind of glib, superficial interpretation of

this offence, uh, all the historical evidence says no, no,

no, forcing us to kind of step back and think

again about what's happening during this period.

So we're skipping over a lot, but the next kind

of thing to go to now that like science education

and the patent system don't explain anything is a deeper

explanation.

And this explanation is the explanation most favoured by contemporary

economists.

Okay.

So um, this is the explanation of people like Darren

Margolin I'm James Robinson.

And you know people talk about these guys being noble

adjacent.

And Darren was certainly, you know, on track for a

Nobel.

Uh, apart from the terrible recent writings on AI who

seems to be really getting it all wrong.

But anyway.

But what's interesting here is that they see a very

simple dichotomy or distinction between rich countries and poor countries.

They note that rich countries tend to have what they

call inclusive institutions, okay?

And inclusive institutions are these rules of society that are

basically, um, you know, designed to maximise the prosperity of

all.

So things like democracy or like compulsory education systems, uh,

legal systems that treat everybody equally.

Okay, and freedom of labour, you know, uh, abolition of

slavery.

Okay.

And so these inclusive institutions tend to be, uh, tend

to exist in rich countries, in poorer countries.

You tend to get a different style of institutions, extractive

institutions.

And these are basically rules of society designed to extract

wealth and income from one subset of society to another.

Okay.

So it might be some ruling aristocratic class, might tax

farmers, okay, for the right to be on their ancestral

lands.

And and it could be the case that the legal

system prioritises some people over others.

Okay.

So if you're from a certain family and you have

a speeding ticket, maybe you don't pay the fine or

you're allowed to get away with it.

But in contemporary Russia, for example, um, so you have

an inconsistent legal framework.

And this just echoes to everything in society.

So how can you have prosperous economic growth if the

whole system is just corrupt from the bottom to the

top of society?

So these extractive institutions are actually, in human history, far

more common than the inclusive institutions that we live in

today.

Or if you think we live in today.

So it's this distinction that they that they really like

hammer on.

So one of the kind of one of the kind

of key kind of elements to be aware of here

is that they try and prove this with real world

historical data.

Okay.

And so they're very famous for very clever experiments that

are very kind of smart, where they observe like, you

know, um, different things going on.

We'll look at some of their papers about colonialism later

in the course.

Um, but you know, an example that they point to

at that happens, they think like organically as a natural

experiment is what happens between North and South Korea in

the 20th century.

So their argument is here that you've got basically peninsula

people who are very similar.

Okay, that's more or less than the same place.

And up from the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s had very similar

GDP per capita.

Okay.

GDP per capita is our measure of progress.

National income per capita, our measure of economic growth.

But then you get this institutional divergence, okay.

Following the Korean Korean War where the the North becomes

insular and basically has a set of institutions and really

centred around one family.

Okay.

And then you have South Korea, which also which has

much more inclusive institutions.

So this is the argument.

And the argument is so profound that you can see

this if you were like an alien, like, um, you

know, like in a space station orbiting the Earth.

And it was dark.

You could see this from space, but you can see

that there's some light around Pyongyang.

But basically, South Korea as a measure of development, just

street lights.

Um, is is is is way ahead, as you see,

with the GDP per capita numbers, uh, of of of

uh, North Korea.

Now, I would be critical of this because there's so

many other things going on.

And as you should be to one North Korea like

turned away from international trade to a far greater extent

than South Korea.

And also South Korea invested a lot in its educational

sector as well.

So it could be just those two things.

But it's a kind of a it's just such a

powerful observation.

It has to be in the back of our mind

as we think about this big question of of where,

of where growth comes from.

So what are some of you and Robin said, a

lot of other seats is that you see this in

the world today, and you could look at the comparison

and say, just north of the US Mexican border relative

to just south.

If you look at the towns like Laredo and the

wave of Laredo, you can see just astonishing differences just

with these different institutions, it is claimed.

And they see this cross sectional difference in the world

today also played out over time.

So basically over time in, say, England, you get a

gradual destruction of these extracted institutions and emergence of inclusive

institutions.

And they have lots of papers on the mechanisms.

They think that actually international trade and the rise of

a merchant class is actually kind of leading people to

lobby for this kind of change.

And people have looked at that in detail.

But basically you have like all these things happening, Magna

Carta, the agreement between King John and his barons to

limit his power, the, the, the what happened during the

Civil War and then in the mid-17th century, and also

the Glorious Revolution of, uh, and the ascension of William

of Orange in 1688.

Um, and these are all things you can talk about,

but basically all of these things result in more checks

on the monarch's power.

And the idea is that this creates the right kind

of framework, the right kind of institutions that later give

rise to explosive and increasing modern economic growth.

Again, I'm sceptical, but it's good to be kind of

aware of this.

What's interesting, like as a kind of matter of just

being kind of sceptical of this on this back to

like, uh, Greg Clark, Greg Clark's critique of the institutional

viewpoint is that all of these if institutions matter for

the for the economy, for that GDP per capita, it's

because they structure incentives.

Okay.

And if you look at something like the Washington Consensus,

the Washington consensus is kind of this illusion to this

this package of policy measures the International Monetary Fund recommends

to poor countries.

And they say you need to do all of these

things to get your institutions correct.

So things like you have to have stable money, no

more printing money to pay your bills, okay.

And low tax rates and low public debt, uh, security,

free markets.

So Clark argues that all of these things were actually

present in the medieval world.

And if you take this seriously.

So this this provides a nice ballast to our, you

know, the, the institutional narrative.

Um, and these were all present centuries before the Industrial

Revolution.

So it's it's frustrating, as you can tell.

Uh, I could talk about this for a long time.

And, and the question is, what fundamentally caused the Industrial

Revolution?

institutions.

And we talked about that just now.

Geography.

We didn't talk about it, but we will talk about

it perhaps next week.

Uh, human capital.

We talked about a little bit demographics and genetics.

We didn't talk about that at all.

But all these things might determine technology terms, industrial evolution

and this problems with every potential explanation.

Maybe the truth is some mix.

Well, what can explain the timing and the place in

the industrial revolution?

Let's finish by looking at closely at one recent theory.

And this is the theory of Bob Allen.

And this theory is nice because it weaves together an

historical narrative, as I said before, um, with some economic

interpretation.

So what it does is it looks at the historical

position of the island of England.

And what happens in, um, in England is that England

has an early modern, like you're actually talking about, like

late medieval, like you're talking about 1200s.

1300s.

For some reason, England is a place where wool is

exported.

There's a comparative advantage in wool, you know, wool growing

and sheep's sheared, packed into a ship, sold for profit.

Somewhere else.

There just sits.

That's the first industry before any like, you know, cotton

textile or steel wool textiles.

Okay.

And what happens is in that context, you have the

Black Death.

And I told you the Black Death is happening around

the mid 14th century kills about 50% of Europe's population.

And what happens is, is that you get all these

social and economic facts of that.

But what we really care for in this theory is

what effect does it have on the sheep?

Okay.

So what it meant was there were more sheep on

better land, essentially because so many people died, it freed

up land for sheep to spread and multiply.

So English sheep actually grew fat and had a great

coat.

And this really accelerated Britain's pre-existing comparative advantage in the

export of wool.

Okay, so basically this early lead in wool textiles and

was basically further kind of buttressed by very successful English

colonisation.

Okay.

Following the conquest, the Elizabethan conquest of Ireland, Britain goes

on to establish colonies over the world.

And you can think about all the kind of contemporary

debates about colonial extraction in this theory.

How it operates is that these were effective markets for

English wool exports.

Okay.

And these wool exports or kind of skip over it

actually stimulated this explosive growth of London.

So you get like these export cities in particular London

which was the main export port Work, work.

So London grows in this kind of Malthusian economy that

has this export good, where the black debt is enabled,

its comparative advantage to be underlined.

And you see this.

And so basically you have these, these explosive growth.

And in this world and this is just a measure

of population size.

And I think I emphasised that last week.

I'm pretty sure I did that with you guys.

Almost sure.

I almost bet my life on this.

But you know, I'm not a gambling man.

And so basically, you know, this kind of sees this

explosive population growth of this city and it's growing fast

because these world exporters are able to pay high wages

to, um, to, uh, to workers coming into the city

such that the city which still periodically experiences the plague

is still able to grow.

Okay.

So basically the the kind of London grows and grows

and grows because of the successful world trade, buttressed by

colonisation all the rest of it.

But it's only able to grow so much because there's

a very cheap supply of energy in England, and that's

coal.

Okay.

London would not have been able to grow as substantially

as it did without the availability of coal.

Remember, coal is going to warm you on cold winter

days.

This is your first winter in London.

You're going to find it all about it.

Although the winters are so mild relative to, say, the

northeast of the US.

But anyway, you still need still it still gets nippy.

And you know, it's nice to to eat food and

drink hot tea as well.

Um, and so here is a, here's a very satisfying

picture of a piece of coal.

So just breathe that in for a moment.

And, and you know what's interesting here is that this

theory just shows these dynamics happening in the economy.

You can see here just the price of coal from

1400 to 1800, and the graph is horrible.

You know, I'm taking it from Bob Dylan, famous for

like, horrible rock.

But here you can see that this is just flat,

whereas the price of wood is exploding.

So that would have if wood was the only available

energy source, that would have limited the growth of London.

But the availability of coal shipped in from the north

on ships from Newcastle allowed the city to keep growing.

Okay.

And it means that like coal, uh, you know, the

availability of water to anywhere else, it was much cheaper.

Okay.

So cheap coal was a really big characteristic of this

period around about, say, from 1600.

It's cheap and it was available when you compare it

to other places.

So what's happening is that you have London growing, exporting

wool and then later all sorts of other goods to

colonies, to the United States, to all the whole world.

And the growth of women has been facilitated by cheap

colour.

But what's happening, though, is that this can only exist

because employers and entrepreneurs trying to make money in London

have to pay those high wages to get people to

come to London.

Remember, you've got to compensate them for the plague, for

one thing.

And also the fact that life's pretty expensive in London,

right?

It's not going to happen on this.

Workers get high wages, okay?

And you can actually see it like I'm going to

skip over this.

This is some detail on how Babylon calculates it.

And again it's a horrible graph.

But basically you see right at the top let's pick

out London and you see that London's wages also Amsterdam.

But let's just focus on London right now.

London's wages are the highest in the world when you

compare them.

Like when you convert the prices, when you do purchasing

power parity, You convert them into how much food they

buy.

You know how many grams of silver they are.

Basically, they're the highest in the world, okay?

And they're they're increasing over this early period of this

revolution.

So you've got these high wages.

Babylon shows you their home.

Okay.

We know we've got cheap code.

Babylon shows you there's cheap cult.

Okay.

And what's interesting is, is that this, you know, stimulates

agriculture.

That's a whole kind of drama.

But we can just.

You can take my word for it and look for

it.

But the takeaway is.

High wages, cheap energy, give you directed technological change.

You want to make money in London.

Do you want to employ 50 people to do a

task, or do you want to maybe spend a bit

of money, get a machine and hire five people to

do that task?

You want to economise on wages, okay.

And then invest in a copper.

Okay.

So you have this historical contingency of wool exports, the

Black Death, the growth of London colonisation.

You have and it gives you these markets.

Then you also have, um, the the existence of coal,

all this cheap energy.

So you have this dynamic where you have high wages,

cheap energy, thus incentivising the type of labour saving invention

that we were looking at that ah, characterises the period

of industrial revolution.

Remember the spinster.

Okay.

That means you need less spinsters to spin cotton, right?

It's not good for the spinsters.

They're unemployed.

They've got to find something else to do.

But it generally gives us modern economic growth.

Okay.

So really interesting dynamics highlighted by okay.

And an example of this is to look at, say,

the English joke where you're basically baking pots.

Okay, this is an English kiln.

It's kind of like a kind of chimney.

And you've got all this coal, okay.

And you've got loads of coal called cheap, and you

can bake these pots to be kind of, you know,

so they're secure, you know, and the process and the

energy just flows out the chimney.

If you look at kilns from, say, China, first of

all, no real coal charcoal sticks.

But energy is scarce.

So the energy is recycled through the chambers of this

specific type of kiln.

And this is kind of produced this from Bob Allen's

book.

You know, it's kind of showing you that these relative

factor prices, in this case energy are really mattering for

the type of local solutions you get to economic problems.

So the Industrial revolution is just a specific local response

to factor price wages and copper.

Okay.

So yeah, there it is summarised for you.

And there's a nice blog post.

I think there's lots of kind of, um, critiques here.

I'm just going to give you a little preview and

just to kind of get you thinking about it, because

that's where the most fun is.

You know, first of all, this is a really great

theory.

This is really fantastic.

And something that's probably one of the the kind of

the most nuanced developed theories that you will see of

the Industrial revolution, um, ever, you know, in human, human

history.

So a great achievement.

But there's some really exciting kind of clever critiques of

it that are out there.

And one of them is, um, you know, the idea

that, like, wages are high, you know, not just because,

um, people need to be compensated or plague or whatever,

but in economics, we think wages are high because productivity

is hot.

So what's going on with the English worker?

And if you actually look at informed contemporaries at the

time of the Industrial Revolution, you have Arthur Young and

Thomas Malthus, and like they're kind of noting that wages

are higher in England, but that's because English labour is

more efficient.

Okay, we might think back to the colour moralising of

the Hogarth sketches.

Right.

And what that implies.

So it turns out for me there's this kind of

mysterious behaviour change that's explaining all of this, though we've

kind of omitted.

There's like a ghost in the in the machine here,

which people are kind of having a go at, but

I don't think we've quite got.

And so, so, so as I said, I'm kind of

working on this question myself.

So I'll leave this with you for now.

And I'll just finish on the idea that, you know,

we see kind of, um, you know, these are the

kind of, uh, you know, basically the prices of watches

and these come from like, criminal reports from this area,

from around about Holborn.

So some petty aristocrats will be punched in the face

and have a silver watch stolen, and then they will

catch the guy and there'll be a court case.

So some clever people took the information on how much

what the characteristics of the watch were.

Or was it silver, what was the quality of the

movement, who made it?

And they looked at watch prices from 1710 to 1800,

even before 2010.

And these were able to find that like watches of

the same quality were becoming cheaper.

Okay.

And what is why is that?

It's because of labour becoming more productive.

Okay.

And this Bob Allen's kind of theory kind of explain

this.

Not really.

Not really.

Because you don't see those type of substitutions.

And that happened in this industry.

And there's lots of people have studied the watch industry.

So you can look at some industry specific effects.

And you can also see other behavioural changes like a

favourite.

One of mine is the decline of violence over the

long run.

Murder.

Okay, surprisingly, less and less people are getting murdered.

Um, and I think that illustrates the changing behavioural capacity

of people, which is changing.

In addition to these forces identified by Alan.

And all of this brings us back to this picture,

which we started with.

And we've got some kind of frameworks to think about

it, but definitely it's something that I hope you enjoy

debating in your class this week.

Okay.

For now, thank you very much and see you next

week.

Thank you very much.

Sorry.

I think next week.

Because like so.

Yeah.

Why did you do that?

Lecture 3:

Okay, folks, uh.

Welcome back.

This is the third lecture of 101, and there's, like,

so much to talk about today.

So what we're going to do today is look at

what are the kind of primary explanations for why some

countries are rich and other countries are poor.

Do you remember last week we looked at the origins

of modern economic growth in Britain?

Okay.

And we looked at the Allen theory, which explain the

connected factor prices and specific historical contingencies to the origin

of sustained economic growth that gives us the modern world

we live in today.

But when we look across the world, we feel we

can see that some places have not experienced the kind

of economic growth that others have.

So Western Europe, the United States, Canada, Australia, um, and

now, you know, that kind of frontier level of economic,

uh, living standards is, uh, very equally spread across the

globe in particular, say, sub-Saharan Africa, but also countries in,

say, Latin America and South and Southeast Asia seem to

lag behind, even though in the past 20 years, places

like China and India have started to grow very rapidly,

even on a per capita basis, they're quite a long

way behind the richest countries in the world.

And we'll try and kind of give you an overview

of, uh, of why that is the case or why

we think that is the case.

Okay.

We know that if we look back in time, everywhere

was more equal, but there were also a lot poorer.

Okay.

Uh, but it's really this gap between the kind of

these kind of macro regions and sub-Saharan Africa is not

here, but it's going to be way at the bottom.

There's a problem generating economic growth there.

How can we explain that?

So as I said, you know, uh, we're going to

look across the world and see what the big theories

are that explain what these global, uh, differentials.

Okay.

So what we're going to start off with is, uh,

you know, a broad kind of brush painting of geographic

fundamentals and also the disease climate and maybe both of

those factors imposing very strict and barriers to what's possible.

Okay.

Um, and then we're going to look at the Americas,

um, and India separately to look at how those, the

experience in those continents highlights contemporary theories of international economic

development.

Okay.

So, um, again, these this is the kind of big

question of all economics.

Why are some countries rich and some countries poor?

Um, you might have seen the Nobel Prize was awarded

yesterday to, uh, a 300 of economists, um, who work

on historical questions.

on that work will feature prominently today, so it's been

fun to follow the inevitable kind of, uh, like, uh,

pointed critique of that award from other economic historians.

That's been fun.

Anyway, so we'll we'll mention that a lot today.

We'll get to it.

But before we get there, let's think about some of

the basic fundamentals of generating wealth.

Okay.

So presumably to kind of have an economy that's thriving

initially you need to have some sort of productive agricultural

sector.

Remember in poor countries agriculture farming is the majority of

the economy like 7080 plus percent okay.

Very poor economies.

They're generally agricultural.

Okay.

So maybe there are kind of issues that mean that

some countries can't have productive agriculture because they're very hilly

or they're deserts or they're, uh, primarily covered by glaciers,

say, in the case of Antarctica.

And then also, you can think about hard geographic features

that determine the possibilities for prey.

Okay.

And one of them might be the existence of a

navigable river network, where you can kind of put a

load of stuff on a boat and move it from

A to B before you've even invented the wheel, and

also things like basic, basic kind of safety.

So some of these places, you know, are just not

going to work on a global scale.

So geography absolutely matters, right?

You know, um, and this kind of basic level, you

know, so the Sahara desert, like I'll show you a

map of the world in a moment and you'll see

that, you know, uh, the climatic limits to any agriculture

there or to human life are going to preclude anything

other than just bare bones survival.

Okay?

You're going to find in certain marginal climates where, you

know, say, uh, the US, uh, live, uh, on these

kind of frozen tundras in the northern Canadian plains or

the north of Siberia.

There's going to be very little kind of, you know,

thriving human life, uh, there as some places are just

too small.

Um, and, uh, large parts of Africa, for example, like

one of the kind of features of that continent is

the lack of, uh, you know, deep navigable river networks.

Also, you have, um, I was teaching, um, geography yesterday,

uh, economic geography for the, for the second years.

And we were talking about, um, you know, the kind

of bio geography of the globe, the fact that Europe

is home to what are eventually, you know, are domesticated

animal species like pigs, chickens, cows, all their ancient ancestors.

Their ancestral homeland is the Eurasian continent, whereas wild animals

in Africa tend to be rhinos, hippos.

They tend to be grumpy.

They don't tend to follow human leadership very well, and

they tend to be very dangerous to humans, and particularly

elephants, surprisingly enough.

Um, and Europe just had this kind of good luck,

this good biogeographic look.

So we can think about geographic look in determining a

lot of this.

And this is very obvious when you look at like

classifications of climate.

Okay.

And we're thinking about this for, you know, very kind

of poor economies, economies in this Malthusian era that we

talked about in lecture one and what's going and what

kind of climates are going to give us the kind

of thriving agriculture that gives us a chance to maybe

have specialisation, like Adam Smith talked about and maybe give

rise to civilisation.

So you're going to see that, say, in the Sahara,

the north of Africa, there you see that there's just

very hard limits to, um, to agriculture, as in the

Arabian Peninsula and also the interior of Australia.

So.

So these things absolutely matter.

And you can just see there's just more data I've

just purged from the literature.

And you can see basically how the climate maps onto

suitability for cultivation.

You can see there are big red spots which is

good on the bottom left graph there.

And in your in your Asia.

And the rest of the world has has capability for

productive agriculture, particularly the the Pampas region in Latin America,

you see, jumps out at you.

But Eurasia, you know, relative to, to to everywhere else

is is unusually well provided there and navigable rivers which

can lead to trade.

You can see this is just interesting.

And I think the, the kind of takeaway here is

that if you there's this classic division between northern Europe

and southern Europe.

So southern Europe, you know, gave rise to the great

empires, uh, of ancient Greece and, and Rome, of course.

But you can see that in this kind of, uh,

you know, early modern era that you can expect to

see perhaps more trade and more productive agriculture.

In these large plains with large navigable rivers like the

Rhine and the same and so forth.

Um, that there could be possibly more scope for kind

of trade, uh, and so forth and specialisation again.

So again, this is going to be geographic look, because

the hunter gatherer ancestors of these farmers, you know, say

in the year 1500 did not pick this place because

of its suitability for agricultural trade, but it's rather just

where they happen to randomly settle down.

So another aspect that's that might also be hard coded,

like mountains, rivers, climate is the disease environment.

And specifically the incidence of malaria and malaria is actually

interesting because it tends to kill a lot of people,

but it also weakens people a lot.

So it's a very economically destructive disease.

The Black Death had the had the charming kind of

feature that it tended to kill people outright.

Okay.

So that was kind of economically efficient, which is kind

of interesting.

And Europe, of course, was a hotbed of the Black

Death.

But Africa has malaria.

But what's interesting is, is that other places have malaria,

but it generally tends to be very concentrated in sub-Saharan

Africa.

So the question might be is Africa poor because of

malaria?

Okay.

And so one kind of kind of way to think

about this is to go back in time and look

at where malaria was a century ago.

And it turns out that malaria existed in most of

the world 100 years ago, but it was actually eradicated

through different types of insecticides and also clearing pools of

stagnant water.

So it's a combination of technology but also just efficient

economic organisation.

Okay.

So what's interesting about that is that the process of

development and income growth, say, in Europe, in France, Germany,

across the north of America has eradicated malaria.

So it's maybe not the case that malaria impedes development,

but that development gets rid of malaria.

Okay.

And, you know, as I said before, you know, it

exists worldwide.

And I've already mentioned all of this.

But the way to think about this is to kind

of think about this duality, malaria development.

Okay.

And how do they connect to each other.

So if we care about causality, we might want to

think about what the underlying model we have in our

mind when we think about malaria and development is.

So what I'm going to show you is like a

lot of words to illustrate, like a causal diagram known

as a Dag.

It's a directed acyclic graph.

It's just a graph with big bubbles and lines between

these kind of ideas.

And so we're going to do it for malaria and

development.

But what I want to mention is I think it's

a really cool way of thinking about all sorts of

problems in economic history.

And what helps us think through is two way causality,

the direction of causality, and also what we call endogeneity,

the idea that things might be, uh, infected by some,

you know, other kind of omitted factor.

Okay.

And we'll come back to this as the course develops.

So basically here's a picture of three different distinct models

of malaria and development.

So we started off by looking at the world.

And we saw that Africa is poor.

And when you look at malaria Africa has a lot

of malaria.

So the first idea is a malaria makes Africa poor

okay.

Malaria is is impeding development.

And you see there's malaria development and there's a line

of causal line right at the edge that's linking malaria

to development.

But then I showed you the historic distribution of malaria.

And malaria used to be in this country, like, you

know, several centuries ago now.

And it was basically, uh, endemic to England and also

to Western Europe and as Western Europe and England developed

during the Industrial Revolution, during the origin growth.

They were able to basically apply insecticide clear to stagnant

water, and also basically arranged society so that malaria was

actually eradicated.

So the development caused malaria to be eradicated.

Okay.

So that's a different world.

That's a different causal model that we have in the

back of our mind.

But what's nice about this is that just makes it

explicit.

And then you can see what the difference is, you

know, and you know, so I've seen my colleague Eric

Schneider, who you might have seen because he's doing the

introduction video to this course on Moodle.

Um, and so like, he loves all their stuff.

So they will do dogs in some of his kind

of papers where you have different, you've got like maybe

25 different bubbles with like lots of different lines connecting

them, multiple lines.

So, you know, I think at that stage it gets

a little bit kind of silly.

You know, I think these are useful when you keep

them simple.

Don't go crazy, you know.

But I think simple is good.

Um, and then finally we have what is probably happening

in reality is the fact that, like, there's a duality,

you know, malaria is actually impeding development because it's making

people weak.

It's killing people.

Uh, but it's also the fact that these places are

poor that stops them from being able to eradicate malaria.

So you have this kind of two way process.

And that's where they're both endogenous variables.

They're both affecting each other.

But it's nice to just be able to classify this

and to help you think through these various different problems.

And what's really interesting about this is, um, are like

almost every issue in economic history can be explained here.

So you might be interested, say, in, uh, in, uh,

mortality.

Uh, I'm growth, which is malaria is a form of

mortality.

But say you could switch it to fertility, right.

You could say that basically if fertility is high in

the Malthusian sense, that keeps countries poor.

Okay, there's all these little mouths to feed and they're

not very well educated.

But as countries get rich, people reduce their fertility.

So you can use this in this network to think

about all these causal dynamics.

Okay.

So they're just a quick summary of hard geography, um,

and its relationship to growth and also the disease environment

and an illustration of dykes to help us think through

some of these problems.

And as we go through the course and as you

go through this lecture, uh, and, you know, you might

be worth thinking about these problems in that way.

And I've actually done that With what we're going to

talk about now.

So I'm going to finish the lecture with a Dag,

uh, for, for institutions.

Right.

So institutions is the word of the day was this

is what economists think explains everything, or specifically the economist

that just won the Nobel Prize.

Semi controversially, I think explains absolutely everything.

So I'm going to give you a kind of a

history of this, but then finish with a guy explaining

institutions and growth the way we looked at malaria and

growth okay.

So how we're going to motivate this is we're going

to start looking around the world a little bit.

So we're moving away from England and we're going to

look at the Americas and India.

First off we're going to look at the Americas.

And the Americas is really interesting because you have this

stunning geographic pattern.

Okay, uh, of economic development in that the north of

America, in particular the US on the continent, tends to

be a heck of a lot richer than the South

of America.

Mexico and Mexico is actually technically North America than the

Central America and South America.

But you can see it here just just illustrated in

this heat map of of GDP per capita at a

kind of subnational level.

So you have these big regions, um, and you can

see that it's, it's, it's very clear that like the,

um, the kind of the north of the Americas is

richer than the south.

And what's really interesting about this is that it wasn't

always the case.

It turns out that we think that around about 1500,

uh, the south of the Americas was actually a lot

richer in the north.

And you might think about those famous kind of, uh,

Aztec and, and, uh, Incan cities that were discovered around

about this time, and they tended to all be located

in the south of the continent, whereas the north didn't

have those type of urban developments.

So data is a problem when you're talking about 1500.

What economic historians typically do is they look at exactly

that urbanisation.

And they figured that a country that has a lot

of urbanisation is relatively rich.

Okay.

If you have a productive agricultural sector, remember we could

talk about having specialisation.

Urbanisation allows you to have specialisation.

People can live in big cities and do all sorts

of things, specialise in trade and merchants and maybe open

universities, all these kind of things.

So what's happening here is that, uh, these guys, um,

and these are the guys who won the Nobel.

This is Arthur Makhlouf, uh, Johnson Robinson Jr.

And you're going to hear about them a lot.

So it's worth remembering their names.

And so basically what you get here is the natural

logarithm of population density in 1500, going from, uh, you

know, not not urbanised, not densely populated to densely populated.

Right.

So you've got this distribution of historical data to analyse

around about 1500.

And what's interesting about that is that places like Canada,

Australia, uh, and so of course, don't tend to be

kind of, you know, densely populated.

Right.

But they tend to be richer today than they were

in the 1500.

And this is kind of a reversal of fortune.

Okay.

So there's a reversal of fortune for who was rich

in 1500 and who's rich and say in 1995 when

this graph was, was made.

So that's a 500 year kind of reversal of fortune.

Um, you see this in Latin America in that some

of these Latin American countries say a little bit later

on 1900 or so, like Uruguay, Argentina, Chile like tend

to be actually globally on a global level, relatively rich.

And they've fallen behind a lot as well.

And so the argument with this, this reversal of fortune,

the fact the places that were rich as measured by

population density in 1500 become poorer, the same in our

in our time.

This US model, Johnson Robinson, argued that this means that

geography can be fundamental because geography is not changing.

The mountains aren't changing, not on 500 year level scale.

The rivers aren't changing.

The temperature is not changing until relatively recent recently.

So basically, geography cannot be fundamental because of this reversal

of fortune character in the data.

And what's interesting, as I said before, like, you know,

there's also the reversal of fortune for these Latin American

economies that were once considered some of the richest in

the world, like Argentina and Uruguay.

And what explains this long relative decline?

As I said before, the key idea is that institutions

matter.

Now, what are institutions?

That is the kind of billion dollar question, right?

Because what economists think of as institutions anthropologists might think

of as culture.

Right.

You know, so there's a lot of different things going

on.

So the the kind of the big guy who kind

of defined this idea is Doug Norman, also a Nobel

Prize winner.

And so the shorthand definition are these are the rules

of the game.

Okay.

So if you think about your playing football, you know,

American football, soccer, whatever you want to call it, whatever

your your tendency is, there are certain kind of rules

that everybody abides by.

And if you break those rules, there's a certain expectation

of what happens.

The rules got broken, the people are punished.

But the game works because most, most people play along

with this institution.

And so society has rules, right?

If I go out and, you know, commit a bank

robbery, you know, uh, you know, I'm going to get

caught with certain probability.

I'm punished.

Right?

And it's acceptable.

Right?

There isn't like a debate over every time, the way

you would see, uh, things happen, say, in more traditional

cultures without strong laws.

In those societies, typically what people ask is, uh, if

someone if someone is murdered, if someone is assaulted, if

someone has something stolen, usually in those societies, what people

ask and deciding who who's right and who's wrong is

how related to you to to to to me are

you you know, it's like genetic relatedness determines how you

feel about whether someone is right or wrong.

Whereas in societies that have rules of law.

Okay.

Uh, we actually have a kind of a higher principle.

We look at the morality of this, and it goes

this break the written code law.

Now it turns out there's a very rich, you know,

uh, literature and, and growing, kind of growing kind of

awareness that that thinking is very unusual.

In fact, it's been called weird, right, by Joe Henrich

at Harvard.

It's basically Western educated, industrialised, rich and developed, rich and

developing the same thing.

But hey, you know, close enough to the weird acronym.

And so a lot of global psychological variation is geographic,

uh, and, you know, so that's, that's just like an

aside and, you know, if you're interested in that, like,

this is I think that that, that, that kind of

like this kind of work in evolutionary psychology really connect

with this.

But for right now, what you need to know is

that institutions are the rules of the game.

That's it.

This is the 101.

Okay, I'm going to calm down and stop going off

and master tangents and deliver the lecture that I wrote.

Okay.

And so this is a really big figure for this

idea.

What's on the x axis are our measures of of

of for at the country level.

So there's Ethiopia.

Uh, there's uh, you know, Russia, Hungary.

Um, and these are protections Tanzania, Haiti, Zaire, um, Guatemala,

Argentina in the middle, uh, Hong Kong, average protection against

the risk of expropriation.

Okay.

So the risk that you could have your property rights

infringe, you could have your, your, your property taken away

from you.

Okay.

Going from where really things are very insecure, right?

If you own property, if you own a piece of

land, it could be the case that someone just takes

it off of you with a bunch of big guys

and says, well, this is mine.

What are you going to do about it?

If that happens to you in one of these countries

like Luxembourg, uh, the UK, the US, you can just

go go to the courts, go to the beast and

say something, you know, against the law happened and it'll

be sorted out for you.

Okay, so you're kind of protected against this Wild West

kind of lawlessness that you get in some places.

So you have some countries that have very strong protection

against this type of thing.

Okay.

And some countries that have almost none.

Okay.

And when you kind of do a chart like this,

you'll find that that level of protection against expropriation matches

perfectly like a 45 degree line with income.

Okay.

Income in 1995.

This is when this paper was written.

It's a very famous paper.

So that's why we're doing 95.

There was nothing special about 1995.

That's like more or less contemporary.

When we're thinking about, uh, these issues on a deep

historical level.

So I think that is this is again from a

JR.

This is the the Nobel Prize winning contributions.

Okay.

And I'm going to explain why why it's such influence.

Right.

But we're going to get there.

There's a little bit of background.

So go north was the big guy who, you know,

a generation ago who came up with this idea that

institutions really mattered.

Okay.

And he thought that North America was successful because it

had British institutions.

Okay.

Um, but what's interesting is, is that other places had

British institutions and like English common law, respect, property rights,

all these different things.

Uh, it's not clear to me what exactly it is

about that, that that makes a place rich.

Um, but you've got these other places which are also

British style institutions like Argentina and of course, the British

Caribbean, Which basically had this different trajectory.

So it can't just be British institutions.

It's got to be something else.

And this is where it gets a little more interesting

when we get specific.

So the big kind of idea, the idea, um, in

this literature for the Americas, came from a duo called

Engelmann and Sokoloff, Stan and German and Ken Sokoloff.

Okay.

And so their idea was that basically you had these

different factor endowments in the new world.

Remember, we looked at factor endowments for Britain last week,

and these factor endowments either led to, um, basically types

of kind of slave economies essentially that generated massive inequalities,

even though they were actually really rich.

They were really rich because they were just generating so

much profit.

Things like sugar and um, you know, mining like Potosi

tossing silver mines or whatever.

And those kind of things, uh, led to, like, really

extractive, corrupt institutions run by a small group of elites

who basically kept the vast majority of the population either

in kind of some sort of indentured labour or in

full blown slavery and those kind of economies, even though

they are rich in 1516 hundred and 1700, they tend

to kind of do very poorly over the long run,

because they don't generate the type of modern economic growth

that we see in Britain in the industrial revolution that

we see in the US as well.

Starting at the end of the 20th century, Earth started

the 20th century, mid, mid 18th, mid 19th and early

20th century.

So basically the idea is again like Lincoln things to

factor downwards.

So basically what you have is that both North and

South America had an abundance of land and natural resources

relative to labour.

They're basically empty when, uh, when they were, um, rediscovered.

Let's be correct about it.

By by Europeans.

There are people living there, of course.

Um, um, we can talk about we were talking about

that yesterday.

Um, we'll try and squeeze some, some important details on

that as we go through this.

But basically I'll give you some specifics.

So, um, you know, there's three types of economies that

they see in the Americas.

One are the kind of sugar producing economies, okay.

And these sugar for export, of course, to Europe.

Um, mineral resources, I mentioned mining, uh, before and then

land abundant and empty.

So land abundant and empty is North America.

Okay.

So I think the key point to an agreement, Sokolov,

is that there was no commodity to get a slave

labour force to exploit.

Now in the south of the United States, you had

cotton.

Okay.

So what they're thinking about is the north of of

of of of America.

And if you think about like where the economic dynamism

comes from in the United States, it's not the South.

Okay.

So I guess they're thinking about the north of the

of, of Dixie or whatever.

That Dixie line is cool.

So basically you're thinking about the north of North America,

the Great Plains, the great cities, Chicago, New York, uh,

California.

And so we're not thinking about that.

And so you're thinking, um, but broadly, this is characterised

by North America, the north, North America, north of the

United States.

And these guys we can look at here.

And it's interesting.

Yes, there's some data.

Um, so the sugar and slave economies, the examples are

Barbados, Cuba, Jamaica, Brazil.

And what's interesting about them, as I said, is that

these are just quotes taken from the paper to help

you, help you get up to speed with the facts.

Um, but basically these were ones once very rich.

Okay, but the key idea is they became rich and

there was an at least a small elite that were

able to set themselves up at the top of society,

okay, and set up institutions, rules of the game that

benefited them and kept the the money kind of pipe

churning ex cash by basically profitable slave labour.

Okay.

And so what you get there is, um, a really

huge inequality together with extractive at least preserving institutions.

And that's a really key idea that you'll see Adger

also emphasise as well.

Okay.

And then even when you had, say, the abolition of

slavery, the historical legacy of these rotten institutions is what

keeps them poor today.

According to Engelman and Sokoloff and also adjunct.

Okay.

So you also have a kind of rich renewable resources

in Mexico and Peru.

And, um, you can see this because you have, uh,

you know, like the Spanish conquering, uh, you know, uh,

large territories in South America, the Incan empire, the Aztecs,

Bizzaro Cortez.

Great.

You know, and very violent stories that, that were very

familiar with.

But what happens here is that the Spanish seem to

be more incentivising, an extractive goal of extracting gold and

silver from their new territories and then actually generating, you

know, kind of inclusive style, modern economic growth now nowhere

hide inclusive style, modern economic growth.

That was the industrial revolution.

That's kind of the 20th century.

But Engelman and Sokolov and Aja say that these guys

set up extractive institutions that preserved elites.

Okay.

In fact AJR.

Go further.

They say that this specie import gold and silver from

this new world preserved by institutions in Iberia, Spain and

Portugal as well.

So it actually this was affecting some European development as

well, because the long run impact of importing gold and

silver to your economy when you don't have any sort

of British style industrial revolution, you don't have an increase

in productivity is you might guess it.

All you do is increase the price level, right.

But it also enabled the elites to tax to have

huge kind of luxury consumption as well.

And I'll just leave this example of the, um, of

the Potosi silver mine and, you know, um, and the

Juan Mercury mine, which has been studied by one of

Marla's, um, PhD students.

Um, Melissa del and I'll just leave you.

That's another example of the type of extractive institution.

It was basically a forced labour scheme where everybody like

that was near the kind of was, was, was, was

kind of on a certain side of the line and

was basically conscripted to provide labour.

So it was basically a form of slave labour, maybe

not fully full blown slavery.

Remember, there's going to be all these shades of grey

between full blown slavery and full free labour.

This is kind of more of a tied labour scheme.

So they were free, you know.

But then the village is not to provide certain people

and they couldn't negotiate.

So you can see she studies the effects of that

today.

But anyway you have these commodity economies sugar which we

looked at then also these mining economies.

And as I said before, just to repeat to emphasise

the takeaway, I'm giving you a lot of stuff, but

I want to repeat what's really important.

The idea here is that these commodity economies, uh, basically

allowed a small group of elites have become very rich.

The elites acted to preserve their status, and basically the

type of rules and laws and institutions that were set

up in these societies led to massive inequality, and also

led to these countries being relatively poor today because of

the long run, persistent impact of these institutions on the

culture.

Okay.

Now, if you think there's a bit of a jump

there, you're absolutely right.

Do you want to ask a quick question?

Yeah, sure.

The type of development we're building in the current state,

for example, in the South, where they might have sold

a record straight from the mine to the port.

Yeah.

For example, leaving the Americas, the roads and infrastructure there

would be more ideal a useful even to average people.

You see this happening a lot in economic history.

So a poor country gets a lot of foreign direct

investment.

And so what the foreign direct investment does is basically

builds a road, as you say, from from a mine

or something like some natural resource.

You know, it could be rare earth minerals today and

directly to the port.

And then it has literally nobody uses this train line

to go from A to B to C to see

their to see their, their mother who lives in the

village that they left when they were a kid because

they can't afford the train tickets.

So an example of a country where this mechanism happened

was Spain, like Spain, had this effect that a lot

of foreign capital came in to build railroads.

But no Spanish people use it as it was too

expensive.

So there was no kind of.

They call them linkages between this new infrastructure investment and

the economy.

So there is this kind of a dynamic.

What you really want is to have a railroad come

in and just transform the economic geography of the place.

We're going to look at railroads later in the U.S.

and in the US.

They seem to have played that role.

You know, the West was built because you built railways,

and there's all these towns that built up and there's

this great kind of, you know, romance around that.

And Whereas there's been places where these things have just

not worked.

Um, okay, so basically what happens with the US and

also we I could see some people going, you know,

what about cotton slavery in the south of us?

Absolutely.

Of course, you know, but we're thinking about the north

of the America, basically.

This was basically land abundant and empty.

And according to Agam and Sokolov, with their British style

institutions.

And that's where you get this kind of good economic

growth and not the type of commodity, extractive, corrupt economic

growth that you get in the south of the Americas.

And there's some summary for you there as well.

So, um, I think like, you know, I'll just skip

that last slide and you can read it.

It's it's kind of clear, uh, distinguishing between formal and

informal institutions.

Um, it really is the definitional issue of institutions is

like, you know, it really is almost a philosophical quest

that's never ending.

Like, what's the boundary between institutions and culture?

Right?

We've already hinted at that a little bit.

But AJR, these are the guys who are the contemporary

face of the institutional interpretation, uh, of, um, of economic

development.

In fact, one of their papers is called a institutions

are the fundamental, uh, cause of growth.

I'm paraphrasing, that's not an exact phrase, but it's basically

that's more or less what it is.

So they have all these papers that have had gigantic

influence on the field.

So when I was in New York, I went along

to a seminar on Latin American economic history of Colombia,

and all they were talking about was one paper from

H.R., the one that I'll talk about with you in

a moment.

And, uh, it was stunning to see the influence of

this.

And there's also these popular books and, and they kind

of connect to what we're talking about in that they

they emphasise, as Anchormen and Sokolov did, this distinction between

inclusive institutions and extractive institutions.

So nor, nor, uh, Engelman and Sokolov, see, uh, you

know, extractive institutions in these commodity economies.

Okay.

And, you know, uh, you know, Barbados, Brazil, uh, Peru,

etc., and inclusive institutions, institutions in the north of America.

Right.

So basically here's here's more, there's more.

A classic example, um, is like North and South Korea,

um, you know, North having like extractive institutions and they

define them as rules, a society designed to extract wealth

from a subset of society to benefit another subset on

this kind of leads to a lot of inequality and

prevents the kind of inclusive economic growth that we get

later.

And what's interesting, it's really England where you see the

Industrial revolution and you see inclusive institutions, um, become the

culture.

Right?

And what they see is, is that in England, their

explanation for the Industrial Revolution is that over time, slowly,

the English got the institutions right.

Okay.

One of them was the rule of law.

Okay.

There used to be the Star Chamber, where the Crown

could overturn any legal judgement against it that was abolished

and made the sovereign subject to the law of the

land.

Okay.

So everybody being equal before the law.

There's also a rise of merchant traders, okay.

Connected to the rise of Atlantic trading.

Um, of course, in this connection to cotton and slavery,

which are very, very interesting, uh, as well.

Which, which, which, which I loved have more time to

go into it.

But they see the kind of the period after the

English Civil War and the so-called Glorious Revolution As being

kind of evidence of this kind of new path that

England is on.

And so here was the announcement yesterday.

Uh, let's just take a moment.

Uh, so people seem to care about this, uh, the

Nobel Prize in Economics, 2020 for Darwinism, Simon Johnson, James

Robinson.

Um, and what what they've demonstrated the importance of societal

institutions for a country's prosperity and society's sort of poor

rule of law and institutions that exploit the population do

not generate growth or change for the better.

The laureates research helps us understand why.

So like like that's what our lecture has been about,

right.

You know, that's basically emphasising it.

So this is um, I want to emphasise their most

influential specific empirical finding and what they, what they, what

they do in this paper.

It's basically they're looking at, at the world during the

period of, um, colonisation and the way that they kind

of identify statistically institutions is very clever.

Okay.

What they do is they look at disease, climate.

Okay.

Remember we were looking at malaria at the start of

the lecture.

And they're looking at that across all these colonies that

the Europeans went out to conquer.

And they have this theory okay.

Seems reasonable.

The idea is that if the disease climate is like

Europe, relatively benign, they settle and they set up inclusive

institutions because they're living there, they're having families there.

Their population is growing there.

They're part of that society.

If they go somewhere and like 70% of them die

within the first year, they say, screw it.

And they set up extractive institutions like what we see

in the commodity economies, like we see with the kind

of forced labour schemes in Peru and Bolivia.

Okay.

And they just they just want to extract from that

economy.

Okay.

So basically these institutions, these laws persist over centuries okay.

And so it really matters okay.

But what's interesting is, is that like the kind of

frontier in, in economics and an economic history is to

show causality.

Remember our DAGs.

They were to get us thinking about what direction is

that arrow going in, or is it going in two

directions.

And with disease and development, we know that there's an

endogeneity, a two way causality between the two.

Right?

Well, what what argues is very clever is that people

didn't know until they went there what the disease climate

was going to be.

Okay.

So it could have been highly malarial.

It could have been like, you know, uh, uh, there

could have been lots of wild animals that, that, that

attacked and killed you.

Um, but basically the idea is they use settler mortality

as an instrumental variable.

What that means is the instrument gives you kind of

natural experiment style variation.

Okay.

So the instrument is a kind of a randomness.

It's randomisation.

You've heard of randomised controlled trials.

You've heard of people being given placebo pills.

It's the same direction they want to have a kind

of a natural experiment from history.

And the natural experiment is the randomness of sexual immortality.

Okay.

So basically where sexual immortality was high and use a

they impose extractive institutions where it was low, they impose

inclusive institutions.

So remember that chart with the contemporary measures of expropriation

that we looked at earlier.

Well, this is similar, but it's just basically looking at

settler mortality during the era of colonisation.

And the figure just shows you the kind of the

bivariate relationship would have fitted line.

That's a negative relationship.

And you can see that where secular mortality is really

high.

Mali.

Syria.

Tanzania.

Togo.

Uh, you can see that there is basically very little

development today.

Okay.

Or settler mortality is relatively low.

Australia, New Zealand, USA.

Um, I think it's, uh, Zaire perhaps, but you can

see that income is actually a lot higher.

So they use this kind of evidence to say that

institutions are the cause of growth.

Okay.

If you believe this narrative, if you believe their statistical

storytelling.

And I think that, like, there are a lot of

critiques, that's what's really great about this.

Like, it's been fun to be on Twitter and go

on marginal revolution.

Marginal revolution.

I very much recommend it's the most read economics blog

in the world, Tyler Cowen, and he has some nice

podcasts as well.

But basically and they talk a lot about this and

the critiques are really interesting.

And there are a lot, you know, remember malaria.

Malaria is killing Europeans who go to Africa, but it's

also killing African people too.

So it's not clear that the instrument randomises that effect

the way it could just be.

Also malaria, which overwhelms the possibility for development.

Okay.

But we don't have much time to go into it.

But this idea has been spectacularly influential and provided the

kind of research agenda for huge subfields of economics and

economic history.

But it's actually been been kind of fun to be

around since it came out.

But to see how many substantive critiques there are around

it, and I'm going to kind of you might want

to think about it as we go through.

Okay.

So I'm going to conclude, but I want to just

talk about India for a little bit.

Not as much as the Americas, but just give you

an overview.

So India there's like Witness India a huge place and

it has mountains and valleys and so forth.

But it has an interesting history.

And, you know, basically you have a mughal India from

1526 to 1857.

Um, you know, Mughal coming from, from the Mongol invasions

of that part of the world.

And what's interesting about India is that before the British

Industrial Revolution, India led the world and cotton textile production

and technology and dyeing and so forth.

So that was really interesting.

A lot of the early British cotton textile industry, which

was the big characteristic good of the Industrial Revolution, came

from borrowed technology from India.

So that was interesting.

And you have then basically, uh, you know, the British

East India Company becoming fantastically wealthy.

You get the incorporation of India into the British Empire

underneath the, the Raj.

Um, and then of course, you get modern independence with

the creation of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.

So what's really interesting is that India is a really

good example of long run economic stagnation.

An economic historian, Bishnu Gupta, have constructed the real wage

measures, the wages like divided by the price level like

we saw on natural wood.

And that measures this living standard pattern over the long

run.

And what you see is that India is richer around

about 1600 than it is, say, uh, you know, uh,

than it is in 1961.

Uh, Akbar was one of the ones this was this

great, uh, Mughal emperor, uh, at the start of the

period around about 1600.

And I'll just emphasise this, this dotted line is Indian

GDP relative to Britain.

And again, like the wages this is coming from 1600.

So you see this massive decline okay.

And so it's really interesting.

And there's the wage data I think like you know

I'll just point out, you know, and that you can

click on this.

This brings me to Roy's work.

The tanker Roy's according to department, and he has this

nice, like, like evaluation of India from the institutionalist perspective,

can Norths theories remember?

He was like British institutions are good anger men and

Sokolov are factor endowments creating extractive institutions.

And what's happening with settler mortality.

And to just summarise, he goes through all of these

and finds that none of them explain what's going on

in India.

Isn't that interesting?

Okay.

And I think that since, you know, the the critique

to institutions is that often when you look at a

detailed country, it often doesn't explain the variation that you

see.

So it's a very attractive idea.

But in the Indian case it doesn't really work.

And and I just point out, like you can see

that Pakistan and India like modern territory, the section mortality

is relatively low, but they don't tend to be near

this line.

So there's lots going on here.

So I give you some some things you can look

at in your own time.

There's also this contemporary debate about the role of the

British, uh, drain.

Uh, the, the people who are interested in degrowth seem

to like this as an example.

And there's some good points here as well.

Um, but, you know, I guess, like, I guess, like

I want to finish here with the idea that there's

definitely geographic aspects.

But remember, India has like a very, you know, unique

kind of culture, you know, like everywhere, you know, but

if you think about, like the level of education in

India in 1961 or in 1600, or the status of

women in a country where the average age of marriage

is 13 and that's average.

You know, there's people a lot younger than that get

married.

And also the impact of the caste system and what

that does for a country such as India.

I'm just saying that cultural, deeper cultural forces and I

say culture as a throwaway thing, you know, I've got

thoughts on the specifics, but just for now, let's call

a culture.

Deeper cultural norms seem to matter more than arbitrary institutions.

Okay, and this gets me to my takeaway.

Okay, you can see that many places are growing recently.

India is growing many parts of South East Asia, in

particular South Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, and also not in America.

So if you ask me, just to be critical about

this, are institutions fundamental?

I do not think so.

Okay.

And the Indian experience suggests that institutions are not fundamental

to growth.

And you can look that up in the notes I've

left you and and at least not in the, in

the sense promoted in the literature.

So what are the lessons lessons from all of this?

Well, institutions are fundamentally humanly devised.

We have this idea from Doug North from um Anchormen

and Sokolov and Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson ager that institutions

the rules of the game.

You get them right and good things happen and we

grow rich and the job is done.

Well.

Where do those institutions come from?

They come from the populations themselves.

They come from the collective interactions of all humans, all

of us together.

They're humanly devised.

And I think of institutions as actually being more of

a bottom up process than a top down.

An example of this is Afghanistan.

You can't, you know, just go in there, get rid

of the Taliban and impose western, North American, US style

institutions on a, on a, on a, on a culture

that is just that's just not how the world works

there.

Right?

So what you have is, you know, something else entirely,

a bedlam, it seems like.

But basically this is the Dag to think about this.

So basically you have institutions, okay, which can determine growth

memory.

If you were coaching this dog for ajar its institutions

to growth.

That's the end of it.

What I'm thinking is it's like everybody together in the

individuals with all their hopes and needs, like, you know,

operating based on their desires and all all the all

the rest of it.

Uh, you're kind of internalising a sense of morality.

And you're also, you know, your, your, your preference for,

for honour and all, all the rest of all these

things, all that cycle.

The underlying psychology will create both institutions and also the

culture that creates growth.

But the connection with the institutions and growth, while it's

appealing, doesn't seem actually to fit the empirical record when

you look at the specifics.

Okay, even though it's a very appealing, uh, theory on

of course, the Nobel Prize committee thought so, too.

Okay, let's park it there and I'll see you next

week.

Thank you.

Hey, your thoughts on.

The war hasn't been kind of violent.

And there's more violence that's coming from this thing, which

is also creating a situation.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah.

Whatever these things.

Go down.

There is.

No.

Afterlife.

We.

Really haven't.

And that's.

Exactly.

Lecture 4:

Okay, folks, let's crack on.

Um.

I see that the herd has been somewhat thinned a

little bit.

Like.

I hope that doesn't continue.

So today we're going to talk about, um, the 19th

century US.

And in contrast to last week, we're going to look

at aspects that made the 19th century us a successful

economy, as opposed to the relative economic stagnation and reversal

of fortune that we saw in Latin America.

Now, last week, we spent a good bit of time

thinking about institutions with the week that was in it,

and it was a fun lecture, and we were critical

as we should be, you know, and part of the

motivation for last week was why we saw this pattern,

and we didn't really talk about a lot of the

North American aspects.

So we'll talk about them this week.

But last week we were looking at this distinction between

fundamental geography, the disease climate, uh, as evidenced by a

focus on malaria.

And then we had this dive into Institutions, you know,

North and British institutions broadly defined.

But then we saw the Engelman and Sokoloff distinction between,

um, you know, commodity economies and the type of institutions

and inequality that they breed.

And then finally, we saw this Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson

institutions as being inclusive or extractive, and that determining the

wealth of nations.

What I was suggesting to you in the background of

all this was that institutions were humanly devised.

They were coming from they were very much embedded and

originating within the cultures of these places.

Um, and, you know, there's there's more we can do

on this.

And we'll do a little bit more on this today,

but less on the institutional side.

What we're going to focus on today is geography and

growth once more, but a focus on the 19th century

US and what's happening in the style of industrial revolution

that you get in the US, and what the role

for economic geography is whatever economic geography means.

So we'll talk about geography first off.

So we'll start and finish with these topics of economic

geography.

You'll notice that we got terms like agglomeration, uh, market

access, uh spill-overs on various different types of marshland and

Jacobian externalities.

We'll finalise them towards the end of the lecture.

But basically, you know, neoclassical economics didn't really think about

geography as mattering.

It's one of those kind of things that's abstracted away

from in terms of, um, you know, uh, like how

economies work, but through the work of many economists like

Paul Krugman.

Uh, economic geography is, you know, central to most contemporary

accounts of The Wealth of Nations.

And geography has always been important to historians.

And last week we saw this.

We just saw that like some places were just not

Conducive to generating economic, um, activity, whether they were deserts

like the Sahara, the interior of Australia, whether they were

continents that didn't have extensive navigable river networks that impacted

trade, like Africa.

Um, and we talked about this already.

So I'm just recapping this for you.

Europe had this Goldilocks character in terms of having a

lot of very nice features, um, in terms of, uh,

agricultural development and later trade and so forth.

So in a way, geography does come first.

Um, as I said last week, most poor economies and

most human economies are going to be agricultural economies, okay.

When productivity is low, it turns out you need to

have 80% or so of your population working at producing

food, otherwise you will starve.

So all human societies, all human civilisations, were primarily agricultural

and civilisations before the Industrial Revolution.

Okay.

You had urban centres, but, you know, primarily they they

were devoted to producing food and agriculture really matters.

Okay.

Where you see, um, uh, productive agriculture is not in

the kind of central belt, uh, central mountainous belt of

Italy.

It's more in these kind of plains that you get

in between the mountains and the seaside.

Um, you know, sunshine and rain matter and so forth.

Of course, agriculture, um, is one aspect where geography is

going to be fundamental for the style of industrial revolution.

That's possible.

Remember the role of coal in the Allen thesis of

the British Industrial Revolution?

London could not grow without the coal as a resource

for heating and for food and so forth.

Not eating coal, of course, for heating food.

Um.

Uh, don't try eating coal.

It's not good.

Um, okay.

And not not that, uh.

I was a curious kid.

Okay.

Uh, so.

Okay.

Last last week, we looked at malaria.

And geography can impact malaria as well.

And, you know, based on how easy or hard it

is to, you know, drain stagnant, uh, swamp water, um,

you know, uh, reclaiming and all these different things.

So we talked about this, um, this idea and what

it gets, gets us, gets us towards is this kind

of endogeneity.

Okay.

Or two way causality between geography, disease, climate development, technology,

agriculture, everything else.

It's all there's a two way causality.

So mankind has been able to kind of exhibit control

over geography, not quite in a terraforming Star Trek way,

but there's definitely been an ability to control the disease

climate.

And as we look at like making life interplanetary, you

can think about, you know, mankind, uh, humankind conquering geography

as well.

And, um, you know, we'll come back to this at

the end of this lecture as well.

But it's just thinking about where all of these things

come from.

And you can put institutions into this chart as well

and start thinking about what the directionality is of the

causal arrow and what's kind of a knock on effect.

So again, individuals, collective individuals culture creates institutions which create

economic growth.

Uh, but also the culture directly affects growth as well

potentially.

So you can redraw this chart whichever way you're thinking.

But it helps elucidate what could be the kind of

direction of causality and also clarify the degree of internal

two way causation in the system.

So we're always thinking like this every topic.

So every topic we're not going to see like a

diagram like this.

But it's really worth sketching it out because it helps

you just get a nuanced feel for what the argument

is, and that will help you get a high mark

on your exam, which is what you want.

I'm going to assume, okay, so getting that nuance is

kind of what we want to look for.

All right.

So today we're going to talk about some different aspects

of the global economy in the 19th century with a

focus on the US.

And what you see during this period is, you know,

the emergence of, you know, industrialising economic growth in North

America.

But it's also coincident with gigantic population flows from the

Old World to the New World, okay, both to North

and South America.

But, you know, maybe the slight majority going to the

north of the continent.

And what facilitates this to a certain way is the

transport revolution that you see happening, perhaps from as early

as 1700, if not before, to say 1870.

And you can see that, uh, what this is kind

of evidence by economic historians by looking at the price

of things.

So one of the nice kind of features of this

field is that we think about these ideas, but economic

historians usually come up with clever ways of measuring them.

So the the cost of freight, okay, is seen by

people like Nick Harvey to decline about 95% between, say,

1718 70.

And as the cost of, say, transatlantic shipping journeys goes

down and enables more of the population to actually do

them.

Okay.

And it also facilitates the information flow of ideas, um,

and capital as well.

So as we'll talk about it, well, we might get

a chance to talk about it.

We're talking these are just like this is like Facebook.

Facebook used to be a thing when I was your

age, that would stop all the kids from doing, you

know, Facebook is like, archaic now, of course.

Uh, apart from, like, Zuckerberg, uh, it's been in the

news for some for testosterone replacement therapy for some reason.

But anyway, uh, you can see how the world is

kind of connected with these virtual connections on Facebook, and

it maps out the world.

But before this, you have, like, vast loads of people,

um, but also like, as in money, like people who

have savings in England that is getting invested in, say,

the Argentine railroads.

Okay.

Which is really kind of interesting.

So the world becomes globalised in this kind of mid

to late 19th century period.

Um, which, which kind of marks this kind of growth

of the North, the North Atlantic economy.

And you see, in terms of numbers, the kind of,

say, the the number of railroads in the world, uh,

the steam fleet.

Yeah, the the kilometres of European railroads, all indexed here.

You can see this is all going up from this

1872 pre-World War one pre 1913 period.

It's an era of of of globalisation.

And this is also the period where you see this

huge population flow between, uh, the, uh, the Europe and

the North America.

Of course, one of the kind of characteristics of the,

of our popular conception of the Industrial Revolution is the

is the steam engine.

Okay.

And you might have like, found it like interesting that

the steam engine played virtually no role in our theory

of the Industrial Revolution, according to Bob Allen.

That's because it comes around about 1830.

Okay.

And the British industrial revolution is really starting like about

a hundred years before that, you know, so the timing

is kind of old for it to explain growth.

But we do see it play a central role in

the, uh, in the expansion of the American frontier, and

in US economic geography, it's at least taught to play

this huge role.

Okay.

And and it also just has this connectivity uh, um

benefit also benefiting like, say post office letters.

Do you see more letters going from A to B?

Um, and there's more kind of efficiency gains relative to

canals and state stagecoaches.

And here's a video of the expansion of the rail

network in the late 19th and 20th century, late 19th

century.

I'm sorry, in the, in the US to see just

what it looks like.

Uh, um, what's kind of what's kind of surprising about

this?

Um, just and, you know, you know, I hate disappointing

you, but, um, I live to disappoint people, it turns

out.

So basically, uh, the railroads did not play a huge

causal role in economic growth in the US.

We think it's really surprising.

Right.

But do you think that this must be creating all

these kind of economic efficiencies and like lots of opportunities,

you can now kind of take the train from, you

know, uh, Cleveland, Ohio to, you know, Davis, California or

whatever, and, and sign a deal and be back, uh,

you know, in time for, for TI, which is not

going to happen anyway.

But basically, Bob Fogel, who's this gigantic figure in, in

economic history, uh, won the Nobel.

Not that that matters, by the way.

He I don't know why we go on and on

about prizes, but we're humans, right?

We're state is seeking monkeys that are just attracted to,

um, markers of status.

Anyway, uh, Fogel calculated what the what the kind of

like gains from the railroad war in the US.

And what he found was very small numbers relative to

GDP.

And he calculated by this kind of idea known as

social savings.

So he compares the price of, of say, taking the

train or taking sending goods on the train, a package

on the train relative to the cheapest available alternative.

And it turns out that you had a canal network

both in this country and in the US before the

rail network took over, and the cost of sending things

by canal and then stagecoach with horses and whatever, he

could calculate that and compare the costs between each of

them.

And so what's interesting is that he sees an effect

in terms of the location of trade, in that some

areas, when in other areas, lose due to the railroad.

But the actual aggregate effect calculated by this social savings

measure, by comparing the railroad to the to the alternative

are actually like a tiny percentage of GDP in the

region of 1% of GDP of gross domestic product.

And, you know, that was kind of, you know, a

surprising result and a kind of, you know, it's kind

of challenges to kind of this, this idea.

But others have still gone on to kind of reflect

upon economic geography in a, in a slightly kind of

more nuanced way.

So this social savings route is very kind of crude

and might miss certain kind of aspects of economic geography

that we'll talk about later in the lecture.

But one of the first one is like market access.

So if you're connected to a region more efficiently, that

effectively increases the size of the market that you're you're

selling into, that can be good, okay.

Because you can then have a larger, you know, if

you're a firm, you can sell to more consumers, okay.

If you're a firm you can hire from a larger

pool of more workers.

But it can also be bad because there's more competition.

Okay?

So if you're making, you know, um, whatever, you know,

uh, you know, some sort of internationally traded commodity, okay,

uh, that's going to be, you know, to kind of

fight for, for, for, for, for its life will a

larger market.

So there's both gains and losses from trade.

And also, you know, we tend to think as economists

that the gains outweigh the, the losses.

But of course that ignores the political economy of all

this.

So one of the kind of kind of frustrating aspects

of Brexit is that it's clearly not an economic decision.

It's obviously a decision that's designed to appeal to what

we would call the political economy.

Okay.

Um, which, which, which matters too.

But but economists put less weight on that.

But it's just not what traditionally what we consider economics.

But in the US these effects really matter.

And we're going to look at them towards the end

of the lecture.

Okay.

Before we get there, I already previewed the idea that

a big feature of the US in the 19th century

is these migratory flows.

So between 1850 and 1940.

30 to 55 million Europeans left the continent permanently, with

about 60% going to the US.

Okay.

And free mass migration entered after World War one.

And that kind of you can see in the numbers,

which I'll show you in a moment.

So this kind of, you know, pre-World War One era

is a really like high period of, of globalisation, both

in terms of these labour flows.

But as you know, if you go on to study

economic history, you'll find out like both in terms of

capital flows as well.

So why did Labour go to North America where Labour

was attracted or like like a magnet, like a magnetic

force to the US because the price of labour, uh,

wages were higher in the US.

Okay.

So you can see some of these flows, um, you

know, there's these are different numbers, you know, for to

find differently, but they're just giving you a sense of

where these migratory flows are happening.

Europe to North America being the biggest flow.

Obviously, you have the transatlantic slave trade.

Uh, they've skipped the part where they go to Liverpool

to get on the boat.

Uh, but you can see also there is an interesting

kind of strong flow to South America as well.

Um, so like a really big period of global movement

in terms of people and the major sources of immigration

to the United States are interesting.

You can see that basically, uh, Ireland is a huge,

uh, flow.

Half a million people, uh, in the 1860s, 1870s, nearly

650in 1880s.

But Germany, you know, 0.7 of 1,000,000.7, 1.5 million inches

the 1880s.

And Great Britain as well.

They're the major kind of contributors.

And you'll notice the Italy is really low and then

kind of gets gets very high in the 1880s and

1990s.

And what's interesting is you might kind of query this

because Italy's economy is Malthusian.

We might you might say, if you want it to

be slightly controversial, but it's very, very poor in the

1850s and 1860s.

And remember, in the barbell and real wage figure, we

had wages from Florence and you could see that you're

in the Renaissance era.

They were actually quite high.

And then from that, that Renaissance peak, they're just declining

to be below subsistence by about 1800.

And we can see here that Italy is really poor,

as evidenced by all sorts of metrics.

But there's actually not that many people leaving Italy.

We think that when countries are very poor, there is

a constraint on migration through poverty, not being able to

afford the trip, but also perhaps education and ignorance as

well.

So I'll show you that schema in a moment.

But it's just interesting to see the numbers that are,

that are, that are flowing across.

If you look at the rates from the countries that

are sending people, you actually get a slightly different picture.

What's really interesting here is comparing, say, Ireland, and this

is the rate leaving per thousand.

Let's focus on the 1880s, where you've got 140 per

thousand and 14% leaving across a decade and then accumulates,

uh, relative to say, somewhere like, oh, I don't know,

France or it's three per thousand.

So what seems to be happening?

If you're interested, it's all about demography.

Demography is destiny.

This is a period where mortality had declined in Europe

and fertility was still high, particularly in somewhere like Ireland.

And there are just these big families and the populations

are exploding.

And where do these people go?

Well, they just leave.

Okay.

So it seems to be almost like, um, like some

sort of homeostatic system that kind of babies reproduce in

old Europe and in travelling to people, the frontiers of

the United States.

And actually, Malta himself observes this, uh, this phenomenon as

well.

But France, the French are interesting because they actually are

all have modern small families by this period.

And they're they don't have an age of high mass

immigration the way the Irish and the Italians.

Okay.

So really interesting kind of dynamics as, as, as as

to what's going on here.

And so it's kind of almost like the, the migration

to the New World to the US is like a

giant safety valve for these really poor economies of Europe.

Ireland and Italy are really poor countries at this time,

but they their population is expanding rapidly.

If they couldn't emigrate, that would have led to a

more Tunisian nightmare.

Okay.

I'm perhaps more balanced.

Remember, the Irish had a famine in the 1840s.

A great hunger which was was very lethal and deeply

impacts upon the psychology of all Irish people.

Talk to an Irish person for for 25 seconds.

They'll eventually mention the farmer of the 1840s.

Right.

And so, uh, you know, there's there's this kind of,

you know, I mean, to think, uh, like, scientifically about

it.

We like to think about counterfactuals.

Counterfactual is a kind of a simulation, a mental model

where we think about, well, what would have happened, you

know, if you didn't do something right.

And it's worth thinking about.

Well, if North America didn't exist and you had the

European style of demographics, what would have happened in Ireland?

Would there have been another famine?

I think that's a really good question.

You know, on, on, uh, the answer is could be

yet, you know, which is kind of really interesting.

Right.

And and then you see so like what you see

is like these, these waves of migration to the US.

And you see, um, that it's really north northwest Europe,

uh, particularly the Irish and the British and it's kind

of late 19th century.

Uh, then they, they start stop going towards around 1900.

Um, then you see southern Europe, that red line, that's

the Italians and mainly Italians actually peaking around here.

And then you see Asia, Africa, the Americas picking up

more recently.

So these kind of interesting kind of patterns that you

see in the past.

And I said one model to think about why why

it looks like this.

Because why isn't it the case that the Italians um,

and also, uh, like, say if you're from Africa as

well, why aren't you migrating earlier if there's a higher,

higher, higher wage differential?

Uh, but we do think that the emigration rate at

low levels of of of of, of income is actually

constrained to certain degree.

When you get these relative high income differences.

You get big migratory flows.

And then as as these migratory flows occur, what happens?

Wage rates equalise between Europe and North America.

Not completely.

But that's the dynamics that we think are happening.

And that is what the economic kind of force that

attenuates the level of migration.

Did you want to ask the question?

I was going to say we also mentioned the contribution

to Africa to us.

But I also want to think, I would think about

how like there was a really high level of discrimination

against corporate corporations, like they used to burn Chinatowns in

the U.S. during that time.

Oh, this this is this is this is this is

absolutely the issue.

What's going on here?

And so in the migrant literature we think about assimilation,

but also labour market discrimination and cultural discrimination.

So so the big question is, is that when you

see migrants come in What I do see, wage differences

is this that evidence for discrimination and so forth.

So that's where the literature spends a lot of time.

And so like we're looking at this in the historical

terms for maybe more European migrants, but for say, Asian

African migrants, you can look at this for more contemporary

data because this is happening more towards the throughout the

20th century, early 20th century and mid 20th century.

And so like, yeah, no, it's absolutely the case.

And what I want to tell, I'm going to show

you an example of some of the picture in a

moment.

The issue there is it's very hard to to work

out.

Is it discrimination or is this an effect of, say,

some sort of selection effect from the sending country.

So like basically say like you have a pattern of

um, saying Irish people go to the US and they

earn 50% less wages than being made of us.

Right.

Is that racism against Irish people?

Or is it the fact that the artists who do

come are maybe not university educated, maybe they're working, uh,

as labourers?

Maybe that did the economics of the flow are selected

for maybe a long term status or human capital dimension.

So they've got a theoretical idea, and I actually think

it's the reverse.

The Irish that went to the US seem to have

been acting positive to that, that they earned a bit

more.

The Irish that went to England.

I'm going to show you where actually maybe was more

negative selection.

So it's selection versus discrimination.

So yeah.

And people think about experiments.

And for Norway I'm going to show you in the

literature, uh, there's a neat experiment where people argue, they

look at brothers and they look at inheritance law.

And I think that that's kind of a random shock.

I don't think I believe them anymore.

I thought it was very clever when I first heard

it.

But when we get to it, I'll show you this.

Okay.

Go.

Okay.

Um, but the key takeaway from this migratory flow stuff

is labour is flowing to where it gets a higher

wage.

Okay, so the American dream is being facilitated by the

fact that a labourer can leave Ireland or in Italy

and go to New York or go to the east

or west coast and earn, um, a higher salary, enabling

a higher standard of living.

Fuller Valley, um, you know, uh, you know, more kind

of economic independence and respect.

And then they could have by staying, uh, you know,

on, on the farm at home where they're from.

Okay.

And wages in the US, um, like on the left

here, just relative everywhere else are significantly above wages in

the old world.

Okay.

So we think this kicks off kind of labour movements,

you know, that's why people move, okay?

And it's kind of one of those things in economic

history, it's rare to see something just so simple.

You know, you just you turn the magnet up a

little bit and then the, the little bits of, uh,

magnetic dust kind of, uh, gravitate towards it.

You might think of a similar dynamic for why London

and, uh, other cities grew in the 19th century.

London earlier, of course, as we've seen, wages were higher

and people were induced to leave their hometown to go

to where they could get a higher wage.

Okay.

And what's interesting about this is dispersion of wages as

populations move.

What you expect to have is more labour supply in

the US, less labour supply in Europe, which actually in

most models, uh, in most models of kind of trade,

uh, uh, basically show that wages will converge over time.

So what scholars show is that the degree dispersion, uh,

you measure made by the coefficient of variation.

Price is basically declining over time during this late 19th

century period of globalisation.

So this period actually seems to be a kind of

a period where you get big labour flows, big capital

flows, which we won't focus on today.

But you can take my word for it example Britain

funding Argentine railroads, etc..

Um, and then uh, you also see that the founding

of large numbers of international organisations, uh, like the modern

day Olympics, begins during this period.

Um, and you see, uh, the laying of telegram lines,

telegraph lines across between the US and Europe, the world

starts becoming more connected, but also more economically dependent on

each other.

And it's in this climate that people are writing books

on how war between Britain and Germany is impossible, because

they're so economically connected.

Right.

So it's just, again, you know, Interesting.

So we have this kind of period that's also known,

by the way, just as an aside, and the world

was on this currency standard known as the gold standard

okay.

And that really controlled against inflation.

So for a lot of kind of classical economists you

have free trade.

You have the gold standard.

Um, you know, you don't have much of a welfare

state.

So for a libertarian economist where the state should be

small, um, you know, the economy, the invisible hand should

just do its work.

This is like the great period.

But look what happened, ended in, you know, basically World

War One, a catastrophic interwar period that there is quite

a lot of damage.

Uh, not as much as the World war is, of

course.

But then it was it was led to the Second

World War, which is in many ways World War one.

The interwar period in World War two just seems to

be this ongoing European civil war that I would wager,

are actually kind of really impressed by, by the economic

kind of failures, perhaps of, this of this period which

which are interesting to think about, but maybe that's more

of a philosophical aside.

As I said before in the migrant literature, and there

is this we've already kind of highlighted it here, uh,

this, this kind of like interest in working out how

much, um, you know, uh, discrimination and how much selection

of migration is going on in these flows.

And so what you can see is you can look

at earnings, um, and, and wealth and, you know, demography,

lifespan, if mortality rates of migrant groups and you can

see differences.

So this distribution is basically, uh, basically uh looking at

brothers in the Norwegian census and the US census and

looking at occupations, ranking them in terms of their earnings

capacity.

Okay.

So 100 is the top ends or 150.

Even zero is like no poor neighbours and they can

see that when they compare brothers here.

There's basically a case that when people go to the

US, what's happening is, is that they, um, that they

have a lower incomes than they would have had if

they had stayed in Norway when comparing brothers.

So this is perhaps suggestive evidence that this might be,

um, might be kind of, uh, like a discrimination factor.

But what they argue in the paper is they look

like basically on a nuanced, uh, like, empirical test, looking

at sets of brothers, uh, where they think that inheritance

law basically randomly induced the younger brother to leave.

And so what, what what they kind of think is

actually happening is negative selection in that what's happening?

You know, it sounds kind of a perverse way of

putting it, but basically what's happening is maybe there's a

kind of the unskilled Norwegians are more likely to leave

than the very high skilled lawyer or higher educated.

Type.

So the appearance of poor Norwegians in the US is

not evidence of anti.

Norwegian discrimination.

It's just your taking that those working class Norwegians and

seeing them in a different context.

And so one of the kind of interesting kind of

aspects of this, I'll let you look at this, um,

uh, you know, in your own time.

Uh, um, and can I just emphasise research is a

kind of, uh, like a back and forth process.

There's more recent work finding different effects, and but I've

done some work on this for myself, for England, for

for England, and with respect to the Irish in England.

And what's, what's interesting about the Irish in England is

that there isn't this kind of romantic kind of fairy

tale that's told about Irish to England migration, the way

that you get, say, for Irish to the US.

So the Irish go to the US.

Irish in the US is very romanticised.

You have like, you know, a lot of contemporary culture,

like gangs in New York and all the rest of

that kind of stuff.

But then you also have like, uh, like the Kennedys

and all this kind of like political and economic success,

whereas he's the Irish, and England doesn't seem to have

that same kind of romance to it.

So what you can do is just look at the

wealth at death of people with Irish surnames in the

English wealth that death records, which I've got, I've got

all of them.

Right.

And basically you can just categorise them where, where what's

happening.

And it turns out the Irish are about 50% as

rich as native born English or those of English surnames.

And that's something that's going to really disappearance as we

go towards the contemporary era.

But there's still quite a kind of a penalty.

And you've got to ask yourself, there could possibly be

anti-Irish sentiment in in the labour market or in some

other dimension, and could be in the minority market.

But then you've got to wonder about, like the Scottish,

the Scottish display the opposite pattern.

When they come to England, they tend to do very

well.

So you've got this kind of weird kind of inequality

that if you believe it's anti-Irish discrimination, then you've got

to believe that there's some sort of positive discrimination in

favour of Scottish people, which is kind of hard to

believe.

But they're, you know, it's just an attempt to kind

of sketching out a picture for an element of migration.

And, you know, economic economics that we've actually never even

seen any data relating to it.

So that's kind of where this literature is at.

It's it's trying to kind of identify this effect just

by putting some numbers on it and then thinking about

some clever empirical, natural experiments to exploit.

So basically, you know, uh.

the takeaway is, is that you have this interesting 19th

century period that's characterised by these factor flows, labour and

capital.

Okay.

And people leaving Europe for a better life.

As an aside, I told you about the underlying demography,

which is just fascinating, at least to me.

Um, and what's interesting is, is that people leave Europe

for the higher wages, as we talked about, um, and

what, you know, you have these higher wages in the

US and the higher wages in the US, we think

are just a function like in the Allen model of

relative factor scarcity.

The US is land and natural resource rich.

Okay.

Um, and lots of productive agriculture.

So these wages are high to attract the relatively scarce

factor of production people.

Okay.

But basically if there was nothing dynamic happening in the

economy, if there was no productivity advance, all those people

would leave, the wages would go down, and then we

just be be kind of recursively back to a more

an equilibrium.

Okay.

So something dynamic happened in the economy that wasn't just

population growth, but it was productivity advance.

And we look at that um, here okay.

So American industrialisation America had great raw material availability, abundant

fertile land, water power, coal and oil.

And then with this 19th century globalised migration people.

But people are expensive.

Okay.

So there were incentives to economise in those high wages.

So what you see is manufacturing basically incentivised, like in

theory, to substitute raw material and energy for people.

Okay.

And what you see is directed technological change in American

industry, uh, during this period.

And we can highlight this to three elements.

First is the invention in industry of the concept of

interchangeable parts.

Okay.

And I say invention because just like the discovery of

the Americas, other people have discovered it long before other

people.

So let's just take that with a pinch of salt.

The assembly line okay.

The invention assembly line and also modern management.

So interchangeable parts is interest uh typically associated Eli Whitney.

And so to the cotton gin or the cotton engine

which removes seeds from cotton.

And what you have here is a concept of making

a machine that is interchangeable parts that are produced in

isolation.

Okay.

And this is good because instead of having an artisan

produce one machine with all these bespoke elements, that probably

works beautifully but can never be repaired, because once that

guy retires or, you know, falls off, uh, you know,

his horse cars and dies, Uh, you know, it's it's

it's it's it's not possible to kind of fix it

again because he had very specialised knowledge and a way

of doing things.

But interchangeable, standardised parts allows for, first of all, greater

specialisation in production, but also greater facility for repairs and

also greater facilities for customisations for specific jobs.

So you get easier assembly, easier repair.

And also if you split production into components of interchangeable

parts, you can you can just kind of dumb it

down what needs to be done.

And this is a good point.

A lot of the British industrial revolution and the industrialising

growth in late 19th century US involved dumbing down production.

Okay, they call it de skilling in the literature.

So instead of having artisanal high value production, you just

kind of make the thing really simple and you get

someone who's, uh, probably not as talented to do the

job, but for a lot less money.

Okay.

And, and that's kind of what leads to these productivity

advances.

And you can see this when you look at like,

industry specific, um, sectors that resisted modernisation like this, like

watchmaking in England, for example, famously resisted this kind of,

um, this kind of division, um, and was obliterated by

cheap imports from Switzerland.

Okay.

Another example is the singer washing machine.

This is made by interchangeable parts.

And that's why there are so goddamn many of these

things.

Okay, there's some shop, I think.

I think it was All Saints.

Uh, you know, this kind of, um.

I guess it's a fast fashion brand.

You see it in Spitalfields, and I think in one

of the windows or in all the windows.

They just have, like, about, like, you know, it looks

like to me, 200 singer machines.

It just stacked on each other as a kind of

wall, you know, as a kind of pattern.

And so these things are beautiful.

Like you can see there's beautiful like art.

You know, it looks artisanal, but actually this is absolutely

the beginning of the end.

It's the end of beauty.

Okay.

Pause for emphasis.

But these interchangeable parts could production by 50% and lead

to like them being able to produce something that like,

looks beautiful to our modern eyes because we've been we've

been destroyed by the internet and, uh, fast fashion, uh,

something that looks very beautiful, but like, actually basically obliterated

the artisanal sector that existed beforehand.

But it's made with interchangeable parts that can be swapped

out, but also allowed specialisation, like Adam Smith talked about,

uh, in the production process.

So that's interchangeable parts.

The next thing to think about is the assembly line.

And here we have, uh, unfortunately a stylised fact.

So the idea is that Henry Ford, you know, Henry

Ford of the Ford cars, you know, Henry Ford, if

you can have any colour you want for the car,

as long as it's black.

Basically before Ford.

The idea is artisanal, artisanal producers with a love of

beauty crafted projects individually in teams with bespoke components.

Okay, hard to repair because they were very much expressions

of of of the poetry of the producer and so

forth.

Ford comes along and breaks the back of, of of

this artist sector or artisanal sector and divide teams into

labour to, uh, to basically produce things with interchangeable parts.

So these ideas are related and in a connected workflow.

But it's funny because there are many examples of assembly

line production long before Henry Ford.

They're just not the dominant form of production.

And I'll show you a picture of the Arsenal of

Venice.

Um, you know, the pictures from 1797.

But the Arsenal of Venice is apparently existed since 1104.

Then there's also other ideas, including, um, Cincinnati hog slaughterhouses.

So this is the arsenal of Venice.

And you can just see here this is where they're

producing their their fleet.

And you can see they split it into whole making

caulking of the whole mass weapons, ropes, anchors or a

sails.

And there's a bakery, you know, you know, like you

can just see how it's still it's it's the idea

of assembly line kind of manufacture, but it just wasn't

the dominant form.

And you got flour manufacturing.

We split the components up and then this, um, Cincinnati

hog disassembly line, uh, you've got let's read it out.

Killing, cutting, rendering and salting all kind of split up.

So instead of just someone having a pig carcase and

say, deal with that, I'll see you like, uh, I'll

see you at the end of the day, you've split

it up into components.

And this division, as I said, just like Adam Smith

talked about, allowed for this, uh, productivity gain.

But like, remember, again, a key point is it's actually

fundamentally descaling in the first instance.

You need a less skilled worker to do it, and

that's why you can pay them less.

Okay, so this might seem might seem cruel and capitalist

and like where is the beauty?

And you would be right.

But this kind of cruel turning of the screw on

the, on the worker is what leads to these productivity

gains and what is led to the kind of great

riches of the world that we live in today.

And this is also evidenced by Henry Ford's Highland Park

factory.

You'll notice that in 1914.

This is coming way later.

But this idea, I guess, in terms of becoming dominant,

is really is really taking hold in 1914.

And you can see just with good numbers, just how

more efficient that turning the screw was getting.

Again, no moral kind of assessment here.

Uh, but we can we can we think about the

moral the moral sentiments of that.

Uh, Adam Smith has a book called The Theory of

Moral Sentiments.

So you can see how you can see how they've

just turned the screw here from 13 hours to assemble

a Ford chassis down to less than two.

Okay, that means that they can sell them for cheaper,

and means that people can afford cars that would never

have been able to afford cars in the past.

So, you know, interesting.

The morality.

Finally, modern management is involved.

And and this is where you get to the kind

of modern theory of management from so-and-so to Alfred Chandler.

Um, you get to like, you know, a shift from

like, family productions, family artisanal productions, uh, where one person

is working on one object for a long period of

time to where you get lots of interchangeable parts being

produced on an assembly line.

You got large hierarchical firms, uh, benefiting from economies of

scale.

You know, unit costs become cheaper the larger your your

unit is.

You get a rise of professional managers and rise of

mass distribution.

Rise of advertising.

Think of Mad Men in the 1950s.

And this kind of managerial, you know, um, kind of

revolution really makes the US economy globally dominant in the

20th century.

But it's it's an elevation and splitting up of tasks,

uh, that you see continuing on from Henry Ford in

the early part of the 20th century.

So, yeah, so that that kind of captures some characteristics

to do with 19th century US growth, very different from

the kind of long run institutional narratives that we were

telling last week with our last few minutes.

Today, let's look at aspects of geographic persistence and the

growth of cities.

Okay, so a key idea in economic history is something

called part dependency.

And part dependency means nothing, quite frankly.

What it means is, you know, um, something is something

because it was that yesterday, like London is a city

and rich because it was a city and rich last

week.

Okay?

There's just this persistence over time in terms of urbanisation

and wealth, of course, except when there isn't, in the

case of the reversal of fortune of, say, Argentina and

Chile and Uruguay in the 20th century.

But we think about path dependency as this path that,

that the places are on.

Okay.

So there's been a city here since Roman times, and

it's successful today, perhaps because it was successful yesterday.

There's just an internal inertia to what's going on here.

And maybe it's to do with institutions, uh, say the

cloth makers Guild and not many cloth makers in London,

but there's a cloth makers guild and the City of

London.

You can go and visit their archives and talk to

the archivist, who seems very lonely.

Um, and then, uh, you also have infrastructure?

Um, cities, um, in particular, rivers tend to stay in

the same place over time.

And so these cities, as I said, set up to

be self-reinforcing.

And they benefit from agglomeration effects, which we'll talk about

in a moment.

But visualising this is really interesting because you know who's

flown over the US.

Okay.

Do you ever look at the window?

There's maybe nothing there, right?

It's just empty.

And then you go, you're kind of going across here

and then you see Salt Lake City and it's like,

oh wow.

There's like some lights.

It's mainly empty, but it's the population is deeply concentrated

in these population centres.

Okay, okay.

The East coast has some some big places.

Of course.

You know, I'm not going to list the cities in

the US, but you can see there's these interesting geographic

patterns.

The height of this is indicating population, by the way

the population distribution so flat there's nobody it peaks where

there's more people.

And you can see this globally as well.

And you can see that like basically like what?

The Facebook map, the global population distributions tends to pick

out coastlines and rivers.

Okay.

So cities tend to be more or less located on

rivers, lakes and coastlines.

Okay.

Uh, so they're mapping out the geography of the world.

And so geography is determining where cities are, uh, to

a certain degree.

And and what you can see over the past several

centuries is that more and more of the world is

are living in cities.

Okay.

So cities seem to be associated with growth, with the

industrial revolution, with the global kind of, um, pattern of

economic development.

And here's more of this, which is just really cool,

right?

It's kind of it's, it's, it's it kind of really

visualises, um, economic geography in a way that you wouldn't

expect, actually.

So basically, why do cities exist?

Well, there are several kind of ideas, but they're all

related to contemporary ideas of economic geography.

One of the ideas is that by clustering together, people

benefit from agglomeration, positive agglomeration, effects and knowledge.

Spill-overs okay, so one idea is marshalling economies, and this

is really industry specific.

And the idea is that if you're in an industry

and you cluster it with other, other, other kind of

people in that industry, like say, Detroit in the car

industry, you can benefit your industry because you've got you

can cluster suppliers and you have a managerial class that

you can poach from your competitors.

And workers can flow between different, uh, different kind of

employers.

And then you can also have local educational establishments specialising

in the production for your managerial class, for your worker

class, etc..

Now this is a this Detroit's the classic example.

This is all great until there's kind of a global

shock in the car market and Detroit goes into freefall.

And then you see a quick rise and and an

even faster fall.

Okay.

And if you look at contemporary like pictures of of

Detroit, you see, you know, something that grew very fast

and disappeared quickly.

So you have all of these kind of other industries,

Lancashire cotton industry, uh, the Midwest, the Detroit car industry,

Swiss watch industry, London, New York financial centres.

I guess they become fragile as well.

And I'll leave you.

This is just a side something I did and watchmakers,

I've mentioned them already.

But the other thing I want to mention before I

let you go are Jacobs externalities.

And these are more general.

This is like basically everybody clustering together.

And I think what happens here, what's really driving this

is that you create for me, um, you know, like

a lot of different kind of positive spill-overs.

So you've got like lots of local supply of general

and business support.

You can have more specialist kind of coffee shops, for

example.

You've got more kind of diversity, more trained workers, and

that can learn a kind of greater and more diverse

exposure to different industries.

And this allows more new ideas to flow across different

industries.

Okay.

And this is what possibly leads to these famous knowledge

spill-overs that we all cluster together because this creates something

extra by all this kind of intellectual exchange.

And, you know, the broad kind of based industry, um,

crossover supports this as well.

And the example is like pretty much any big city

that you see here.

Okay.

So I'll finish with this Dag.

Okay.

So you have cities.

And if you think of the city, here's the ultimate

way of clustering the collective hive mind, the collective brain.

Okay.

That leads to kind of some of the more interesting

kind of expressions of human culture, like, say, in Silicon

Valley or this city, but leads to great music, uh,

great interactions, great life, Etc..

Okay, uh, let's stop there and, uh, I'll see you

later.

Yeah.

Thanks.

Yeah, it was a little rush towards the end, so.

Jacobs.

So.

So let's think of marshalling.

Externalities are the ones where you've got you're you're in

the automobile industry and you cluster with other automobile makers.

Okay, but Jacobs externalities, you know, thanks to the economist

Jane Jacobs.

It's like if you're in any industry, you cluster with

any other industry.

So it's broader.

And there are benefits to doing that from like knowledge

spill-overs and, you know, workers and education and all that

being clustered into one area.

Similar.

Very similar.

Yeah.

Just like.

Yeah.

Exactly.

Yeah.

They're related.

Yeah.

No no no no.

Competing not necessarily sharing.

Yeah.

Yeah I know what you mean.

But like they're not like it's not like they're holding

hands and singing kumbaya right.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah.

But they're sharing it in a kind of.

Yeah.

Like they're in the same place.

They can share the air, you know?

Yeah.

I mean, the same reason for increased competition.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah.

Exactly.

So like people benefit.

Yeah.

The economy develops.

Yeah.

Thank you, thank you.

See ya.

See ya.

The economics.

Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah.

The new ideas that.

Yes.

The benefits and get in the city.

Yeah.

Don't be a bad industry.

Yeah.

Even the externalities start to fail, too.

Yeah, yeah.

So any, like, new business strategy or something in Harvard

business, it takes years.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

I think there are subtleties to this that really matter.

Because when, when, when industry starts to fail like the

best, most ambitious people in the first.

So they then if you don't have like the really

smart guys in the room anymore or women, you know,

uh, yeah, things fall apart pretty quickly.

So it's a little bit more new.

So selection migration comes into these externality effects as well.

Yeah.

Largest state in the country.

But yet it's losing population.

Yeah.

People like me and others are.

Oh yeah.

Yeah yeah.

All the business that's done.

Yeah.

It doesn't work anymore.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Running the business are outdated.

Yeah.

The information never comes back.

I thought it was quite interesting.

Yeah.

Good.

All right.

Thanks a lot.

Lecture 5:

You know.

Okay, folks, let's crack on.

It's five Bypass, um, will begin.

So welcome back to 101.

And today we're going to talk about technological change.

So I had to shout to shut you up.

Um, uh, so basically last week we talked about geography

and growth, which kind of followed on from the week

before a little bit.

But last week we definitely focus more on North America

and characteristics of, um, US economic growth in the late

19th century.

Um, we also look at an early 20th century.

So we focus upon the growth of industry.

And then we also dabbled a little bit in economic

geography agglomeration.

Um, we'll see these things come up again this week.

We're going to develop all of these ideas and look

at technological change in a more general framework through the

purpose of the kind of, I guess, association of these

technologies with an idea called general purpose technologies, and seeing

what we can learn from that as a concept and

how valuable it is, but what we see are these

great waves of general purpose technology come about.

Over the past several centuries and, you know, steam, which

is, you know, very variously associated with periods of the

Industrial Revolution and the computer age and telecommunications.

And also it's very relevant as we're going through this

period where we have a new general purpose technology.

Yeah.

You know, I.

Great.

You've you've made it.

And so we'll get there eventually.

But I think that the, the kind of the exciting

part about general purpose technologies is that they have this

capability to transform all of economic life because they're general.

Okay.

So a great example is the mythos that surrounds the

building of the US railroad.

Okay.

So you know, the the building of the railroad, the

the expansion of the western frontier, all of these things

are kind of collapsed, collapse into the collective consciousness has

been this great kind of dynamic period in US economic

history, creating new opportunities and creating new links, creating new

markets and creating new, uh, new and expanded lives.

Uh.

So, uh, last week we mentioned the idea of how

people could basically evaluate the impact of technological change.

And one way that's quite famous in economic history comes

from Bob Fogel.

And this is the idea of imagining a counterfactual.

And a counterfactual is imagining a world that doesn't exist.

And that perhaps has one thing removed from the world

that we live in and the classic counterfactual.

Um, you know, in, in economic history, American economic history

is this counterfactual 19th century US that didn't have railways.

Okay, so then you compare maybe some attribute that you

can calculate and say a simulation or just a set

of equations.

This stuff is happening in a very kind of, you

know, simple way on Excel spreadsheets at a margin and

just imagining what the, what the kind of cost savings

would be from moving from, say, uh, canal's a canal

based uh, network to get goods from A to B

and people from A to B in the interior ships,

of course, around the, around the coast and looking for

like what the actual savings were from the invention of

the railway.

And as we as we kind of talked about last

week, it turns out that those savings are actually relatively

small percentages of GDP.

And this is something to think about, because for all

these general purpose technologies, they tend to have really small

effects on the economy, and they take a long time

to kick through.

So it's actually kind of counterintuitive, but they do end

up transforming the world.

But they take a long time to get there.

Um, but of course, there's more kind of going on

than just those simple cost savings the railway connected places

that were never connected before, thus enabling kind of the

growth of, of of markets and market access, as it's

called by economic geographers to take place where, where these

places weren't connected before.

Okay.

So when we think about invention over, uh, the kind

of the history of, of of, of our species, we

see like great moments and great geniuses arise and you

see often isolated, um, instances of, of extreme technological achievement.

Okay.

So the Great Pyramids of Giza or the Roman aqueduct

system that that brought, um, you know, water to, to

the, the, the, the imperial city, uh, you know, and

then you had Nero's palace and the rotating kind of

dining room.

There's stunning kind of examples of human ingenuity.

But these before our own era didn't really achieve widespread,

um, you know, a diffusion, if you will.

Okay.

It's only in our kind of recent time that we

see the fact that we have, like, mobile phones in

our pockets and, you know, and magic kind of tools

and access to information, you know, that would seem like,

like a complete fantasy to our ancestors.

But there was great ingenuity in the past, but it

didn't kind of travel very far.

And you can see that basically a lot of the

kind of invention, say, going from 1120 to 1670.

This is from Greg Clark here.

All of these inventions are, are are truly ingenious, um,

you know, including Arabic numerals and literary achievements, including the

Boccaccio's Decameron.

And, uh, we have also navigation achievements.

Uh, the importing of the potato into the into the

old world from the new world.

But all of these things really didn't have this widespread,

transformative effect on the economy and in many cases, until

much later, if they had any effect, uh, at all.

For instance, uh, gunpowder, you know, uh, obviously was it

existed in the East and China, but in Europe, 1275,

it took many centuries for it to actually be usable

in warfare.

So this just helps us take with this Leonardo's notebooks,

um, you know, uh, you know, aqueduct technology and Rome,

the pyramids of Egypt, you know, what you can get

are inventions.

Okay.

But then you have this crucial distinction of how they

travel.

Okay.

If basically the invention has a commercial application, we can

maybe, perhaps call it an innovation.

Okay.

And so these innovations can be kind of commercially applied.

And if you think back to our lecture on the

Industrial Revolution, it needed a good okay, that basically was

a product of innovation that had a mass market and

that were textiles, okay.

Textiles were what people needed.

That was the thing that really spread helicopters needed, like,

you know, a few more centuries to come, you know,

to have widespread demand.

Okay.

So you weren't going to have an industrial revolution based

on the innards helicopter ideas, but like the more mundane,

banal application of, um, of ingenuity to making cotton shirts

or knitting shirts at a in a cheaper, more efficient

way, that's what transformed the world and gave us the

the modern day wealth of nations and enable us to

live longer lives, enables infant mortality, slashed, you know, by

a factor of 100 and enable this kind of common

knowledge economy we live in right now.

Um, but, you know, it's it's so it's interesting.

You can see diffusion, the widespread use of invention and

imitation, just basic copying.

And this can be a great way of just doing

things.

And, uh, you know, I think Japan, China is often,

uh, Japan used to be kind of like, um, you

know, tags is a great imitator of US and European

invention and innovations.

China has that, you know, you go to AliExpress and

you find lots of kind of different kind of electric

bikes and, you know, even like mechanical watches that seem

to be imitations of European US designs.

But remember that economies and cultures that start off imitating

others inventions also end up innovating.

That tends to be how the process works.

Um, and so I've also I'll finish with watchmaking today.

But it's really interesting to me that watchmaking.

We think about Swiss watches and, you know, they cost

like a lot of money.

And it's not entirely clear why they cost so much

money, like 250,000 for various different kind of brands and

so forth.

Um, and then you have like the, the origin of

the Swiss watchmaking luxury watchmaking industry, basically producing cheaper knockoffs

of English watches.

So you can actually see that Chinese watchmakers are doing

cheaper knockoffs of Swiss watchmakers, but the quality difference isn't

as big as you might expect.

It's actually pretty good, uh, like a fraction of the

cost.

But that process of imitation.

And why you imitating?

Because you're hungry, right?

You know, you feel that kind of desire to kind

of, you know, start a factory, build a business, produce

a good for market that will make you a fortune.

But you can only do that by producing something that

has like wide consumer demand.

And there's only a limited consumer demand for these high

end luxuries.

So like, you know, lots of distinctions between invention, innovation,

imitation, diffusion.

And one thing that facilitates all of these innovations are

the kind of general changes in technology and technology.

So we've lived through or I have lived through.

You are the kind of the generation that grew up

with like smartphones and social media, for better or worse.

Right.

And and now we're all going to experience what, what

a, what AI is going to do or what it's

not going to do.

Maybe it's just massively overhyped, right?

But there's a context of general purpose technologies in the

background to all these other things.

So we have, um, electricity, you know, might be a

general purpose technology, but another general purpose knowledge technology, you

know, are going to be books.

Okay.

So economic historians have looked at book production in Europe

going back a long way.

This is going back to the year 500.

And this is, um, uh, from economic historians looking at

the, the books, uh, per million inhabitants.

And you see this kind of kind of rise, um,

from the fifth century to the, to the, to to

the 10th and then a real kind of plateau, I

think, between the seventh and say, say, a 11th century,

12th century before, like a bigger rise.

You know, you'll notice that the axis here has this

funky scale.

It goes 0.1 to 1 to 10 to 100 to

1000, uh, to 10,000 and so forth.

This is a long ten scale.

Okay.

So it's really it's really just kind of squashing down

a lot of the variation, but really interesting to see

these changes over the, over the long run.

And, and the paper is really interesting.

If you have a look at it it's linked here.

Boring and ended.

And the idea is that you see all this slow

and gradual innovation and invention in book production.

Okay, so you have pre 100, you have scrolls okay.

You might have seen like the Dead Sea Scrolls.

You know, where they found like uh, you know they're

using the AI to read some of these scrolls that

basically are to damage to unfurl because they just like

disintegrate.

Then you have the emergence of the first kind of

books, which were known as Codex.

And it was news to me that it was in

this in the seventh century, around the six hundreds, that

individual words were separated, which helps.

Right?

And then around 800, you see modern punctuation, uniform scripts,

uh, these paragraphs, and then you get the substitution of

paper for parchment in between 800, uh, and 1450.

And of course, the big moment in book production is

the invention of the movable type printing press by Gutenberg

in Germany.

And so, you know, you know, you might think that

this contradicts the last line, but the last slide was

on a log scale.

This is what happens if you plot the data on

a on a linear scale.

Okay.

So believe it or not like these.

This is the same data, same data farther here.

It's actually an insight here.

That's where the data source from.

And I've taken more of the data.

But you can see here that the impact that this

has.

So like um yeah.

No no.

So so just spectacular.

And you can think about all the effects that, that

this has.

But it's still kind of, you know, book production is

still vanishingly small.

And in particular, in this period most of these books

that are produced are religious texts.

Okay, there's very few kind of modern scientific knowledge being

created or how to manuals, or even the modern novel

is still several centuries away by now.

And so, yeah, this this is this is my little

tip.

Always check the axis.

Uh, so this is the linear axis.

Same data as there.

So, uh, you know, what were the impacts about?

Like the printing press was that it made book purchase

cheaper.

Okay.

And that's how we as an economic historians would really

track this.

Okay.

So this is a calculation based on, uh, the price

of books, uh, relative to the average, um, workers wages.

Okay.

So we have estimates of average workers wages for many

places in Europe going back a long way.

For example, we have the records of the rebuilding of

the City of London following the fire.

So the building records for Saint Paul's Cathedral list the

day wages is one source and it even goes back

even further.

Not so you can see basically, you know, um, how

long an average worker had to work to buy one

book.

So you can see that from around 1200 to 1450

it's around about two months.

Okay.

And then the movable type printing press really has there's

lots more data in it, but there's a range of

observations.

But you can see that clustered points is is trending

downwards such that by say 1550, 1600, it's about one

day to buy a book.

And again that's a large scale.

Okay.

So you can see the decline is very severe okay.

If you plotted this on a linear scale to be

more dramatic.

And yeah, so that's a kind of an example of

an interesting, you know, general purpose technology.

Innovation didn't matter.

Doesn't matter.

Okay.

Exactly.

Does it matter?

Let's.

Let's think about this.

Okay.

So our colleague in economics, Jeremiah Dittmer, argues that it

does.

Okay.

He argues that it matters because it's associated by with

faster population growth.

Towns that were kind of, uh, had printing press businesses

grew faster than towns that didn't have printing press businesses.

Okay.

And so he argues that the interpretation here is that

this is like a modern kind of tech economy, okay,

that you had this frontier economic growth that led to

diffusion of ideas and led to faster growth.

Okay.

Um, and he has all this interesting kind of ways

of identifying this effect.

The counterargument is that it's a consumption good, okay.

It doesn't make your city any richer.

It could be just that your city is richer and

growing faster.

There are people flowing in from the rural hinterland into

this urban environment in these German cities, French cities.

And then they want to read because the city is

doing well anyway.

Okay.

So you might want to think about, like, as you

said, like a Dag diagram to think about what the

direction of causality is between them.

Or it could be that there's some underlying factor, okay.

That's just something in the air that's creating both of

these things together.

And, and here's a, here's an illustration of, of a

printing press.

And it's from a German town and it's called the

Grand Park.

And there's, there's all these, um, all these kind of

I don't know, I don't really know what's going on

in the picture, but isn't this interesting?

And that is the zombie people have come to kind

of hang out.

It looks like they just want to be friends, right?

Uh, anyway, they're they're killing everybody.

Okay, so basically, this is like the data in Jeremiah's

paper, and it shows the cities were printing and 1450,

1460 all the way down to 1500.

And he argues that these cities that do this grow

faster.

Okay.

Okay.

So we have these we're going to kind of focus

now just to give you a like where it's going

intellectually.

We're going to focus on various different general purpose technologies

like we just did with printing and books.

And then think about do they matter?

Okay.

And it turns out that yeah, they do matter.

We think they matter.

We hope they matter.

But it turns out it's very hard to measure it.

Okay.

So we've talked about printing and we talked about how

we measure it with city growth.

And from the mid 15th century and the problem of

endogeneity and two way causality and the fact that it

could be just the fact that cities that are doing

well, you know, want to read books because they're It's

just.

It's just something that happens when you grow richer.

It's like it's consumption.

Good.

Not not a good that creates growth from water or

something that we reward ourselves, you know, with.

Okay.

What we're going to look at next is steam.

And then we're going to look at computing.

And then we're going to have a look at AI.

And that's going to be fun because it's going to

be based on complete speculation.

Um, and then we're going to finish by thinking about

what causes this technological change.

Okay.

What's the ghost in the machine okay.

So steam okay is classically associated with the Industrial Revolution.

And it's seen as a kind of a technology that

changes everything.

Okay.

But what's amazing about this is that it had really

nothing to do with the actual original industrial revolution.

So what you have are steam engines being invented around

the time of the Industrial Revolution.

Thomas Newcomen for steam engines.

James Watson proved design.

You have actually.

1830 is the key date for the first railways in

England, and then 1838, the first steamship across the Atlantic.

But remember, the steam power was was invented initially to

pump water out of mines.

Okay.

It wasn't used in transport until much later.

And remember, whilst you get the the kind of the

1830s as being the decade where you see the application

of steam in transport, remember it takes a long time

for it to actually really take hold.

Okay.

Be fully, fully full innovation.

So really, the steam engine comes too late to be

a significant explainer of the industrial revolution.

Okay, so the steam engine seems to come about as

a result of the Industrial Revolution, or at least associated

with it not causing it.

Okay.

And here's some nice images of some various different steam

engines.

These are the type of steam engines that that were

invented originally, which were pumping water out of the ground

so they can be mined and they're variously innovated to

be more efficient and so forth.

Then you see the first early kind of train steam

engine trains.

And then if you look at this steamboat down here,

you can see it's an old sailing ship here, but

it's been it's been rigged out with this water wheel

on the side.

And obviously later they worked out that it was much

better to have the engine just somewhere at the back

there.

Um, but yeah, no fantastic period of very exciting, dramatic

and famous inventions.

But what's really interesting is that it didn't cause the

industrial revolution, as I just said.

Okay, so steam is too late, okay to be really

driving the change and say the cotton textile industry.

Okay.

And and the takeaway is that before about 1800.

The contribution to economic growth from steam is around zero.

Now it's not zero because there is there is some

steam in the economy, but it's close to zero.

And you can see this here from this table from,

um, from uh, like compiled by Cormac O'Connor but comes

from Nick Crofts and his co-author, but let's say 1760.

Okay.

Steam is like, really a really small part of the

British economy in terms of the horsepower, thousands of horsepower

that are being produced in the economy.

But look at by 1907, steam is dominated.

Okay.

Steam is like basically 98, 99% of power in the

economy.

So it does matter.

Okay.

But it doesn't matter during the classical period, the Industrial

revolution.

That's something to get fixed in your mind.

Okay.

So steam is a general purpose technology, like books like

I like computing.

And we've mentioned this general purpose technology and framework throughout

the lecture, but we haven't paused to define it.

You'll notice that the kind of lecture is structured around

this idea of general purpose technologies, because in the literature,

economists and economic historians have found it useful to have

a kind of a kind of an abstract concept of,

of general purpose technologies to kind of collect a few

stylised facts.

And that's kind of what we're going to do today.

So general purpose technologies are a technology that can be

improved, is widely used, has many uses, many complementarities.

And you can maybe think about it, maybe there's some

general purpose technologies that we haven't mentioned so far.

Remember we talked of books.

We talked about steam power.

We're going to talk about AI and computing.

But there's also electricity, which we also mentioned as well.

So the general purpose technologies have this have these characteristics.

And another general purpose technology might be the factory system.

Remember we looked at the the kind of the the

the.

Well, we briefly mentioned Henry Ford and Lincoln and Lincoln

Park and and the idea of how you would have

just very kind of, um, you know, assembly line manufacturer

would interchangeable parts, um, you know, that that concept is

also a, a kind of general purpose technology, as is

modern management systems.

Okay.

The idea of specialised marketing teams, managers, hierarchy, team leaders,

whenever you will, all of these things, these modern management

styles are also a general purpose technology.

Um, we also kind of talked about them last week.

What's interesting is, is the general purpose technology heuristic.

The abstract notion allows us to make some generalities about

what these things do for economic growth and allow us

to maybe help predict the future.

Okay?

And help us explain, you know, uh, you know, whether

we should have put all our money into, um, um,

into AI.

Start-Ups.

Um, the initial impact of a general purpose technology on

productivity growth is typically very small, okay?

And the realisation of its potential may take several decades.

And this there was a kind of, um, there was

a kind of an interesting kind of quote from Bob

solo, famous economist, who said that you could see the

computer age everywhere, but it didn't show up in the

productivity statistics.

Okay.

So it's really kind of interesting how you get these

innovations that change everything, but the productivity just doesn't show

it.

So one of, um, one of kind of Nick Nicholas

Craft's great contributions was to kind of revise measures of

economic growth for the British economy during the Industrial Revolution,

and part of that project was to look at what

the contribution to growth, to productivity growth was from, say,

steam.

Okay.

And what you get is a very small number.

Okay.

So remember the contribution to growth during the period of

the classical revolution, say 1750 to 1800.

Here, 1760 to 1800 is 0.01 of a percent per

year.

Okay.

And remember like this is going to this if we

want to compare it to something, the information and communications

technology contribution contribution.

And this is an era of IBM mainframes, fax machine

telephones uh and then finishing with, you know, uh, those

really big mobile phones that you see in the original

Wall Street from the 1980s.

Gordon Gekko greed is good.

That was contributing about 0.7% growth per year.

So it really is fair to say steam contributed nothing

to the overall revolution.

And even even like I said, it took a long

time to catch like by 1830.

It's still still next to nothing, but it gets going

and it contributes about a third of a percent to

productivity growth per year.

Okay, so what's interesting is why why is this so

low?

Okay.

Well our mind kind of looks at things and gets

attracted to the dramatic changes.

Okay.

So in industrialising Britain the steam engine is exciting new

technology.

And you see it and you notice it, but it's

not everywhere.

Britain is still, you know, you know, an economy in

transition.

And steam power actually accounts for a very tiny proportion

of the capital stock.

The capital stock is the r, the money and buildings

used to make other goods.

So steam is only a tiny proportion of that productive

part of the of the British economy.

And despite its ubiquity and our ubiquity and our human

minds attraction to novelty, it really did not matter all

that much at the time.

It was not fundamental.

And here's a counterfactual would Britain have had an industrial

revolution without the steam engine?

What's the answer?

Yes, yes, I think so.

Okay.

It's not fundamental.

It's another fruit of growth.

And obviously once it gets going, it does contribute to

growth.

But I think the British or the or the humans

broadly defined, whatever it the British humanity itself, all of

us would have created something else.

So that's why I'm saying we're finished with dogs.

But you might start thinking about the relationships in your

mind as you go forward.

Okay.

so another general purpose technology to think about in this

framework is information technology IoT, or as it used to

be generally referred to information and communications technology.

So these acronyms are changing all of the time because

we're interested in the long run.

We look at literature from across the past 50 years

or even 100 years, even back to Malthus in 1799.

And so in the kind of 70s, 80s and 90s

information and communication technology was how people referred to to,

to these, to these innovations.

And basically they were a form of general purpose technology.

And that basically took information, applied transformation and give you

some sort of, you know, uh, transformed version of the

original data.

So if I do, um, 11 multiplied by four, uh,

into my calculator, that's my input.

And I got 44, you know, and that's that's basically

the calculators helped me just to do that.

So when we often do not get an abacus table

or just kind of start counting beans or to do

it in my head and, and you see these, this,

this, this structure, by the way, you see take array

of data, transform it and have a new array of

data that has actually existed for a long time, for

thousands of years.

So computers and their most basic form, taking something, transforming

it, and then presenting the answer have been around for

a long time.

And I think there are people who talk about it.

And I got some of the pictures because it's in

the North House article.

It's on the reading list.

There are examples of various counting devices from this area

surveys and dated to around 450 BC.

We got famous calculation devices such as the Solomon's Tablet,

uh, from from Athens dated to around 300 BC.

I don't know how they worked.

I'm not I, wouldn't be able to work it out.

We also have conceptual machines that are very mechanical.

Doctor Leonardo's notebooks.

Okay, so these these ideas are in the firmament.

They're in the collective consciousness, but they're not being realised.

Right.

But around about the, the kind of the, the period

of the Industrial revolution, like the year before we get

the first train lines between Manchester and Liverpool and seven

years after, I'm sorry, was 1830.

That 1838 was the first steamship across the Atlantic.

But at the same time you get Charles Babbage's Analytical

engine, typically thought of is the first mechanical counting device.

Okay, computer.

And so what's interesting, remember I was saying what's the

counterfactual here.

All of this invention is happening, you know, more generally.

Okay.

It's not like Charles Babbage invented this counting machine.

And then the Industrial Revolution happened.

It's happening far too late for that.

Okay?

It's happening 100 years at least.

If not more are too late for that.

But it's again, it's another process of an economy where

lots of people are tinkering around and inventing cool things.

Okay.

And so what you have are various stages in, say,

computation.

You have, up until around 1900, mechanical, uh, methods of

doing this.

Um, I am and before that you had the manual

kind of abacus methods followed by electro electromechanical relay, vacuum

tubes, transistors, microprocessors, and then eventually you could get nanotechnology

and quantum computing going forward, which seems to be as

unbelievable as it sounds, seems to actually be something that

is realistically going to happen in our lifetimes.

But what's amazing is, is that we're economic historians.

So just like with the books, just like with the

steams, we want to just look at this in numbers.

What's it doing for you?

What has the what is the industrial revolution?

What is the computer done for you lately?

Okay.

And then you have here this is the kind of

the improvement, uh, the improvement from the manual is dating

from 1850 to 2006.

In terms of what was kind of, um, available, I

think, in the economy.

And so you can see the ratio.

You can see there's a lot of zeros in the

ratio.

These are gigantic spectacular improvements.

And this paper is written in 2007.

It would be a really cool project if you're looking

for one to extend it to 2021.

Right.

You know, I think we got some stuff going forward,

but I'm not sure if we've done it exactly the

way he did it.

But these imply spectacular growth rates per year.

So this is an area where we've just got this

super crazy kind of annual progress.

And he draws it here.

And so these are exponentials okay.

And you can see here how progress is accelerated in

the post-Second World War.

And you've marked out a few kind of big moments

here.

Uh, you've got like the manual just indexing.

This is.

This is one one to the power of equal 0

to 1.

Uh, and then you can see basically the abacus is

this is a is one.

And then you have like uh one by e to

the power of 14.

Uh, you have something like the, the NCR Linux cluster

or the Dell 619.

Uh, I don't know what they are.

You'd have to go to a computer museum if you're

so, so, so inclined.

Um, and then there's various ways of doing it.

This is computing power on, on the, on the y

axis.

Then on the y axis here is you got the

price, just like we saw the, the kind of the

price of books deflated by average workers wages.

Here we have the price.

How how is it called the price per unit computing

power.

And you can see here that it's just making computation

so much cheaper okay.

In a spectacular kind of degree.

Okay.

And it's amazing.

But what's amazing is look it okay, you can see

that this is just an amazing increase in productivity since

this Dada okay.

For some reason, there's just almost, almost like Moore's Law,

which we'll talk about in a moment.

But does this matter for productivity?

Well, in this country, productivity has stagnated since the great

financial crisis of 2008.

Okay.

So we've had like spectacular increase in productivity over the

past 15, 16 years.

I'm sorry.

We've had spectacular increase in computing power.

You know, like our phones and our pockets are so

much we can answer email.

You can you can pull up Excel.

You can actually, um, you can run large language models,

you know, locally.

Now with computing power, more computing power than the Apollo

space program had In the 60s to send the first

mom to the moon we each have in our pocket.

What are we using it for?

Oh, I don't know.

Tick tock.

You know, keeping track of eBay, you know, uh, you

know, WhatsApp, uh, photos, all these different things.

So is it surprising that all this computing power is

being used and used by US status seeking humans to

just do what you as are interested in, which is

gossip, and keep tabs on our relative social status.

Okay, on productivity has stagnated, at least in this country.

So again, it's like Soros paradox of computing.

You see the computer age everywhere, but except in the

productivity statistics.

So it's really interesting.

So I've got there's some more crafts data, you know,

and uh, you know on this.

So he's calculating ICT contributes GDP growth across these periods.

And he gets much bigger numbers.

And then, then the then then steam, which is interesting.

But what's interesting is, is that again, like steam engines,

computers are just not that widespread across the 20th century

until recently.

Okay.

So this is kind of, you know, an interesting calculation

as well.

So the steam contributions to GDP per capita, as I

said before, are a lot lower than information and communications

technology.

But it seemed to be going getting larger as you

go forward in time.

So I'll leave these numbers.

Then they bounce around a bit.

You can check them out yourself.

But basically the takeaway is that general purpose technology is

transform our psychological impression of the world around us.

Okay, you think of steam, maybe, I don't know, maybe

I'm the only one and not some steampunk kind of

plague doctor kind of, you know, thing where the world

is being changed uh, or, you know, information and communication

technologies where we all live online.

But the macro productivity implications are very modest initially, and

it seems to take a long time for it to

bleed into the economy.

But if you compare steam to ICT and that's what

those numbers that I skip past a little bit, do

they show you in general that ICT information communication technologies

gave us more growth, more bang for buck in terms

of productivity over, say, the mid to late 20th century

than steam did over the period, say 1760 to 1900.

Okay.

And this kind of combines this, uh, idea that general

purpose technologies are being adopted faster.

Okay.

So it took a long time for steam to take

over as the dominant source of power in the British

economy.

Okay, but the personal computer and the internet have become

ubiquitous.

Much faster.

Okay.

And I even faster than that.

Like, how long did it take for, like, everybody to

be kind of like outsourcing?

Oh, you know, like the I was going to say

outsourcing their personal problems too.

I think that was only me.

But you know, but but but it's it's, it's it's

like there is this kind of like people kind of

like have this didn't have the kind of lags that

they had in terms of even getting cell phones.

Okay.

I was around when cell phones became a thing.

I was maybe 18, 19.

I was actually exactly pretty much close to your age

or most of your age as first year university.

And yeah, like it's it's kind of like cell phones

came in, but it was it took a little while

for them to kind of become completely ubiquitous.

There were still people who were too cool for cell

phones, you know, I'll see you when I see it.

You know, that thing like that just doesn't exist anymore.

So one of the kind of takeaways is that these

old technologies took a while.

Cars.

This general purpose technology we didn't mention so far.

They take a while to become adopted by the average

person, but it's getting faster.

Okay.

And this brings us to the kind of fun part

I.

And so Ali has been talked about for a long

time as being a new like, source of productivity growth

for the economy and following the kind of, uh, following

the kind of the, the, the following very, very hard

and fast at a fashion of cryptocurrencies, a lot of

the kind of silly money that that, that is looking

for high returns and the gambling casino money has gone

into the Start-Ups that are working in the AI space.

So this has led to many people critiquing this.

I seen as being, you know, a lot of promise,

but actually not really.

It's not entirely clear how these AI companies are going

to make money, but it's also not entirely clear exactly

what they're going to do.

Okay, I think there's a huge confidence interval.

Okay at the kind of I wanted they could completely

replace so many, um, what we think of knowledge workers

in the economy.

Okay.

And we kind of have people speculating that most of

the internet will become completely synthetic in, in really fast.

Okay.

And I think we're seeing this already.

I don't know if you're looking at news sites, but

you can really tell right now some of them which

are just so obviously, uh, you know, generated by some.

Marvin.

Okay, you've seen the images, um, you know, they're impressive,

but they still I think they still do.

They're still kind of there's still a sense that there's

something off with them.

But so it's unclear if, you know, these type of

model makers will replace artists wholesale.

Will they replace general musicians in terms of diagnostics?

Will they replace um professors in terms of explaining things

eloquently at a decent pace?

Um, but it could give us another productivity growth.

Okay.

There could be, you know, increasing returns to scale.

Okay.

Where the increase in output is greater than the recent

input.

And we could have explosive exponential growth.

So some people are talking about no effect.

Some people are talking about like these really big effects.

I guess it all hinges also on your kind of

on your kind of sense of what's going to happen

to machine intelligence relative to human intelligence and the prospect

of superintelligence, because if the AI does go in that

direction, I don't necessarily think it will, but, um, that

will be that'll be a whole other kind of thing.

Okay.

But one of the interesting kind of way, connecting this

to what we've been talking about is more as more

and more was this guy, you noticed that the number

of transistors on computer chips more or less doubles every

two years.

So you can make them smaller and smaller.

Okay.

And this pattern growth, and it was more of an

observation than a law.

But it's amazing because you can actually just kind of

test it.

And it seems to more or less hold, at least

for the limited transistor interpretation.

But people have taken it to mean all technology.

Okay.

The technology is just getting better and better.

It has exponential growth.

It's doubling, doubling, doubling, doubling, doubling, doubling okay.

It's not slowing down.

It's an exponential logarithmic rate of growth.

Not in a linear rate of growth.

If it was a linear rate of growth the growth

rate would be slowing down.

Look it's a log scale which is the second takeaway

from today's lecture log scales.

That's like a 1000, 5000, up to 50 billion or

whatever it is, transistors on a microchip.

And what's really interesting, you can see it in other

ways.

This stretches this graph back to 1900.

Looks like a straight line, more or less analogue scale.

Um, but in other areas you can actually see, let's

say the cost of, of, of, of processing the human

genome.

And in genetics laboratories that has gone down way faster

than Moore's Law.

Okay.

So in terms of price and you can see it's

kind of followed Moore's Law.

It was just like getting half half, as half as

um cheap per year or whatever.

It would follow that white line, but it's actually deviated

strongly away from it.

So you know, you don't want to you don't limit

yourself to like these Moore's Law characterisations.

Again, it's not coming from theory.

It's just a conception.

And so that leads to kind of really kind of

fun things to think about when you think about the

future of AI.

So you can think about like how this is real

world data.

Okay.

In terms of artificial intelligence like that, we're kind of

getting close, like in our lifetime.

In your lifetime, more or less.

Just before you were born, we could simulate like an

insect brain just about.

And now we're getting close to, like, a mouse brain.

Look how close to a human brain.

Soon enough.

Um, all human brains.

And, you know, you might have seen this stuff before,

but it's kind of ubiquitous in other word of the

day in our popular discourse.

It's exciting to think just how this could lead to

exponential growth, like economists are seriously talking about.

And lots of others, you know, and the achievement of,

you know, human level artificial general intelligence could lead to

mass substitution of eyes for jobs that we thought of

as middle class and being very safe, like being a

GP, like being a lawyer.

You're seeing that already with many different software solutions, perhaps

also tutoring and professing.

And, you know, you could have Brad Pitt give this

lecture, right, you know, with some sort of AI, you

know, so you have something to look at, you know,

well, well, you get bored.

And I don't know, it's interesting because students are also

outsourcing like their their essays to, you know, ChatGPT and

so forth, and a policy that we're now allowing in

the department.

I'm actually interested to see how you guys use this

technology.

It's still very easy to kind of tell because the

AI, the AI is still have biases in them.

Some are hard coded biases, and you can tell straight

away by the way, FYI.

But it'll be interesting to see.

Do we just get to a stage where students, like,

write their essays that AI the professors grade them with

AI, and then we never actually interact, you know, in

reality at all, which seems a rather sad, but I

think like, it actually moves us to a situation in

academia where we prioritise creativity again.

So instead of learning off sets of dates or learning

off syntax rules, we're actually thinking about what can we

learn that's genuinely creative here.

So I think it's actually a really exciting time.

It could be.

But the truth is our history of general purpose technologies

shows that they don't really make much of an impact

when they're introduced.

So steam and electricity and ICT had much lower impacts

than you might expect.

So I think a lot of the kind of venture

capital that's gone into I, the economic history of it,

despite this kind of maybe science fiction fantasy, that it

could be this, this great thing and it might be

slightly unwarranted.

And then we have the prospect of superintelligence.

But the superintelligence prospect is a whole other level of,

um, of, of to get into.

But basically the idea would be that, um, if you

have all this extreme progress going faster than Moore's Law

in terms of technological progress, transistors on chips, in terms

of computability, and then you get to a stage where

basically, um, you can outperform human brains, you can outperform

all human brains put together.

And then you have then an AI that can basically

build itself and build better versions of itself.

That's when we get this singularity moment where things take

off.

Okay, so there's exciting kind of, uh, explanations there.

So if you think of the biological range, uh, asi

and then the problem is, is that when you have,

um, an alien life form that you've created, um, you

know, it doesn't really it might not think of us

as being anything like the saying goes, anything, anything more

profound than paperclips, you know?

And maybe it doesn't need paperclips anymore.

Um, okay.

So where does all all come from?

We can only guess about artificial superintelligence.

What it would do.

It could be that AGI needs more than information to

be achieved.

There's a theory that we really need to be experienced

in the world to a physical body.

If AI's are just locked down in a virtual world.

They never really learned to process reality.

The way that we do in ASI is just pure

science fiction, and these interactions create consciousness and so forth.

But like when we think about it for our purposes,

what drove technological progress in the past was it, you

know, intelligence, culture or something else?

And like I said, it's kind of endogenous.

Like I think that what's what I've hinted at before

is that we think that you get steam and it

creates growth.

You get like electricity, it creates growth, or you get

like computers that create growth or a A.I. is going

to create growth.

But the fact of the matter is there's there's a

whole set of human behaviours that are creating these technologies

together.

Okay.

And it's this latent factor which is basically the the

human collective unconscious, if you will, which could be related

to things like, you know, average intelligence, human capital, the

power of our institutions, all of these things in non

sceptical, all of these things come together might be broadly

defined as culture, but it's culture that is determining growth

and technology together, whereas this link is actually much weaker

than we think.

And that's kind of an interesting kind of takeaway from

our history of technology.

And so to give you a sense of how technology

interacts here at the last moment would be on these

watchmakers.

And what's really interesting is, is that look at the

scale.

This is the log scale of a price, a watch

from the 1700s down to say, the early 1800s.

And what you see is there's a big decrease that's

about a 75% decrease in the price of a watch,

whether it's silver, same movement, same, or watching the same

quality, English watchmakers became much better, much more productive at

making watches over this period of time.

But there was no technological advance.

Big spectacular productivity improvements.

Okay, Because, uh, you know, of a whole range of

factors with no one technology.

So I think this tells us more about where technology

comes from.

So watch productivity gets better consistently from the end of

the 17th century.

So it's not the industrial Revolution was not just cotton,

steel or steam.

And it's not one single innovation, but this underlying latent

factor, this wind behind the sails of all these things

that are moving together.

So the wind is pushing forward technology growth, watch prices

and steam engines, Babbage's computer engine, steamships across the Atlantic

eventually I but it's coming from the kind of same

kind of ghost in the machine that's driving all of

these other factors.

Okay, let's let's pause it there today and I'll see

you and see you the week after next.

Thank you.

Jesus Christ.

And he also.

Knows all this?

Yeah.

He.

All right.

Thank you.

Lecture 6:

Sorry.

About that.

Nothing.

To.

Worry about.

I.

Okay, folks, let's, uh, let's begin.

So welcome back after reading Week.

Uh, this is 101.

It's also 111.

Um, and so what we're going to talk about today

is it's not exactly growth versus development.

It's actually looking at history beyond just say, GDP per

capita or income, and looking at different aspects of what

you might broadly call development.

But it's even broader than that, and I'll explain it

as we go forward.

So last time you might have quite some time ago,

um, in ancient history, we talked before a reading week

about technological change over the long run with a lot

of fun, fun lecture.

Um, lots, lots of laughter.

Abed, um, book prices over the long run.

And we also looked at general purpose technologies.

Um, we looked at the, the impact upon these kind

of changes on the economy and try to characterise them

in a broad set of stylised facts and speculated about

the future with regards to things like AI.

So technological change explains, uh, economic growth.

But what explains technological change?

Okay, I'll try and kind of be talking about that

in the background as we go through this lecture today.

Today we're going to be looking more at a broader

range of characteristics behind just, um, income growth and development

over time.

And we'll also look a little bit at aspects of

inequality.

I actually kind of edited that down a touch, because

you're going to see me at the end of the

year for like a full blown lecture on inequality.

And so I just thought I'd kind of re orientate

that towards the end of the year.

Um, so.

Okay, uh, you know, we have already seen this chart

many times in the course and it shows us the,

the escape from the Malthusian homeostatic system, self equilibrium system

that kept incomes low for most of our species history.

What you get at the time of the Industrial Revolution

in England.

Remember the Allen thesis.

Remember coal and direct to technological change.

We get the explosion of, um, of sustained efficiency um,

increase in the economy.

Okay.

That's what the industrial revolution does.

You get technological change and makes the production of, say,

cotton textiles, you know, 90% more efficient in a very

short period of time.

And that's we see that all over the economy.

And what we see then is just, um, the, the

escape from this Malthusian trap of humans beginning in this

country, um, uh, and then followed by the rest of

the world shortly thereafter.

So the point one of the kind of big takeaways

from today's lecture is the difference between economic growth and

other measures of, say, human development.

So, as I said, we usually concentrate on GDP per

capita.

And that's what that chart is showing.

Um, and uh, what we talked about for most of

the course until now, um, and that is really the

kind of the, the major kind of currency in economic

thinking when we think about our country being rich or.

Poor.

Okay.

We're thinking about GDP per capita.

Okay.

And we defined what GDP was.

Um, but there are other aspects to human life.

And we're going to talk about all of these things

today.

So we're going to talk about length of life or

lifespan, which is a more kind of poetical way of

putting it, I think.

And that matters beauty, art and museum and so forth.

We're going to talk about violence.

Um, we're going to talk about height, leisure time, education,

inequality, happiness.

Okay.

And just as I was saying about, you know, poetry

and beauty, you might think of those things as mattering

too.

But, you know, there's a whole range of different aspects

that matter.

Um, for, for the, for the, for the human experience.

What, what I'm going to show you just to kind

of, you know, not make this, uh, like a murder

mystery where, you know, what is the point of this

lecture?

The point of the lecture is really that all of

these things are very strongly correlated with GDP per capita,

and they're also very strongly correlated with each other.

So you can think about the modern world as coming

about through a kind of deep set of behaviour changes,

or a latent factor that moves all of these variables

together.

Okay.

It's not one thing.

And so one of the kind of takeaways from the

past 20 or 30 years where we've had innovations such

as the Human Development Index by the UN, which we'll

talk about later, which tries to broaden our conception of

GDP, is that, yeah, you've got variation, but all of

these things are pretty much moving together.

And I'm going to show you evidence for that as,

as, as we go forward.

And that's one of the big kind of critiques of,

say, the, um, for individuals.

Um, some of you may have heard of this literature,

the degrowth, degrowth who kind of think that, you know,

economic growth is destroying the planet, and perhaps we should

have less economic growth.

And we should basically, um, focus on things like redistribution

and, um, maybe focus on things that aren't like, uh,

are more sustainable.

The problem with that is that the mechanisms through which

we've reduced poverty, for example, and increased length of life

and, uh, increased inequality have all been driven by GDP

per capita and income growth.

So capitalism is as evil as it is, has been

the most equalising benevolent force in human history for reducing

poverty.

Okay.

So that fact instinctively and I feel the same.

I just feel like that can't be true.

Right.

Because capitalism is bad, like greed is bad.

But actually one of the takeaways from economic history is

that it's actually the reverse of what you think.

Um, there hasn't been any economic system that's been as,

as, as as fair as this one.

Now, all of the this is that's a kind of

a broad statement.

And it's built upon broad correlations.

So you can be critical and you should be critical.

And that's why I'm saying it, because I know the

half of you are going to be wound up by

that, but that's kind of the idea.

So if you think I'm wrong, you should basically think

about why.

Right.

Like I have a nice little empirical argument for what.

But what I'm going to show you now is just

not that I'm telling you capitalism as being this great

force.

You know, I actually I'm not like, strongly committed that

idea.

What I'm committed to is a broader picture of the

origin of the modern world that's far more related to

individual behaviour change over the long run, and I think

lifespan is a perfect one to get to get going

on this.

So basically lifespan and, um, you know, um, hard work

and, uh, you know, patience, all these virtues, they generally

tend to be a set of characteristics that are like,

think it was like are the ghost of the machine

that are driving about growth and development.

Okay.

And so the system is all a system of correlations.

The causal chains are hard to work out, but definitely

that's my sense of this.

So let's talk about lifespan.

In England, lifespan has increased from 40 to about 80

over say the past half millennium 500 years.

But this simple average disguises huge variation.

Okay, what's interesting is, is that infant mortality rates were

really high in the past.

They were like 30 to 50% and an infant is

a child below one.

So like this is just the hazard of getting through

that first year of life.

Not only so that's one characteristic.

The second characteristic is that like death and death rates

were just very kind of wild year to year.

So you would see wild variations due to famine, epidemics

and also bottle violence much more severe than today.

So, um, you know, this is just life expectancy over

time, around 40 with these dips for a period of

subsistence crises and rising around about the time of the

Industrial Revolution.

Actually kind of a better century later, actually, if you

can see that.

What's really interesting is in this system is that, um,

you see this kind of broad based rise of lifespan

amongst the general population, amongst the poor, amongst the rich,

but this rise in lifespan happens earlier for the rich

and then the poor.

So there's something in terms of behaviour that's changing, that's

related to status.

So this is lifespan going back to the 18th century,

uh, 19th century to say 1800.

And this comes from genealogies of European aristocrats.

You can look at their birth and death dates and

kind of, you know, do a bit of statistical jiggery

pokery just to make sure that, you know, the sample

is staying the same over time or whatever.

So you have to kind of just do a prediction

and you can see that these things are rising off

around 1400 and again around 1700, but it precedes the

general rise of the population around 1800.

So there's movement here, and I think that this is

related to this behaviour change.

I've been talking about.

The other behaviour change that I think really matters is

the the change in infant mortality rates over time.

You're seeing dramatic declines in infant mortality rates in England

and in particular in, say, Western Europe and France.

And then later on we see this in the rest

of the world.

But this process, just like the industrial revolution, is happening

in Northwest Europe.

Okay, so here's some French data.

And you see this just so you can see the

very high level of 30%, 30% of births just dying

in their first year of life.

They're born.

They just don't survive.

This is excluding stillbirths.

A child that's already dead at birth.

And you see this big secular decline, big decline post

1900 as well.

But you see these these spikes, which is very characteristic

of pre-industrial mortality patterns.

And this chart from our world and data really captures

that.

That the picture.

The fact is that this red line is the most

important one.

So we already saw this coming from the same graph

that I showed you from the Cambridge group earlier.

But this is going back to say 1750.

You can see that dip in that earlier chart and

see this expectation of life and zero.

And you see it's rising dramatically from the mid 19th

century and even more dramatically in the 20th century.

But you can see that you can look at these

various different life expectancies from different cuts.

So they basically the life expectancy for a one year

old, okay.

If you get to one, you've already survived the first

year of life.

Then when you die, you see that's going up as

well.

And then for like, you know, a 20 year old,

40 year old, 70 year old, but you can see

as you go higher in the age distribution, the age,

right, the actual rate of increase is slower.

So the majority of the increase in length of life

since the industrial revolution in the world is coming from

infants who just survived that first year of life.

Okay.

And that's giving you a lot more, uh, humans to

experience the joys of being alive.

And you can see there's still spikes here.

You can see this, this kind of dip just due

to Spanish flu.

It's nicely annotated, but that's a huge, big characteristic.

And that's one of the kind of like the immediate

kind of counters for people who don't want any more

economic growth.

Economic growth has been associated with dramatic declines in infant

mortality.

We generally think the declines in mortality are a good

thing.

Okay, even if we're kind of trying to be agnostic

about everything else, like dead kids tends to be bad.

Okay, so at least you kind of agree to that.

Uh, none of your kids dead infants.

Okay, so just an interesting characteristic.

So in the past, like, actually, I think I showed

you this in the first lecture, you can look at

pirate records and just look at how many deaths are

being recorded every day.

And you see just periodic spikes of bubonic plague.

Another thing that's associated with the Industrial Revolution and the

add on growth is the disappearance of epidemic crisis mortality.

Okay, so we're richer.

We can upgrade the food stores we have.

We can afford to do modern medicine and we can

be cleaner.

We can shower.

We kind of have an education system that lets us

know where disease comes from.

And, and this all of these things, even though the

exact mechanics are really contested.

And when you try and do research in this area,

it's really hard because it's completely non-intuitive, like, uh, we've

got like these hunter gatherer brains to pick, uh, nuts

and berries and, and hunt wild animals.

We like, like these correlations are never go the way

we think they're going to go.

And so that's kind of interesting.

And so like I teach this uh, in second year

and a masters and PhD.

And so my research is on this and it's a

fascinating area.

Like the as I said before, the mechanics of how

this happened are really perplexing.

And one of the things you might say, well, this

is just this is one of the great achievements of

modern medicine.

And I can tell you now that it's not right.

This lifespan was rising.

Infant mortality rates were declining.

And long before you get effective, modern health interventions, which

are only really happening like post-Second World War.

There might be hope that there might be things like

sanitation, uh, clean water supplies.

Um, uh, you know, um, uh, all all of these

things which we do see happen in the 19th century,

but like, statistically, we have a really tough time linking

it to these declines.

So economic growth is broadly correlated with us, uh, public

health, as I said, maybe it's human capital and education.

And then we have like scientific innovations such as the

germ theory of disease.

But what I'm saying is that, like, these correlations are

hard to pin down, but it's all part of this

generalised change in behaviour that gives us economic growth, that

gives us the industrial revolution.

It gives us those efficiency gains.

Um, and that's what I'm proposing here.

And that's kind of what the team, the lecture is

today You know, if you if you want to kind

of think about it a little bit more, you know,

one of the great, great moments in kind of, uh,

you know, the history of intellectual history, of thinking about

where diseases come from was, um, you know, John Snow

in, in 1855.

So basically this is a map of, uh, the, the,

the deaths from cholera at the time, uh, of, of

a cholera outbreak.

And at the time, we didn't really understand where cholera

came from, didn't understand that it was a water borne

disease.

People thought it was from a generalised miasma, you know,

that would just float around in the air.

But basically, John Snow worked out from this, this map,

you can see that all the deaths were clustered around

this ex on Broad Street in Soho, near here, the

Broad Street water pump.

Okay.

And then once he realised that, it was just like,

it's like a data driven ark, right?

You're like, well, there must be something about that, that,

that, that centroid.

And he worked out as the water pump.

And he famously as soon as he realised it, he

went down and he broke the crank himself.

He had to break the crank himself because nobody believed

him.

Okay.

He was ridiculed at the time.

So it took a while for people to actually catch

up with this.

He's not the only example of this.

There's other people who noticed patterns, like noticing that, like,

uh, that, uh, you know, doctors, if they went straight

to deliver babies from the morgue after, you know, educating

themselves, playing around with cadavers and seeing what's inside a

dead human body tended to have very high mortality rates

because of the transmission of cadavers.

Part in the work of Semmelweis again ridiculed at the

time and died like, you know, feeling like his life

where it could be the mess.

So but anyway, the kind of culture that gives rise

to this style of thinking that broadly became accepted later

is what we're interested in.

And again, you're seeing, um, lots of aspects.

You're seeing kind of, you know, uh, this is life

expectancy across the world in 1800.

You know, it's hard to see right.

at the top.

It's old red.

And that's basically the global average here is about 20

to 20 9 to 40.

Number is 40 in England.

But it really low relative to where the global average

is in the low 70s.

And you see like with almost all of these global

maps sub-Saharan Africa has lower uh lower success than, than

than say uh, northwest Europe, for example.

Do you see these strong kind of geographic variations?

But that's one of the great achievements of the modern

world has to be to increase this, uh, this life.

And you can just this is just some more graphs

to kind of entertain yourself with when you look over

these slides.

So lifespan is one aspect.

Okay.

Um, another aspect I think of development that we forget

about is the background level of interpersonal violence.

Okay.

So it turns out that in the past, the world

was far more violent than it is today.

Okay.

Um, and this is like a really Surprising kind of

kind of thing.

And there's been a few kind of brave scholars who

tried to estimate this, and it's completely contrarian, I think,

to where our instincts tell us.

And I know this because I was surprised when I

found this out.

And I also know that my friends, my Irish friends

were very upset and this would get things would go

very badly, you know, when I would tell them about

this finding.

But basically, if you look at, say, historical estimates of,

say, the, the homicide rate, the murder rate, you're just

going to find that in the past.

And it was way higher than it is today.

The long run decline in violence is something that you

might be aware of if you read, say, Steven Pinker's

Better Angels of Our Nature, which summarises the literature, and

I'll mention that moment, but it's actually very surprising.

So it's part of this modern world.

So you get correlated with income and development, not only

lifespan but decreases in violence.

And so here's a chart from Greg Clark.

And it's basically an estimate of the homicide rate and

cause of the of the estimated for this period, because

they kept great records of who was murdered, because if

someone was murdered, their property reverted to the king.

Okay, so so there was a reason, an incentive to

keep good records.

And you can see that it's just a secular decline.

You can see the doughnut records here, but it's declining

to just being a fraction, you know, in the year

2000 to what it was, say 1200s.

Okay.

And, um, I've done this myself actually, because, uh, from

the same database of European aristocrats, you know, what are

aristocrats?

Aristocrats were basically, uh, you know, they had this, these

titles, dukes, uh, you know, knights and so forth, because

they were effective at leading and organising, uh, you know,

uh, violence.

Right.

So it's kind of an, an interesting kind of thing

to kind of think about, uh, you know, what their

kind of Violent death rates.

And so from the genealogy data, you can calculate it

now.

I'd love to spend like three hours explaining the very

intense statistical method I use to look at the pattern

of death in these genealogical records.

So I have millions and millions of aristocrats going back

to the eight hundreds.

But you could look at like the pattern of death

to see which were likely violent.

So it's a statistical inference, but it's less reported here.

And you can see that these guys, 30% of the

men are dying violently.

And then this decreases in this kind of early modern

period.

And this red line is an alternative estimate from the

English ducal families.

There's like being a duke.

And England is like, you know, a very, very high

aristocratic title.

It's really just, just next to the, to the, to

the monarch.

Um, but you can see that like, basically that's real.

That's actually just genuine historical, uh, estimates.

And these are mine for millions of European aristocrats.

So you get this long run decrease in violence.

And just like with lifespan, it tends to be that

the the very elites seem to have this behaviour change

before the rest of the population, which is something that,

like I'm currently working on and this is more homicide

rates.

This is from Belgium, Netherlands, Spain, Italy and France.

And uh, this is from Eisner.

Um, and this is going back to 1250.

They're typically open from cities and they're estimated with better

noise.

So they bounce around.

But the general story is they were high and they're

declining over time.

And it's really surprising, like current declining mortality rates, you

know, uh, from homicide are just a fraction.

So I just chose to focus on homicide today.

But you can do this for war and bottle deaths

as well.

And it's really surprising that they're declining to.

Okay.

And yes, obviously of course, you know, and this is

like the That World War one and World War Two

are in the data.

Right.

You know, so yes, even considering so it's really spectacularly

interesting.

And as I said, if you're interested in this, Pinker's

Better Angles surveys this field.

But, you know, there's really like building on the work

of others, including the clerk and also Norbert Elias.

The civilising process.

And what's interesting is, is that, you know, Pinker goes

into the psychology and whatever, and it's all stunning and

surprising or whatever, but it's it's just that last point.

A lot of it's connected to behavioural change over the

long run.

There seems to be something where people are just behaving

differently.

Right.

And so in this book, uh, Norbert Elias, the civilising

process, he's just talking about the history of manners and

what he calls a civilising process.

So one of the chapters involves, like, how common it

was just to spit everywhere in the past.

People just be spit, you know, and they also be

just carrying their own knives so that they would eat

with their own eyes.

So the idea that you would be given like a

cookery, you know, to eat, to eat at wood is

something that that developed over time.

People carry their own knives, uh, they drink a lot

more and they're spitting everywhere and disagreements are constant.

Another kind of example is the history of duelling.

Okay.

So like, you know, the duelling, you know, someone would

offend you, you take off your glove and you smack

them in the face, and then you go and you

act on.

Right.

Uh, if you see in the film, uh, what is

it, uh, is it Kubrick's, uh, Barry Lyndon?

Uh, you know, that's kind of starts off with a

what it what a duel.

But anyway, the point is this, like lifespan growth and

development is something that's changing over time, but we don't

necessarily think of it as part of GDP per capita.

There's a broad correlation I propose as part of this

generalised behaviour change.

It's it's it's this kind of thing that's capturing this

behaviour change that gives us growth, development on the modern

world.

Another thing that's changing over time is height.

Okay.

And this was a big kind of thing in economic

history a few years ago.

It was referred to as the biological standard of living.

Okay.

So instead of GDP you could use a height.

Okay.

So height we know is a function of genes pretty

much.

Uh, typically there's going to be a very strong correlation

between parents and children, uh, in terms of height.

Um, but also childhood nutrition is going to matter.

And also like the disease burden is going to really

affect it.

So what you can do is look at height, um,

in the sense that it picks up those nutritional fluctuations

as a measure of well-being.

How many of you have heard of the normal distribution?

Right.

I think I've talked about it before.

Yeah, you've got it right.

This is the normal distribution.

Bell curve distribution.

Okay.

So that is typically a that exists itself in nature.

Right.

So when you get if we took all of your

heights and plot of the data, the frequency distribution, there

would be an average height, okay.

And then there would be variation from that.

And you have these statistical laws you talk about.

So you have the mean okay.

And then you know the standard deviation okay.

That's what these terms mean.

And you could say that 95% of you will be

two standard deviations of the mean.

Okay.

And 99.7 would be standard deviations.

So you see this everywhere, but you typically notice it

for height in particular.

And you can also see things like I was actually

quite surprised by this.

No surprise that men and women have different heights, but

I was surprised in this sample that the average height

for men was 510, and that seems that seems too

high, uh, to be honest.

Anyway, let's not worry about that.

We can do this in the past as well.

And what's interesting is people were a lot shorter in

the past.

Uh, that seems to have gotten the biggest reaction out

of you, like the high thing.

Who cares?

Oh my God.

Anyway, in the past it's about 5 or 7.

Okay, skeletal remains in Europe.

And you can see this is data survey survey by

chart.

And it's just telling us that the biological standard of

living like in the mortician world's okay.

And this is going back a long way to the

year two zero.

It's around about 87.

And there's a lot of variance around that.

And then you can see that it's shot up uh,

in an old mod of modern era.

Okay.

So the biological standard of living maybe gives us a

sense, you know, beyond GDP, of how this is actually

affecting average heights and the industrial revolution and the origin

of growth, as suggested by that last chart, is associated

with, like large increases in the biological standard of living.

So this suggests like by the way, I think is

this is two this is too severe, I think, to

be, uh, primarily a genetic effect, say true selection.

If only tall people can leave their genes.

If the world is really brutal place and you know,

shorter people, you know, just are outcompeted by 12 people.

I don't think that's what's happening here.

That might have happened in the in the past.

For sure.

It has to happened.

But basically in this chart this is more revealing to

us the, the, the the effects of GDP growth on

nutrition okay.

So it's causing people there's lots of people I think

you should be 180cm, but they only grow to 165

because of the nutrition and and on the epidemic diseases

they're catching.

Okay.

So it's really revealing, you know, like, uh, what income

is, is doing okay.

Now it's not the causal chains again, you know, kind

of keep saying that aren't obvious or they are obvious.

And then you collect data on them and then they

just don't work.

But what we can see is that broadly defined, like

what lifespan, violence and height is also moving in this

direction of GDP, they're all correlated together.

Now there's various mechanisms.

So you can think about that.

Like if you give me more food, more protein, more,

more, more milk, uh, you know, potatoes, uh, I'll grow

to be taller.

And in fact, the Irish were always historically taller than

the English because of milk and potatoes.

Right.

Surprising amount of protein in potatoes, actually.

But anyway, um, you know, what's interesting is, is that

when people are taller, we think that they could actually

be more productive workers as well.

So there's going to be two way causality, but really

interesting characteristic of of the world okay.

Yes.

Please ask a question.

Yeah.

All the time in high school.

That's that's a really great question.

So what you need is a very severe downturn in

the economy to affect average heights.

And so the biological standard of living literature that started

off with the proposal that the initial years of industrialisation

in England from say 1750 to say 1820 where associated

the commerce.

This guy he argued that heights went down and it's

really interesting.

So that kind of fits into the kind of whole,

say, Karl Marx interpretation of, of, of, of the emergence

of capitalism being associated with a very severe decrease in

the standard of living in the English.

And there actually is something to it.

So I've looked at that data and what I think,

where it's where the consensus is with me and what

other people is.

Basically, it's not that they go down, it's that you

have a movement from the countryside to cities, and the

city has got a lot of disease.

And, and, you know, whatever.

And heights are kind of flat during that early period

of the Industrial Revolution as well.

So like, it's not that heights go down in that

period.

They're more like flash when they do.

You think the income growth suggests they should be getting

higher.

But I think there are kind of um, you do

see heights fluctuate over time.

And we the interpretation is, is that, um, height declining

is a sign of very, very hard times.

I think the period before the Black Death is the

period you might see it like, for instance, and in

in Clark's data, see here 1200 to to just before

the Black Death.

They're actually heights are going down from the skeletal remains

that we found.

So basically I think that that would be a great

historical example of of that as well.

Okay.

Thanks for the question.

Uh, so all of these things are moving together.

Um, and we just have this great question which was

like just kind of maybe thinking about the other the

other direction.

If times can get worse and do people get shorter?

And the answer is yes.

And we can see that from the period before the

Black Death and perhaps the early Industrial Revolution period, although

that's debated, everything's moving in the same direction, suggesting that

there's a kind of a deep connection between income growth,

development and all of these other aspects of development.

Okay, another aspect which you might not have thought about

is leisure time.

Okay.

So, um, how long was the working day in the

past?

Life is not that much fun if you've got to

work from dawn to dusk, seven days a week.

Okay, so leisure time is something we can actually try

and kind of guess that.

And so what's striking is that, say in the in

our times, like working hours say over the 20th century

have dramatically decreased.

Okay.

And at the population average.

And that's driven by, um, things like, uh, the increased

participation of everyone in higher education.

That's reduced work.

Okay.

But we start working at a later age.

We actually work fewer hours a year.

There's more days off.

And retirement is there's more.

You know, retirement is really interesting people still retire, you

know, round about 65, but they live a lot longer.

When people brought in the retirement age, you know, 100

years ago in this country to be 65, that was

above the average age of death, right?

So it was quite, quite a striking thing.

So that's led to a lot more leisure.

And so what's interesting is, is that we work less.

And, um, what's interesting is that during the Industrial Revolution

era, one of the behaviour changes is that people started

working a lot more.

So I'm going to talk about this at my second

years next week.

I've got some like artistic, uh, pictures from, from the

period.

Um, I don't know if I showed them to you

the Hogarth prints.

Maybe I showed them to you for the Allen lecture.

Um, I'm getting one.

Nods.

Maybe.

Maybe I can't remember.

Um, but, um, that was evidence of a changing culture,

uh, towards work.

And what happens during the period of the Industrial Revolution

is people seem to work longer hours and also more

intensely.

Okay, if we compare this to like, hunter gatherers, they're

working even less, right?

They're sitting around, there's a lot of sitting.

Right.

And and I think that fits one of our characteristic

dimensions of the early period of the Industrial Revolution.

And also this picture, which is from the early 20th

century, US, which is child labour.

Okay.

So child labour was was a big part of the

early British industrial revolution and was still like a big

thing, particularly in poorer kind of more rural parts of

the US even until the last century.

And what you see is that, um, you know, there's,

there's people talk about, you know, the attitude towards work

was just very different.

Okay.

Um, and young children would be working either in agriculture,

uh, such as the little girl who was picking oranges

in the film The Fall, which I watched, uh, uh,

over the weekend.

Um.

It's an okay film.

Anyway, um, children age for working in factories and mines.

But you see all these legal changes over the 19th

century in England, just sequentially and persistently moving in one

direction, which is raising the minimum age a child can

work.

But you also go to see in the in the

next section that we also get education acts which simultaneously

outlaw child labour.

Okay.

Uh, but also kind of mandate that children stay in

school to a certain age.

Okay.

What's interesting about this, just to reemphasize, all of these

things are going in the same direction.

What's happening?

The economy is getting richer.

It's bringing in legal changes, saying children cannot work, okay.

They have to stay in school.

Okay.

So children have always kind of worked in the past,

but, you know, it's not so much that like this

is there's any kind of causal dynamic here.

It just so happens that again there's a broad correlation

okay.

England gets richer.

it can afford not to send its children to work

on an introduces legislation to that effect.

Okay.

So we'll talk about education in the next sector.

But the net effect of all of this is that

working hours and these are estimates from the literature.

You can see they're increasing 1750 to 1850 to about

3000 hours per year.

And then there's just this big decrease associated with the

child labour legislation, but also the education Acts we'll talk

about in a moment.

And it's just decreasing.

And in terms of the hours work, you may you

get interesting international variation in hours worked.

And that can be kind of somewhat cultural.

Places like South Korea, the United States tend to work

a lot longer hours than places like France.

And in fact the US France comparison, as always, is

always fun.

But actually France doesn't work.

They work there, you know, it's like, uh, but anyway,

different cultural aspects.

So okay, again Taking a breather.

All of these things moving in the same direction.

Okay.

Life span, uh, violence, height, leisure time.

And now we're going to talk about education.

Okay.

And what's really interesting about education is that this has

been one of the really big changes over the past

500 years.

In the past, like virtually, virtually no one could read

and even fewer people could write.

So, um, you know, uh, like and also it also

connects to our, our, our kind of data on books

from just before reading books were kind of relatively rare

and they're very, very expensive.

And, you know, people just want to be sitting around

reading.

Whereas today, um, literacy rates are pretty much close to

100%.

Literacy rates are just like they're really only good at

distinguishing very, very poor, illiterate societies from, uh, from you

know, from the rest.

You know, they don't really tell you any variation because

it's just too blown to, uh, measure.

And so in 19th century England, where we get the,

the kind of the, uh, the kind of the, the

child labour legislation, as I suggest to you, we also

get a sequence of schooling, such as the Forster Act

in the 1870s and it's added to in the 1880s.

And these are kind of raising the minimum age a

child could leave school.

Um, what's interesting about this is, though, this is coming

kind of late.

You know, the late 19th century is way after the

Industrial revolution, right?

So what's happening in England from about the 16th century

are long run increases in literacy.

So what I'm trying to tell you, my interpretation here

is the system is changing.

You know, you know, we have the Nobel awarded for

institutions.

Institutions mean everything.

They determine incentives.

You get the right kind of laws and everything falls

into place.

You know, that doesn't explain anything about the real world,

obviously in Afghanistan.

Don't mention that.

But in England, the legal changes, the institutional changes in

terms of education and child labour are coming way after

the income growth in the industrial revolution, suggesting that the

institutions come after the kind of behaviour change in the

rest of the population.

And you can see that we've got women and men

and it's a bit of a bit of a messy

graph, but it's coming from real data, from pirate registers.

And so it's just this kind of like wind beneath

the sails here, raising literacy from far before the Industrial

Revolution.

So what I'm saying to you is the behaviour is

changing in the, in this, in this society.

Okay.

Later on you get legal changes but they're not.

It's like, you know, if you had legal changes back

here and then and then this happened afterwards, you might

say the institutions really matter.

But for me it's there's there's a deeper story about

individual cultural change.

Okay.

And just like what?

Guess what?

Lifespan violence.

uh, you know, all of these things.

The leisure time changes, um, and the the child labour,

uh, this education thing is, is preceded by centuries of

change in the system.

Okay.

And then you can see this in other places as

well.

You see like very big variation literacy.

But really it's these kind of, um, you know, you

might draw a link with the Protestant Reformation, uh, with

the type of countries that are rich, whereas the top

here.

And then it's interesting, the ones that are, that are

right at the bottom.

And of course, the 19th century in terms of increases.

And so, um, illiteracy rates and that's just the same

data expressed a different way.

But one of the kind of conceptual attempts at like

getting beyond just GDP, uh, has been to like, uh,

construct alternative measures of development and the go to one

that the, the scholars use and also policymakers use has

been for the past few decades.

The UN's Human Development Index.

Okay.

And the Human Development Index is an index okay.

So it's 0 to 1 and sometimes 0 to 100

just to be annoying.

But it's typically 0 to 1, you know.

And what they do is they kind of evenly weight

income education and lifespan okay.

And so then it gives you kind of a more

kind of balanced view of development.

As I've hinted to you before, I'm a little bit

sceptical because all of these things are all correlated with

each other.

So I'm not I'm not entirely sure what extra bang

for your book you get by doing this.

Rather kind of.

Oh dear God, so are you okay?

Is it okay?

All right.

Yeah.

That's okay drama.

Anyway, someone doesn't like the HDI and is going to

just want to move on anyway, I agree.

What what like it's kind of like it's just such

a it's kind of, you know, I guess here's why.

Here's why I don't like it You're combining information, right?

And reweighting things.

But in many ways you're combining three indexes into one.

And they say different things, right?

You're throwing away information for something that's a little bit

more, quite frankly, glib.

Okay.

Well, that's my opinion.

Uh, you take it or leave it.

But anyway, this is what it does.

It kind of weights these things in it equally.

It normalises them so that the sum comes to some

value between 0 and 1.

One third life expectancy at eight zero, one third, some

education index and one third income.

Okay.

And and guess what?

Uh, it tells us that sub-Saharan Africa is poor, you

know, which we knew already.

Right.

But it kind of, I guess, rescaled things.

And so this is kind of a nice kind of

HDI across the world.

I couldn't find a satisfying map.

So it went to some person on Reddit who did

a better map of the underlying data.

So, you know, look at that.

And it's also at this kind of subnational regional level,

green is good.

Okay.

On red.

Red is bad.

Okay, so you can see northwestern Europe.

Uh, the usual.

The usual places.

Right?

Maybe there's some sort of places that move around in

the rankings a little bit, but not much.

Krafts has done this for the, uh, for the cross

for historical Europe.

And you can see how, um, basically like for Europe

in the 1990s, it doesn't really tell us much, right?

You know, but you can see in this earlier period

we can compare where these European countries are relative to

their global ranks in the past.

So you can look at somewhere like like Ireland, which

is going to be I don't know, I can't tell

the difference between these colours and that's my fault.

Let's say it's a point three.

So Ireland in 18 70.3 high score would be down,

would be down in the dark Reds worse than sub-Saharan

Africa.

Um, I'm not so sure.

But anyway, interesting numbers.

And that's what some economic stories like to do.

I'm a little bit more critical because I don't know

why throwing away information by averaging it is particularly helpful.

Okay, I'm going to finish with two topics as we

go around all these topics.

The first is one that I find very interesting, inequality.

And I find it interesting because capitalism and the moral

kind of foundations for accepting a system which generates great

differences between those who are good at it and successful,

are good at paying bribes and being corrupt, for example.

And those of us who maybe are not those huge

inequities and have to be kind of somehow.

Marty.

Marty.

Justified.

So inequality basically comes into our kind of psychological, you

know, assessment of, of the world we live in.

And, you know, I think I started the course looking

at this and we'll come back to this.

We'll look at a lot more like interpersonal interaction within

a society, interpersonal inequality.

But what's amazing is, is just at a country level.

And I think I might have talked about this in

the first lecture, is that if you look at like

the global inequality, what's interesting is the vast majority of

inequality in the world today is between countries and not

between individuals in those countries.

And you can see that by looking at this chart

when we get there.

So basically this is a a slice of rich and

poor countries.

So the countries are all lined up here.

The the graph is a little bit tricky, but just

keep looking at it.

You get that.

And so you can see here that the societies split

into like these classes from rich and poor.

And there's five slices of the income distribution, top 20%

at the bottom 20%.

And then the 20% is in between.

And you can see that like for a lot of

these poorer poor countries that like basically all classes are

very, very poor.

Okay.

And then you can see that in these rich countries

there's a big kind of way.

So if you think about this as a kind of

a relief map where you're kind of going hiking, right,

if you wanted to kind of go as high as

possible and you're here, you probably want to go.

You want to move countries, right?

Then you're staying in the same country and try to

go here.

You can do a lot better.

And this might explain, like, you know, contemporary kind of

migratory flows.

In fact, contemporary migration flows are like should be a

lot higher if that's the one dynamic that that that

reaches back.

We know migration is affected by lots of other things

as well.

But basically this is where you want to go.

And so later on we're look we'll look at within

country inequality.

But the major takeaway is that between country inequality is

the vast source of all inequality.

Okay.

But within countries we have a huge amount of work.

Now looking at the shares of, say, the top 1%.

Okay.

And what we see there is that they have declined

spectacularly since about 1900 to about 19 in the early

1970s.

And then they've started to rise again.

So this is from like, uh, all the project that

is really kind of put forward by Thomas Piketty in

Paris.

Okay.

And I've done some of this work for England myself.

But you can see that basically it's the wars, uh,

particularly the Second World War, that really shocks the wealth

distribution.

And all of the really big wealth holders lose a

lot during that period.

And and also it's taxed during the 50s and 60s

and 70s.

Then suspiciously enough, around the 80s, it all starts to

reverse.

Okay.

So like, you know, this is kind of a huge

kind of topic for economic historians and students of inequality.

So the takeaway here is that the, uh, the kind

of the inequality story, at least over the 20th century,

has been one of great equalisation.

Okay.

And so I'm going to have to ask you to

take my word for that a little bit, you know,

because, you know, obviously there's there's a lot behind that

statement, but it looks like economic growth over most of

human history has created more equality.

Think about that ancient Egyptian society that was a society

of slave labour.

Short lives and God kings.

Okay.

The Pharaoh, right.

And his family and the priests and cars.

Okay.

This is a spectacular inequality.

We live in a time of great inequality, but it's

way less than it was in the past and way

less than in the times of the God kings.

Okay, in various different manifestations from Persia to Egypt, you

know, wherever.

We'll return to this, um, you know, later after Christmas.

And this is actually from my own work.

This is looking at the distributional consequences just to see

what's happening across these wheelchairs.

Oh, I meant to take this out today.

I'm sorry.

Ignore it.

We'll see this later.

Okay.

Um, just one thing I wanted to emphasise.

And again, I want to talk more about this, but

we can't do it justice.

One of the great changes over the past century and

a half has been the, uh, the kind of, uh,

a greater role for, for women in the economy.

So gender inequality, uh, vis a vis women has, has

actually declined a lot.

And there's one piece of evidence this is female suffrage.

So how do females have the right to vote in

a country?

And so you can see here that basically around 1900

that's around zero.

Okay.

And then you can see that it's actually going to

about 150 countries by around year 2000.

So again, all these aspects we've talked about all of

them.

And then inequality along the lines of the share of

the top 1%, but also gender.

Now we can go to a period where things can

reverse themselves for like ten years, five years, 20 years.

But over the past several centuries, as this shows you,

what's correlated with economic growth has been greater quality, which

is very surprising.

And I know that some of you will object to

that anyway.

Happiness.

Life has changed dramatically since the revolution.

Industrial revolution.

Are people happier?

The first thing is we don't know, right?

Because we've only been taking these kind of surveys like

since the year of my birth, 1980.

Yeah, I'm like really old.

So basically, um, this shocked me because I just put

this in earlier.

I just seen what comes up.

If you look for the first graph you can find

on this like 90% satisfied with their personal life, what

am I doing wrong?

Like, it is like I am like I am not

in that 90%.

Like just honest to God, Jesus Christ.

Anyway.

Um, like.

But then what's what's interesting here is that when you

look at more, the more academic work it's actually showing

kind of like different things.

So you look, you go to a different source, you

find different takeaways.

And this is from the more this is from a

kind of a more academic report than the Gallup survey,

because the Gallup survey might not be properly collected.

Maybe there's some bias in the way they're asking the

question and the way the sample is constructed.

But here we have more recent and I apologise that

it's small, but I wanted to get this in because

it's showing you a decrease in happiness, which is, you

know, and also like for a certain age group since,

you know, the mid 2000, which is kind of, I

think far more consistent with what, what what was being

discussed in the academic literature.

If you're kind of curious, like there is this big

debate about, uh, smartphones and Instagram just frying our brains

with, uh, you know, constant kind of, um, you know,

um, Exposure to stuff that isn't making this particular happy.

But, you know, what's interesting is, um, guess what?

This this is just looking at happiness and equality during

periods of economic growth.

And I just just found this today.

So this is the standard deviation okay.

And the standard deviation is a measure of inequality okay.

The bigger the standard deviation the more the more unhappiness.

Unhappiness there is.

There's just there's people aren't just all happy.

They're kind of both happy sad.

There's more inequality.

And that was coming from that when I showed you

the norm the normal curve the standard deviation makes that

curve wide.

And so they're just measuring how wide the curve.

And they're showing that that's going down over time since

the 80s and all of these different countries.

So like you know it's really interesting.

And what really supports this and this is maybe more

of a simpler graph.

So if you didn't like last graph, just forget it.

If you did like this, you know, uh, you've got

great taste.

But basically here you have self-reported life satisfaction versus GDP

per capita.

And there's a really strong systematic semantic relationship like the

higher your GDP per capita, the more happier your country

is from the survey data.

Okay.

Um, you know, the US is a lot happier than,

uh, than China, for example.

Okay.

Uh, India relative to, uh, France.

Um, you know, again, not necessarily causal, just that like,

there's these broad set of correlations that are just really

kind of fascinating.

Okay.

And yeah, a bunch of things you can see by

the map.

Uh, again, there's only really one map of the world.

Uh, in particular for the extremes in it, sub-Saharan Africa.

And, and then this is just, again, just looking at

the dynamics.

It's essentially the same figure.

Okay.

So to conclude, life is better today than in the

past on every metric metric of development, longer lifespan, lower

violence, taller and more leisure time, more learned and more

equal, um, and so forth.

And, you know, maybe we're happy.

Maybe we're not.

Okay, so it's been a pleasure.

See you later.

Amen.

Thank you.

Oh, sure.

Yeah, yeah.

I think it's an issue.

Now because we've got like.

So.

Many views on the internet and you get last year

on that as well.

So we actually.

Yeah.

So it's going to be.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah yeah yeah.

Yeah.

That that's my interpretation.

Yeah yeah.

Yeah yeah yeah.

No I'm working on a book.

Yeah.

And I was wondering so this is Yeah yeah yeah

yeah.

And, uh.

Yeah.

So I think, like, there's, um.

Yeah, I think you can think about like, different kind

of cultures.

I think like an underlying culture that kind of rewards.

So an example is in kind of in the driver

culture, you might get a culture that five years worth.

So like Napoleon China and looked at the animal and

they go out and.

Kill her, kills a man during that lesson.

So fathers more children.

It's like that culture rewards.

It's what I mean.

So then we go through culture, which are values, you

know, like basically accumulating wealth and being patient and being

educated.

And then that's why people are learning to read because

they're basically the culture is shifted.

You've got like a culture of like a gentleman, like

that's coming from the least the gentleman.

If you insult someone, he's patient, he's understanding, you know,

and then you have the modern mind.

Today he was like, you know, you know, is a

feminist and, you know, like the culture.

So you see something around time that's like the kind

of like the old days, but it's like.

You know, if someone.

Lecture 7:

So it's hard.

Thank you.

Thank you.

All right.

I'm not sure this thing is working.

No.

So I'm not able to move around as much, so

I'll struggle a bit, but that's okay.

So welcome back to 101.

Internationalisation of economic growth.

I'm going to take you through a tour of the

next 10 or 11 weeks or so, something like that

certainly until the break in January.

so welcome back.

Exciting for me to be back in 101 this year.

Always a good course to teach.

Today we're going to look at understanding European catch up

thinking in relative terms of Britain in the late 19th

century.

How do late industrialism converge with the early, early industrialising

nation to the extent they do?

Okay, so in terms of how we're going to play

this, here's kind of a I'm going to turn this

on to Do Not Disturb.

Here's how we're going to sort of play it today.

Start by thinking about the facts.

So what is the growth record Britain versus European neighbours.

And if you want competitors who grows quickly.

And when who catches up what's the timing.

Now once we've seen some of the basic contours of

the facts, we're then going to try to go through,

um, accounting for this growth.

So what are essentially the proximate causes?

How much depends on factor use versus productivity, the intensity

to which factors are used okay.

Or the the effectiveness the efficiency with which factors are

used.

So it's kind of look at those proximate causes to

go with the basic facts.

Now then we're going to explore one of these stories

in the literature which is well economic history.

So don't have a tendency to fly off the edge.

That'd be bad.

That's a tendency we don't want.

But an economic history is a tendency, a different one,

to talk about leaders and followers.

Okay.

Some economies are on the frontier, the richest, most productive,

the best technology, the most education.

However you want to think about it, other economies or

regions within an economy even are a bit further behind.

Okay, so how do they catch up?

There's sort of an automatic convergence process, sort of regression

to the mean.

But often along the way There are strategies, either public

or private, to do this.

So this is what some economists, famously Alexander Macron um,

penned as substituting for missing prerequisites.

So get an idea of what that might mean, how

it might work, and whether the stories people tell make

a lot of sense.

I want you to think about that last part a

lot.

I'm going to tell you the stories and invite some

critical reflections, okay?

But that's for you and your readings to really delve

into a bit more.

Last two things to wrap this up.

I think a nice case study.

One of my former colleagues got really interested in this.

I think it's a good example to look at Sweden,

which I don't sure growth miracles seems a bit strong,

but it's one of the really successful late 19th century

developing nations.

And what can we learn by examining the Swedish case?

Because it's got some commonalities with elsewhere in Europe, but

also quite distinctive.

I think it matches nicely to some of the themes

we'll look at together in the coming weeks.

And finally, we'll do a bit of a leader follower

overtake her.

Question mark comparison between Britain and Germany.

Where are they in 1913?

At the end of the period we're talking about.

So how much does Germany catch up?

And in doing so, what does its structure look like

in relative terms?

Okay, so that's the kind of the ball game today.

Alrighty.

So what are the oopsie daisies?

There we go.

What are the facts?

First fact is, in the period 70 to 1913, we

see sustained economic growth in most, if not all, of

Europe.

Okay.

The more developed countries in Europe double at least their

income per head over this period.

So it's not always amazing growth rates in a given

year, but continuous steady growth, just a few recessions in

the 1890s for the most part, but often good growth

rates.

And it's not just limited to like France, Germany, Belgium,

the Netherlands.

Right.

Northern Europe closer to Britain, if that matters.

Also a bit more advanced economically before the Industrial Revolution,

right?

They've got more human capital, better education systems.

People talk about institutions to the extent we can measure

those.

Right.

We also see lots of growth in less developed southern

and Eastern Europe, maybe slightly lower growth rates.

Okay.

Certainly from an initial worst position, but still sustained growth,

which you don't see before 1870.

So nice pictures or pictures nonetheless.

We think about, uh, northwestern Europe if you count Switzerland.

I don't know about that, but I haven't changed my

colleagues likes.

It.

Makes a nice illustration.

Think about Germany, France, Switzerland, tootling along at maybe 1.5%

per annum.

Okay, so good years, 2% growth or more, which is

kind of a metric we understand today as being a

good level of economic growth.

Okay.

So good growth across northern and Western Europe if we

go to southern Europe, what's the difference?

Or Eastern Europe?

Obviously a lower initial level.

So the starting points here, about half of what they

were on the previous slide for Italy, Spain and Russia.

Also the slopes are a bit less exciting right.

These are slower growth rates.

They're not doubling over 44 years but still 1% per

annum.

So probably good years, 1.5% with some not so good

years thrown in like everywhere else.

Okay, so the idea here is growth is spreading right?

North Western Europe's growing strongly.

Southern and Eastern Europe are at least growing.

Okay.

So what things explain the spread of growth.

And do those things also help us explain a bit

the difference between these two sort of very crude regions.

Okay.

Now it's also can be useful to think about this

in comparison to Britain, which has a leader in terms

of GDP per capita or GNP per capita.

Here's again in 1900.

Gary commits Dollars.

That's your red line at the top.

Our European economy is converging to the British standard.

It's a bit of a mixed bag.

Okay, some of those slopes.

There's a lot of colours here, right?

But some of those slopes are steeper.

Look at Denmark, the black line.

Switzerland, the dark green line, Sweden.

The light bluish cyan line thinks a bit steeper as

well.

Others not so much.

But there's growth everywhere.

So growth everywhere.

Some convergence in terms of GDP per capita, maybe more

convergence if we look elsewhere, which we'll talk about a

bit as we go through the the topic.

Okay.

So there's growth in Europe.

Good news okay.

But then we want to understand what's the character of

this.

Oh Denmark go right to the end.

Sorry about that.

You can tell I haven't done a lecture for a

while.

I'm all clumsy on the buttons.

Alrighty.

So important feature of this.

Using our favourite E 101 terms.

This is intensive growth, Okay, so it's not just more

labour, more capital.

It is some of that.

Okay.

But on top of that it's intensive growth.

So some of the other features of the period hours

of work, as I'll show you in a minute, fall

everywhere.

So people go from the 72 hour work week.

Yeah, 12 hours a day, six days a week to

the 60 hour work week to less.

Okay.

So that means less labour input to generate more income.

So that raises income per hour as well as income

per capita.

Maybe we're understating some of this growth.

We're not doing an hourly terms because we're doing it

in income per worker.

So that's maybe a per person.

So that might be a useful thing to think about.

There's also more capital per worker.

So that is sort of extensive right.

Raising the capital stock.

But it's also making workers more productive.

And even given a certain amount of labour and capital,

we see good levels of TFP growth pretty much everywhere.

Okay.

So that's consistent with productivity growth, not just sweating the

capital more or extracting more out of the workers.

So again, for some comparisons, I quite like this one.

It's not my numbers, but they're pretty much bang on,

I think, from the Cambridge Economic History of Europe comparing

the change in annual hours worked around Europe.

Okay, big falls in Scandinavia, pretty big falls in central

and southern Europe.

Not so exciting for Italy perhaps, and the UK.

So Britain already has by European standards, quite low work

hours in 1870.

Other places converge okay strongest convergence Scandinavia also elsewhere.

What explains these changes?

Partly it's a story about developments.

Okay, maybe with more income we can afford to buy

more leisure and people choose to work less, right?

Of course, working isn't just about a choice.

It also depends on what the employers want.

It depends on technology.

It depends on policy and the law.

Okay, so while work hours are declining, we also see

the increase in legislation limiting work hours, putting constraints, all

those kinds of things.

So that's also part of the development story on the

side okay.

Which also could make workers more productive on the margin

on your 50th hour of the week, maybe you're more

productive on your 70th hour.

You get the idea.

Okay.

So reduction in the amount of labour input to get

the same worker to get even more output per person,

that's a good thing, right?

That's a sign of productivity and intensive growth if we

think about the capital stock.

So how well equipped are these workers that also rises

across Europe?

Okay.

It's a bit more um, even across these comparison countries.

Again, Scandinavia, France, Germany, southern Europe, Netherlands as well if

you like.

Okay.

And again, capital per worker is increasing more on the

in the continent than it is in the UK.

So again, that's a convergence story, right?

There's a more rapid increase in capital upgrading on the

continent.

Again, Scandinavia looks like a strong positive outlier here, the

highest rates of these countries.

So again that's going to make workers more productive.

They're better equipped of course that's going to require savings

investment all those things.

So for these economies starting a bit further behind, how

are they going to get their capital stocks going.

How are they going to save a we need right.

How are they going to get people's savings to the

capitalists.

Are they going to do it domestically.

Are they going to borrow money internationally?

Are they going to try to get some 19th century

foreign direct investment FDI going?

We'll see.

All those strategies sort of happen on the ground here.

And finally of these little pictures.

Uh.

Very important for dry throats.

Um, the annual change in total factor productivity over the

period.

Think of the pictures I showed you before.

Probably not too surprising.

Denmark, Sweden.

Over 1.2% over the period.

France, Germany, Spain pretty solid.

Italy and the Netherlands around like the level of the

UK.

So everywhere it's growing.

Okay, so it's a positive story across Europe and Britain,

strongest in Scandinavia here, maybe a bit less convergence across

these countries.

Italy, Netherlands looking a lot like the UK but still

quite a bit of convergence.

Okay so good period for growth everywhere.

The continents having bigger changes in labour input on the

downside, capital input on the upside and also in terms

of TFP for the most part.

So those are the facts right?

Okay.

So what explains this.

Are these countries or agents in these countries people write,

adopting similar approaches to developments.

Or do we see different patterns in different countries depending

on endowments, culture, language, whatever you want to think about.

What might those stories come out to be?

Okay, so why do countries grow?

Oh, here I changed my slides from what's on paper.

So I got I got to make sure I don't

do dumb things.

It's a very bad tendency.

Okay, good.

So why do these countries grow?

We can start with simple stories, right?

What do we know?

The leading industrial nation is Britain.

Okay.

It's the most industrialised, has the highest income per capita,

for the most part, has higher real wages and higher

living standards in lots of these countries, or most people

in these countries.

Right.

We're sort of talking here in a one on one,

like an economy is a monolithic single unit.

Please remember that's not true.

Right?

There's a distribution of outcomes within these places.

Later on in we'll talk more about those individual variations.

Right.

But telling a big story here.

Right.

So but one thing with if you have a leader

and you've got a bunch of followers, you'd expect there

might be some catch up potential, right?

Like you see in sports and modern day economic context,

people observe that there's an economic leader and they say,

hmm, why can't we get more of that too?

So countries, people in these countries study Britain.

They send agents and individuals to look at how British

industry works, other aspects people liked or didn't like about

British society.

Think about Karl Marx as the downside view of this,

perhaps, and try to understand how could we learn, adopt,

do better.

Okay, so there's catchup potential and we want to understand

how and why this took place.

Were there national strategies.

Were there private strategies.

How did this play out on the ground?

Okay, so goes back to this really classic paper with

8000 citations.

That's a good number.

I'd like to have that one day.

Okay.

Oops.

I spread out my slides a bit here, which is

this idea of catchup growth, mostly associated with the late,

great Moses Abramowitz out at Stanford in the 1980s.

He wrote about this for the rest of his career.

So this is the first paper that's important.

Whereas you might define a leading nation, just like I

did, having more capital, okay, modern technology and the highest

productivity.

So think about your econ 101 or whatever.

I forgot the codes at LSC.

They've all changed x one, b, x or whatever they

are now.

Right.

Production possibilities.

Frontier for the leading nation Britain.

Other countries are on a possibilities frontier inside that right.

Whatever labour capital they use, they can't produce as good

a combination.

So they want to try to move out to the

top PPF the top production possibilities frontier.

So the followers have less capital, they have inferior technology,

there are no weaker PPF and lower productivity.

And as we see in other social and athletic or

whatever context you want, if you're behind, there's room to

move, right?

You can look with the leader does and copy what

works well and not copy what didn't work well and

maybe catch up fairly quickly.

Okay.

There's advantages to being the follower can study the leader

as opposed to the leader who's always on the frontier

innovating, which is very uncertain.

And often you end up running out of road.

Okay, it's a bit of a funny analogy for countries.

Okay.

But let's go with it a bit, okay.

Thinking about it's the agency individuals, the firms and people

in those countries who are actually making the decisions and

the governments too, as we'll see.

Okay.

So if you've got room to move, maybe there's like

kind of, you know, regression to the mean.

Those who are bit further behind tend to do better

in the future.

Those who have done well in the past tend to

come back a bit over time.

That's also a powerful analogy for understanding growth.

If you're a bit behind, you can move.

So what facilitates this moving okay or catch up growth.

It's going to depend on a bunch of things.

It might depend on having and these are some of

them easy to measure.

Some of them hard to measure.

Right.

Institutions may be hard to measure.

It depends who you ask.

This year's Nobel laureates versus others would give a different

answer, right?

But certainly they matter, right?

Having good institutions, the right institutions might make growth a

bit more easy.

We could think about things like financial systems.

We've got savings and investment projects.

And getting from A to B could be a big

constraint if you don't have good financial intermediation, human capital,

all these sorts of things.

So maybe, maybe catchup growth depends on having a bit

like the right preconditions.

You need some education, you need a financial system that

works, and you need institutions that will facilitate growth.

That sounds like an ideal scenario, right?

In this, we can imagine roles for the government and

roles for the private sector.

So maybe government helps with the institutional framework, okay.

By supporting good rules of the game, by, um, providing

human capital formation possibilities, i.e. easily accessible schooling.

Maybe the government helps by through sanitation and so forth.

Finance that could be mostly private, right?

Having banks that channels savings to investments.

But are those banks aren't there?

Maybe then there would actually be a role for government.

So we can see these things to go a bit

on either side.

Right.

Lots of things can be done in a public setting

or done by private agents.

And what if a brand is really powerful ideas, powerful,

but also a problem, I think, as we'll talk about,

is what he calls social capabilities.

Okay, lots of people love this idea.

It's kind of describing in a nice way on a,

in a way how people, organisations might respond to economic

opportunity.

If you have quote unquote good social capabilities, maybe as

a society can innovate quickly, adopt British technology, learn from

Japan.

If you're China in the 1980s, whatever the story might

be, social capabilities might help economies adapt, grow and so

forth.

Sounds like a good idea, right?

Easy to nod your head.

Yeah.

Social capabilities sounds great.

Well, it's a bit trickier than that because Abramowitz also

wrote no one knows just what it means or how

to measure it.

Same guy.

Right?

So if you're like me, an economic historian who likes

to look at data run regressions, you kind of want

to pull your hair out, right?

What are we going to do with this?

There's this really nice and interesting paper by Jonathan Temple

and Paul Johnson in the 1980s where they said, okay,

a bit of a puzzle with a brand of ideas,

right?

Good.

When you become an iron at the end of your

name means you've made it.

Right.

But these Abramowitz ideas are challenging.

What they did in this paper say, well, we'll take

an index of social, political and economic indicators done by

some development economist in the 1960s, and they find that

actually forecast growth really well in the period afterwards.

Now, are those social capabilities.

Some of those indicators have a lot to do with

developments in 1960, right.

Not just potential.

So it's a bit of a tricky sticky one okay.

So social capability is a great idea.

You'll read about them how exactly we measure them or

define them.

Right.

Does having an educated population is that part of social

capability?

We probably all think so, right.

But surely it also depends on how rich a nation

is, how much it taxes itself to pay for schooling.

That's institutions and past development, right?

So it's kind of hard to untangle these things, right?

Great idea.

What do you mean guy?

Anyway it's good.

But so think of that idea.

But also think about how hard it is to, like,

put your thumb on it.

Okay, so if you've got a good idea, tell us

if you get a Nobel Prize.

All right.

But we'll come back the idea a bit as we

go.

Alrighty.

So thinking about Europe versus Britain and thinking about, um,

hang on a second here.

I made some changes to how I taught this a

couple of years ago, thinking about some of the proximate

causes, like the economic structure matters and different parts of

the economy are important.

So it's again, we want to think about leaders and

followers.

We might say, well, what did Britain look like?

I was not a good feasible model for Germany or

Spain, or I was going to say Luxembourg, maybe Belgium.

It's a bit bigger, right?

The answer is probably not.

Okay.

Britain is really, really different.

Before Britain industrialise, it's already had a big reduction in

family farming.

The farmers are marching.

You might have noticed this morning down to Westminster, but

still as a share of the economy, they're relatively small

players except today.

And that's true in 1850 already.

Okay.

Britain has this commitment to free trade, and other European

economies are much later to adopt and less willing to

sort of apply consistently, as we'll see.

Britain's also big overseas lender.

So as well as investing capital domestically, British Savings go

to build railroads around the world, as you'll see with

me in the weeks to come.

Also Britain, what's a big industry?

Well, there's more than one.

But the biggest one is cotton textiles.

Right?

Cloth.

You can think about steel being important as well, but

it's cotton textiles is kind of the model industry of

the British Industrial Revolution.

And none of these features are true in Europe, right?

Farming is much bigger much later.

Even in the next most industrialised nations, it's much less

committed to free trade.

People are interested in tariffs for developments.

Europe does lend a lot of capital abroad, but not

to the same extent Britain does.

And in Europe, when there's industrialisation and when there's that

catch up growth, it's mostly coming not by being a

cotton textile leader, but through other industries, as we'll see.

So in terms of structural differences, I think that's an

important thing.

I'm going to try to remember to save it for

about a couple of minutes.

Is that across Europe what happens?

Is there a structural change to look more like Britain

in terms of the sharing agriculture?

There's falls across Europe, but Britain still remains a big,

massive Outlier.

Okay.

So again slightly different set of countries where the data

is good or available in some cases from Austria-Hungary down

to the Netherlands.

Right.

Much more agricultural in 1870.

Um moderate convergence to 1913.

Okay.

So they're moving in the same direction.

They're becoming less rural, more urban, but from a much

higher baseline.

And as late as 1913, agriculture is often still the

biggest occupation for men, let's say, in these in these

economies.

Okay.

So they're they're having the change in the direction, but

they're not as far along.

Now, what's also going on with agriculture over this period?

One thing we also see as part of this urbanisation

movement, if you will, matching up nicely to where you

were initially with high levels of farming to low, there's

big rises in farm productivity.

You get this in Britain, you get this in the

Netherlands, which was the second line on that picture, but

much bigger ones.

As we go to the left here, the, um, my

left, your right.

Is that right?

Your left.

My right, whatever.

Left.

Right.

It's all the same.

Not really.

Okay, so farm productivity goes up as a farm sector

go smaller.

What's that telling you that this transition is pulling not

very productive workers out of farms in Lower Austria.

They're going to Vienna.

Working in industry, we're probably productivity is quite a bit

higher.

So that sort of structural change is a big part

of the development story, right?

Just getting workers from agriculture, where the extra workers don't

contribute much to the farm and into industry where maybe

they do have more impact, can give big gains.

Okay.

And you get more productivity as the share workers and

agriculture goes down.

That said, these places are still not as far along

in terms of farm productivity.

So as a share of British productivity, most of these

countries.

And again these are averages right.

So within them you'd find very productive places and less

productive places.

But the averages are starkly different right.

Only France and maybe Germany from that picture are above

half of British agricultural productivity levels.

So while they're moving in the right direction and there's

easy gains out of getting extra workers out of agriculture,

they haven't gotten that far along yet by 1913, right?

Germany is surprisingly rural and agricultural, for what we'll think

of as a modern industrial nation at the end of

this period.

Okay, it's not like here or here, not like the

US either.

Also, to go with this, right, that there is this

I thought about not having this slide, but I've got

it anyway, just to remind you that that agricultural share

and GDP per capita have this tight relationship, right, that

getting workers out of farming tends to be correlated with

higher income per capita.

Okay.

So again that structural change is important.

Okay.

I think I've said this a million times now right.

Structural change.

Think about that as one of the lessons from this

lesson.

Right.

That there's lots of growth through getting labour out of

low productivity, our culture into industry and services, making the

economy less rural and more urban.

We see that in the late 19th century here.

We're also going to see it, I think, with me

after World War two in Europe as well, when really

pushing industry long after World War two, also contributes to

this growth in parts of Europe that were further behind

at the beginning.

Okay, so that's good.

Now that's for agriculture.

So those changes are going to be important for catching

up.

Right.

Just changing the structure of the economy.

That's an easy way to grow and maybe an easy

way to converge eventually.

How about the industrial side here.

As you might expect, industry is of rising importance across

Europe except in Spain and maybe some other exceptions.

Not on my graph.

Okay.

And we do see some convergence with Britain.

Go go go.

Yep.

Um, let me just make sure I haven't missed something.

So employment shares in industry in Britain remain in the

ballpark of the low 40% from 1870 to 1913.

For other economies, our best estimates are mostly increasing shares

in industry.

So Germany is getting the closest there is the Netherlands

moving up Italy, France also exception being Spain, which is

actually going the opposite direction.

Right?

Not exactly deindustrialisation, right?

The number of workers industry are going up, but the

share of the economy that's industrial is shrinking or the

share of the workforce that's industrial.

So other economies are on a growing industrial path, even

if not the same industry as the UK led leader

in Spain is on a more agricultural specialisation path.

And of course, Spain is a big country, right?

Catalonia.

The Basque Country will look a bit more like other

parts of Europe.

Go south.

It's going to be very different.

So again, all of these think about the internal differences,

right?

Catalonia not like the rest of Spain.

Certainly the Basque Country isn't like the rest of Spain.

Finally we think about services where the Netherlands converge to

converge a bit with Britain.

And other European economies are well off British levels.

So, as we know, London especially, but also the rest

of Britain, is a big service economy.

That's true here.

It's the biggest sector by 1913.

Okay.

And these economies are kind of moving in the same

direction but from much lower levels.

So by 1913 this changes are in the same direction.

But the structure is quite different still.

Um, yeah.

Here I made some changes.

Yeah.

Okay.

good.

So how did this catching up and convergence happen?

So here's one of those ideas right from Gershon Cohen,

uh, supervisor of many famous supervisors of supervisors, if you

can put it that way, one of the most famous

Harvard economic historians ever coined the term substitution for missing

prerequisites here.

The idea is, suppose you look at Britain as a

market led economy on the lead in terms of industrial

development in 1870.

How did it get there?

Mostly through the private sector, through private, through well-functioning markets.

Suppose you don't have all those markets dialled in.

Suppose you have an issue of scale.

Suppose you have an issue of missing markets.

Suppose something's the private sector just isn't providing due to

some market failure.

A coordination failure if you will.

How can you fix those either with private enterprises?

private responses or with public.

So we're going to walk through three ideas from northern,

southern and Eastern Europe.

I'm going to tell you the stories to tell you

some ideas why you might like or like less some

of the stories, but also are we to think about

especially which of these narratives do you by which do

you think hold water?

If you read more about them, think about them.

Which are these are the most compelling?

So three examples and let's start.

Yes, I haven't changed this.

Let's start with Germany.

I haven't taught this lecture for a few years, so

I had to go back and think about it.

It's always dangerous thing already.

So part of the German story could be about tariffs

okay.

In two particular ways.

First of all there's a sovereign.

I think I said that right.

Uh tariff union between Prussia.

So among Prussian states and then other German states.

Keep in mind Germany isn't unified until the 1870s.

Okay.

So these are among independent German states, setting a joint

customs union.

What does this do?

It eliminates internal barriers among these little states and sets

a common external tariff.

Okay.

So it's reducing tariffs within and imposing a common tariff

around German speaking Europe except for Austria-Hungary.

Put it that way.

So what are the implications of this?

First of all, it makes for a bigger domestic market.

Severe German industrialist or Prussian industrialist.

Now you've got a bigger market to which you can

get your goods without tariffs.

For those industrialists, it also provides protection, right?

It's going to help keep out British goods.

So you, the Prussian industrialist, now have access to this

big German speaking market.

Okay, so this is a bit of a development, a

bit of a development strategy that so the Rhine happens

before industrialisation, but it might have these implications.

Might not everyone believes this story Okay.

But one thing that goes with this development is these

large, export oriented firms bigger than Britain in many cases

in terms of firm size.

And they're also capitalised.

So it's not often a very competitive market.

So if you're a German consumer, buying stuff from these

firms is expensive okay.

But they've got really good access to export markets.

Right?

German railway systems subsidise the cost of shipping goods to

the border.

Okay.

So these industries become these export oriented firms, right.

Which then is a stimulus to develop and be productive,

sort of.

On the other hand, the domestic market is quite uncompetitive.

Okay.

There's a trade off there.

Consumers are losing.

These capitalists are winning.

There's efficiency and inefficiency arguments on both sides of the

table.

But that's one thing we see as part of this

model.

Another part of the German Mean story.

Yes.

Is changes in what you might call financial intermediation.

And there's two to think about.

The first one that most economic historians have talked about

for decades is universal joint stock banks.

Okay.

These are banks supported by the states that provide comprehensive

services.

So there are savings for a little you and me.

They provide capital to firms that are often not necessarily

owned by the national government, but certainly monitored and sometimes

governed by it.

So and what they can do is they can help

fill in these missing markets.

Suppose you have people who want to save, industries want

to borrow, but you don't have banks that put them

together easily.

Right.

In other contexts in Britain or the US, right.

If a firm wants to raise capital, it might sell

shares right?

On private financial markets.

Maybe here those markets weren't really there.

So these investment banks kind of bridge that gap.

Okay.

So in the German case it's the four D's.

It's Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank, Darmstadt Bank and the other

one is like disco or something.

Snake Bank I forget the name, okay, but they're big,

they're universal, and they bridge the gap from personal savers

to investors now.

But they're not the only kind of bank that works

is this really neat paper by Sibylle Lehmann and Fabian

Valle who say, actually, within us, I think it's just

looking at Prussia in their piece, these regional public savings

banks also do the same job, right, that they're banks

that only locals can save them.

And those banks have policy restrictions.

They have to lend the capital also within the region,

and they find a strong correlation between industrial development.

They say it's causal, too, between industrial development and the

presence of these banks.

Again, they solve the financial intermediation problem.

So maybe tariffs and unions may be financial intermediation for

Germany Okay, Italy.

There's also a story about financial intermediation that maybe goes

so far.

So again, underdeveloped capital markets as in the German case.

And here rather than sort of, um, you know, the

big banks and Deutschland, it's private investment banks often backed

by foreign capital.

So one example, excuse my Italian Credito Italiano did my

best.

Okay.

Which is backed by the Rothschilds and also French money

okay.

So private agents see an opportunity to be the investment

bank in Italy in this is after unification.

Yes.

They see the investment property in Italy and they come

in and provide finance.

Now if we look at Italian economic history, though of

course we do see positive industrial development, but it's mostly

in the north, not in the south.

Right.

So again is did financial intermediation help but only so

far because maybe limited social capabilities.

Okay, the South has a, um, very different property and

tenure arrangements.

It's got more inequality.

Big landowners with peasants farming on it, less human capital,

a much less educated population in the north of Italy.

So maybe those things somebody can measure easily, right?

Some not so easily about social capability.

Maybe they matter to capture that idea in a picture.

Okay.

Here's regional GDP, uh, benchmarked to 100 over the period

71 to 1971.

We focus on the first part up to 1911.

What we see is the northwest and the south are

moving apart.

So things that help Italian development mostly help Tuscany, Lombardia,

Piedmont, um, and so forth.

Venezia.

Okay, so it works, but not everywhere.

Might be might be one of the lessons from Italy.

Finally, Russia.

I thought about not doing Russia this year, but I

did anyway.

Here, this here.

Russia is further behind.

It's slower growing.

So one of the consequences is the state has a

bigger role than, say, in the German case.

So in the Russian context, in Tsarist Russia, the state

owned and directly financed railways, unlike Britain and America, where

private capital initially did the job, Russia also has tariff

policy and is actually entrusted to state in facilitating technological

transfers.

So let's bring the best technology from Western Europe into

Russia in iron and steel.

And an engineering part of that is recruiting foreign entrepreneurs

okay.

So they bring capital and expertise.

The state encourages this.

So places like the Donbas get lots of French capital

in the late 19th century.

Finally, there's a financial intermediation story here.

It's the Russian State Bank, okay, which has a direct,

active role in the financial sector and eventually has these

subsidiaries that collect savings from different regions from different parts

of the population.

There's a peasant's bank, for example, and they also channel

investments in different parts of Russia.

Okay.

So again, state has a role try to do similar

things we see elsewhere in Europe.

So maybe they're learning the lessons from Germany.

Okay.

But much more activist given the much further behind initial

position.

And as we saw growth was okay but not amazing.

Right.

So there are other problems under the hood here we

don't have time to talk about in a 40 minute

lecture, but we'll do that later with Judith in the

course.

Okay.

So that's some ideas about missing subsequent prerequisite.

It could be filling in financial markets.

It could be encouraging new firms to develop.

It could be things like transportation infrastructure.

That's a story in Germany, Also in Russia.

How about this Swedish story I've been interested in, and

trying to learn a bit more about the last week

or so, which is Sweden looks so amazing on the

GDP pictures I showed you.

But if you look at wage growth and living standards,

it is one of the more impressive 19th century growing

economies.

It's also interesting because if you're a of a certain

age like me and learned economic history in the 1990s,

you'll remember your professor is talking about Sweden as an

impoverished sophisticate.

That is before 1870.

Sweden isn't a rich country in terms of wages or

income per capita, but it's got really high literacy rates.

Lots of kids go to school, therefore has high human

capital before growth.

So it's just waiting for something to come in to

let that human capital kick in and lead to sustained

growth.

So what was the driving?

What allowed Sweden to then build on its human capital

leadership before the period?

It's probably it's almost certainly, I'm going to say better

educated than England in 1850.

Okay.

I'm saying about checking the data if you don't think

that's true right in.

But it's comparable.

First, some of the facts just in terms of wages,

the Swedish wage line is the dotted one with the

with the dotted lines with the diamonds.

There's a shaded area which gives you like the 10th

to 90th percentile.

Right.

The confidence interval.

Wages are rising quickly by European standards.

We also know in Sweden it's got rapidly declining child

mortality.

So while the GDP figures aren't amazing, wages are growing

quickly.

Health is improving rapidly.

You're more likely to make it past age five.

Sorry.

These are yes the deaths per 1000 under the age

of five.

So what explains what explains Swedish success then?

Okay, first part of it through the 1870 ish.

It's growth of industry through trade.

Okay.

So a bit like Germany later on.

Sweden is quite export oriented.

Initially its sort of staple things, things that are harvested

or pulled out of the ground, timber and iron.

Okay.

But the second industrial revolution, right where we get into

engineering, chemicals, things like this, that's where Sweden really takes

off, and that's where natural resources, okay, are complementary to

all that education and human capital.

Think about Sweden.

It's got the south where most of the cities are,

the north where there's loads and loads of resources.

When you get into a more advanced, sophisticated industrialised economy,

those northern resources are incredibly valuable and they're complementary to

new industries that uses the human capital from the south

of Sweden.

So for this to work, you need an integrated market.

You need north and south to be responsive to each

other, partly in trade and commodities.

So goods need to be shipped around, but also in

terms of labour markets.

And that's the other bit of the story to go

with the human capital and the resources.

Sweden's got a really integrated labour market both within Sweden,

so people move around the country in response to opportunities

more quickly than most of the rest of Europe, but

also internationally.

Okay, I don't know if I like this slide from

my colleague, but I have changed it a bit.

Okay, so in terms of the domestic integration, this is

a picture, a snapshot of wage growth against initial wage

differences.

And within Sweden, the poorest localities grow more quickly than

the richest ones.

Okay.

There's convergence within an inverse relationship between wages and growth.

And that's consistent with a market where labour moves around

to the best opportunities.

And by 1910 Sweden has really high regional equality.

Okay.

So workers move in response to opportunities.

All of a sudden there's demand in northern Sweden to

mix that human capital with the local resources.

People go there much more quickly than other national contexts.

Okay.

So people move around and that helps.

Part of the story is also that the urban rural

wage gaps are very small.

Again, this isn't perfect evidence that when there's a good

job in the city, people leave their farms to go.

But if people were reluctant to do that, you'd expect

quite big urban rural wage gaps.

And they're never big over the period of 1831 to

1900.

So there's quite a bit of likely responsiveness to urban

opportunities across Sweden through the period.

People move and consider these different opportunities.

That's the subtext here.

And to go with this, which you might or might

not know, depending on what, um, TV and radio shows

you listen to people listening to the radio podcasts you

watch, watch or listen to.

Between 1851 and 1900.

Over 800,000 Swedes migrated to the US.

So again, people, Swedish folks moved within the country when

there was trouble when they were shot or the opportunities

are better abroad.

They also left the country.

Okay.

And again, places within Sweden with more immigration had more

rapid wage growth.

So Sweden was integrated nationally but also well integrated with

international labour markets.

So surplus labour, you know, that structural change to go

from agriculture to industry, that happens quickly in Sweden and

Swedish industries, not so hot.

Go to America instead.

Okay.

So that's again part of the driver of wage growth.

Okay.

Let's go leave Sweden behind and go back to an

end with the last five minutes or so.

Oh my time is okay for lecture one.

I'll work on it.

Comparing Britain and Germany by 1913.

So again, Britain being the leader, Germany, Germany being the

industrial nation that many eyes overtakes Britain eventually, right in

some matters.

Sitting in 1913.

The UK is still the richest country in Europe under

most measures.

Okay, although the crossover's coming soon, depending who you ask,

it's still the most advanced economy.

I don't know, I like that term, but what this

means is it's less agricultural, more industry service, it's more

modern looking.

You might.

Say.

It has higher productivity, agriculture and services.

However, Germany does overtake Britain in manufacturing productivity.

That's not driven, though, by being really good at cotton

textiles.

It's driven by being really good at new industries.

Okay.

While Germany is export oriented, that story I told you

before about firms are big players within Germany with a

big export focus.

Britain still remains dominant in trade, although it's close.

So in terms of manufacturing labour productivity, this is from

Steve Bradbury's great book on productivity.

They're pretty close even throughout the period.

But after 1900, it's pretty clear that Germany has gotten

a decent chunk ahead.

It's a manufacturing.

Productivity in Germany is higher, but it's not across the

board, right?

It's really driven in particular by particular sectors in older

sectors like cotton textiles.

Germany doesn't copy Britain or become highly productive.

Its advantages lie in newer, more scientific sectors.

So the story for Sweden about human capital cultivating new

industry.

Ask yourself that question here, because that's where Germany becomes

a big player, those types of industries.

So a couple of quick comparisons.

If we look at just output of cotton textiles.

Well Germany produces more of them.

Right.

But it's never like Britain and it's not really converging,

I would say over the period.

Where.

We see differences are in things like sulphuric acid.

Okay.

Not a pleasant thing to make, but an.

Important.

Industrial good that's used as an input into other industries.

So think of these not just as final output.

Think of these as intermediate goods okay.

They're UK production of sulphuric acid increases a bit over

the 44 year period in Germany, is increasing much more

rapidly and really takes off after 1900.

Okay.

So that's a newer industry where Germany becomes a big

player, a much bigger player than than Britain.

Another example think about the production of synthetic dyes in

1913.

Again, industrial process, something that's used as an input.

And other industries, okay, Germany's kind of dominating the world

market.

The UK has a slight, tiny, not very filling slice

of pie.

Okay, so Britain still dominates its industries, but these new

industries that are only really important mostly after 1890.

That's where Germany is a really big player.

And again, it requires some resources.

It requires some industrial human capital, different skill sets, right,

than, say, cotton textiles.

You need some engineers in these processes, right.

The way you don't need in cotton production.

In cotton textile production.

If we look at trade figures.

Okay, despite this transformation, despite German dominance in some sectors,

Britain still retains over a quarter of world manufacturing exports

circa 1913, with Germany number two.

And again within these slices of Trivial Pursuit applies.

Also, I think when I look at this right within

these pie slices, the composition would be very different.

Britain would have lots of cotton textiles, of course, and

a few other things, other manufactured final goods.

Germany would have a much bigger chunk of.

Intermediates.

The kind of goods that were a much more important

part of economic production after 1880 and 1890, so the

composition would also be very different, even though the shares

aren't, aren't so different.

Okay.

On the other side of the trade balance are imports,

right.

Britain's commitment to free trade not matched by Germany on

either the output of the input side okay.

And that's synonymous with us.

Okay.

So Germany catches up to a substantial degree, becomes a

leader in many sectors but doesn't really look like Britain.

Different industries, different orientation, different government.

Attitude towards trade.

Okay, my last notes.

People are getting ready to come in.

So perfect timing.

So this is mostly been about Europe right.

And what we see is Europe is partially catching up

with Britain.

It's going to look really good in some little parts

of Europe.

Two would be much more convergence points.

But over this whole period it's also falling behind the

US.

So to end with if we compare European US GDP

per capita, the US is forging ahead even more with

an even more different model of expanding agriculture and expanding

industry and attracting labour, not setting it out.

When there's a shortage.

Okay, so there's another development model out there.

That's.

Trumping what's going on in Europe.

As well.

Okay.

Thank you for putting up my first lecture.

I think the timing's not too bad, actually.

I'll see you next week to talk about international economic

institutions.

Yep.

So.

Testing.

Testing.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Lecture 8:

Okay.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Can't wander.

Uh, welcome back to 101.

Where, uh, next two weeks, we're going to take, uh.

Oh, no.

No typos.

We'll take a tour through looking a little bit at

globalisation, economic development circa 1870 to 1913.

Some of us I know you've seen a bit of

with Neil, but we're going to give a focus on

some different aspects, give it a structure to think about

it.

So today, to get warm on that topic, and also

because we're going to see later in the course how

these things unravel, we're going to think about the rise

of international economic institutions over this period.

So again thinking about what some might call I think

it's fair.

The first global economy and understanding the role of globalisation.

Okay.

That's more than just trade okay.

But today we're going to focus on trade.

So there's a massive increase in as I'll show you

in global trade over the period we're looking at.

And we want to understand what are the underpinning things

that facilitate these big trade increases okay.

And so today we're going to talk about some of

these economic institutions.

The first one is sort of um I don't know

what I want to say.

Technical mechanical but still important.

Okay.

The idea of multilateral settlements to reduce transaction transactions costs,

to make it easier for economies to trade and have

deficits and surplus at all, washes out in the end.

Okay.

Important to underpin multilateral settlements but also other aspects of

allowing economies to trade more easily is the gold standard.

Or today we're going to focus on the classical gold

standard of the late 19th century.

Okay, so always exciting for me.

I'm not a money macro guy at all, but I'll

give you the best story that I think makes sense

on these questions.

Um, if you're interested in financial economic history, our department

is amazing for that, by the way, at undergraduate and

graduate level, just not me.

Okay.

But I've talked to my colleagues.

They're really smart.

They give me wonderful advice.

Okay.

But if you want to do second year courses in

financial, economic history and money third year courses, we've got

you covered.

So stay tuned.

In the future, whether you're an E student or an

outsider, I think there's some of the best courses we

have.

Okay.

So we're going to focus on the facts and the

explanations to start.

So thinking about rising.

Aha I made a new picture, an updated picture thinking

about the facts regarding the increase in world trade in

the period of 1870 to 1913.

What I've done here is I've just taken the Our

world and data cover picture.

I didn't actually change the year scale, but I think

that's actually quite useful for us.

Okay.

So this is just tracing out exports as a share

of GDP okay.

So that's a good measure of trade intensity at the

world level okay.

Not looking at particular countries here.

What do we see on this scale from ballpark 1860

to about 1910.

Substantial increase from below from about 5% to closing in

on 15%.

So not quite a tripling okay.

So sharp increase about 1880.

And then a long steady period with high levels of

trade per GDP of course.

Nothing like today okay.

We're talking about half the level.

So compare this nice nice this Plateau in the mid

in the early 20th century.

It's not too far off the level of 1980, right?

It's probably higher.

It is certainly higher than the 1960s.

Of course, GDP is higher after World War two.

So we've got to remember that right.

But as a share of income trade was really important

then okay.

For a long time.

So we have this long period with high trade flows

as a share of world income.

Okay.

Income is growing as we know from this course in

that period.

So trade's got to be growing with it right.

So that's a really important fact.

And it's really, you know redoing this picture for today.

It's really remarkable to me how stable that is.

Okay.

Like there are some little bounces but nothing major.

And that should be a hint to you that this

period, 1870 to 1913, is quite special and unusual, at

least in Europe.

And like, you know, countries settled by Europeans or North

America and Australia.

Okay.

So that's one of the facts.

There's high share of trade in GDP by even post-World

War Two standards.

And it's stable, pretty stable for 40 good years.

Yeah.

That's really quite remarkable.

Of course.

So a rise in global trades from 17 to 1913

I think even more impressive.

The high stability I think lower than today of course.

And also I should probably redo this next these next

pictures too.

But I think the old style charts do it pretty

well that trade growth trade grows everywhere.

And of course for that increasing share usually more rapidly

than income.

So these are old school pictures, but I think they

capture the historical data from Madison quite well, because that

hasn't really changed very much since good old Angus was

doing the work.

Okay.

So again, the blue bars our GDP growth from 70

to 13.

The sort of red fuzzy ones are export growth and

you know world trade grows faster.

And that's true everywhere except Latin America.

Okay, where the trade growth is pretty good but outpaced

by GDP growth.

Interesting looking at Africa, which is going to be colonial

almost entirely in this period.

The rapid trade growth against income.

And there's Europe Western offshoots.

What does that mean?

US Canada Australia, New Zealand Angus Madison love this term.

And so it's in there too.

Okay so those are the facts right.

And keep in mind Latin America looks a bit different.

So some of the nice stories I'm going to tell

you this lecture about why trade grew Latin America had

some challenges right.

We'll talk about more in coming lectures but also here

for understanding trade growth perhaps.

Okay.

So that's in terms of growth.

The other aspect to think about is so not just

in terms of the the growth rates of these regions,

but in terms of the levels.

And there shouldn't be surprising builds on last week.

I think Western Europe dominates global trade.

So again, thinking about where conditions are ripe, what institutions

work.

Well, that's going to be a bit of a focus.

So again here is lovely old fashioned pie charts.

But the data hasn't changed.

So we don't have to change them too much either

okay.

The big green piece of cake looks like a Pac-Man

that's really hungry.

Okay, that's Western Europe then.

The rest of the world Western offshoots, US, Canada, Oceania.

Right.

Uh, there's Eastern Europe and what becomes the Soviet Union

at the end of the period or afterwards?

That should be Russia really here.

So Latin America, Asia, Africa, so Western Europe dominates global

trade.

Okay.

As a share of GDP, I think we'd find the

same thing.

But I haven't worked that part out here.

Right.

So maybe hold off on that one.

All right.

Maybe not for Africa though.

And also within Western Europe a bit like we talked

about last time.

It's the UK and Germany who dominates?

France?

Italy.

Netherlands.

Belgium.

Smaller chunks.

Okay, so we have two big exporters in Europe.

Western Europe dominates world trade, but everywhere trade is growing

rapidly.

Okay.

So again, which country's institutions are going to be important

to maintaining a big global trade environment.

Well Britain must be should be important right.

It's the biggest global trader.

So what happens in London might be important.

What's happening in Germany with institutions.

There could also be key to the story.

Okay.

Just to preface some of what we're going to talk

about or I'm going to talk about Burgundy, listen and

hear and think about as we go.

Okay.

So those are the facts.

What are some of the explanations?

Okay.

So before we get into the nitty gritty institutional details

about about what's going on, there are some broader facts

we're going to talk about.

They're going to matter next week for explanation as well.

So the first fact we could think about is certainly

from a continental European perspective.

This is a period remarkably free of conflict.

Okay, so the Franco-Prussian War ends in 1871.

World.

First World War begins.

1914.

Between those two.

You've got a window that's relatively peaceful in Europe.

Okay, this isn't like complete global peace.

There's the Spanish-American War.

That's only three months.

The Mexican Revolution, ten year conflict from 1910, the Pacific

War.

That's Chile, Bolivia, Peru.

So other parts of the world still have conflict.

I picked three examples that involve Latin America.

So maybe think about that a bit for part of

the story.

Okay, so it's not global peace, but certainly for the

core economies in the world economy.

Right.

It's a peaceful period.

That's really important.

War disrupts trade in a big way.

Right.

Warring warring countries don't trade about much with each other,

but there's also research that shows that third parties are

also affected by this.

Okay, so if you're trading partners in conflict, it's going

to affect your trade as well.

I don't think that's surprising.

Right.

But you know, people actually estimated the size of this

and it's substantial.

That's one thing.

Second thing there's a big fall in transportation costs.

We'll talk a little bit more about this next week

too.

But two ways we could think about are the transportation

innovations of the railways and of steamships.

Okay.

What do railways do?

They allow you to move goods inland quickly at relatively

low cost.

Okay, so railways can replace canals which are cheap but

slow, but more importantly, they can replace like wagons going

overland, which are slow and expensive.

Okay, so railways let you get goods inland where you

don't have waterways and let you get time sensitive goods

inland even when you do have a water option.

The other option is of course oversea transport through steamships,

again starting in the 1860s.

For transatlantic ones, I want to say.

So these technologies, they allow goods to go faster with

less waste and often cheaper.

They also allow you to trade in different types of

goods.

Okay.

Want to ship fresh meat across America?

You need refrigerated railcars.

Want us to take butter from Argentina to Britain?

They did.

Okay.

Put loads of salt in it.

That helps.

But also refrigeration on steamships.

Okay, so these new technologies also allow for the trade

in more time sensitive perishable goods because they're quicker which

also increases trade.

Right.

So that's part of the story is the technologies to

ship stuff around costs fall.

Um, time gets shorter.

It means goods you wouldn't ship economically before now become

feasible, right?

Both perishable goods, but also low value goods.

Right?

You're not going to ship low value goods in its

15th century by sail or the 16th century by sale,

but with steam and rail, that becomes economically feasible.

Okay.

Related to the transportation costs is a fall in communication

costs.

Okay.

Telegraph a great example.

Okay.

So telegraphs go with things like the railway and particularly

but they don't always go 1 to 1 together.

So there's really interesting work by a former undergrad student

LLC looking at which markets got a telegraph without the

railway.

And did prices change because of it?

Yes.

Okay.

As a shortcut.

But you could understand why this matters, right?

Do you want to trade long distance?

It helps to know what the prices are, right?

If you put your stuff on a boat and Britain

gets to America 4 to 6 weeks later, whatever prices

might be wrong by the time you get there?

Okay.

Your information may be very old.

By having the telegraph and more rapid information, you can

time your trade more quickly, respond to market shocks, all

that kind of stuff.

So information also facilitates trade, lets people arbitrage efficiently, all

that kind of thing okay.

And to go with all this we'll see a bit

more formally in next week.

Why it's important is specialisation okay.

So with lower transportation costs with better communication countries regions

people can specialise.

Okay.

If I've got certain set of endowments in a region

or a country that can become more agricultural in response,

other places can concentrate on manufacturing and do away with

farming as a big activity.

Think about the story we tell about the British economy

in the 19th century.

You know, farming disappears early, very manufactured, centred trading nation.

It's kind of doing this right.

But other countries can also enjoy the benefits and the

changes that come with specialisation.

Perhaps we'll see more about this next week, where we'll

talk about some of the theory that goes with this,

to make sure our brains are completely wired to the

economics of it.

So those are some reasons.

Some people also like to say Britain was, well, I'm

not British, so I don't have to feel I have

to say this, but there's an argument that this is

also potentially Britain's role is important to you.

Right.

It was the biggest, uh, biggest piece of pie we

had as a nation a couple slides ago.

Right.

And as we've heard a million times over, probably by

now in this course, Britain is committed to free trade

in this period.

Okay.

And remains so even as we'll see later in the

course.

Other countries commitment to free trade starts to crumble a

bit.

Okay, the UK is a specialised economy relative to most

of the other ones we're talking about here, certainly relative

to continental Europe and North America At the beginning of

the period, and it exports manufactured goods and imports food.

Okay, that starts before 1870, but it intensifies.

Excuse me in this period.

Okay.

Trade looks like it benefits British welfare.

Okay.

Food prices fall because of free trade.

That's a good thing for living standards right.

So it raises average living standards.

Probably has particularly big effects on the cost of living

for those for whom food is a big chunk of

their expenses, who don't have that much income to spend.

Okay.

And, you know, it does remain the Britain does remain

the world's largest importer.

I like this fact until 1939.

So it's a big free trading nation.

So it's got a role in this story.

Whatever country we're sitting in studying globalisation here or studying

the institutions.

So maybe Britain Britain's institutional Structure could be important in

the story.

Hint, hint.

Okay, so that's sort of a tour of some of

the broad factors that what about the economic institutions you

need to make everything work.

Whoops.

Wrong direction.

And here we're going to talk about two.

Okay.

We'll talk about multilateral settlements which you might also see

referred to as a multilateral payment system.

It's a little bit technical when we're going to talk

about, but I think it's probably good to be on

the same page.

And then the gold standard, which is part of the

first story as well and has other effects I think

we want to think about.

So how do multilateral settlements work?

Okay.

I don't like telling this story, but I'll do the

best I can.

Um, so imagine you have countries with different trade balances.

Okay.

Britain trading with the US or Argentina, something like that.

Okay.

Bilateral trade is pretty easy, right?

Country one wants to trade with country two.

They can trade equivalent value of goods.

Right?

I've got manufacture goods I want to sell to you.

You've got agricultural goods you want to sell to me?

If we meet each other's needs through barter, no problem.

If your goods I don't like as much as you

like my goods.

Maybe you give me some cash as well to balance

the trade.

So give me your stuff.

And $5 or 5.

Sorry.

And we might be easy with this.

So they could balance in terms of the goods or

with asset flows as well, cash being the most obvious

asset.

But it could be other things too.

So bilateral trade with a picture is pretty straightforward.

So imagine it's UK and Argentina.

So manufacturing goods and agricultural goods that works pretty well.

And suppose the UK exports 100 units worth of stuff

to Argentina.

Argentina exports the same stuff back.

That's easy right?

They exchange stuff.

The stuff's worth the same amount.

Everyone goes home happy.

That's pretty easy.

Of course, in the real world, this doesn't happen too

often, right?

Normally, our meats don't coincide perfectly, even in a 1

to 1 swap.

So in that context, might be something like this.

Suppose Argentina exports more stuff to the UK than the

UK exports back to Argentina.

In this case, the UK owes Argentina 50 currency units.

What do you do?

Find more stuff to export or sell assets or send

cash to Argentina if they'll accept your cash.

That's important.

Accepting part.

Right.

So that's how you balance this trade.

The commodities don't match up.

Find some other assets to fill the gap.

Pretty obvious really, baby stuff, right?

I don't think we need to explain much more of

this.

That's easy, but multilateral could be complicated.

What do you have?

Multiple trade partners.

How is it going to work out?

So let's look at a little trade triangle.

Here's a nice easy scenario with three trading partners okay.

The UK exports to Argentina and Argentina send stuff back.

Argentina and the US also have equivalent export and import

values.

And the UK exports 100 units for the sub to

the US.

The US expert's 100 years of stuff back to the

UK.

Here everything bounces out in a three way trade, but

I think it's pretty obvious this is an unlikely scenario.

It's if it's unlikely for two countries or people's trades

to match up.

Imagine getting those coincidence of wants in terms of monetary

value for three seems pretty unlikely.

A more likely scenario is something like this, where Argentina

exports 100 more to the US and vice versa.

So in this case, Argentina is a net exporter okay.

The US exports.

The market is a net exporter to the US.

Okay.

The US is a net exporter to the UK, and

the UK is a net exporter.

Back to Argentina and exports 100 units.

More stuff to Argentina than Argentina sends back to the

UK.

Okay, so each country here has a deficit or surplus

position relative to another country.

Okay.

So how would you balance out the trade here.

What a solution is.

Well the the easiest the brute force method would be

say well straightforward.

Each economy we have cash or capital that goes in

the opposite direction.

So the UK owes the US 100 units.

The US owes Argentina 100 units.

Argentina owes 100 units to the UK.

And you could simply have those currency units have that

cash move back to balance the trade.

It would cost 300 units of currency.

Right?

Each country looking at each trade balance separately.

That's what you do.

So that'd be like bilateral bilateral bilateral.

Right.

But of course that's going to have higher transaction costs

than saying you know what these all balance out right.

The Argentina's net position is zero.

It's a net exporter to the US but a net

importer from the UK to the same degree.

So those two positions cancel each other out.

Same for the US.

It's a net importer from Argentina but a net exporter

from the UK to the UK in the same value

terms.

So what they could do say you know what?

We each owe each other 100.

So let's just cancel this out and call it even

and go home and not send any money through back

channels to each other.

Okay.

So from a multilateral of perspective.

You don't need any currency or capital flows to balance

this.

It all evens out.

Okay, so if the countries will recognise each other's mutual

trade positions, they can say these things are all equal.

It's like when you're splitting the bill at a restaurant,

we don't need to send money from you to me

because we're all even at the end.

Okay, so if the countries will, will will recognise each

other in a multilateral fashion, there's no transaction.

Extra transactions cost here.

So you want conditions where the countries will be willing

to do that.

Okay.

That's again quite a simple example.

More complex and more realistic is that these trade deficits

and surpluses don't balance.

Okay.

So in this scenario the UK exports 50 more to

the UK than the guests in return.

The UK exports 70 more to Argentina than in return

and Argentina exports 20 more to the US in return.

So in this case, right Argentina is a net is

a.

Those are the individual bilateral relationships.

And of course what the implication is these would be

the capital or currency flows that go back in the

opposite direction.

If we made those capital and currency flows, we need

140 currency units to balance the finance world trade.

Well, we could say instead as well, actually these positions

don't equalise.

But is Argentina, who is a net, who has net

exports and net trade deficit against the other two.

So to balance trade and said we could say Argentina

has 20 currency units going to the UK, 30 going

to the US.

All the trading partners recognise each other's mutual debts, if

you will, or mutual positions.

And that would only cost 50 currency units for world

trade to be balanced.

50 is less than 140.

There's lower transaction costs.

It would be economically advantageous.

This is trickier, though, right?

These countries have to mutually recognise the positions.

They also have to believe that you can have some

sort of multilateral settlement like this.

They all think each other's currencies are recognised, valued, stable,

all that kind of stuff.

Okay.

So you can imagine how this works.

A club of countries say, yep, you owe me this,

I owe you that.

But those guys over there also.

Oh, so let's put it together, work out the cheapest

way to make the balance.

Okay.

That would be this is with three countries.

Imagine you've got 60 countries, right?

There could be big savings and transaction costs.

So this should seem all very obvious, right.

But it's important because it could save a lot of

financing of global trade.

So again in that case bilateral solution to that trade

balance will cost 140 units.

Multilateral would be 50.

Okay.

What would make the multilateral settlements work though?

That's the question.

So for the simpler model to fly.

Yes.

All countries have to be willing to accept other countries

currencies.

For that to happen the rate of exchange should be

predictable.

So here the US and the UK both have to

be willing to accept currency flows from Argentina.

So what idea is this thing called the gold standard

is a way to facilitate this.

It's a mechanism that countries can fix their exchange rates

to each other.

All the currencies are quote unquote good as gold, not

just children that are going to school.

Okay.

And therefore, if Argentina, the UK and the US are

all the gold standard, would we take Argentinean pesos just

like they take US dollars or sterling?

Sure.

It's all in the gold standard.

All the currencies are backed by gold.

The exchange rate is fixed.

There's no risk to accepting Argentina's payments to solve the

this problem here.

UK and US shouldn't look at Argentina differently.

If you believe that story.

Okay, so that's what the gold standard does, right?

Basically the gold standard says under the classical gold standard.

Okay.

So if I don't say it again where today we're

going to talk about the classical gold standard to 1913,

which I'm going to tell you a story.

Why it works pretty well.

Okay.

post-World War two post-World War one.

Pardon me.

The gold exchange standard doesn't work well at all.

So keep in mind that these are different, slightly different

institutions.

But also one works, one doesn't and keep thinking about

why that is before the classical gold standard, what the

what the arrangement was.

And again, this is an international arrangement built on partly

Britain's early commitment to a gold reserve currency.

But it's not like an organisation that does this right.

This is all sort of, um, countries do it, but

there isn't a world government which monitors this or World

Central Bank or anything like that.

So if we think about institutions, this is an exchange

rate mechanism as the institution under this, currencies are all

worth a fixed amount of gold.

Okay.

So a price of an ounce of gold was 4,

four shillings 0.11 here, $20.64 in Canada or the US,

107 francs, eight centime in France, Belgium.

You get the idea.

It's like the euro, right?

What countries entered the eurozone?

It was on a fixed exchange rate, of course, in

the eurozone there is a European Central bank.

There's other institutions around it here.

There's nothing.

Right.

Well there are these countries, banks doing all the work

potentially.

So there's no coordinating central bank for the gold standard,

right.

Not formally at least.

Okay.

So it's an agreement that currencies are set to a

fixed amount of gold.

If you look on I was going to say a

dollar bill on a 5 note.

I promise to pay the bear on demand the sum

of 5 that comes from the gold standard that your,

um, currency was redeemable.

You go to the central bank and ask for your

gold in exchange.

So that's a modern ish British banknote.

Historic banknote.

Bank of England.

Uh, this is a bit more explicit.

Uh, something to pay the bearer on demand.

The sum of 20.

1916, 16th of February.

Oh, nice.

Important date for me.

Um, okay.

And also in Argentina.

So here's a banknote for the Republic of Argentina.

Paga Apple pay the bearer.

This is from 1891.

It's from the law of 1890.

Okay.

So again these countries currencies were fixed to gold in

terms of the value.

And they were also in principle convertible for gold.

You go to the bank, ask for your gold in

theory.

Okay.

Practice was a bit different as we'll sort of talk

about.

Okay.

So fixing to gold also implies fixed exchange rates like

when you enter the euro.

Right.

So a pound was $4.86 2522 francs.

Whether Belgian or French 11.46 Argentinian gold pesos or 0.23235oz

of gold to a pound.

So this is a fixed exchange rate system.

But given my example before, you can see maybe why

this could work.

Do we trust Argentinian pesos?

For sure.

If the goal centre is working because it's a predictable

foreseeable price relative to the pound or relative to the

US dollar, we have trade debts.

We know what the peso is worth, and therefore it's

we can rely on Argentinian traders, or we can rely

on a multilateral settlement mechanism to balance these trade flows.

Okay.

So that's the idea of the gold standard.

How is it enforced?

Because again, there wasn't like the gold standard Bank of

the world getting countries to do things with central bankers

who made pronouncements, etc., etc..

So the idea is that there are two mechanisms.

The first is the price specie flow mechanism, which I'll

try to talk you through without making mistakes.

It's going to be very stressful for everyone.

And then what were known what came was called the

rules of the game.

The things that central banks were supposed to do to

make the gold standard work.

Okay.

Now, like I said, there was no bank of the

gold standard running the show, coordinating across countries.

But as the biggest trader and as a country that

was on the gold standard first and the longest.

London, and particularly the Bank of England do have a,

um, implicit coordinating role here.

They set the example.

They do things that other countries maybe don't do, which

help the whole thing along.

Okay.

So what's the so how do these stories work?

First let's think of the price specie flow mechanism, which

is kind of like a neoclassical story for how the

system could work.

So imagine so the issue with the fixed exchange rates

is what if those are prices, right.

And what are the price of your currency is a

little bit off.

What if your currency is cheap relative to demand for

goods from your country?

Okay.

What you'd expect then is people want to import goods

from your country, right?

They're cheap on world markets.

They buy lots of imports for your country in a

free market with floating exchange rates that would push up

the price of your currency.

Right.

In this world, we don't want that to happen.

We want to keep the fixed exchange rates.

So imagine an economy.

Let's go with the opposite story I just told.

Sorry for imports exceed exports.

So in the story I had before, suppose Argentina which

imports more from the UK and the US than it

exports out.

Okay.

We don't want the peso to fall in value.

We want to keep it fixed at 1146.

Right.

Pesos to the pound.

So what what we what happens under the price flow

mechanism is that gold flows out of Argentina in response.

Okay.

See if monetary gold flows in response to imports leaving

the country.

What does that mean?

The money supply in Argentina falls.

Okay, so that's the specie part, right?

With not enough demand for Argentinian goods.

There's a fall in the money supply in Argentina that

causes money, incomes and prices to fall.

Not real incomes necessarily.

Right.

But money, incomes and prices.

So that's the mechanism.

We have too many imports okay.

Which means less demand for pesos to buy Argentinian stuff.

The money supply falls.

Money, income and prices fall with the reduction of the

money supply.

Very neoclassical kind of story.

Okay.

What happens with prices falling?

That makes your goods more competitive, right?

And with Argentinian prices being lower, there's more demand in

the UK and the US for Argentinian stuff that's going

to push imports back up.

It's going to reduce exports.

Sorry, it's going to push exports up.

Argentinean stuff is cheaper in world markets.

It's going to reduce imports.

Argentines buy domestic stuff now that's a bit cheaper compared

to traded goods.

International goods I should say.

And that's going to restore a balance of payments in

the in the trade accounts.

Okay.

So it's like an automatic equilibrate mechanism.

One more time to make sure we all have this

right together.

If you've got a balance of payment deficit like Argentina,

a trade with a trade deficit, it leads to an

outflow of gold.

There's not enough demand for pesos.

What does that do to the money supply falls.

Okay.

Uh, prices in Argentina fall.

The fall in prices makes Argentinian go's more attractive.

Makes foreign goods less attractive.

Imports go back up, exports fall, and you go back

to equilibrium at the exchange rate you have.

Okay, so the gold flowing out of Argentina into the

US or the UK does the adjustment.

That's the specie flow, right?

Part of the price of specie.

So that supposedly, according to David Hume, should happen under

a gold standard with trade.

Okay.

And that would restore the economy back to balance.

Okay.

Now sounds nice.

And in a econ 101 perfect neoclassical world, it could

happen quite quickly.

And therefore there aren't big real effects, right?

So if prices adjust quickly and gold flows very rapidly,

prices there could be a very quick response to the

deficit and trade rebalance quickly.

In practice, gold flows don't happen very quickly, if at

all, as we'll talk about at the end of the

lecture.

Oh, okay.

Um, and with less flexibility, you could get real income

effects due to the changes in money income.

If this adjustment is slow, you might get unemployment due

to those real income effects.

Okay, so this mechanism should work.

The question is how quickly does it work?

Okay.

Now because it might not work quickly.

The implicit idea this term didn't come about until later.

Keynes.

After this period, the central bank should also follow what

he called the rules of the game that the price

specie flow mechanism is slow.

Central banks should also encourage the adjustments to maintain the

gold standard with monetary policy.

What should central banks do?

If you have a trade deficit, you should raise interest

rates.

Okay.

Do you have to rap to speed up the effects

of what the price mechanism is going to do?

Okay.

Let's walk through step by step how that might work.

So again imagine my imaginary Argentinian example with a balance

of payment deficit.

Too many imports relative to exports.

What should the government do to reinforce the automatic adjustment

of price specie flow?

It should raise interest rates.

What we what we mean by that is it should

raise the discount rate, the rate at which the central

bank lends to all the commercial banks in the economy.

Put that interest rate a bit higher.

Okay.

What does that do?

All the commercial banks raise our interest rates.

What happens in response investment falls.

Okay.

It's more expensive to invest.

Private individuals don't go to the commercial banks as much.

Less investment.

Less investment should cause output to fall.

Okay.

You're engineering a recession to stay on the gold standard.

Okay.

But it could work, right?

In the sense that if output falls, that pushes down

the prices of domestically produced products.

Imports rise.

Sorry.

Exports rise, imports fall and you're back to equilibrium.

So here the central bank is reinforcing the automated adjustment

of price specie flow by pushing output down for a

while to rebalance.

So hopefully you can see why this is a tricky

thing to do.

Right.

It might not be very popular with your citizens to

say, you know what guys?

Gold standard.

We've got to have a recession.

Sorry, because that's kind of what this is suggesting, right?

So the the issue is that applying the rules of

the game, this for sure should lower output and raise

unemployment.

And given the price specie flow works slowly.

Some countries follow these rules fairly regularly.

And of course the question is why would you do

it?

Why would you, in theory, be willing to trade off

output shocks for stability of your currency?

Okay, because it seems like a challenge, right?

If you were a voter, you might not like this.

Well, one of the answers might be there weren't too

many voters in the 19th century.

Right?

So lots of the countries who are on the gold

standard have a form of limited democracy, but it can

be quite limited.

So two fairly new studies, I think, reinforce this idea,

one by Cramer and Millions, which found that more democratic

countries were less.

I don't remember exactly how they measured that if they

double checked, but that they were less likely to stay

on the gold standard.

Okay, so democracy is a challenge.

Voters don't like recessions.

They might not care that much about staying on the

gold standard for their lives, right?

Second argument this is two former students at LSE, one

who's now a professor at UCL, that there was also

a democracy debt premium, that debt in democracy was more

expensive than autocracies.

What might that be telling you?

It might be telling you that democracy's ability to stay

on the gold standard might be perceived as more risky.

Okay, so Costco and Leo's paper really good students, by

the way.

So fantastic to see this kind of has convincing evidence

on that case.

Okay.

So where democracy was more limited, maybe sticking with gold

was a bit easier on average.

Good argument to think about.

Okay, there were less voters to complain.

But more generally, uh, yeah.

That, you know, this was important for the multilateral settlement

system.

Okay.

And so again, if countries are weighing up or central

banks or governments are weighing up, the pros and cons

of the gold standard are the benefits of trade.

How do they compare to the cost of playing the

rules of the game.

That seems to be true here.

So the more democratic you are, the more challenging it

might be that those poorer voters, potential voters might object,

and they're the last people to get the vote right.

As a franchise expands in many places, the other fact

is that the cost of the rules of the game

could vary quite a bit.

So there's quite a lot of research suggesting that the

cost of the gold standard could be higher for peripheral

nations.

The idea being that for Argentina to make the rules

of the game work, you'd need bigger swings in offence

to, um, to, uh, engineer those changes in the trade

balance.

Okay, so that could be quite challenging for peripheral nations

to actually stay and commit.

So if you're the US and the UK might multilateral

example, this might cause you to ask a few questions

about sticking with Argentina in a multilateral system.

Okay.

We'll come back to those questions right at the end.

But then what are the advantages to gold?

Okay.

So thinking about the costs and the benefits on the

benefits side.

Well this is a nice term coined by, I think,

Mike Bordo, that it was like a macroeconomic Good Housekeeping

seal of approval.

You want to attract foreign investors and capital being on

the gold standard helps.

Would you be willing to invest in overseas railway bonds

in some country you've never been to, and will never

been to you in a language you don't speak or

understand?

Well, maybe if they're on the gold standard, your investment

looks a bit safer.

Okay, so so it's partly about trade but also about

attracting foreign capital.

And maybe the gold standard was important for that.

And as we're going to see next week, the late

19th century is a world of huge capital flows, especially

for peripheral countries.

So Argentina has a challenge that the rules of the

game might be more expensive for them.

On the other hand, they need capital flows to build

railroads infrastructure to accompany all the immigrants who are coming

in the 19th century.

So they also have a big benefits of assuring these

capital flows under the gold standard.

Okay, so countries like Argentina big cost, big benefits to

staying on gold potentially.

Um, another so related to that is if you've got

the Good Housekeeping Seal of approval, investors might be more

willing to fund your national debt.

Can Argentina issue bonds.

Right.

National bonds, not just private projects, but to, you know,

afford the national debt, you know, the equivalent of Treasury

bills that might be more, um, palatable if they're on

the gold standard.

Because if you buy that debt, you buy those bonds.

You can trust that 1 is still worth 0.235oz of

gold when it matures, as long as the system doesn't

fall apart, right.

And that could be really useful for peripheral nations.

So suppose the classic example of a not very credible

government in terms of fiscal decisions is Greece.

Okay.

So maybe more peripheral nations that struggle to raise money

or to sell their national debt to finance projects.

Being on the gold standard might give you credibility that

your own government's independent macroeconomic policy doesn't give you.

So you sort of tie one hand behind your back.

So investors think you can't use that hand to like

blow their money.

All right.

To make that analogy okay.

So let's end the last five minutes or so by

thinking okay sounds like a nice story okay.

And I give you the reasons why lots of economic

historians think it might have worked.

The reality here is really complicated.

No, it agrees, like so many good subjects in this,

so many good topics in this course.

Okay, but a good question is did it work?

Okay.

So we can start by the most basic things.

By the end of the 19th century, all the major

and many if not most minor economies were on the

gold standard, so countries adopted it.

The benefits from the perspective of governments seem to outweigh

the costs in this period.

Okay.

There's no examples of devaluation over this time period.

Some countries suspend the gold standard when they're in difficulty.

Uh, one good example is during some of the smaller

conflicts in the period.

There are other examples where countries temporarily suspend the gold

standard so they can do something to deal with the

shock.

But when they do up to 1913, they come back

to the previous exchange.

So it seems to work over these 43, 44 years,

okay, that countries were on gold and so forth.

Now, given the potential challenges.

We talked about the Bank of England and London.

Here's how that might have been important.

Okay.

As you said before, Britons on the gold standard committed

to global trade and throughout the period it runs a

steady balance of payments surplus.

Okay.

And that exports more than it imports.

Okay, so one thing we know, the Bank of England

does play by the rules of the game more than

any other central bank.

Okay.

But we also know that's important is some of that

surplus is recycled through capital flows.

So the surplus in the trade account is balanced out

by capital leaving Britain to some of the places that

have a deficit in the trade account.

And that makes it easier for everyone to stay on

gold.

So what helps Argentina and other peripheral nations a lot

in this period is if they have a trade deficit,

it might be partially balanced through the capital account by

having British capital coming back to them, meaning less of

an adjustment.

Okay, so some I was going to say all some

economic historians maybe most often think of the gold standard

is effectively a sterling standard in this period.

Okay, so here's the idea with the capital outflow.

So again imagine the UK exports more to Argentina than

it imports.

So in this picture the UK has a balance of

payments surplus on trade.

But if capital comes back through investments to Argentina that

could balance out the the that could use a capital

accounts to offset the trade accounts.

Okay.

So and because that those flows are coming out of

Britain, out of London through this period, it makes the

system work easier.

Peripheral countries, if you cut this off, Greece, Argentina, Portugal,

Brazil, a much more problematic, sustainable state.

And this was also in the interest of British investors,

right.

Because they're good returns perhaps in these places for their

capital.

So that's why Britain's important.

It's not that.

It's not that the Bank of England tells other countries

what to do.

It does follow the rules of the game.

The German Reichsbank also follows the rules of the game.

So that helps.

But it's the capital recycling that lets us quite decentralised

system actually function right, without a coordinating formal central bank

or anything like that.

So it worked.

It stayed together, but it certainly wasn't perfect.

Okay.

Uh, yeah.

So for a few reasons.

First of all, countries ability to, um, um, work the

system, if that's the right word, very quickly.

So core countries like the UK or Germany could potentially

or France.

We'll talk about it in a minute.

Could it potentially get a lot of gold coming in

through small interest rate increases.

So they play by the rules of the game is

small discount rates increase in Britain has a big effect

on gold flows okay.

For peripheral countries.

Where are they going to stay on the gold standard?

If things get tough investors might worry about that.

You need a much bigger interest rate premium to attract

gold.

What does that mean?

Bigger output fluctuations and potentially much less attractive to your

citizens than the British case.

So that's partly offset by these capital flows, but not

entirely.

The other important thing is we talk about the rules

of the game.

Britain, Germany play by the rules of the game, right?

The US doesn't play by the rules of the game.

It doesn't have a central bank.

Right.

In this period.

France sterilises gold for us.

Okay, so instead of allowing the increase in gold to

increase the money supply, you can have policy instruments to

take that gold out of circulation.

So how do bank how do countries do that.

In the 1920s what France does.

So it's a later period.

But the best example I can think of in the

1920s when gold flows into France, what do they do?

They change the reserve requirements of banks.

They have to hold more gold in their vaults to

issue currency.

That allows France to increase its gold.

Gold supply without increasing the amount of money in circulation

in the US.

They attract gold in the 1920s and 30s, and they

put that into like a non-active account so it doesn't

increase the money supply.

So sterilisation are a bunch of policies that if gold

flows in, you don't have that monetary supply increase that

goes with it.

Okay.

So in other words, you're offsetting the price specie flow

mechanism by going against the rules of the game.

Okay.

It's kind of complicated how this works in reality.

But lots of economies don't follow the rules of the

game because Britain, at a lesser extent, Germany do.

Okay, not bad timing for once.

So thanks for listening.

And next week we'll extend this by saying more about

globalisation, growth and development.

See you then.

Thank you.

But you.

Know.

Oh.

Yeah.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I.

Lecture 9:

This is.

To.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Alrighty.

Welcome back.

What's this?

Someone's card is 101.

Here we are.

Two weeks ago into December.

Very London winter weather.

The last few days.

It's kind of wet.

Not exactly cold.

You don't know what's going on.

And today we're going to talk about globalisation growth and

development.

So here's the plan for today.

I'm not sure defining is a right word.

But what do the things we associate with the economics

of globalisation.

Okay.

First thing we'll talk about.

Second then thinking about those that characterisation I'm going to

use.

What's the sort of evidence in terms of the patterns

across the world.

Uh, 2000 actually running it up to 2020.

Okay, so I've updated some of the materials for the

first part of this to bring it forward.

Okay.

So defining it, what do the outcomes look like.

And then what are the effects.

So what's the relationship between these globalisation trends convergence and

economic growth.

And finally we'll come back to think about policy.

So policy will be there a little bit throughout.

What things facilitated globalisation in the past.

But also what are the policy and political challenges.

Okay.

It's on the table now.

Read all this talk about tariffs initiated particularly by the

United States, but maybe other countries too.

Those sorts of discussions are very much on the table

in the past as well as we'll see.

So that's the plan.

And also maybe really good because sometimes I say this

but forget.

So I've put it now in a slides I don't

remember that.

Think about how this connects to the earlier weeks right.

A few weeks ago we talked about the ideas of

Alex Gershon cron follower countries substituting for prerequisites to catch

up to the leaders.

Okay, that could be through technology.

It could be through other factors.

Okay.

Lots of that has to do with like the government

doing things or private actors engaging in particular ways, maybe

through institutions.

Today's story is a bit more like neoclassical textbook economics

doing the work for us.

Okay, that if we've got trade and factor flows around

the world, maybe that will almost automatically lead to convergence,

lead to the spread of development through that.

Okay.

So a nice complement to what we saw in earlier

weeks.

And important to remember, all these different explanations could mesh

together in some way, as I'll try to say as

we go through some of today's evidence.

Okay.

So first we think about what is globalisation.

You can write a book about this.

I've got a slide about it.

Maybe that's enough to give us a bit of a

sense is what we're thinking of for today is, you

know, reduction in barriers between international markets, okay.

Things that facilitate these reductions and barriers, which then facilitate

cross-border exchange, okay.

So we can think about trade, whether it's in goods

or potentially now even more so in services or not.

More so, more so than the past.

Okay.

So we often think about trade and commodities moving across

the border.

We could also think about factors of production.

Right.

Capital can move between countries as it does in the

past and today.

Also migration labour moves between countries okay.

So if we reduce barriers between international markets the goods

will flow and the people in capital can also follow

or move instead of the goods potentially.

Something interesting to think about right.

Are trade and migration substitutes are complements.

I'm not going to talk about beyond that, but interesting

things to keep in mind.

And finally, we could also think about facilitating exchange and

flows of technology, whether it's, you know, embodied in machinery

that gets imported into new markets or whether it's the

spread of ideas, blueprints, knowledge through training that might also

complement capital flows could easily complement migration.

Right?

People trained at elite universities go back to other countries.

The ideas then disseminate.

You can imagine this story, right?

But a world in which those factors and ideas move,

that can have big implications for growth and development, and

particularly for convergence, because you can probably see how the

stuff, people and ideas could move from the leading countries

to the follower countries, if you will.

So going back to those ideas from Abramowitz and Gerson,

from.

Okay.

So we think about this being reducing these barriers.

I will remind ourselves because we've already talked a little

bit about it.

Right.

I think you have a bit with Neil as well.

We'll remind ourselves of in the context of the period.

We're looking at how those barriers are reduced.

What would expect is a growth in these international flows.

Okay.

And one thing we might also see okay, is we

get market integration and convergence because of us.

Okay.

That's what a neoclassical blackboard, econ 101 or whatever it's

called an LLC.

No econ 1BFI don't know.

They've changed all the course codes.

Right.

But but it's what introductory economics would predict.

Neoclassical world.

These flows move.

You get market integration and price convergence okay.

More sophisticated models might make different predictions, something you'll see

in your second and third year economics or economic history

courses potentially if you take them.

Okay.

But for starting point.

That's a good one.

And then we'll see what the evidence says.

But even within that, while you might predict convergence, these

forces also have distributional implications.

Some people find that the demand for what they produce,

what they're selling has or their skills rises.

Others find trade and migration is competing away.

What I'm going to do okay.

And so some agents might benefit, others might be hurt.

And that might lead to the policy response to force.

Okay.

Or countries might to, um accommodate the benefits of globalisation.

In the past, they may have had implicit deals made

with groups and society who might otherwise oppose.

Okay.

And so there's a really interesting historical narrative narrative about

that will come to you towards the end of the

lecture.

Okay.

Uh oh.

Here.

I just worded this differently.

Anyway.

That's fine.

So how globalised is the world economy?

1850 to 2020.

What do the patterns look like?

Just in terms of the facts.

Okay.

So again, uh, especially in the 19th century, focusing on

the period of 1850 to 1914, we see we find

unprecedented, unprecedented growth in trade, migration and capital flows.

And I would remind you that not so much trade,

but the other ones, especially migration, you could argue are

very large, even by the standards of recent decades.

Okay.

So again, this picture I think I had a couple

weeks ago, that's what happens to trade.

Don't need to say more about that.

But it's part of today's story too.

So that should look very familiar.

So let's not dwell on trade rising.

But it does.

Okay.

How do we look at migration.

So rather than like a global migration figure these are

annual um documented or legal migration if you want to

put it that way to the United States from 1820

till Until 2023.

Okay.

So again, this is just a prepared figure from the

MPI, the Migration Policy Institute that draws upon official entry

statistics or official entry statistics to the United States of

documented migrants.

Okay.

What do we see in these numbers?

Good bump to 1850.

Then there's lots of up and down.

But, you know, very large numbers of migrants entering the

US in the late 19th, early 20th century.

If you look around the first years of the 20th

century, it's tipping over above a million migrants a year.

Okay, so those are big flows.

Okay.

Quite changing to the nature and size of the US

population.

Okay.

Of course, that all falls off a cliff in the

1920s with restrictions.

We'll talk about a little bit today and in the

future.

And also, you know, the depression, the Second World War,

all that kind of stuff.

Slow rebuild in the 20th century.

It isn't really, though, until the 1980s and not even

the late 1990s, until you get to the level of

annual flows per year of the early 20th century.

Okay, so when I started teaching this course.

What is that?

Right around here, you know, it's really the first years

beyond the max flows of the, um, early 20th century.

And then, of course, here we've got more consistently high

numbers entering the US since 2000.

Okay.

So the absolute amount of migration entering the US is

high in the past compared to most years, in recent

decades.

But if you think about this whoops, I've added something

here.

If you think about this, not so much.

Just the number of migrants, but the share of the

US population.

Okay.

So these are smooth numbers that take out some of

the big fluctuations year on year okay.

As a share of the US population.

That's the orange line here.

Okay.

Early 20th century is well above recent decades.

Okay, this looks like I should double check how they

smooth this data out.

Okay, but that's not so important.

That's the stock.

I'm sorry.

That's.

So this is a bit different.

This is a stock of migrants, not the flows.

Okay.

So the blue line is a total number of former

folks in the United States.

Okay.

So the first picture I showed you, just to make

sure I added this, I thought it was better to

have this picture too.

These are the annual flows each year coming in.

Okay.

And this oops.

In this picture the blue line is a stock of

migrants okay.

The right of the total number of migrants in the

US.

The orange Line is the stock as a share of

the US population.

Why am I showing you this figure?

because that ratio, even today with very large annual inflows,

still hasn't reached the peak of the early 20th century.

Okay, so as an immigrant, it's ever been an intensive

society of the US.

The late 19th century still remains above America today.

Okay, so you hear numbers about huge numbers of migrants.

On the one hand, it's true.

On the other hand, as a share of population, we

aren't yet there.

We were in the past.

Okay, so loads of migration in the past.

Hope you're convinced.

How about capital flows?

So this is from a well cited paper by Maria

Oswald and Alan Taylor.

This is the share of foreign assets in world GDP.

Okay.

So how much stuff is outside borders if you will.

Okay.

And that increases in the early 20th century to close

to 20% remains well above average, well above what we

see until the early 1980s, but contemporary foreign asset holdings

far exceed the early 20th century, late 19th century.

So this is substantial compared to after World War two.

Fairly trivial compared to today.

Okay.

Another way to think about capital flows.

So that's like the stock is to think about UK

foreign investments as a share of domestic savings.

So in the period we're looking at how what share

of UK settings went abroad.

There's a cut up by five year intervals.

And what you can see I hope is that these

numbers bounced around.

Oh gosh.

Okay.

From as little as 11 or 12% to up to

over 50% or close to 50% even in the 1880s.

So what this tells you is often the share of

US of UK savings being invested abroad, as high as

also volatile.

Okay, so capital flows were large out of some countries

like Britain.

And they were, you know, they bounced around a lot.

So that could be quite destabilising.

It's also telling you potential movement of capital to opportunities,

changes in perceived risks, all those kind of things.

Okay.

So that could be good for developing for countries that

are attracting capital but also quite destabilising in that these

flows were much more volatile than immigration.

Okay.

So the facts right.

We see big migration, pretty big capital flows, lots of

trade and lots of volatility.

So why does it start around 850 as we said

ago big decline transportation costs a little bit more detail

in that game import okay.

So again part of it is internal waterways like canals

in the US.

The Erie canals, built between 1817 and 1825 connects inland

to York like Buffalo.

I've been to Buffalo with, uh, New York City and,

you know, so you can use the Great Lakes.

And the canal sort of allows you to facilitate, uh,

water transportation.

Saint Lawrence through the Great Lakes offers into the Midwest.

Anyway, the bottom line is Buffalo, New York.

Transportation costs were cut by about 85%.

That's huge.

That's before the period we're talking about.

In the period.

Think about railroads.

There's about 9000 miles of railroad in the US in

1850, up to a quarter million by 1910.

You'll see a very similar pattern in European countries, Asian

economies.

The timing is a bit different, but a pattern of

massive growth in rail infrastructure is part of the story.

And railways go places where the water can't easily go

right.

Water needs gravity.

The US Midwest is pretty flat.

Pretty dry rail can go places where water doesn't get

to.

Finally, as I mentioned a couple of weeks ago, steamships

are important.

So rather than sailing having motor powered shipping.

So river steamships, especially in the US on the Mississippi

from about 1807.

Transatlantic steamships from about 1840.

And bulk shipping.

It's cheap enough to, to move to move bulky, low

value added goods around the world from the 1860s um,

including things that need to be refrigerated, things that are

perishable, etc., things that need to be delivered quickly.

What happens to the cost of transportation?

People still refer back to Doug Norris very old, famous

1959 paper on freight costs.

Okay, and this is just from a work in Williamson

tracing out a British index of shipping costs and the

famous North Index, and they start to tip down around

1850 and fall steadily.

Okay, so this is making distance less of a barrier

to trade.

Also less of a barrier to migration okay.

For capital flows it means information might be moving more

quickly to.

Okay.

So again now so from these innovations, long distance trade

and bulky low value commodities is now possible.

I mentioned refrigeration.

So we can think about shipping perishable goods meat butter.

We can salt butter like crazy.

That also helps.

But you get the idea has to get there more

quickly even without refrigeration.

And also it's really useful for shipping people.

Okay, so the voyages are shorter.

You're out of work less time when you're travelling to

your destination.

The shorter voyages and better conditions mean less mortality on

ships.

Okay.

Uh, disease operates on transatlantic crossings in the early 19th

century are definitely a thing.

They're not so much attained by these events.

Okay, so it's just safer to migrate or you're likely

to ride in a better position.

Okay.

Uh.

I should also add.

right?

This also goes with communications, right?

Think about telegraph lines that follow the expansion of the

railroad that allows information to flow, as well as the

goods to people and for capital flows.

Information is super important, right?

Where how do you react to prices?

Can you arbitrage, etc. etc..

Okay, so not my slide but also put that in

the slide.

Okay.

So transportation and communication improvements really important as a fundamental

thing that allows us to happen.

Policy is also really important.

So if you will to get the ball rolling.

Is Peel's repeal good tongue twister.

He said enough of the Corn Laws in 1846.

So what were the Corn Laws?

The Corn Laws were introduced after the Napoleonic Wars to

keep grain prices up, to make landlords happy.

Right.

So in this case, corn means all grain, not just,

you know, ears of corn that you barbecue on a

summer night or a baseball game.

Okay.

So corn is wheat, rye, all those things.

Right?

Grain.

So landlords were interested in keeping the price of grain

up after the periodic wars.

The Corn Laws either said you can't import below a

certain price, which is very high, or impose large tariffs

on the import of grain.

Okay.

So this was to prevent trade with Europe for grain.

Okay.

Peale repealed the Corn Laws in 1846.

Right.

The Free Traders of Manchester, Richard Cobden, won the arguments

okay.

And convinced Britain to abolish these protective tariffs to encourage

cheap food to come into Britain, but also, hopefully with

reciprocation, to provide an outlet for their manufactured goods in

Europe.

Okay.

Following on from that, the first sort of modern trade

agreement or border free trade agreement is a carbon trading

treaty agreed in 1860, under which Britain and France agree

to large to large reductions in tariffs together.

Okay, so that falls on from the Corn Law.

That gives Britain a better output market for their manufactured

goods.

It means France has a good market for its export

goods, wine, other things too.

But people always talk about wine in France.

An important feature of Cobden Chevalier is it includes what

you call a most favoured nation clause.

What this means is Britain and France make it made

a trade agreement in 1860.

If France subsequently made a trade agreement with another country.

Other terms, it has to automatically extend those terms to

Britain as well.

Your most favoured nation will give you the best deal

we make with any other country is also extended to

you.

Why is that important?

We often talk about these trade agreements as being bilateral,

right?

Country A and country B get together to make an

agreement, but with most favoured nation clauses, what you agree

with any other nation becomes extended to all your other

partners.

So the bilateral the bilateral agreements have multilateral consequences okay.

That's really important.

And also it's a border trade agreements typically have this

uh characterisation as well, right.

That you grant most favoured nations clauses or status that

any good deal you make, any country you give to

all your other partners that haven't ever found agreement with

you.

And finally, of course, as we saw last week, the

gold standard.

So again, we saw there how the gold standard and

could help with some of these multilateral settlement issues.

Here most favoured nation clauses turned bilateral trade agreements.

They almost have an implicit multilateral component to go with

it.

Okay.

So those are some of the changes in the mid

to late 19th century that really help get trade going.

Now that it's cheaper, the policy restrictions are taken away,

at least for a few decades.

France doesn't reintroduce a tariff with Britain or a raise

the towers of Britain until I think, 1892.

So that's a good three decades of openness.

Uh, okay.

So we've talked about policy.

We talked about transportation.

Now, what about the economics of all this?

How does that play out?

So to think about the impact of globalisation, to think

about the impact of all this trade, right, we could

appeal to speaking to Washington on us as they probably

extrapolated models of trade based on comparative.

That's what we're going to talk about, is how this

model of trade can help, um, it makes predictions about

convergence that follow from trade.

So the texture of that idea was that economies have

different factor endowments.

Right.

And those factor endowments, uh, determine their comparative advantage.

So in they we take a UK, US story in

1850 or 1870 plus that they said we'd probably say

the UK is a land abundant, labour scarce economy.

Right.

Land is scarce in Britain.

You may have noticed if you come from other countries.

Okay, but there is a big abundant labour supply in

1870, so wages are low because there's lots of labour.

Land rents should be high because there's not a lot

of land relative to the population.

Okay.

So low, uh, uh, labour, abundant land, scarce, low wage,

high rate.

That would be Britain on the on the other side

of the Atlantic.

In the US, land is abundant, so rents are low,

but there's not a lot of labour in the mid

19th century, so wages should be hot.

Labour is relatively scarce.

Okay, hopefully that crude story kind of makes sense.

Historically it does.

If you look at the data, pretty much if that's

the case, it should be that the UK and the

US find different things easier to produce in Britain.

Agricultural produce is going to be expensive.

Labour is expensive.

I'm sorry.

Land is scarce.

You need land to grow, corn to grow wheat.

Okay, so our cultural goods will be expensive to produce.

In Britain, manufactured goods which rely on labour and cities

will be relatively cheap in the US.

It would be the opposite story.

Manufactured goods are expensive to produce when labour is scarce.

But agricultural goods in the US, food is cheap to

produce because land is abundant.

There's loads of fertile land.

So growing grain is cheap.

Okay, so the labour scarce.

The labour abundant economy of Britain has a comparative advantage

in making manufactured goods.

The land abundant economy of the US has a comparative

comparative advantage in agricultural goods.

Okay, so they're not trading.

That's the deal in each country and Britain.

Boy, food's expensive, but machinery is cheap.

In America, our food is super cheap.

But all the machinery, all the capital goods, is really

expensive.

So of course, if you reduce transportation costs and they

start trading, what's going to happen?

The UK is going to export its machinery to America.

America is going to send its food to Britain.

Right.

Britons want to buy cheap American food.

The grain.

Americans want to buy cheap British manufactured goods.

So the model predicts each economy should specialise in producing

the commodity in which it has a comparative advantage, and

that comparative advantage depends on the factor endowments.

Okay, I'm probably going to say that 3 or 4

times again as we go.

All right.

So in Europe I didn't know what was the next

slide.

In Europe labour is abundant.

Land is scarce.

Low wages, high rents.

Manufactured goods, cheap food.

Expensive.

As I said a few minutes ago.

Okay, so what do you do with trade?

You export your manufactured goods, which are labour intensive, and

you import grain.

Okay, like I said, that's in Europe.

On the American side, land is abundance.

Labour is scarce.

So without trade in the in the outset, wages are

high, rents are low.

Food is cheap.

Manufactured goods are expensive.

So if they start trading with Britain, they'll export agricultural

land intensive goods.

Excuse me.

And import manufactured goods.

That's the theory of your own kind of simple economic

genius, right?

And it has some nice predictions, right?

One prediction is there should be price convergence.

Right.

If if GRE is expensive in Britain.

But now they can import American grain because transportation costs

are lower.

What should happen.

The relative price of grain.

And Britain should call because they've got the cheap American

stuff.

The price of grain in America should rise.

They've got a bigger market for their outputs.

Okay.

Same shopping for manufacturing goods, right?

You should get convergence in the prices of the commodities.

That's a prediction of actual oil in theory.

That seems pretty straightforward.

The other kind of cool thing, if you like economics,

I think it's cool.

I don't know.

My children don't think so, but it's sometimes cool is

that it should also lead to factor price convergence.

Right.

So because America's British manufacturers are exporting all these manufactured

goods to America, they weren't before trade.

It's going to push up the wages the workers of

manufacturing over in America, they're they're exporting all these agricultural

goods to Europe.

It's going to raise the demand for land and push

up rents.

Okay.

So price convergence should lead to factor price convergence okay.

Rents will in Europe wages rise and rents fall.

In America, rents rise and wages fall.

Why do we care about this?

That implies international wage convergence.

We want to know that globalisation costs the burdens they've

been given.

This theory says yes, it should.

Right.

And you shouldn't have wage convergence for compensation.

We might present increasing inequalities between countries in pay.

Okay.

So a quite simple neoclassical model with a nice prediction

about price convergence for the stuff you're producing and selling,

which also has a prediction about price convergence for labour,

which implies convergence and living standards.

Right.

It's something we really care about.

So that's the model.

How does it do?

So best story to tell.

This is a so-called grain invasion to see Hector or

Lean in action, which is from about 1870 when grain

from the US and Canada floods European markets.

Okay.

So it's really well, the transportation revolutions kicked off from

1850.

It's really the early 1870s when sending sheet grain across

the Atlantic becomes a profitable thing to do, metre or

trader.

And that's going to kick off a big textural experiment.

Okay.

So what does this do to food prices, living costs

and real wages where I look at that.

And how did the voters on the ground feel about

this, this great invasion?

You might say, oh, wage convergence.

Isn't that wonderful?

Living standards equalising around the world.

But wait a minute.

If you're a British farmer, this.

You might think this really sucks for me.

All it's American grain.

Not fair.

We're going to have a strike in March on Parliament,

right?

So some parties will be very happy with these developments

from globalisation.

Others will be concerned, outraged.

We've got to do something about it.

So if we think about price convergence that definitely happens.

Okay.

So this is US, UK, US wheat price differences again

from this book, a really nice book on your reading

list.

You should look at a couple chapters if you haven't

already or work in Williamson.

Um, top line is the difference between Chicago and UK

prices.

The bottom line is the difference between New York And

lower line New York and UK prices.

What we're seeing is those New York, UK price caps

are tiny by 1910.

The Chicagoans are a bit higher because of the inland

transportation, but they fall even more in relative terms.

Okay, so that's price convergence across the Atlantic and the

price of wheat.

Okay.

Kicking off in the period of the grain invasion.

So that first part of the prediction looks like it's

coming true.

I told you this story for UK, US, but it's

also interesting to see similar processes happen elsewhere in the

world.

So this is looking at rice prices in Asia for

Osaka, Bengal, Jakarta and the lower Yangzi Valley.

Okay.

And again the prices are going up after 18 after

the 1870 around here and there.

Definitely more convergence in those prices after 1870.

So I like telling the UK US story because we

can all sitting here in London and you can imagine

it or like it in my head.

But elsewhere in the world we see a similar dynamic

of grain prices coming together.

Okay, so that also sounds like price convergence, doesn't it?

It is.

Price convergence doesn't just sound like it.

Okay.

So for price convergence there's a very simple story.

It seems to work.

What about wage convergence.

This is more complicated right?

It's more complicated partly because there are other forces that

are going to contribute to this.

Okay.

So your own predicts you should get wage convergence due

to trade based comparative advantage.

But there's another thing happening that the workers are moving

okay.

And the workers moving across the Atlantic is going to

move labour supply round and cause changes in wages in

and of itself.

So what you might predict helps you all in should

cause wage conversions between the UK and the US.

If British workers are also emigrating to United States.

That's also going to have effects, right?

It's going to reduce the supply of labour in Europe,

which pushes wages up and raise the supply of labour

in America, causing wages to fall.

Okay.

And so you would get international migration would lead directly

to wage conversions.

So really important.

This isn't actually so on the exam.

Don't say a migration as heck Shirley.

It's not.

Hint hint.

Yeah.

But it can have a big direct effect.

And in fact a worker lives in argue most of

the wage convergence that comes is due to this especially

and has effects on wage convergence, as you'll see in

the readings where they're probably dominated by the effects of

migration.

Okay, they have a fancy model fancy model in 1999

to try to unpick the two.

Okay.

Factor.

Mobility also matters on the side of capital, right, that

we have big capital outflows leaving Europe, especially the UK,

seeking higher returns.

Okay.

And one thing we know for sure is this does

seem we know for sure it does look like this

goes with um capital price convergence.

The.

Okay.

So if we look first at um what were the

returns for UK investors of investing domestically or abroad.

So the red bars are domestic investment, the blue bars

overseas investment.

They bounced around an awful lot.

But in lots of these ten year periods and half

of these ten year periods, the overseas returns are bigger

than the domestic ones.

So for British investors, sending your capital abroad often looks

like a good proposition.

The rate of return is always at least 5% against,

often better than the domestic interest.

So investing abroad makes economic sense.

Okay, the prices are high and there is evidence that

it leads to convergence.

Okay.

So this is again from this famous Obstet and Taylor

paper stroke book chapter.

This is looking at the spread of bond prices in

peripheral nations relative to London.

So this is a price of bonds for not like

Europe and America, but you know, Latin America, other countries

on the periphery relative to UK bond prices.

What do we see?

That's convergence in the price of raising capital in the

late 19th, early 20th century.

Okay.

So we see price convergence for commodity markets.

We also see price convergence for capital markets.

Okay.

Again how much of that is textural and how much

of that is I think we'll work with those who

would say most of this is capital mobility, not actually

right.

So the capital is chasing opportunities.

And that's the dominant feature here.

Now what about wage convergence.

Right.

So it's going to be tricky to say how much

is your own.

How much is migration.

But one thing we do know over this period but

those sources didn't need to wages.

So this picture is giving you the dispersion right.

Giving the coefficient of variation across a set of countries.

So different countries at two different levels.

But a C13 like a core Europe and New World

countries that are N and C they have observations.

Okay.

What's the data without dispersion falls for KC 52.

So the services across the Atlantic world.

So Europe, Canada, the US, Argentina, I think they have

Australia, even though it's not the Atlantic.

You can argue about that later.

All right.

But among that set of countries wages come together.

Okay.

So there is convergence in living standards to the extent

we think wages picked it up.

Well.

Interesting picture I think is to and this is also

highlights while Hampshire or Lynn and migration matter.

And again if you ask Oracle they say migration did

more work than Poland.

But heck Charlene did some work okay for wage convergence.

So here there's a if you look across convergence for

our set of countries 123456789 ten.

There's 17 I think on this chart you can check

my math if you will.

There is a downward relationship between a negative relationship between

the initial wave levels in 1870 and growth afterwards.

So that's what we'd expect for convergence.

So the line slopes down.

But as we can see, lots of countries are way,

way off the slide.

Okay.

So which is interesting to think about to understand that

part.

So we think about outliers.

Oops two groups of outliers in Europe.

First of all we've got Portugal and Spain that have

slow growth despite poor initial wages.

When we talked about substituting for missing prerequisites a few

weeks ago, some people think of Spain as a classic

example of an economy that didn't substitute.

Exactly right.

The suffering of Catalonia and the Basque Country Spain remains

very industrialised.

There's not much development to promote industry.

There's lots of specialisation in agriculture in Spain.

Okay, so it doesn't do the Gershon Cronin thing very

well in the late 19th century.

Okay, for the outlaws of the talk.

Sweden, Norway and Denmark, obviously, all Scandinavian economies we saw

a couple of weeks ago.

Right.

Sweden, the impoverished sophisticate, really high human capital, very integrated

internal market.

If you ask him, the work is half finished today.

He'd say Denmark's where the countries where the elite forces

were the strongest.

It really specialises in certain types of agricultural product.

Think about Danish pork and butter today that's in 19.

And cheese.

The 19th century is the beginning of this.

Okay.

And the oil in forces in Denmark seems to do

a lot of work in causing convergence, more than most

of the other European countries.

Okay.

Fancy model to show that we don't need to worry

about.

But the Scandinavian countries have high initial human capital which

matters from 1870 onwards.

And maybe the oil enforces work a bit more strongly.

Certainly capital work would say that's the case for Denmark.

Okay, so there are some outliers.

And again, what is this telling us is not all

about one theory, right?

Also Sweden has lots of migration as we saw a

couple weeks ago.

So some countries converge more or less if a convergence

forces of the market are being complemented by those substitutions.

Accompanied by high initial human capital or in the case

of Denmark and I think I would say also Sweden,

there were open to trade to allow the forces to

work more strongly than, say, Germany, where tariffs are never

really completely removed.

So the outliers are interesting.

The other thing to I'm going to skip this slide.

That's not so interesting because you had a very similar

one a few weeks ago.

The other thing you notice is, well, actually lots of

these countries aren't really catching up with the leader, are

they?

France, Belgium, Germany, Britain, the Netherlands.

There wage growth is about the same as the US,

so there's not much convergence there either.

What is this telling you?

The US is exceptional, right?

Technology is advancing in the US the way it's not

very bright.

So again, picture all that convergence works out to an

extent.

But the US is forging ahead in terms of technology.

It's the leader that's expanding production okay.

And that's working against convergence right.

If you split this period into two, the first period

you find Europe.

You have convergence.

The second period, you wouldn't believe that.

That's the engine of production.

The beginnings of using, you know, large scale migration in

large part of us is moving away.

So how Charline works, but other things can push against

it, right?

Technology.

Agglomeration economies in the US are pushing against the convergence

forces.

Okay.

So when you look at this picture and think about,

yes, there's this nice relationship between wage growth and convergence,

but you're thinking about the country stories.

It's not always one explanation that that covers the whole

world.

Okay.

What about thinking about policies for the last ten minutes?

That's not too bad.

So as I've alluded to a few times, we can

think about globalisation having its discontents.

Right.

But okay, it looks like if you're a combination of

trade and factory flows, we see convergence in this period,

right?

It's the life of the century.

We might also ask what about the winners, the leaders?

How did workers, landowners and capitalists view the experience and

what were their views different in the US and Europe,

given their different initial factor endowments, which would fit very

much with a Poland type story?

So if we take European labour, this might surprise people.

It still surprises my colleagues sometimes.

But lots of 19th century socialists were actually pro-free trade.

Okay, the German Socialist Congress in 1899 officially adopted the

position of the poor free trade.

Why?

Simply because free trade that more demand for industrial output

and most of the workers in the social work world

in factories, making them packages that also meant cheaper food

so they could raise the living standards of the working

classes.

Okay.

So like when I was growing up, you know, left

wing politicians on the counter against free trade with the

US 100 years earlier, the sort of opposite implication, because

the benefits would mostly go to the working classes.

They thought about this.

They wrote about this, the Belgian socialists talked to the

German socialists came to the same conclusion.

Okay, okay.

In America it's very different in America.

Globalisation is going to reduce wages or cause them to

grow more slowly than otherwise.

At least that's the fear, right?

That without that migration, without this trade.

Maybe wage in America will be even higher.

So on the other side, there's an earlier backlash against

globalisation, particularly with the former restricting immigration.

So the US introduces a literacy test in 1917.

Could you read 40 words in any languages and in

the language of your choice?

They had these cards you'd have to read when you

arrived at Ellis Island.

By 1921, they introduced quotas by national origin.

These things happen in 1917 and 1921, but the literacy

test almost passes in 1896 as well.

So there's a long debate about this first.

Okay.

America also has a backlash returns up in the form

of tariffs.

So good example in the news recently.

The next US president has been looking at.

McKinley apparently introduced a tariff in 1890, which had an

average tariff of about 50% on most goods.

Okay, so America was never really that free trade oriented

towards industry, and in the 19th century was often a

very protectionist one.

It was a manufacturing follower in many industries.

Right.

It wants to keep up those high wages.

So the tariffs would help with that.

Okay.

American capitalists were proto right.

European capitalists want to export.

So a different story or some of them did.

How about landowners.

Well landowners are never happy with this free trade in

Europe because they want to have the price they're up

of protected.

They want more expensive food because it's good for them.

Okay.

And it might make it harder for their workers to

run off to the cities to be urban workers buying

food rather than relying on, you know, subsistence alongside farm

production for the last level.

What's also important is that all the landowners, political parties

and lots of other landowners, of course, were important, but

not nearly as important as in Prussia or in France.

Okay, so continental landowners have a bit more political clout.

What happens with the grain invasion?

Landowners demand tariffs.

And in the case of Germany, they get them.

So Germany introduces tariffs on grain to keep out to

some extent American imports, something Sweden and Denmark don't do.

By the way, thinking about that fishery before, which also

comes with a set of some industrial tariffs in Germany

on some goods that they fear competition.

Okay.

So tariffs and restrictions on migration are a response to

the price pressures of these flows you might say.

Finally Uh, this was this is a story I told

you for the period 1850 to 1913.

What happens after 1914 as we're going to talk about

more.

The First World War suspends normal economic activity.

And after this four and a half year, five year,

five year intervention, it's really difficult to get back to

participate, as we're going to see in some detail with

me in a few weeks.

Last thing to end today's lecture, the last five minutes.

So I think it's really interesting to think about the

challenges of globalisation and having a welfare state.

When I started teaching this course, this was all the

rage, this topic.

Right?

So if you want to have a welfare state with

social protections, you need taxes to pay for it, right?

That can be tricky.

No one likes paying taxes that much.

And some people are better at avoiding taxes, particularly mobile

related and avoiding taxation.

Uh, when to choose.

Okay.

So again, do economists have this choice?

Either we accept worst social provisions or we have more

taxation on the factors that can't be.

Labour.

Labour can lose, but not quite as easily as capital.

And land doesn't mean so big taxes on land to

pay for the welfare state and social productions.

Okay, so that's one potential dilemma for modern economies.

Another perspective is does economic growth actually raise demand for

provisions like there's an income effect?

I think history is an interesting setting because we have

the setup of early welfare states in the backdrop of

late 19th century globalisation.

So how do they get that to work?

So one of the really interesting facts, I think, is

that the introduction of labour market protections is actually possibly

related to openness to trade.

Okay.

So this idea is that this there was a Labour

common right.

These workers, they saw the benefits for free trade, lower

food costs, good for industrial demand in Europe.

And they're willing to support it as long as they

get some protections from the volatility, from the external risk

of being more globalised.

Okay.

So Michael Govan has this really nice book about this

and a paper which has this figure I find pretty

handy, which is the correlation between the share of trade

and national income in the late 19th century, circa 1913.

So that's early 20th century, not late 19th, against what

he calls a Labour compact index, where higher numbers mean

more protections for workers and sort of, uh, powers legislation,

factory restrictions, inspections, all the kinds of sanction failures in

some cases.

Broadly speaking, the countries that have more trade also have

more protections.

Interestingly, it's not just Michael Herrmann who finds this or

who talks about this when they repeal the Corn Laws.

One of the arguments was workers would like to have

cheaper grain without the Corn Laws, but they also want

a ten hour working day legislated at the same time

that will go for free trade.

If you give us some basic protections in terms of

working conditions.

Okay.

So these things don't have to move in opposite directions,

that with globalisation allowing mobile capital, you have to give

up and having a welfare state, if globalisation makes your

state richer, you can actually end up with improved social

protections.

In the late 19th century, that seemed to work out

right.

Whether work out in the 21st century is another question.

I want to think about.

So just summarising globalisation, then we have these big increases

in trade, migration and capital flows.

1870 to 1913 or even from 1850 of you.

Will.

That seemed to go with strong evidence of commodity price

convergence, which reduced the cost of living for European workers.

That was a good thing for them.

Migration and trade led to wage convergence within Europe.

Okay.

And again, lots of migration, some through the Charlene factor

forces and also led to, let's say some convergence with

the US.

Some convergence because technological leadership is sort of a tailwind

the US has that's keeping it apart from Europe, even

as other factors might cause convergence.

So think about this.

Not just one thing going on here.

Explain the patterns.

And finally we could talk one more thing.

I forgot how this slide.

Yes.

So of course the effects are different across nations and

interest groups and how much convergence was varied.

Think about all the other things besides neoclassical economics that

mattered for the fortunes of different countries in this period.

Then the last thing, how about going from then to

today?

Okay.

In that period we're looking at us.

Industry did maintain, I say, extensive protection for jobs and

very high rates protection in some parts of Asia and

other parts of the world.

Other agents also lobbied for protection and eventually got it.

So the question I always ask this course as a

good question to ask this month, right, is will international

institutions make the present gains of globalisation more durable?

Maybe we'll find out in January with that.

Thank you for listening.

See you next week.

We'll talk about Latin America.

Thank you.

Always.

I always start a platform because that's the LLC culture.

Start at five past and it's.

Okay.

I mean, I have to certify.

I can't really start later.

I'm talking late.

Yeah.

Your LLC.

Um, traditional LLCs.

Everything starts with classes from one to the other.

They Bypass.

Yes.

Sorry.

Of course.

I don't know.

It's a theory.

Uh, the theory is.

Why would it be?

It would be less because of transportation.

It's true.

That's true.

Uh.

If you look at Latin America, I guess.

Uh.

It's got really high setting.

Yes.

And it has really high waves that really depend on

the capital.

So, like parts of the world that are integrated and

that like, okay, you're joining us.

So that will still fit.

So that channels are getting more.

Right.

Trade costs on fire.

So the storage system.

So it works for the Atlantic world because they have

these contracts for the global South.

It's in the 19th century.

It's a mixed bag because we'll talk a lot in

the next week.

They get loads of migrants and have lots of them

and quite a bit of trade.

Oh, okay.

Yes.

But then we're thinking about like the thing about the

Global South after 1850.

Then you have all these policies to prevent travel, and

they're going to be worse.

The prospect is worse because they're not part of the

network of, you know, good travellers.

So, yeah.

Um.

But if you look at like.

Oh, it's okay, we can talk about London.

No you're not.

Okay.

Oh.

Yeah.

Yeah, yeah.

Lecture 10:

What?

Was lost.

I don't know.

I just feel like.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So.

I.

Don't know.

If you.

Get it?

At all.

Oh, God.

Is this?

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I know.

Oh, God.

So.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Welcome back.

For our last session of the.

Autumn term, as we're calling it now, where we're going

to talk about Latin American developments in 1913.

So before I begin service announcements, if you haven't already.

Be great to fill out the course evaluation form, which

is on the Google page.

It's good lecture, so maybe you want it for us.

Why not let us actually construct the UI also really

for features right there kind of on the beginning there

for years that we asked for the essential help.

So please take a moment to do that.

That'd be great.

So what are we going to talk about today.

Right.

Evaluations.

Not that exciting but important.

Um.

Oh dear I've got these breaks.

Well that's fine.

Okay.

So we're going to start by thinking why is it

worth spending a week looking at Latin America over 100

years ago.

Okay, one reason to preface it.

I got some nice questions at the end of last

week saying this nice, positive sounding story about globalisation.

We've been.

I was intuiting last week what about the global south

then and now?

Often we hear maybe globalisation isn't so positive.

It could be bad for developing countries, or at least

they don't share the gains we told looking at the

Atlantic world 100 years ago.

So here we're going to move a little bit away

from that, right?

We're going to see a part of the world where

it's touched by the globalisation we talked about last week.

We can see some regions, some parts of it that

probably benefit others, not so much.

Right.

So it's a nice bridge from some of the questions

I got walking out of the room last week.

Perfect timing.

Now to get the table started, to get the ball

rolling, the table set whatever analogy you want.

We'll start by looking a little bit at Latin America

today.

Then we'll go back to look at what some people

call the Belle Epoque, the period from 1870 to 1913,

where at least some parts of Latin America and not

the whole of the space.

Right.

So one important thing to think about as we go

through this experiences, uh, is in under most under most

ways, you would classify one of the leading world's leading

economies.

Okay.

So what explains this really successful period.

And a little bit what explains the end is there

do models of growth based on exports particularly exports or

primary products.

Do they work.

Okay.

So this way of thinking about developments, it's a model

we see in Latin America.

Does it explain the success where there was success, the

failures where they were failures?

Thinking about Latin America versus other parts of the world.

Okay.

We're also going to talk about institutions and development.

So for export led growth to work.

If it does.

Do you need the right institutions?

And there's a whole big story about whether or not,

you know, Latin America, the Caribbean, Central America have the

wrong institutions relative to the rest of the continent.

What do we think about that?

And if so, why?

Okay, so I'll tap back to some of the earlier

stuff you've seen with Neal.

So why do we care?

Some good reasons.

Okay, well, today we often classify Latin American economies as

developing countries or developing economies.

What part of the global south, as we might say,

okay, but going back a century, parts of parts of

South America are among the richest economies in the world,

as we'll see today.

If we look at that in terms of GDP per

capita, they're pretty good.

If we look at in terms of wages.

Think about the metrics we talked about last week looking

at convergence and living standards.

They are clearly outstanding.

Okay.

So why were they rich then.

Is it just a story about factor endowments, labour scarcity

or do other things support this?

Okay.

And if as we're going to see Latin America, we

wouldn't associate as being among the richest economies in the

world today, right.

For the most part, can we see the seeds of

labour decline already a century ago?

So by understanding development to 1913, where it's strong, where

it isn't.

Can we get some intuition as to why we'll see

this more later in the course?

The 20th century wasn't so successful for the most part.

Okay, a couple other reasons.

We want to understand, like models of economic development.

There's this book only famous if you're Canadian, I guess,

in economic history.

So a very small market called the prairies and the

Papas.

Okay, that Latin American economies in India, to a large

extent are like settler economies.

Okay.

They have some of the characteristics we talked about last

week for the United States or maybe Canada being land

abundant and labour scarce.

Okay.

It's a little bit different across the continents.

Okay.

Some places have a large indigenous population that the Spanish

colonists enslave, others not so much and look much more

like Canada, the US, at least on paper if you

just draw the factor index.

Okay, so why you have a divergence between Canada?

The US eventually is an interesting question to ask.

Okay.

Second, related to that is well, if you're engaging in

primary products based development, growing stuff, raising cattle, pulling material

out of mines, okay.

Harvesting things.

There's a long literature in economics debating whether natural resource

endowments are actually an inhibitor to growth, that they're a

bit of a curse.

Okay.

Something you'll come to I think with me actually this

year, later in the course when we look at development,

say in Africa, okay.

But here, this is clearly this is a good context

to ask this question.

Right.

We look at North America.

Canada.

And the US.

Well endowed with resources.

No sign.

That's a curse.

Latin America, well endowed with resources.

Things look pretty good in the continent for part of

this period.

Okay, but doesn't really last too long.

That brings us to another reason that we might be

interested.

Colonialism.

Okay, maybe that sets the institutions that determine whether or

not natural resources are a curse.

So does it matter that you had different colonists in

Latin America than in North America?

Maybe.

Do those colonies behave differently because the resource endowments are

different?

That story is out there.

You've seen it already, I believe, with Neil.

But Argentina, Canada.

Are the resource.

Endowments really that difference?

Question mark.

Last thing I think is useful to bring in today's

story.

And it also links a bit with some of the

other topics we've seen is what I call core periphery

thinking.

Okay, so we're at the LSC.

Arthur Lewis, one of the, uh, I was going to

say Godfather.

That's not the right word.

One of our the people we all look up to

as being students or faculty at LSC had this model

of, you know, of a two sector economy with a

core area that has manufacturing potentially high productivity and a

periphery, okay, that has low productivity, agriculture, stagnant developments.

And you know, what gets you out of this trap?

So the question is, is this thinking useful here?

How we think a lot of the American economy is

having a core okay.

What is there is New Janeiro maybe the coffee.

Export industry in Brazil.

And.

Then a large scale periphery of low productivity, low human

capital agriculture.

Okay.

Again, thinking about globalisation and the global south, those stories

may right.

Would that explain some of the patterns we'll talk about

today?

It's an area that has its core purpose.

So both within Latin America, perhaps.

A core periphery story makes sense that when we talk

about globalisation being beneficial, it's only for the core in

these economies, but also core periphery.

We might use that thing to understand Latin America as

peripheral nations, at least geographically in the period we're looking

at, okay.

And if they're resource intensive exporters, whereas the manufacturing, industrial

high human capital core is in Europe and growing in

the US.

Okay.

So those ideas about a core, a periphery with different

development levels and development not necessarily causing convergence in those

models.

Okay.

That's something I want you to keep in the back

of your head today as a bit of a counterpoint

to last week.

Right?

Okay.

So let's try to understand I have a printer failure.

So I'd normally have my slides printed out.

But today I just got some notes.

Uh, so really find or a, um, I should worry.

Latin America today.

What does it look like?

So what I've just done is run up a few

comparisons of some major Latin American economies Chile, Argentina, Uruguay,

Mexico, Brazil against the US and the UK.

Here's GDP per capita.

Okay.

What do.

We see?

Big differences.

Right 1993 2020.

Uh, GDP per.

Capita in the US three.

Times the regional average here, the UK, I'd say comfortably.

Above double the average.

So there are big differences in terms of relative income

per capita also absolute.

Okay.

So those economies have grown a bit over the period.

That's okay but probably not as fast.

And also the gaffes have opened up as a consequence.

Okay.

So just understanding the present day backdrop, that's one thing.

Fact two labour markets don't look like they work so

well.

Laughter okay, so this is comparing unemployment Right.

So the shares you want to work against us and

the UK.

You can see though, the colours are great.

I should really make these lines of the sizes.

Um, but using our own data.

So I'll figure that out.

The purple and brown lines are pretty much mostly towards

the bottom, as is Mexico.

But if we look at across much of the 20

early 21st century, massive large scale unemployment and the other

for, um, Latin American countries.

Okay, so it looks like labour markets aren't working that

well.

Okay.

So low wages, high propensity of unemployment, people in the

context of Latin America also we'll see this later in

the course.

Also talk about underemployment okay.

Folks who have the skills to work in advanced manufacturing,

but there isn't enough demand for their skills and the

better jobs or who work less hours than they'd want

to in the jobs to which their skills match.

So if we add if we looked at underemployment, we'd

also see big differences here.

So it's like a part of the world that today

has lower income per capita spare capacity as not sort

of soaking up all the potential.

Okay, two things facts.

Third fact, I don't like these measures, but we should

talk about them anyway.

This is a world Bank measure of political stability and

absence of violence and stroke terrorism.

Okay.

So it's how secure.

And safe a country is, as assessed by some political

scientists.

I've been trying to read the methodology at the world

Bank.

It's a little bit to be obtuse, and I can't

say much for one election.

Right.

But that is, uh, it should go from 2.5 to

-2.5.

The highest scoring country in the world is Liechtenstein at

1.6.

The worst is was last year.

Maybe will change.

You know Syria -2.7.

Okay.

So positive values, more stability, better governance, negative values.

Worse.

Okay.

It's a bit of a mix, but Latin.

America has low values, with the exception of Uruguay.

That does really well this type of measure.

Okay, I'll throw out the US and the UK here,

which aren't really that high by Western European standards.

Canada is like 1.2, Switzerland 1.3.

Throughout the period, Germany is right around 0.8.

Okay.

But generally speaking.

So I don't know how seriously we should take these

measures.

Rice, is there a bunch of people sitting in a

room trying to count riots to add this up?

Okay, maybe not sitting.

In a room, but they're doing the best they can,

but still sort of, uh, there's maybe some design issues

here, but one idea.

That governance is better in North America and Western Europe

and Latin America, that is not really such a Europe.

So there's variation.

Within, but.

Generally speaking.

Lower, worse governance scores in the region.

Again, we want to tell stories about institutions We connect

to that, right?

So don't take those numbers too seriously.

But the ideas I think we should take seriously.

Um.

One more two more things, I think.

One is other sort of economic measures.

The first one is inequality.

Okay.

So either Gini coefficients and again Uruguay not so large.

All the other ones are bigger than the US which

has high inequality by rich world standards and substantially higher.

Although the UK which also is a little inequality country

in general.

Okay.

So finally people in terms of income distributions today, and

if you look at things like crime statistics, think about

another way to assess security.

They're also high.

So both robberies and violent crime which have been proxy

by homicide here.

Those numbers are quite they bounced around a bit.

They are.

Things get recorded differently in different countries.

But these differences are so.

Large it.

Can't all.

Be down to reporting.

Okay, so again thinking about governance, security, inequality, unemployment, low

income per capita.

Right.

Sounds a bit like a toxic mix in terms of

the economic statistics.

But if we go back a century okay, we can't

compare all of these things.

But where we can, some things.

Do look.

Surprisingly, maybe surprisingly different if you haven't really looked at

dealt with this before.

So we do a similar sort of GDP per capita

drawback.

Okay.

I'm sort of okay for time to the 1872 1913

period.

What do we see?

Relative income gaps for some in Latin America are substantially

smaller.

So look at UK versus Argentina.

That's about a 30% gap in GDP per capita.

It's going to be bigger for Uruguay and Chile.

But still the.

Absolute level also is quite a bit slower.

So they're not quite on the same GDP per Her

family tried to stay in the UK, US but Argentina's

nobility falls off.

Uruguay Chile also show quite well.

Chile shows substantial growth this year.

It's a bit of a mess, right?

We have Mexico and Brazil were at the bottom right.

So there's some variation within, but it looks like the

richer parts of Latin America are on a decent development

track.

You would say looking at GDP for government okay.

There's still a gap, right?

There's still a growth divergence when we take it this

way.

But that's one thing to consider.

The absolute gap also is quite a bit smaller in

terms of what that income would would get you in

terms of consumption.

Now that's looking at GDP per capita.

Thinking about living standards and also thinking about a lecture

Olin type story of factor prices and convergence.

Our favourite thing.

If we look at relative wages.

And this is comparing Latin America to the US from

the period of 1870 to.

1929, that looks much more promising.

Okay, so I've got wages.

Here for Argentina.

Southeastern Brazil.

Northeastern Brazil and Uruguay.

Where do these wages come from?

They're mostly going to be through the States.

Okay.

So keep in mind we talked corporate here thinking about

this like comparing what is ours and what did BDO

and Rio to think.

You know urban wages in the United States.

What do we see though.

They're pretty high right?

In Argentina wages are 75% to close to equality with

the US in the period.

Similar for Uruguay with a different time trend within Brazil.

Southern Brazil right wages maybe a quarter of the US

northeast in Brazil much lower.

So that's closer than the GDP gaps, right.

So if we were thinking a factor proportion story of

labour scarcity, we'd notice that if you were thinking about

migrating you'd also notice that, right.

So while the US is maybe a better destination for

immigrants than Argentina, given the higher wages These ways are

part of being quite a good part of Britain, and

much higher than a big chunk of Europe.

Okay, so you're thinking about leaving and going across Atlantics

to make your life better.

70 destinations look pretty good, right?

Even southern Brazil's wages are fairly high compared to Italy,

Spain, Portugal.

Okay, so again, from the perspective.

Of the individual, not income per capita, these are attractive

destinations, right?

Which maybe this is labour scarcity working for us.

Uh, given the attractions.

Hang on.

I'm just going to check.

I didn't miss a slide here.

That's fine.

Okay.

Given those wages, people went.

Okay.

So on your.

Your.

Left here we have a poster in.

German advertising weekly trips between states about sales 30in right

from blowing of France to Rio Plata.

And in our Argentinos brochure by going up river.

Okay in the middle.

This is in Croatian.

It's the white star line.

Okay.

Going from Hamburg to a whole bunch of destinations in

the south.

Okay, so obviously, uh, people all over Europe were interested

in maybe doing this voyage.

Right?

The final one here is a cover of a pamphlet,

A Guide to Emigrants.

What to expect indeed for GC.

Okay, so those pages, people were like, oh yeah, we

actually got the ship to go, right?

And they did okay.

It was an attractive place for migrants given the high

wages.

As a result, these are incredibly immigrant.

I should make that a bit bigger next year.

Zoom it out.

Incredibly immigrant intensive economies.

Okay, so what I've traced out here is the decade

by decade dividing the number of immigrants coming in by

the population.

Okay.

We know from earlier in the course, I think.

Last week of the week before.

The US is incredibly immigrant intensive.

It looks a lot like Canada here.

But holy moly.

Look at Argentina, right?

It's it's immigrant inflows of a share population much, much.

Larger than up in the north.

Okay Brazil not a million miles off.

Okay.

So high wages are 3 million immigrants.

Argentina, Brazil members Brazil, Uruguay, other parts of the southern

hemisphere.

Okay, so the huge destination for migrants, given the high

wages, not something we talk, we think about.

We're talking about Latin America today.

We might expect the flows to be the other way,

if anything.

Okay.

So big destination, potential labour scarcity, high wages.

People wanted to go there.

Let's try to understand why this was a prosperous part

of the world that attracted millions of Europeans.

Right.

What explains that?

How can we understand the better?

So I think a good way to start thinking this

through is the role of primary products and economic development,

right?

Because often we tell stories.

In economic history that you about your father, you start

with the agricultural subsistence economy.

Then you start out manufacturing eventually becomes industrial services, and

that becomes a driver of the economy.

And agriculture is like a little dog here.

That's a mouthful.

In this case, European and to some extent American and

certainly Canadian.

Development is really sorry.

European and American development is often focussed on industry.

In Latin America.

It's quite different.

It's export oriented.

Okay.

I usually get to ask that question.

The good examples are as also focussed on primary focus.

Think about agriculture.

Think about minerals.

I'm telling you the story today for Latin America.

We see lots of this from Canada as well.

The U.S. is more of a mix as I'm applying

here Australia to put this back to you.

So it's a settler economy story.

I'm telling for Latin America, but other parts of the

world would also kind of rise by this potentially, or

could be one of the explanations.

So it's expert oriented, growing things, pulling things out of

the ground.

So we want to think about, well, is this a

good development path.

Right.

Because it might be tricky to turn resource abundant and

sustained growth.

So you discover you're sitting on oil right?

Oil prices are high in the world markets.

But you might run out of road in a few

years.

Or a few decades.

Right?

You'd expect with resources that are diminishing returns.

Right?

You you start drilling the oil.

Eventually the oil well runs dry.

And what are you going to do next?

Okay.

It gets costlier and cost hurts to extract more oil

as you extract it.

Thinking about agricultural developments when you go to the pampas.

The first fields have amazing productivity for meat raising cattle.

There's a war.

March, March.

The land is a said party to the fire.

As you move, use the land intensively.

Productivity might also decline.

Unless you do something to keep productivity up.

Okay, so diminishing returns.

You could quickly imagine how you're eventually going to run

out of road, right?

Unless you use those resources in a wise way to

somehow raise productivity.

Okay.

Second thing is, what if we're talking about resource abundance?

And, you know, for a while we're sitting on the

beach or we've got gold mines, right?

Should we have extractive institutions to do this?

That would be anti-growth, right?

So you could probably see quite quickly why this is

a path development economists sometimes talk about today, a path

that looks on paper like what might be followed in

Latin America then, but also path that might have these

challenges.

That might explain.

We could ask ourselves why this part of the world

is development slows down post-World War one.

Okay, so first thing, Littleborough, to put in your mind.

So one idea to break through is that, well, if

we're working with primary products.

Maybe and have spill-overs to stimulate.

Right.

So we, we develop in our cultural sector today and

other things in industry will follow likewise with oil.

And we have foil of copper of the minerals.

We exploit those today and other things will follow.

Economist is an old school economics.

But you know it's been revived a bit in geography

because we'll talk about the linkage effects.

Are there spill-overs between the primary production and other sectors

if these exist?

And that's the question I want you to ask yourself

today, later in your second and third year economic history

courses in your economics courses, too.

If you do developments, if these linkages exist, maybe what.

You could do is develop primary products today.

And then diversify.

Diversify will happen.

Naturally Actually.

Through the stimulus of these linkages, you'll have these spill-overs

new sectors develop, productivity goes up.

You're not stuck in a resource trap.

Okay.

If that works out, this is a good development path.

If that doesn't work out, hmm, maybe not so good.

So when we're thinking about linkages, what are the ideas?

Three classic examples okay.

One idea or what they call backward linkages.

So we have a growth and export good.

It's going to stimulate into production.

So for example if your economy is one of the

intensity producing agricultural and rural market, whether it's Argentinean beef

or American grain, it's one stimulation as a fertiliser for

tractors to the cattle to mechanised farming.

And when those things come into play, productivity goes up

and it's going to make our culture productive, but also

your industry will grow your chemical sector.

So that's one possibility.

Another will be forward linkages.

You have the export good as stimulates.

Production of other goods where the export is an input.

So suppose your export good is timber.

You're chopping down trees.

Okay.

Furniture would be a forward linkage.

If you're a major oil producer turned on the plastic

right now.

The information third one is coming up on the managers,

which is if you have an increase in demand for

complementary goods and services.

What do I mean by this?

Imagine that having an agricultural boom makes Argentina say bigger.

It creates more demand.

For local services finance, transportation, communication, haircuts, housing, all these

things.

Okay, so as your market gets bigger due to the

due to primary products production, you'll have a bigger market,

more sectors turn up.

They sort of rub shoulders with each other, and ideas

of productivity improvements follow.

So if these linkages actually exist, then starting with agriculture

or oil or something else could work out.

So what do we know?

Do these ideas hold water in Latin America?

So there's two things we have to do to test

the idea.

So in Canada there's a long and I say for

sure about this.

So we don't need to think about that.

But for Latin America what I do is also make

sense.

So two questions I want to ask.

First of all, when did they actually succeed in being

export first?

Right.

Any of these Latin American economies, all of them are

just some of them.

Second question where we see export developments, do we see.

Complementary activity.

In the linked.

Sectors?

Okay.

This is an easy question to answer.

And what I one this is.

The harder question to answer in what I want, but.

Well, let's let's look at some ideas together.

I'll let you think more as you look at the

readings too.

Okay.

I don't like pretending we know everything.

All righty.

So what are Latin American economies exporting?

They're exporting primary products.

Okay.

Maize in Argentina.

Coffee in Brazil.

Silver from Mexico.

Wool from Uruguay.

Okay.

These what I'm giving you here is the biggest export

from each of these economies.

Argentina is a bit more diverse, as is Mexico.

But like Uruguay, Brazil, Chile, a huge chunk of the

economy of the export economy in one country.

So they're specialised.

The main thing is probably product based and.

Like look at Chile, it's like nitrates or nothing.

Okay.

Later on Chile becomes copper as the main thing.

But we'll talk about that later in the course.

It turns out okay.

So they are exporting primary products.

Is there a lot of export growth in the period

we're talking about?

This is a bit more of a mixed bag right.

So here I've got the export growth.

Uh in percentage terms on the left hand side and

population.

Growth on the.

Right hand side.

And you know Argentina Chile, Brazil have high export growth

rates relative to population growth.

Okay.

So that looks like exports are charging forward Mexico is

high relative to population.

But I would say not that high.

And Uruguay actually the population is more or less.

So.

This is a very crude way to think about for

this export that we're not.

But I hope you can see the differences.

Right.

But as these economies.

Are growing in.

Size.

Some of them are growing very quickly in terms of

trade, others less quickly.

Another way to think about this is to compare exports

per capita in the same set of economies in 1870

and 1913.

Okay, that's from this book by Bulmer Thomas to, uh,

I think I got these numbers somewhere else from historical

statistics for Australia, Canada and the US.

Okay, so again, there's more growth in exports in several

of these economies than in.

The other settler economies, okay.

Especially prior to these two.

But the absolute levels by 1913 aren't always that exciting.

Okay.

So Argentina looks like.

It's kind of in the.

Cap with Australia and Canada, Chile.

Maybe.

And Uruguay as well.

Despite the low growth Brazil, Mexico exports just aren't that

fit right.

So there's growth and trade.

But it's hard to think that these natural economies of

course within those countries, we just looked at the pressures

of the US.

But to tell a story about export that growth.

That might hold for three of these.

Not the other two.

And of course, the US is not just a resource

led economy unlike these energy sectors.

Okay.

So putting Argentina in with Australia and Canada, that kind

of makes.

Sense, right?

The rest of Latin America.

Bit more of a challenge, right?

Chile okay.

Uruguay.

Maybe the others.

They're not really big exporters in the first place.

Okay.

So we do what we wouldn't appeal to that as

an explanation.

I didn't I should have redrawn this with new data.

That's the only thing I meant to do this morning.

I was looking at this last night.

This is a chart showing the correlation.

In 1915 between income per head and exports per capita.

Okay.

And again, are they correlated Uruguay, Argentina Chile or up

there, Brazil and Mexico or down here with a bunch

of other countries.

So again within Latin The big exporters did have our

new products.

Okay.

So it does look like if you got the export

train.

You did better.

Okay.

So to understand the differences within Latin America, it looks

like the big traders were more prosperous.

Does that mean that that more access was causing that

growth?

That's a different question.

So let's try to think about that as we move

forward.

So yes exports were important for some of these economies.

Okay.

So only a few Latin American countries were really on

the export train.

Those that were did grow.

But was it exports that were key.

Do we see export development linkages and positive spill-overs.

So to think about that let's see what we can.

I'm trying to understand what's happening in agriculture.

And that is factoring and whether or not they're really

complementing each other.

The way a linkage story would suggest.

All right.

Oops.

Okay, so if we look at agriculture.

With this finger, it is telling you the share of

the labour force, agriculture and and the share of national

income associated by culture and then a capital ratio.

The idea is to give you a really, really crude

idea of productivity.

Okay.

What does this mean in Argentina?

The share of agriculture in population and population and GDP

isn't too far apart is 80%.

And all these other economies agriculture looks really unproductive, right?

Most Brazilians and Mexicans are working in agriculture, but it's

only about a quarter of GDP.

So that looks like the poor periphery.

With low productivity agriculture.

So only in Argentina of these four.

Do we see high productivity farming?

Right.

That would associate with maybe Spill-over is helping the agricultural

sector.

The other is remain very low productivity.

Okay.

Um, so and the output per labour ratios that would

go with low productivity.

We know from other sources that there's really low land

productivity.

So Mexico, one of the ones in the previous slide.

Yields per acre or hectare, pardon me are happy less

about a quarter of capital.

Okay.

So it's it's not just an agricultural expert or in

these places it's also.

Very low productivity.

Okay.

So you can't have a development boom off of low

productivity agriculture.

That's not really going to work out.

So the ones we've seen here maybe Argentina it works

Chile.

It's certainly not going through agriculture.

Okay.

So and again this thing I've I try and tell

you is, well.

Then maybe for some other Latin American clients of low

productivity, maybe that corporate story starts out right.

You know, a lot of people on the farm producing

very little write very little in marginal terms.

And then a small industrial urban sector in Mexico City,

in.

Santiago and so forth in Bogota, wherever we want to

think about.

Now, what about the manufacturing side?

Okay.

And again, it's hard to make really precise comparisons that

would satisfy a modern trade economist.

But what does historical data tell us here?

I've just given you given us to look at around

1913 the share of GDP and manufacturing and manufacturing and

GDP.

Okay.

And again, it's surprisingly small for most of.

These Latin American economies, right?

Argentina.

And being of the closer to Canada in the US,

but still there's quite a gap.

Okay, so if we're thinking about.

Spill-overs between agricultural manufacturing, manufacturing in some of these economies

isn't really getting off the ground very much, let alone

what we know about its productivity.

Okay.

Um, so we see limited growth of manufacturing even in

the export leaders, Argentina and Chile.

Okay.

Well, we also know that I didn't put on the

slide is when they.

Do build up a manufacturing sector, it's almost all for

the consumption.

So it's probably not the largest.

It's probably not that good.

Okay.

So Argentina has a fairly productive agricultural sector.

Big world capital markets doesn't spill over all that well.

It's manufacturing and it seems to be less likely that

was happening in Chile.

So what's the linkage model?

If these things.

Might help growth elsewhere, why not here.

So what's slowing export led growth?

There are a few stories one has to do with.

Barriers to trade.

Okay, so while some of Argentina Chile are quite extroverted,

we also see fairly substantial trade barriers to entry.

So tariffs in the order of 30% not to in

Colorado Latin America.

So less high than the extreme tariffs we talked.

About in the US but lower than most tariffs higher.

Sorry.

Not as high as like the McKinley tariff for the

US but higher than most tariff barriers in Europe.

Why are they doing this?

Why are economies raising or establishing tariff barriers while also

being trade oriented mostly to raise revenue?

Okay.

If you don't have a modern tax system, you want

to fund the state.

How do you do it?

Tariffs attacks on trade.

Okay.

So for these, you know.

Early Latin American republics tariffs are a good way to

raise Rephrase that.

It was also pointed out it's going to raise input

costs.

You're trying to gauge about a factory.

It's going to dampen the impetus to raise productivity in

your industry.

The other thing that's interesting is not only in Latin

America, but as good examples is they're also interstate barriers.

So within Brazil, Mexico, different.

Provinces and states have barriers to trade which reduce market

potential, which sort of make the size of your market

kind of less impressive than the sum of its parts.

You also have these barriers in the US and Canada.

Okay.

But I think they're quite a bit larger here.

And they come with more upfront costs.

Okay.

So that also means these are these these economies internally

aren't integrated as you'd expect.

Okay.

And that's going to limit the ability to develop a

manufacturing base.

Or to get the productivity you need to be sort

of export oriented in other sectors.

Okay.

The other part of this is that's going to slow.

Growth is what we saw earlier that these are huge

markets for migrants.

Right.

So it should not cost.

These are first rate hikes.

But most of the migrants are going to earn a

living.

So what is theirs is like a global city.

Like okay.

But maybe these urban markets where most of the migrants

go or those who go to some coffee plantations in

Brazil, right.

That's not urban, but.

It's kind of they're doing that to you.

Maybe they're not that.

Maybe they're quite connected to European markets, but there's less

connection internally.

Okay.

So these interstate barriers and trade, maybe there's a similar

sort of barrier in terms of labour where rural markets,

the periphery.

Aren't well connected to the urban core.

Okay.

Evidence that might be true.

Low cultural practices in markets are all connected.

You have low wages and you have low Global productivity

and rural Latin America.

Why don't you mechanise.

Capital goes there.

We know there's loads of capital expenditures for the role

that you got last century.

Poor integration is going to prevent capital mechanisation going to

the rural areas, raising concern.

You might think low wages, low productivity.

There's an opportunity for capital to invest.

Doesn't go in that direction.

The other important thing and this we start to get

into institutions is the idea that in Latin America.

Landowners are politically important.

Okay.

So you don't have to have labour.

What you do in North America, you have a nice

agriculture, right?

You bring in structures in Latin America.

You try to coerce labour into working more than it

was at a wage less than desirable.

Okay.

So the strong idea there that coercion is going to

keep is going to be a way to deal with

scarcity rather than like a market where wages go up,

which is a stimulus for.

Immigration to the rural sector or a stimulus to bring

capital to the rural sector.

Okay.

To mechanise here, landowners have political power.

You saw some of this with Neal, I think a

very extreme context of the metre.

Right.

And they use that to coerce labour rather than letting

the market do the work.

And that probably limits the integration of rural urban markets.

And it's going to slow down rising rises in productivity

diffusion.

Argentina probably the least affected by this.

And so you can see why there you do get

some export oriented agriculture.

That brings us to the idea of institutions.

Okay.

So of course one story which I think you've seen,

okay.

But you will remind ourselves quickly, is that institutions with

landowners who can coerce.

Maybe that's a colonialist, right.

But economic conditions are colonisation help shaped institutions.

Okay.

And those institutions that shape the distribution of economic and

political rights.

So one really nice story, and not necessarily one compelling

story.

It's not nice.

Is that factor down to colonial Latin America helped do

this right.

You had abundant.

Resources, lots of indigenous labour in many parts of colonial

Latin America.

At the same time, there were migration restrictions out of

Europe.

So you have a very small European elite, a big

indigenous labour force, lots of resources and land.

And the institutions respond to this by being quite, um,

uh, what's the word, elitist and limiting, limiting political franchise

and limiting sort of human development to the broader population.

Okay.

So the idea would be that the elites can, like,

lock in their advantages through institutions by constraining participation.

They're not interested in home schooling system.

So I guess that that doesn't get a lot.

And this is also going to come up.

Uh, the ability to develop, um, a productive economy in

the 19th century for some and into the 20th century

from them.

Okay.

So that story for Latin America, which you might explain,

the failure of export.

Led growth in many places is out there.

Evidence to back this up, if we think about comparing,

um, uh, political we think about comparing Latin America to,

say, the US in terms of, um, enfranchisement.

Who has the right to vote?

Okay.

So again, we're leaving out women and black.

Well, I don't know what they did with race in

the South, but we know that's a big limitation.

Okay.

I guess literacy we see like a pretty strong correlation,

right?

Uh.

Uh, the franchise.

Is restricted to.

Those who are.

Literate, often those who are landowners in Latin America.

And so these days it's something less than five Different

countries, and to cope with that, we see a much

lower share of New Zealand population in the world.

Okay, so again, it's sort of limiting development of educational

systems that the elite isn't really that interested if they

have political power.

Okay.

Yeah.

Low human capital would go with a low productivity story,

as I was telling you before.

So it's a compelling story.

But others would say, hmm, it doesn't really fit.

That well with some of the patterns we see.

If you look at inequality in Black American Century, okay,

it's not pretty clear.

So the reason it's so important, surely, to them in

a climate, right.

You do have higher quality, but don't look that much

worse than Boston, Philadelphia, the northeast of yours.

Okay, so that sort of story of colonial regimes linked

to high inequality that persists.

Maybe the data.

Does not support that.

An alternative story goes through like the palsy heritage from

colonisation of the.

Portuguese and Spanish course.

The idea of being a monarch in Spain and Portugal

don't really watch developing these institutions, right?

They don't want these settler needs to have very strict

guardians.

But if you're over in Madrid or Lisbon, you've got

your Latin-American elites that are subdivided.

You don't want them to be too comfortable, and you're

not interested in registry for all except as long slavery.

Okay, so you're not you're not to get either of

those.

Groups particularly secure property rights.

Okay.

So even while the elites are extracting surplus in Latin

America, we'll put it that way.

They may not be that comfortable in terms of having

secure property rights.

And when these colonies don't think that ahead of republics,

it takes decades for your own personal interests, for the

institution simply.

what is that?

Is for taste, for stains.

What does what do the colonial states want to do?

They want you keep their colonies.

Okay.

So they need to defend the borders externally and suppress

dissent.

State capacity taxation such as it is.

Tariffs go for those activities, not things we associate with,

you know, human development.

Okay.

So we have a.

Legacy.

Of poor.

Property rights from the colonial origins, if you will add

forced incapacity.

That's due to the nature of colonisation, not due to

the technologies.

Right.

The fact is very alive across the world.

So that's the alternative story.

We could sort of play around their heads.

You'll see a bit more about that in at least

one of your readings.

So let's end by thinking, okay, so the big picture

here is Latin.

America success story.

It's a mixed bag right?

I was attracted to go to Argentina.

Maybe some of the bases in Brazil.

Of adding one to Dale and Uruguay.

Outside of that.

Don't look so subtle.

It looks like low productivity.

That was our culture and much of the continent.

An internal corporation.

Okay.

That's not resolved right at the internal market.

So integrate.

Eventually that's going to drag down growth everywhere.

But the best the best success story is Argentina.

And even there the book very clearly ends after the

First World War.

So one of the stories there has to do again

with how these migration of capital flows.

So for much of a fact, there's obviously there's mass

migration to Argentina.

What is the consequence of mass migration?

You have a young population with really high dependency rates.

So the share of the.

Population aged under 15 in Argentina is much higher than

other parts of like the New World.

Okay, lots of migrants in the prime age have children

and they do okay.

And of course, that's an economic challenge, right?

You want to have investments?

You need cash.

You want to raise capital.

He says okay.

So high density ratio sort of suppressed savings and slow

capital tuition.

That's eventually also going to slow economic growth.

Now there's an alternative to savings right.

You want to save domestically as long as you can

borrow internationally right.

The story we told last week about all these capital

flows going to the new world that covers the savings

gap in Argentina, right?

It covers this demographic deficit for a big chunk of

the 19th century.

And the early 20th century.

But what happens when those.

Capital flows slow down all of a sudden investment and

capital is going to be a much bigger challenge, right?

And that's in a nutshell, what happens in Argentina?

Eventually, the 1930s and the depression make things even worse,

but you can see how you're running into trouble even

before that.

So I kind of like these figures from Alan Taylor's

92 paper.

Is FD hard to believe.

He was an Argentine expert then.

But he was.

So again 1890 to 1913.

A big healthy capital growth stock 5% population growth 3.5%.

This means capital intensity increases by 1.5% per year.

That's pretty healthy looking.

Post 1913 population keeps growing okay, a slow rate still

substantially, but capital stock growth really falls off.

Okay.

As inflows from abroad policy in history is of course

also.

Initially in the first.

Period in 1913, half of capital.

Stock is foreign owned.

It's a number that falls as the FDI flows, the

capital inflows really suck as well.

So when Argentina has more time taxing capital markets, that's

going to really choke growth in capital.

Lower capital is not usually a good thing.

Okay, as.

It's a big part of the story of slowing growth.

Here.

Okay.

So shall we wrap up.

Yes.

Why not.

So what are the lessons of today?

A there's quite a divergent growth.

Experience in Latin America tonight in Argentina.

Really high wages, millions of migrants, pretty good prices elsewhere

not so amazing.

The periphery was big.

The poor looks small.

Okay.

Exports do believe in a southern.

So Argentina is agricultural and the export led Chile resources

and export led.

Okay.

Uh growth where it does happen is a big magnet

for labour and capital.

But the transition.

To a modern, industrial, diverse economy like you get in

Canada and Australia, they're still quite resource dependent.

Today.

But, you know, they're a bit more diverse.

That doesn't really happen here, right?

So, you know, the institutions.

Are a challenge.

The internal market integration of a challenge.

And we factor closed right up.

Those challenges become overwhelming.

So as long as you've got millions of, uh, pounds

of capital coming in, strong institutional barriers don't constrain.

When that stops, there's trouble.

Okay.

I think I'll end you there.

See you in January.

Have a great, uh, Christmas holiday.

As you wish.

Uh uh uh uh uh.

Uh.

So if there's a question.

That draws a bit more of.

This.

Yeah.

Good.

This is.

This.

This is good.

Thank you.

Yes.

Yeah.

Everything's.

Okay?

I guess.

So.

Are you sure?

Cause I just.

Opened it now.

Yeah, yeah, I know.

Well, look, I mean, this is 101.

We can.

And I think that's viewable to students.

So when you download it, it has a different size.

Are you Are you sure?

Uh, okay.

I mean, updated at, like, just before noon today.

When's what?

Are you sure?

On on the.

Okay.

On 101 during the day.

But so.

All right, look at the one on one page for

the updated slides, because it's really annoying that we have

to like we have this two.

We have more than one parallel thing at the same

time.

So all the lecture slides for one on one.

Do we have to just like to be able to.

Uh, yes.

But you can't do that, can't you?

I think so.

Okay.

I mean, I can move them over and I have

a bit of time tomorrow.

Maybe, but, um.

Yeah.

Okay.

I want to make sure that we have, like, access

to, like, the last before you do.

For sure.

For sure.

Okay, so so you don't you can't access 101, is

what you're saying.

I'm not sure, because I haven't had to regenerate.

Yeah I understand.

I know that part I get.

Okay.

Because normally I just update 101.

And so for the first okay.

So if I move them all right okay.

I can probably just move them over to one over

11.

That's pretty easy to do okay.

Thank you so.

Much.

Yeah.

No I hadn't thought about that problem.

Yep yep.

Oh.

Lecture 11:

Yeah Yeah.

Oh I Yeah.

Just Sure I This is Thank you Thank Thank you

Thank you.

Welcome back to EH101.

Uh, happy New Year.

It's still January, so we can say that.

Uh, same room.

New terminal and new technology, but it'll be great.

So today we're going to um drop the next.

So today we're gonna sort of pick off where we

left, pick up where we left off looking at the

interwar that's between 1st and 2nd World War economic crisis.

OK, so for today's lecture and also the classes, the

readings, all the material together, I want you to think

carefully about how it fits together with some of what

we talked about.

Right, OK, particularly the gold standard, those arrangements that seem

to work really well for an international economic order before

1914.

Quite good for growth, it maybe not for everyone's individual

outcomes, right?

But overall seems quite positive.

That doesn't work so well here.

Also in next week's topic we're gonna talk about the.

Economics of the two World Wars.

OK, so someone we'll talk about next week is also

bless you, super important and relevant for today.

OK, so it's a bit of a tricky thing to

decide the order of this week and next week.

I'm doing it this way this year, OK, but some

of next week will be really useful for today.

So keep those all in your brains as you're reading,

listening.

Participating in classes, all that kind of stuff.

So the outline for today, as always, I'd like to

start with some facts to think about what happened, where

the general patterns are, uh, a new charter.

I haven't seen that.

OK, next week, next week.

Um, that's cool.

Uh, what are the facts, the commonalities across countries, the

differences, OK, we want to think about they're not different

episodes, but it's, it's often we talk about the Great

Depression, especially if you're US or North American focused, but

for much of Europe, the 1920s is also really bad

for some countries, maybe even worse.

We want to understand both the interwar longer slump, OK,

and the really hard 1920s for Europe as well as

the Great Depression, how they're connected, where the factors are

different.

I should have changed the last bullet point lessons for

today or lessons for maybe 2008, uh, where things went

really badly were maybe policymakers have picked up on some

ideas.

OK, we'll come back to that at the end.

So the facts, the facts are bad for for in

economics anyway, OK?

Now pretty much across most developed countries, prices fall and

they indeed collapse in many of the most famous cases.

That goes with a collapse in outputs.

OK, Thinking about economic history, outputs falling, that can't really

be good for the average person who's working, consuming, whatever.

That goes to the collapse in international trade, very dramatic

fall in trade, perhaps the most dramatic of the falls.

Are the big major decline in international lending, OK, so

if we think about the gold standard period when you

have major international capital flows, we think about as we'll

talk today, the early 1920s when central banks try to

cooperate, OK, and encourage bank loans to go across borders

to help with post World War One issues that falls

apart very quite quickly as difficult to arrange at the

best of times.

And of course to go with all of this.

A sharp rise in unemployment.

As I said, the timing differs across countries, as does

the intensity, but these features, you will find pretty much

in any country, location you pick in the world from

the period 1920 to 1938.

OK.

So again, just some easy pictures looking first at wholesale

prices in four countries, and these are indexed to 1929.

OK, so that's set to 100.

What do we see?

In 1938, for, uh, all but one of these four

countries, prices are lower than they are in 1925.

So that's net deflation over a quite a long time

period, right?

Where if you know about this period lots you do

A levels apparently I didn't discover this.

Um, something, whatever, um, prices fall substantially from 1929 to

19313, so that's quite large scale deflation.

But even outside that window before 1929 for all these

countries except France, prices actually fall and post 1932, the

recovery is quite uneven.

OK, so prices falling.

Why is that a big deal?

Think about what this does to expectations, right?

We always worry a lot about inflation in modern economies

just like that's the big challenge in the world today,

right?

Inflation destroys purchasing power, reduces real incomes.

But deflation, you might think, well, it brings up real

wages, right?

It's really not great.

Why would you invest today?

You think it's gonna be cheaper in the future, right?

You would want to defer consumption, defer investments to benefit

from even lower prices in the future.

So deflation can be quite destructive to consumer and also

investment behaviour.

OK, so that is actually quite a damaging thing, right?

Stopping deflation was one of the big aims of people

like FDR around this time or and and FDR's policy

assistance and so forth.

So that's prices.

They fall substantially 29 to 32 everywhere, but also outside

that window, right?

And you can see some country differences here.

We look at real income per capita, sort of Angus

and Madison type numbers I've just put into this colourful

picture.

I'm gonna make this one better next year, actually.

That'd be a good idea.

OK.

Again, uh, if you draw a straight line from 1919

across to 1935.

The top three countries are no better off than they

were in the beginning.

That's USA, Australia and the UK, France and Germany, maybe

they're a bit better off than 35 in 1990 but

not much.

OK.

What we also see here is, so there's not much

growth over 20 years, that's quite damaging to uh people's

expectations, to the political system, to whether people trust the

markets, all those kinds of things, right?

Like the last one, maybe not quite as bad the

last 20 years.

OK.

Um, also you can see different shocks and different patterns

for different countries.

Germany has got this sharp shock in 1924.

Think about hyperinflation after, you know, a few years after

World War One.

That explains this.

Britain, the blue line has a pretty nasty looking slump

in 1921 that persists quite all the way through.

The US things look better to 1929 and then they

have the super fall all.

France, you know, that yellow line, it's just a bit

more me from 1927 all the way through to 1939,

so less of an obvious big shocks but a very

persistent, sluggish, non-growth for much of the period.

OK.

So none of these translate to high growth rates.

The timing of when there's an actual reversal varies across

countries, OK?

So we might want to understand why Europe looks worse

to 1929.

In North America in particular looks really bad after 1929.

OK, but it's not great anywhere ever.

OK, going with those income per capita patterns we could

think about industrial production.

So looking at that one sector of the economy to

1929, it's not great anywhere.

I mean, uh, industrial production is rising but not much,

and again it falls off a cliff in the US

and in Germany from 29.

300.

Germany recovers quite quickly.

Things happen in Germany that might encourage at least the

growth of industry, maybe not living standards.

Keep those things separate in your mind, please, but industry

recovers.

The US to a lesser extent and the UK, France

sort of boodles along with disappointing industrial production all the

way through the 1930s.

So again, big real shock at the core of the

depression.

European countries suffering reversals earlier and a mixed bag in

terms of recovery of the size and scale of industry.

This is the best and most depressing picture in economic

history.

I quite like this spiral graph.

This is a declining, uh, it's like going down the

drain world trade.

So these are the millions of US dollars of trade

by month from January 1929 into June 1933.

OK, and it's going down.

Down, down, down, down debt.

OK.

So 4 years after January 1929, World Trade is about

30% of it was 4 years before.

OK, so more dramatic than the swings in income per

capita are the swings in trade.

OK, so clearly all that stuff about globalisation for 1914,

free trade, ish, lots of mobility of commodities, that's all.

Or it's not gone, but it's rapidly diminished very quickly.

Another dramatic statistics and one that people thinking about their

living standards we care a lot about would be unemployment.

This is unemployment in industry, OK, so it's gonna be

higher in many cases and total unemployment in the country

because services, agriculture, not affected as much or can absorb

extra workers.

OK.

But look at 1920, OK, those unemployment rates.

not amazing, but they're not terrible.

For Germany, the UK, that's fine.

Netherlands, the US a bit harder than you might like.

1926, what do we see?

Big unemployment in Germany, substantial unemployment here, Netherlands mediocre, the

US is ticking along at what looks like close to

full employment.

So there's a difference in the pattern of when unemployment

is worse between Europe and North America.

By the 1930s, OK, everyone's, uh, gone down the toilet

and unemployment terms with industrial unemployment over a third in

Germany and the US.

By 1937, there's recovery in Germany to some extent, a

bit in the UK, Netherlands, the US still kicking along

with over 20%.

So again, different patterns of.

Slump and recovery in terms of unemployment.

This is industrial unemployment, OK, so that 37% for the

US, that's quite a bit higher than the overall rate

of unemployment, which is already really high.

OK.

You look at that number for the UK, that's all

of Britain together.

If you had just the Southeast in 1937, it's gonna

be more like 5 or 6%.

If you had, say, the North Wales put together, it's

gonna be more like 20 to 25%.

OK, so within these countries, certainly within Britain, there's gonna

be big regional differences.

This is just for industry.

If we look for services in other sectors, they'd often

be a bit lower.

Construction would be the worst, industry, the next, the most

effective services, distributive trades not quite as bad, OK?

So I can't get all that nuance and variation in

this picture, but it's there behind you.

So those are the facts.

What are the sort of ways in which the 1920s

economy did and didn't work?

OK, so here's we're gonna again have to connect a

bit the next week, but one of the big features

is World War One was a presented huge challenges for

European economies.

OK.

What happens after the First World War?

There's lots of capital destruction.

I'll give you some numbers next week that leads to

the need for reconstruction after World War One, the losers

have to repay the winners reparations, OK?

Um, and repatriations, so these things are gonna impose fiscal

burdens, right, as well as also more things to say

domestic obligations.

So after the war you've got to rebuild your cities

to some extent.

You've got to pay debts.

You've got to.

Potentially pay reparations and you also have to provide services

to your citizens, OK, so this is before the widespread

welfare state, right, but during the First World War, lots

of young people, mostly young men, but young people too,

are serving in various military forces.

What the governments offer them, they offer veterans pensions.

OK?

That's a substantial fiscal expense.

OK.

So there are big bills to pay after the First

World War, big fiscal challenges, and you're gonna have to

do it.

With a population where a big chunk of your labour

force has died in the trenches, right, that's gonna vary

again across countries.

France is the most affected by demographic shocks of the

war.

It's bad in Germany, not quite as bad in Britain

or other European countries, but to some extent everywhere, you've

lost a big chunk of your prime age labour force

who would be making income, paying taxes, contributing.

OK.

So big financial fiscal costs, less ability to tax the

population.

OK.

You can see the challenge in paying for things, I

hope.

That's on the financial side.

We also have the monetary summit.

So during the First World War, the classical gold standard

is suspended.

Countries print money to pay for things.

I'll put it that way.

That screen's not on.

That's OK.

Um, after World War One, governments and their central banks

try to get together to bring things back to order.

So there's a couple of conferences after Vailles.

The second one is the general conference in Genoa, of

course, where governments get together and try to organise around

a new gold standard where currencies are convertible to gold,

if not all holding gold in their vaults.

I'll explain what I mean in a minute.

They encourage having independent central banks a bit like in

the late 20th 21st century, moves towards encouraging fiscal discipline

to control the slide in the previous slide, and also

for greater cooperation among countries.

OK, uh, not everyone wants to buy into this, but

these principles seem pretty solid and partly because of this,

by 1928, 31 countries are back on the gold exchange

standard.

What do you mean by gold exchange standard under this

regime, it's mostly the UK and the US that hold

gold in their vaults.

The other countries hold sterling or US dollars as a

gold valued currency as reserve.

OK.

the story from the gold standard how gold would flow

in and out in response to, you know, the price

specie flow mechanism or the rules of the game.

Here from many countries it could be dollars or pounds

sterling that do the moving around the world or French

francs later in the period too.

OK, so it's those reserve currencies become important and they

have the gold in the vaults to back them.

Other countries can have the currencies instead.

But it's gonna have a fixed exchange rate based on

gold, but just a slightly different arrangement.

It's going to be important at the end of the

story.

OK, so you can see these big policy challenges we've

got to pay for lots of things and we have

a smaller tax base, OK, and about the gold standard,

the gold standard means fixed exchange rates.

That's another challenge, right?

So for a lot of these countries, the choices are

either you're gonna raise taxes, make your citizens unhappy.

OK.

Sounds like today, or you've got to renege on your

obligations.

Reduce the pensions to veterans, not pay your reparations to

Britain, whatever the case might be.

OK.

That's a pretty big challenge, yeah.

And you can't easily get out of it with inflation

or monetary policy because of the gold standard.

And you can hopefully see the risks of these governments

that renege on obligations or raise taxes tend to lose

elections, as we might know.

OK, in this period, you might be worried about another

socialist or Bolshevik revolution in response to reneging on obligations

or other forms of conflict, OK.

After the First World War, people aren't so willing to

accept a zero welfare state, uh, liberal environment.

Lots of people laid down their lives in the trenches

or came back damaged and wounded, and they expect something

in return for what they gave to the state.

So, so trying to like renege or raise taxes is

a big challenge.

And of course, as I said, you use inflation to

reduce the real burden of obligations, but then you can't

do that on the gold standard.

Those are fixed exchange rates, but you're supposed to invest

invest resources in defending.

One important thing I wanna make sure we remember is

that most economies return to the gold standard on the

same exchange rates as before the First World War.

OK, even though their economies might have changed quite a

bit in terms of structure over that period, one of

the big challenges is if those pre-war parities are no

longer good and your economy is trying to defend it,

you're quickly gonna have monetary and maybe fiscal trouble as

well.

One of the other big changes is, uh, in the

world in the 1870 to 1914 period we talked a

lot about Britain being the centre of the world centre,

pardon me, of the world's financial system that's a bit

different now, right?

The US is clearly the largest industrial economy becoming a

bit of a world hegeman that changes things.

The US does sort of play this role.

So, uh, in the in 1924, the US, uh, um.

Treasury, uh, comes up with a plan to loan funds

to Germany so that Germany can pay reparations to say

Britain.

Britain can repay its war debts to the US.

It's like a big triangle, OK, supported by the Dawes

plan.

Basically they get JP Morgan to issue loans on the

American market to private banks, which they bought.

OK, so that sort of funds Germany being able to

pay its fiscal obligations from 1924.

So in the short term, the US does play a

useful role, but this that's a short term fix with

short term credit.

It's not gonna solve the long term problems of a

balance of a mismatch between spending and taxes and this

big fixed exchange rate regime that countries are investing resources

and defending the gold standard.

OK, and in terms of the gold standard, right, the

typical story is for the gold standard to work it

requires cooperation, OK?

And this period this would require members of the gold

standard to defend weak partners for speculative attacks.

What do I mean by this?

Imagine.

Your currency valuation is too high, OK?

The sterling, say sterling is too high relative to the

US dollar.

What does that mean?

You're probably gonna have a trade deficit.

You're gonna be importing more than you're exporting because sterling

is too high.

Right now if you were to defend this exchange rates,

you're gonna have to, you know, play by the rules

of the game, right, or allow the price specC mechan

flow to work remember a few weeks ago, which is

gonna require you to have a big economic contraction which

your voters aren't going to like.

But even if you accept those things, investors might say,

you know what, Sterling is priced too high.

I wager, they're gonna have to leave the gold standard

and devalue.

OK.

If investors think that might happen, they, they might effectively

have these speculative attacks on the pound expecting a future

devaluation.

It's gonna require all the nations together to back Britain

to prevent that from happening.

OK, so that's the issue here with weak partners, speculators

would think they're gonna have to leave gold and with

better happening and get rid of the currency first.

OK, and that's gonna worsen the issue of the contractions

that have to engage with, OK?

And of course if other countries in that scenario came

to.

Rescue Britain, people would say, aha, they're, they're bailing out

Britain.

They're gonna be the next one in trouble.

So you expect to have this like, um, contagion from

the first nation in trouble to the main predators.

OK, so if the exchange rates are wrong in the

gold standard in the inward period and investors can see

this and suss it out and expect there to be

potential devaluations, you can quickly have a scenario of like

financial contagion.

To go with the challenges of playing by the rules

of the game and the gold standard.

You can see why this might have worked OK in

the 19th century, but with the exchange rates wrong, this

is gonna be a huge pain in the rear end,

right, for European economies and their central bankers.

So that's one challenge is getting monetary policy to work.

Another challenge is that lots of European banks are in

big, big trouble.

The most famous example is this Austrian brand, uh, the

credits, OK, which was a huge bank made even bigger

as a union of many failing banks.

So by 1931, the Credit Ansal had taken over a

selection of fairly big Austrian banks that were going to

fail if they hadn't rescued them.

This bank was bigger than the rest of the Austrian

financial sector put together.

It's the too big to fail bank in that way

of talking about it, OK?

But it was going to fail.

In 1931, it was revealed, I think it's May 11th,

that it is suffering enormous losses.

And was quite close to being, uh, insolved in banking

terms.

OK.

So the Austrian Central Bank tries to rescue the credit

and sell to stop the economy from collapsing and very

quickly, Austrian reserves of shilling are exhausted in this process.

OK.

So again a massive private bank that rescued failing banks

now being rescued by the state, which now says help,

I need other states to rescue our central bank.

So what happens is the BIS in London arranges credits

from the Bank of England here from the Federal Reserve

in the US and from the Reichs Bank in the

Germany in Germany, not the Germany, pardon me, OK?

So these credits help for a while, OK.

Keep the credit as afloat, but also creates pressure on

these countries' currencies.

These economies are trying to bail out this massive insolvent

Austrian bank.

They're gonna also run into trouble because of this.

So that's how the contagion spreads from an Austrian bank

to the Austrian currency to the currencies of Britain, US,

and Germany because they're tied in this way to try

to save something that might not be salvageable.

OK.

And again, this sort of spills over into the German

banking sector.

So there's a banking crisis in Germany during 1931, uh,

and to prop up banks likely to fail in Germany,

like the Dana Bank we talked about a few weeks

ago.

here that the vis reserves fall below reserve requirements in

1931.

They require an international loan to prop up their reserves.

France, not friendly with Germany after the First World War,

refuses to, um, give some fiscal space by allowing for

uh a break in reparations.

It doesn't really want to play ball.

OK, so Germany also requires international assistance, as we'll see

in a in a few slides that puts huge pressure

on banks in other countries, OK, but also other governments

are much less willing to play ball given the experience

of the First World War, in particular France, right?

Spending resources to save Germany's financial system is very low

on the list of priorities.

We'll talk more about oops, France and Germany next week

too.

OK.

And of course, uh, the fiscal side through austerity and

raising tax increases aren't enough for the, for, for Germany

to Bo, keep its banks going and stay on the

gold standard, and it leaves in August 1931.

OK, so it has to ban the exchange rates in

order not to have its banking sector collapse in 1931.

So hopefully you can see the challenges, right?

Countries have this commitment to the global standard because it

worked well before.

The prices are wrong after the First World War.

They want to commit to it.

That creates all these challenges, excuse me.

Monetary challenges in a world where the financial side is

very difficult and the politics aren't very encouraging for international

cooperation after the first war.

So remember those things when we talk about France, Germany,

a bit more next week.

OK.

And of course, other countries also leave the gold standard

in 1930s.

So Britain leaves in 1931, the US, it's March, if

I remember right, 1933, you can check the month.

It's certainly 1933.

France stays on till 1936.

OK.

So again, the timing of these departures are different.

That, think about that against the picture I showed you

before, but for all these countries, the fixed exchange rates.

It's unsustainable given the fiscal side of the economy, given

the poor cooperation, and given the fact that they had

the wrong exchange rates under the gold standard, right?

That's really the bottom line.

OK, so that's what we're thinking about like the 1920s

to the 1930s, especially for the European side, right?

Now, if we, if we travel around the world a

bit more, we think about primary producing countries, remember we

talked about Latin America, uh, the last section before the

break.

One of the other features of this into our period

is that agricultural prices are typically falling faster than industrial

prices.

So what does this mean if you're exporting primary products

and importing industrial goods, you're gonna have a balance of

payments problem, right?

Your exports aren't gonna cover your imports, right?

So what many countries do you uh the, the value?

So what do the countries do or producers do to

try to deal with this?

Increase export volumes, try to balance these accounts, and get

some foreign currency to service your debts.

OK.

But this isn't really going to work, right?

What's the outcome of increasing production?

There's a glut of primary products on world markets, prices

fall even more.

OK, we'll see more about this again on Latin America

in a few weeks.

The response to this outcome is to have import controls

on manufacturers, quantity restrictions and tariffs.

So because increasing primary product production doesn't sort of balance

the trade accounts, countries try to cut back on imports

to make that this might sound familiar.

Try to cut back on import tariffs to balance it

out.

OK, that's not gonna be great for consumers.

Another follow up is that primary producing countries also have

to abandon the gold standard that they can't maintain this

fixed exchange rate in a world where their export prices

are falling dramatically.

And eventually as we'll see in a few weeks focusing

on Latin America, we get debt default in lots of

property producing countries and the pressure then shifts to the

creditors, those who lent money invested capital in these countries,

OK.

Lots of European investors get in big trouble with debt

defaults on the other side of the world.

OK, so that's thinking about Europe and maybe a bit

about, you know, primary producer if you can think about

Latin America but also Canada and the US are kind

of in that boat too, but we wanna focus a

bit more specifically on the US, a few questions to

anchor our thoughts of the question because it is, it's

related to the European and international crisis I'm telling you

about, but it also has its own separate features.

So some useful questions to focus on the US or

to think about first of all how deep are the

shocks.

Yeah, we've seen a bit of that already.

I gave you some idea that maybe shocks or crises

can be contagious, so it's really used to think about

the US context.

Were these shocks contagious?

How is it connected to the broader international slump?

And for the US case, there's some really interesting stories

I sort of teach in my North America course.

I'm not a monetary financial person, but anyway.

Do my best about the role of policy and design

of economic institutions.

OK, so thinking about the US, everyone knows or people

often do know about October 24th, 1929, all right, Black

Monday.

So the point here is to look at the massive.

Decline in the value of the New York of holdings

on the New York Stock Exchange in October 1929.

So thinking about the depression, this is one of the

events pre-staging it or at the beginning of it gets

lots of attention, and rightly so.

It's a huge collapse in the stock markets that investors.

So did everyday people to some extent, and it's a

whole debate about why this happened and how important it

was.

But in terms of a picture, I think that's quite

convincing, right?

Do you have these big fluctuations and by a month

or 3 weeks after you've got a like 40% collapse

in the value in the stock index, something like that.

OK, 40% in one month, I remember that correctly.

OK.

And we go forward through to 1932, so the extent

of that picture a few years, 90% of peak value

is lost.

So a lot happens in the month of October to

November 1929, but the market keeps on slumping all the

way through to the bottom of the depression.

OK, so this is a big crash and of course

people have been interested for decades and they probably for

centuries of what caused it.

OK, so there's various schools of thought that circulate.

One is it's speculation, right?

The roaring twenties in the US stock market was going

up and up.

People were speculating, hoping, guessing it would keep going up

in the future, buying in now, even though the economic

fundamentals weren't that strong.

That's one classic explanation.

Does this explanation have some legs?

Well, if you look at how stock prices and dividends

moved, they start moving apart in 1928, suggesting that valuation

of investors didn't necessarily match that well with the income

streams you associate with the stocks they were buying.

OK, so there's some evidence there for speculation.

There's always speculation, right?

But isn't enough to cause this crash.

Another big theme is the role of credit.

At the peak of the stock market boom in the

US, lots of investors were using call mine to buy

stocks, OK?

Short term loans often acquired with very small deposits.

OK.

So people thought it was a good idea to borrow

very liquid loans that might have to repaid tomorrow to

invest in stocks today.

I'm not sure I want to do this in my

family savings, right?

This seems like a bit risky to me, OK?

So one argument is that these credit instruments facilitated this.

It made it easier for people to speculate or to

make investments maybe they weren't fully informed, whatever.

OK, the last point is, I, I think I need

to reword that the slide.

I said fear of speculation, really think about investor psychology

and how expectations matter, OK?

If the market expects the future to be bad, that

could be self-fulfilling and cost stock market prices to deploy.

Expectations about future income and profitability will affect your willingness

to buy and sell today.

So, a, a clearly important thing is if people expect,

if expectations switch from being very optimistic to quite pessimistic,

that could in itself cause a self-fulfilling crunch.

So probably all these things matter.

Probably there were less informed investors buying in based on

the people a few years before them involved themselves.

They were often doing it but cheap with uh, with,

uh, very liquid loans, short-term credits, relatively expensive.

OK, so the returns aren't charge quite quickly.

And when expectations change, those people who have car loans

to buy stocks, they're in craft right away.

OK, so not sure one of these explains it, but

you can see how put together it makes sense.

Bottom line is this leads to a big loss of

paperwork, right?

About $180 million US dollars over a 2.5 year period

from September 29 to June 32.

Now, of course, most Americans didn't own stocks, right?

So you start having things like mutual funds or what

they call them here, index trust.

I can't remember.

Notwithstanding that, um.

Half a million Americans held over three quarters of the

stock of stock investments, right?

So the average person shouldn't be touched directly that much,

indirectly another story, but directly.

And even for the big investors, an important thing is

was this permanent or transitory.

If your wealth goes, you know, if you, if you

invest in stocks, they warn you, your wealth can go

up or down in the short term, OK?

So a good investor sees through to the long term.

That's the idea that shocks go up and down and

they're transitory.

Transitory shocks shouldn't affect your behaviour that much other than

hedging for them before.

Permanent shocks, a big change in the market, I think

it's forever.

That's gonna lead to very different behaviour.

OK.

And I'm gonna skip this question and go to the

next one.

I think it's interesting if we look at the income

of the top 0.01% of the US population, so the

wealthiest 1 in 10,000 and the richest, sorry, 1 in

10,000, what happens to their share of national income around

this time?

OK.

There was 1928.

There's 1929.

There's 13.

So this elite group sees a big loss of income

with the collapse of the New York Stock Exchange.

So the richest folks clearly had a big permanent persistent

shock.

If you look at the income share for the bigger

population, the top 1% 10% are not much is happening

here.

The big changes are around World War II, which I'll

talk about maybe in the course.

O'Neil will talk about later in the course.

OK, so for the for top investors did have a

permanent hit, and the question is how are top incomes

had a big permanent hit.

The question is how much that spill over to the

macro economy.

Now we talk a lot about the stock market because

we're at the LSE and people are fascinated by it.

There's lots of data and stories, but.

There's troubles also for the US economy.

US agriculture is in big crisis in this period, so

about a quarter of the population are farmers in 1930,

and their incomes declined by about a third between 1929

and 1930.

Why?

Remember what I said about primary product pri primary products.

There's too many on the market.

Prices are falling.

A lot hits the US as well, right?

Cotton prices fall over 40%, wheat prices by 35%, so

farmers' incomes are falling.

At the time when farmers are often making investments using

loans which they got from banks.

Banks aren't they a big problem in this period, yeah.

Well, farmers have been investing things like investing in tractors

and other mechanised equipment.

They borrowed money to do that.

Their incomes have fallen.

They're gonna have trouble repaying their debts.

The banks that lend them money are gonna have trouble

managing this, and that's gonna spill over into the US

economy and maybe even internationally.

There's another problem for farmers, right?

The Dust Bowl.

So first you have a glut in the market and

a big decline in prices, then you have the destruction

of a large share of acreage with the dust Bowl.

So prices are falling and you're in trouble.

Now you can't grow anything, right?

So maybe prices will go back up, but your farm

is worthless, at least for half a decade, a decade.

OK, so the Dust Bowl has a big effect on

the US economy both in terms of migration, where economic

activity is concentrated, all those kind of things, quite long

term effects, but in this period, it's going to be

a double whammy, right?

Behind the collapse in prices, now you have a destruction

of output.

OK, so the agricultural sector, which is linked to the

rest of the economy through the banking system and through

prices for commodities, is going to take a big hit.

OK.

So there's a there's a financial crisis, there's a farming

crisis, and there's also the huge challenges in the US

like everywhere else with monetary policy.

So before the stock market crash in 1928, the US

Federal Reserve is already tightening monetary policy by.

So this leads to a slump in industrial production in

1928.

Some argue this policy may be causing a recession by

raising interest rates, a mild one at least, maybe something

that kicks in.

To the problems experienced in New York in October 1921.

But certainly during the crisis there are all kinds of

challenges.

So the US has a series of banking crises, right?

The first one, October 30th to February 1931, sees about

500 banks collapse, certainly 500 banks in November, December, a

few more after a few more before.

Two big features of this banking crops.

The first is the Bank of the United States.

That sounds really important, right?

Bank of the United States, but it was just a

New York commercial bank.

But it was a pretty big one, as about $300

million US dollars, which collapsed.

OK?

And 5, the second big feature of the banking crisis

is this holding company called Caldwell and Company.

It was a holding company that owned a bunch of

regional banks, mostly in the US South and the Midwest.

Caldwell and Co was based in Nashville.

Again, $200 million worth of assets.

There, when this holding company collapsed, Due to the poor

position of many of its local banks, it meant a

banking crisis that was concentrated mostly in the South and

the Midwest.

It affected banks held by Caldwell and Co, but also

other banks in these regions came under pressure as people

wanted to take the deposits out, put it under their

mattress, but they thought it might be safer.

So this was a big bank in New York and

a regional banking crisis in the South and the Midwest.

That's the first banking crisis, not much done to resolve

this other than attempts to rescue the banks.

The second banking crisis matches up really well and you

see the spillover, right?

You see the contagion from Europe.

So remember the story I was telling you about 15

minutes ago about cutting Estadt and the other big bank

troubles in Europe.

Well, when these banks were rescued, right, often it was

US commercial banks that, uh, finance these rescues, loans.

were issued, they would buy the bonds and so forth.

OK.

So first of all, investors are seeing these bank crisis

in Europe and saying, well, hang on a second, if

you see German banks and huge Austrian banks aren't safe,

what about our American banks here in New York?

Especially as they were often holding the assets or had

issued loans or involved in some of these European rescue

activities.

So there's a quite clear spillover from the European banking

crisis to lack of confidence in the US banks.

This is compounded just a few months later when Britain

needs the gold standard.

So does Britain is the gold standard to soft the

run on sterling given its overvalued exchange rates, OK.

But as soon as sterling leaves the gold standard, that

turns into a run on the US dollar.

So in 6 weeks from September 1931, there are $700

million worth of, excuse me.

Pardon, $700 million worth of gold apples from the US.

OK.

Remember I told you about the gold exchange standard.

Most countries just hold US dollars for sterling as reserve.

The US actually holds gold and it loses a substantial

share of its reserves.

So when the UK gets up on the gold standard,

and speculators think, well, US is going to go next,

we're gonna, you know, Uh, dump the currency, OK.

To prevent, to abate the run of the US dollar,

the Fed has a sharp increase in the rediscount rate,

that is the interest rates at which banks can get

money, and that causes almost certainly the failure of about

2000 banks in the second half of 1931.

OK, so to deal with the conquest of leading goal,

interest rates rise in the US banks aren't in great

shape, go bust.

OK, so again, contagion from the international financial arrangements from

the problem of the gold standard in this period to

US private banks going bust.

And of course people lose their savings when that happens,

right, as you can imagine.

But also, you know, loans for development, all these kinds

of things disappear when the banking sector shrinks.

OK.

Finally, is, and the biggest one is the third banking

crisis, October 32 to March 1933.

Uh, over this period, 9000 US banks closed.

That's about a third of banks in operation in 1929.

So it's a huge effect on the size of the

financial sector.

OK.

It's not just New York City every small town, right,

look to the town from the left and the right,

whenever your bank is gone, right?

So we're gonna save, we're gonna get capital for your

investments.

OK, in response to this, bank federal bank holidays are

declared with suspension of operations.

The cause of the third banking crisis is somewhat debated,

but what seems almost certain is whether or not the

US sticks for the gold standard is part of the

story, right?

So Roosevelt left gold after his inauguration.

A few months after the current one is in March,

if I remember the date right.

OK, but he didn't say before what he was going

to do.

So investors speculating, you know, we're going to be gold,

right, that the capital outflows and also that the Fed

has to respond.

OK.

So again, the international financial fiscal and monetary monitoring and

financial arrangements to get that right, have a big spillover

onto the US crisis.

OK.

So the consequence of those 5, the five-step.

The crisis is a huge monetary contraction in the US,

OK?

Money supply is much smaller.

The real economy shrinks.

Remember those pictures with the US economy kind of looks

like it's going down a mountain at 15% grade or

something like that, move on to.

There's your answer.

OK?

And so one of the questions is, well, who's to

blame for this crisis?

Is it the fault of the Federal Reserve?

Could the Fed, did the Fed's actions make what should

have been a slump a Great Depression?

Should have been more like Europe with less steep mountains

rather than cliffhangers.

So Friedman and Schwartz in their very famous book argue

that yes, the feds to blame, they should have reduced

interest rates instead of raising them when they did, which

would have put US dollars into circulation which would ease

the liquidity crisis.

So Friedman and Schwartz are on the side that the

feds to blame, they should have engaged in modern monetary

policy to to prevent these crises from happening.

Oops, excuse me.

Uh, on the other side of it, you have the

Austrian approach like Hayek, who said, no, no, no, no,

no.

The problem wasn't the Fed didn't do enough.

The problem was the Fed did too much.

OK, this is a market equilibrium and all these interventions

are slowing down the adjustment to a new equilibrium.

OK?

So if the Fed did nothing, it'd be very bad

for a little while, wouldn't be bad for 789 years.

OK.

We get to the nuclear quicker, which is better in

the end.

That's a very Austrian view, OK.

But that view is out there that the Fed actually

made things worse through the interventions that they did.

OK.

Now Related to this, right, as a good question to

ask is, well, some of these banks failed.

Is it because these banks were run terribly, they didn't

have enough reserves, they had bad investments.

Or did you have banks that have good balance sheets

were solvents and were dragged down by the crisis.

OK, I don't know the answer to this question, but

this is a classic question like we ask for contemporary

banking failures is are the banks in bad shape and

they're due to fail, in which case, Hayek is right,

let the bad banks collapse.

Right.

Or is it the case that these banks were in

good shape and the crisis killed them?

I can use in those terms, we killed them financially,

in which case Friedman and Schwartz might be closer to

the truth, right?

Different interventions would allow these banks to get over this

temporary.

Oh my goodness, that's another temporary crisis on the other

side of the road, um, but maybe the most important

thing to think about all this is defending the gold

standard makes everything a huge challenge, right?

The Freeman and Schwartz view that the Fed could reduce

interest rates, supply liquidity, but how do you do that

and defend the gold standard at the same time?

So maybe at the end of the day, get off

the gold standard, allow the fans to act differently, then

you don't have, then, then you have a swamp, not

a crisis.

So it sounds like the gold standard is pretty important

at the heart of this, doesn't it?

I'll let you decide if it's the most important thing

or the third most important thing, but as you can

see, you can't get it reed.

One more thing to add before we conclude, which is

to go with all this in terms of the farming

sector, the stock markets, monetary policy, as again, history comes

back, is US trade policy, particularly with the introduction of

the smooth poly tariff for 1930.

This raised duties on, uh, primary, primary products and also

cotton textiles for the rest of the world.

So raising the cost of imports from all kinds of

places, but particularly you think of Cuba, Canada, and Britain.

Out of the lower tariff rates rose from 26% to

50%, and most countries retaliated to this big increase in

tariffs.

So think about that declining spiral of trade I showed

you before.

Some of that might have happened due to falling incomes,

even without tax, right?

But slapping on big tariffs in the middle of a

crisis certainly made that spiral, uh, jettison and collapse much

more quickly, OK.

So that our tour of the interwaring depression to conclude,

the Great Depression and the interwar crisis were a crisis

on many fronts.

Hopefully you get some idea and I'll let you think

about what the most important things were because really famous

people are just on the Nobel Prizes don't agree on

this, right?

Um, the spillovers between sectors and between countries contributed to

the downward spiral.

The troubles in America made the European slump bigger and

vice versa.

OK.

The international economic system probably couldn't continue the way it

was restoring the pre-World War One environments, but the, the

other short term crises almost certainly amplified things and made

the overall crisis bigger, even with a system that wasn't

set up quite right.

Another important thing maybe is that macro policies have a

right place and a wrong place.

Best example or good example here is the gold standard.

It worked pretty well before 1914.

Different political economy, different economic environments.

After 1918, it was a bit of a disaster, right?

Um, defending it deepened the crisis in the US and

in Europe and most of all, the failure of this

interwar periods that promoted protectionism and as we'll see in

some other sections this term he's had adverse long run

consequences.

Do you have anything else to say?

No, not really.

So thank you for listening.

As always.

Next week, I'll see you to talk about the economics

of the World Wars.

See you then.

Oh Oh part.

Thank you.

Well.

No shit.

Oh I Yeah Yes thank you.

you.

Let me But.

Oh

Lecture 12:

OK No.

Yeah OK OK.

No.

I Yeah Don't know about this thing, I'll put it

back.

All right.

Welcome back to EH101.

Week 11, still in January, but almost done with this

long, wet, grim whatever month.

And today we're gonna talk about building on the last

week.

Looking at the economic effects of the World War.

OK, I'm thinking of 1st and 2nd World War.

Let me put this on mute so it doesn't go

make noise.

That's better.

So here's how we're going to approach the topic today.

We'll start by thinking a little bit, OK, only a

little bit.

There's lots of really interesting things we could say, which

I'll hint at about the direct effects of war, OK.

So what are the How are the ways it affects

economic measures and maybe a little bit.

Then we really want to focus a lot on understanding

the immediate post-war periods for the 1st and Second World

War.

In some sense, That's a lot of the action is.

OK.

Think about last week, all the challenges in the 1920s

with the gold standard, we're dealing with a slump in

Europe with depression.

Some of this comes out in the immediate post-war rolling

period.

Immediate post World War II period in theory could could

throw up any major challenges, but how did institutions, governments,

the world economy overcome it, OK?

And through thinking through these differences and the different trajectory

that the world economy gets on, something we're gonna talk

about even.

More next week for the post World War II period.

Why to think about a couple of things, the sort

of policy and political changes.

So what type of approach to peacemaking and policy comes

in after each of these global conflicts and how does

that matter for economic developments, excuse me, over the coming

decades.

And that marries nicely with what you might call intellectual

changes, OK, different approaches to what is the right thing

for national economies and the international economy based, you know,

the intellectual changes and the policy of political changes are

intertwined but I want you to keep, you know, keep

this in your minds and as I said last week

this is part of like a, you know, TV or

Netflix, I don't miniseries.

OK, going from, you know, the wars, the 1920s, the

post-World War II period, it's hard to know the right

words to do these, but keep in your mind how

these three or four topics really mesh together in an

important way.

So I'll try to remind you that as we go,

but definitely for your own intellectual development for preparing for

the exam, keep those things to the front of your

mind.

Keep your notes in your classes.

Talk about this.

So, direct effects are worse.

Some of this is fairly big, OK?

So if we just want to know what happens to

GDP.

In the early stages of war.

Why is that the case?

mobilisation, right?

Take resources that aren't being put into production by the

private economy, mobilise them for a war effort.

So labour joins the labour force that's previously not participating.

There's more demand for capital resources due to mobilisation.

Those things lead to higher GDP.

However, as you probably guessed from the way I'm describing

this, we're often going to think of this as being

extensive growth, not intensive growth.

If you increase the male labour force participation rates, that's

gonna increase outputs, but maybe not output per worker or

output per person quite so much.

If you have a big increase in the participation of

women.

That's something we see during wartime that could have all

kinds of interesting long term effects, but the short term

effect on GDP per capita might not be that impressive.

You're just adding labour to the to increasing the size

of the income value, OK?

So again, we look at some really simple data oh

Irish.

That was one thing I, I, I updated some of

the slides, but here's one, silly thing I forgot.

Soviet Union perhaps, not Russia.

OK, that's one correction I didn't make.

Let me write that down.

OK, that was on my list, but I was doing

this yesterday and I forgot to update that one.

OK, right, here's the path of wartime levels of GNP

gross national product for four economies.

The US goes up.

OK, mobilisation effects and other things perhaps, as does the

UK, Russia, Germany, Germany initially tips up, then goes the

other way.

OK, so clearly we see extensive growth in the US.

UK, Russia, eventually Germany not so much.

Why being invaded not such a good thing for total

national income seems pretty obvious, but you see that in

the data.

But for Britain and the US, right, where it's mobilisation

and less of the direct negative consequences of the sort

of local destruction and losing territory.

It looks OK for income as a total, but if

we go then from GDP to GDP per worker, it's

a lot less impressive.

OK?

So that's just looking at the UK, which is telling

you that much of this growth in that should be

GNP, another another corruption.

What's going on?

OK, that that should, um, much of that difference is

due to mobilisation effects, um.

Adding factors of production rather than using those factors in

a more productive fashion.

OK, so just income going up, well, hooray, maybe, but

it's not really income per capita grant, and of course

there's a war going on which has all kinds of

bad things associated with it both in the short and

the long term.

OK, so some national income figures look OK and some

historians and economists get excited about that.

You can kind of get it, but in the medium

term, probably not so impressive when we think about growth,

OK?

Again, why think about what's happening to those factors of

production.

OK, we can think about destruction of capital, OK, but

even more so, so, you know, bombardment, invasion, breaking up

the railroads, all those sorts of things are gonna have.

Substantial financial costs in the economy.

You have to reinvest to reacquire capital stock.

Think of a solo type growth model right it depends

on labour and capital, lose much capital, down goes your

output, right?

So that's going to be a level effect and could

even have a growth.

OK.

The other side of it is lost human capital.

We think about casualties.

OK, estimates are these very gave you 16 million total

casualties in World War I.

Uh, maybe 80 million for the Second World War, about

50 of those in Europe.

These estimates are actually quite contested, something I'm gonna mention

on the side here in a minute.

So we look at human losses, that the sort of

standard until this year.

Best estimates come from Steve Broy Mark Harrison, who's done

a really careful accounting of this, looking at losses as

a share of the population in the 1st and 2nd

World War.

These figures are interesting.

Thinking about how the distribution of losses lies.

So in the First World War, as you might expect,

losses lower for the US, a bit lower for Russia,

which becomes the Soviet Union afterwards, substantially higher losses for

Germany, France, which are where the Where the fronts are.

OK, so France, the big loser in terms of human

capital through the First World War, that's the prime age

population, age 15 to 150.

For the Second World War, slightly different numbers as a

share of total population.

Again, who's affected more changes the US, it's relatively small,

as is the case for Britain and France.

Look at Russia, look at Germany, very substantial population losses.

Now where we're thinking about is evolving a bit is

traditional accounting tries to measure in military casualties right governments

actually tried to.

quite closely and then trying to find different ways to

estimate civilian casualties which, as you can imagine, are much

harder to count.

OK.

Conflicts today when they try to estimate civilian casualties, really

tricky.

OK.

Some of you don't know the baseline population very well

and of course, you know, people you don't know are

missing have died, people who you think are missing and

may be dead turn up later on.

Recent book by Cormac O'Grada, who is giving a public

lecture at LSE in a month.

He's a fantastic speaker, so we go to one public

lecture in economic history, go to Cormac.

He's got this new book he's arguing that perhaps civilian

casualties in Europe, I think in Europe, are twice what

is typically thought, or globally, not just Europe, partly through

academy for indirect effects like famine.

So of course war kills people through soldiers die.

Uh, civilians on the battlefields die.

You have bombardments, other things, people die through as um

non-participants who are killed through the war machine.

But he argues we think about things like the effect

on global food supply, and in those deaths, you get

a much higher um um.

Loss of human life.

So he's giving a public lecture.

I'll remind you closer February 20th, and like I said,

we're the better speakers you could possibly listen to, so

I really recommend it.

He's great.

OK.

That's thinking about lies.

What about demographics?

I think I alluded to this last time.

This is looking at birth rates in Europe for the

period 1870 to 1914 by this kind of technical paper

by Vanden Broek in 2012.

There's a nice thing you can see here though.

Look at that.

A big difference around the First World War, OK?

So we think the obvious thing about loss of life

due to war, the direct ways, but also the indirect

ways like Coco grata is now starting to count.

His book was published like 2 months ago, so I

might update next year with some more numbers from that.

Um, but here we can see also thinking about future

population that the war period, certainly the first World War,

suppressed birth rates, OK, and that's gonna have a future

demographic effect as well.

So the bottom red line is France.

It had the biggest hit in terms of loss of

life through the First World War.

It's also got the biggest hit where certainly has the

lowest birth rate during the First World War.

So imagine the demographic implications here in the future for

France.

Y is a function of L and K.

It's future L in terms of size isn't looking too

good.

Think about all the human capital investments, people who are

educated, made them more productive, they're lost due to the

conflicts, OK?

So that surely matters, um.

I mentioned uh capital lawsuits of damage and destruction, and

obviously there's a lot more in World War II than

in World War 1.

The other thing to think about is you're also redirecting

investments.

This is a conventional view among economists, I would say

you're directing investments out of civilian things that potentially have

high productivity into military vessels.

So redirecting investments into war activities may not be good

for future growth.

Alright, there is an emerging school of thought that may

be under some circumstances and go the other way, so

I'm still not sure what I think about this argument,

but I'll give it to you anyway.

So, uh, Gelli has this paper where she summarises how

perhaps World War II stimulated management technology, especially in the

United States.

OK, so to get the war machine working well, the

government encouraged.

Various plans to um better coordinate among firms to have

new managerial techniques to allow for the big expansion of

wartime output and she argues they had big spillovers to

the private sector after the war which eventually spilled over

to other countries.

OK, she's also giving a public lecture at LSC in

March, so if you're interested in this topic, there's another

lecture to go to.

Um, I'm still thinking about this one, but certainly it's

possible, OK, but we have to weigh that against all

the other bad stuff we saw, OK, but keep in

mind that's different from a boring old trickle down argument.

This is about management, not about, well, the things we

learned in making tanks we then use in making civilian

items.

There's that argument too, but it's a bit, I think,

less stimulating.

OK, so that's thinking about the direct effects.

What about the process of peace after the two conflicts?

OK, so it looks like war is probably bad for

the economy, reduces LDK, diverts things into non-productive activities.

Maybe there's positive spillover from some things done to manage

a big war.

I'll let you think about that.

But post-war, certainly how peacetime arrangements are handled is going

to have a big effect.

OK, if we think the wars, if they think the

Second World War simulated good management techniques that led to

increased productivity, well, something had to allow that to spread

around the world.

You're not gonna get that without a successful piece, OK,

whether we, what we think about are you or.

Not in the first place.

So we think about the piece comparing these two global

conflicts.

It's a story of post-war continuing conflict versus an effort

to eventually over the course of 3 or 4 years,

I think 2 years to develop a more cooperative environment,

at least for a big chunk of Europe.

So comparing the way the Treaty of Versailles was set

up and managed versus the eventual Marshall Aid coming through

from 1948 to 1952 and other arrangements like the London

debt agreement.

I'm not gonna talk about that much later.

It was an agreement to essentially um forgive Germany some

of its older pre-war debts that was pre-World War II

debts that come from the Treaty of Versailles.

And also to manage their payments so they're set as

a share of exports.

OK, so reduced the German debt, gave them a more

manageable payment schedule and tied it to trade so that

the people who Germany owed the debt to would like

to buy their exports.

OK, integrate Germany into the world economy.

Finally, if we think about the post World War 1

period, we talked about the rise of tariffs and protectionism

post World War II we get GATT.

We get at least a big initial commitment to liberalisation

of trade.

What did GAP do?

It brought together countries to come up with um.

Oops, big international trade agreements.

Remember we talked a few weeks ago about most favoured

nation clauses in trade.

Unconditional most favoured nation clauses are a cornerstone of the

initial.

That means, uh, if I extend a most favoured nation

clause to another country, of course all other countries I

I trade with should benefit from this.

Eventually, uh, other trade agreements ate away at some of

these principles, but certainly the immediate post World War II

environment was very much let's get countries who are part

of GATT to trade freely with each other as freely

as possible.

OK, so very different to the post-World War One period.

Why is this the case?

Well, let's think about 1918 1st.

OK, time to do a mini striptease, so give me

a sec.

OK.

There we go.

All right, 1918 of the First World War is primarily

a European conflict, reminding you of the main belligerents Germany,

the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Ottoman Empire on one side versus

the UK, France, Russia till 1917, Italy from 15, and

the US, as we probably all know, enters the war

relatively late in 1970.

So that's who's fighting, OK.

The war ends November 11, 1918.

David Lloyd George makes this sombre speech.

11 o'clock this morning came to an end, the cruellest

and most terrible war that has ever scourged mankind.

I hope we may say that thus this fateful morning

came to an end all wars.

So it sounds like quite pro peace, we'll never do

this again.

Fast forward a month.

There's a parliamentary election.

Here's a poster from Romford, I guess out there if

I've got my geography right.

I'm not sure which way I'm standing exactly.

OK, I think it's about right.

Uh, vote for Martin, make Germany pay for the war

and hang the Kaiser.

OK, so discourse became very quickly about the the losers

should repay the victors.

I'm not sure that's quite the right, yeah, that's a

pretty good way to think about this.

OK.

Germany should pay for what happened in the war, hang

the cards, OK, very different from we should have peace

and never have a terrible war again again, those were

the slogans that Lloyd George used to win a big

majority with the liberal party.

And also famous for saying if you want to succeed

in politics you must keep your conscience under control.

I'm sure he's not the only politician who's the case,

right?

But you can see the sharp contrast, a post-World War

II period of who's to blame post World War 1

period, pardon me, who's to blame, who should pay over

here it's the Germans, right?

And of course, um, that's that's a British position.

France takes an even harsher position vis a vis Germany.

OK, so of course much of the front line is

in France.

OK, so if you've been to Arras, I don't know

if everyone has.

I go there a lot, it's, you know, it's on

the front line literally.

OK, it was an important way to think about this

is there's a historical element here that the 1870-71 Franco-Prussian

War is a big part to understand athletes in 1918.

What happened in the Franco-Prussian War?

France with the Napoleon to declared war on Prussia but

lost the war, lost territory.

Paris was uh in siege by the Prussian tro Germans.

They lost the war as a consequence of losing its

war.

They lost territory to what becomes Imperial Germany.

Think about Alza Loreen, OK, and also had to pay

reparations to the German Empire, so they lost the previous

war and paid for it.

This war they want pay back.

OK, I know it's true, the legend, uh, Georges Clemenceau,

who was the French president in 1919 and who served

in the Franco-Prussian War, requested on deck to be buried

standing up facing Germany.

OK, this is a story you'll meet in biographies.

Don't know how true it is, but you get the

idea.

This was not a we'll forgive and forget world.

This was a we lost last time and paid, we

lost territory.

We want that back and we want compensation just like

in previous wars.

Painting from Al Bell, it's what's his name?

Alel Beta Latai, the black spot, OK, where the teacher

is pointing to Alza very somberly.

It's the black part on the map of France.

Uh, the boy is looking very sombre who he's talking

to.

You'll see the boy in white wearing a medal that

would be from his father who died.

In the Franco Prussian board, and he's trying not to

cry.

So it gives you a bit of idea of the

ambience, OK, in the period between the wars in France

vis a vis Germany, which is gonna make France be

very much in favour of a harsh post-war settlement with

the Germans.

Hello.

How about the US who is becoming, as we know

from previous weeks, a bit of the world economic but

also political hegimen.

You asked Woodrow Wilson in 1918 January 1918, would be

more for a liberal sort of progressive piece.

He made a famous 14 point speech where he talked

about establishing a kind of liberal world order that fit

with lots of things we hear about in politics, at

least in the 20th century.

OK, that changes a bit when he given the way

Germany treats Russia in the peace settlement of Lebotsk.

I said that right?

I think I have.

OK, where under that peace treaty for Russia to get

out of the war they effectively cede a bunch of

territory directly to Germany or lose it to new independent

nations, OK.

This has a big effect on the Russian Empire's territory,

but also that Germany wants to use these acquisitions to

keep the war machine going on the West.

OK, so this effectively hardens Wilson's attitude towards Germany.

I'm not a war treaty person expert, but you can

read a lot more about this.

If you're into this kind of stuff, there's like a

million books that I've been, uh, refreshing my memory with

recently, OK.

So leading to the Treaty of Versailles after the First

World War, it's not really a negotiated peace.

Germany is declared guilty and is going to pay for

the war.

It's going to lose land.

That territory goes back to France asa.

It experiences military restrictions.

The Allied powers occupied the war for a set period

before withdrawal, subject to certain conditions.

Another big stickler are reparations which are eventually set at

6.6 billion pounds.

I've got that number right.

That works out to uh done the calculation in modern

currency terms here.

You can read that if you want to.

It's kind of a lot of money, although maybe not

compared to GDP and the flows you can produce.

But certainly symbolically it's a big number.

OK, it's not gonna make Germans or future German governments

feel very positive about European cooperation.

We've got this debt yoked onto our shoulders.

Think about last week when we talked about the problems

of the gold standard and insolvent banks and you know,

American banks and international central banks helping out the German

economy.

These payments do contribute to that problem, right?

All this said, the Treaty of Versailles isn't a typical

of 19th century peace treaties, right?

Franco-Prussian War ends with similar treaties.

This sort of structure is not novel.

OK, it might seem novel today or might seem more

harsh but certainly historically this is not particularly um.

Unusual.

So what can we say about this, about the consequences

of this piece?

First of all, as you probably know from your history,

reparations were barely paid and were effectively unenforceable.

This of course creates resentment between countries, Political consequences.

Will French central banks help out Germany?

No.

Right.

That's what we heard last week uh the brother.

It contributes to meet international economy with minimal cooperation.

Um, backward trade arrangements between countries and war breaks out

in 1939, only 20 years after Delsar was sold.

So the harsh piece leads to poor cooperation.

We have other things compounding it as we talked about

last week, but all goes together, OK?

The most damning way to think about it is just

look at the numbers.

This is a picture of trend.

So it's not that growth is zero, that's just normalising

the trend, long run trend growth to 100.

It follows during the war, as you might expect, and

post World War I, we really don't see a recovery

to trend.

OK.

So all this mess of the international economy we talked

about last week and this week, so it really goes

back.

To the post-war arrangements, of course, those other shocks we

talked about last time, you can't go back on the

gold standard at the prices you were before, but above

and beyond that, right, poor cooperation due to the post-war

arrangements really hold back the potential of the world economy

and uh another global war shortly afterwards follows.

How about post 1945?

I think I'm gonna change these terms a bit maybe

Britain.

is relatively magnanimous in terms of the peace.

The Soviet Union, not so much.

The big debate though is with the Americans and how

do they want to treat post-war Europe.

One view is that of Henry Morgentown, OK, to have

the Morgentown plan, which is to basically deindustrialize Germany, make

it agricultural, and by deindustrializing Germany, demilitarising Germany for the

future.

It would be a much poorer Germany, one that wouldn't

produce all the industrial goods it has since the 1870s,

but one that couldn't easily raise an army to start

a war in Europe.

OK, so the Morgenau plan wants to push along those

lines, OK.

The other side of this, well, hang on a second,

if we do that, what's going to happen to the

European economy?

It's going to remain poor and weak.

Those poor European economies might look east to the Soviet

Union where communism might seem an attractive prospect.

So Marshall's plan instead proposed, let's assist with reconstruction.

Let's bring Germany back into the world economy.

Let's integrate it with its neighbours who shall make future

conflicts more difficult, OK, so you see the distinction one

is let's demilitarise, deindustrialize, make Germany an agricultural backwater to

be safe.

The other is let's integrate to the rest of Europe.

That will make future conflicts less likely to happen.

OK.

Marshall's view eventually wins out.

Fears of communism spreading east into the rest of Europe

are probably really important.

OK, now that said, Germany does, I guess I'm gonna

keep this slides.

Germany does pay some reparations after the First World War.

External assets are confiscated.

It loses industrial equipment and shipping.

Some other amounts are paid, so there are some reparations

from West Germany.

To the victors of World War II.

I'll put it that way, where do these go?

USA, UK, France, a bit of the Soviet Union.

They dominate where the explicit reparations from West Germany go.

So there are some payments that go out.

The London debt agreement helps manage those payments to some

extent.

With their cash payments, it helps.

There are also some implicit reparations.

One is that German coal is free or subsidised to

other trading partners France, what was then a few others,

so that's not like a cash withdrawal, it's an in-kind

subsidy that's a form of reparation.

OK, so that's one additional type.

The other big reparation interesting one to maybe think about

we had a PhD student in our department who was

like became the world expert on this, I think, is

thinking about prisoners of war.

OK, lots of prisoners of war end up in the

UK, in the Commonwealth.

Canada is a big destination for POWs and almost a

million in France, and of course 3.5 million maybe in

the Soviet Union.

OK.

And again, those POWs work for below market wages, doing

potentially productive things, which is potentially a quite big subsidy

to some of those economies.

OK, so Pays estimated the value of 40 per annum,

something like that.

OK, so that that labour was worth maybe 150 million

pounds in the west, then under a million for the

study.

So that's a form of implicit reparation.

That had value to the countries that received the POWs,

OK?

And you know, the, the ones in Canada either were

freed or went back in the late 1940s, getting back

in the Soviet Union was part of it.

It took a lot longer if you ever made it.

Most of it.

That said, these reparations are smaller than the aid going

the other direction, so Britain and the US spent more

money importing food, food assistance into Germany than they received

in direct reparations.

OK, so while there were some cash flows coming out

of defeated Germany to the rest, they were small compared

to the subsidies coming in the other direction even before

the Marshall Fund.

That's of course talking about the West German economy.

What about East Germany?

Not so positive, right?

There we have explicit reparations, perhaps up to $7 billion

US dollars to the Soviet Union, additional costs in form

of occupation after the Second World War, and of course

East Germany eventually quite quickly isn't part of the European

Western trade networks.

Think about the economic losses of losing those gains from

trade.

OK, so I've kept this quote in for years.

I quite like it.

uh, Theo Zola, the editor of the sites, the West

Germans were lucky.

It was the East Germans who pay the full price

of Hitler's war.

OK, so again thinking about post World War II, West

Germany gets off lightly in terms of the financial price,

maybe even compared to the First World War, it's gonna

get back into European trade networks.

It's gonna be a position to perhaps rebuild quite quickly.

East Germany.

Doesn't look so lucky.

OK.

Maybe lucky is not the right word, fortunate.

OK, so that's thinking a bit about war and reparations.

There's also, I think, I don't know how to best

way to place to place to spot this in the

lecture, but there's also an interesting point to think about

how um the macroeconomy is managed after both wars.

OK, which is the idea of monetary overhead.

OK.

So think about during war, OK, consumption possibilities are restrained,

right?

Loss of investment, we're introducing wartime goods, wartime goods.

Aren't so interesting for consumption at home.

People tend to save quite a bit due to the

consumption possibilities.

It's a bit like during COVID lockdowns, lots of things

you might spend money on restaurants, travel, etc.

you couldn't do, so lots of people's savings accounts became

surprisingly big in that period.

OK.

Now, at the end of the war, you have all

this pent up demand.

To acquire those consumer goods, OK?

Supply isn't there yet, right?

The factories have to switch over from civilian goods to

military goods back into civilian goods.

You've got lots of money.

Chasing a few things.

This monetary overhang, you could probably see that could lead

to lots of inflation.

All this pent up saving, people demand these goods, supplies

is not yet on stream.

We're gonna get, get a big short inflationary shock, maybe

a bit like post-COVID years, right?

So I looked quite.

The last 3 years as well, right?

Ford savings followed by demand and supplies not yet put

on straight away.

So what do we have after World War One?

We get this monetary overhang.

We get very rapid inflation between 1918 and 1920.

OK.

What do governments do in response to this inflation?

They engage in contractionary fiscal and monetary policies.

OK, 1921 prices collapse.

There is a big.

recession in many economies in Europe and in the West

as well.

Canada, same story.

Remember the pictures I showed you last week of the

British GDP over time.

1921 is a big negative turning points.

OK.

Unemployment in the UK reaches 2 million in 1921, right?

So when the monetary overhang was spent, prices have collapsed,

and you know demand isn't.

New demand isn't as, um, sustained as the demand generated

by the overhang.

So you can see how this is a big shock.

It's a shock that wasn't managed by economies very well.

Big inflation, big collapse that follows, and then demands not

so um forthcoming due to unemployment.

That's gonna suppress demand.

Excuse me, into the early and mid 1920s.

OK, so that'll be a post-World War One story that

fits quite well the British experience.

OK, Canada, a little bit I know about it, not

too dissimilar, although it's got the US next to it,

which helps take a bit as the 1920s move on.

Post World War II, in theory, the same sort of

storage could apply, right?

However, it's better managed by governments, OK?

So, well, most economists aren't a fan of price controls

and rationing.

They did it earlier and probably did it better in

the Second World War and just afterwards.

So during the war and post-war controls probably helped spread

out the the potential threat of monetary.

OK.

Uh, OK.

Um, in Britain and elsewhere, devaluation took place to encourage

exports.

OK.

If we look at things like taxation and investment, really

high marginal tax rates, up to 90%, you'll see in

the UK also well like 50% in the US.

These tax rates essentially soak up some of this potential

extra demand and direct it back into investment, right?

So post World War II, you've got surprisingly good private

savings in some places, lots of capital destruction.

You want to get those private savings not into consumption,

right, but into investments.

So high rates of taxation, lots of things to generate

investment are part of the story.

Another feature is what economists call financial repression.

OK, so very low real interest rates where the interest

rate you get on saving money will be low compared

to say, inflation.

So financial repression, uh, allows you to deflate away some

of the wartime debts by maintaining these low interest rates.

OK, so various policy approaches helped sort of stave off

the front of monetary overhang and in doing so also

sort of steer things towards investment in rebuilding European economies

uh post World War II.

Of course there's also the Marshall Plan and other international

programmes help channel funds into investment rather than consumer consumption,

OK.

And the other part of the story is that people

are, I will say more about this next week, that,

you know, people are willing to accept this delayed consumption

because by 1950 you're starting to see sustained.

So sacrificing some of your consumption possibilities doesn't seem so

bad when growth rates are very high.

OK?

So why growth is actually so important to get an

economy working, to encourage cooperation, to allow for taxation, to

do public investment, things like that.

OK, so that's thinking about the piece and some of

the differences.

What about the policy and intellectual changes?

So.

OK, so if we think post, uh, World War II,

there's a fairly unified view, there's a fairly unified view

to avoid a second run of the 1930s Great Depression,

but also the bad experience of the 1920s, OK?

So to reverse the failed globalisation, certainly the failed economic

cooperation of the interwar period.

So it's not really a free trade paradise in 1950s

and so forth, but certainly more cooperation, at least getting,

getting part of the world economy working better.

OK, and there's also a strong internal commitment to lower

unemployment.

OK, so unemployment is also quite corrosive to national economies

and to having effective national societies.

It goes with polarisation and bad political outcomes, so low

unemployment, good cooperation, in an environment where people will be,

uh, things that these war and conflict attractive a few

decades ago might recede.

OK, so it's usually to think about the different ways

in which the economy is globalised in different time periods,

OK, to think about the policy choices available to governments.

OK, there's an important point coming up here.

So before 1914, that good old period we talked about

back in November or December, I don't remember, I think

it was November, we know that goods travelled fairly freely

around the world before 1914.

There's lots of trade.

Immigrants also move fairly freely, as does capital.

So before 1914, that sort of Victorian era from 1870

is pretty free flowing in terms of capital, goods, and

labour.

OK?

How's the contrast to later periods between 18 and 39,

as we saw last week, all these forms of globalisation

declined.

Trade collapses as a horrible, horrible.

That fascinating picture I showed you indicates we have lower

capital flows, uh, partly due to these debt crises and

instruments that made international financing much more difficult.

What I didn't talk about so much we we've probably

seen in passing is there's also a lot less emigration.

If people can't afford to pick up and move so

easily.

The first substantial immigration restrictions through policy come in in

the 1920s and lots of.

This is of course all founded on the lack of

future international cooperation and then a desire to avoid this

disaster post World War II.

OK, so how does that play out after 1945?

Trade is liberalised steadily in the post in the post-war

era, so things like GATT help a lot in terms

of extending preferential access in a multilateral way to many.

OK.

By the early 1960s, industrial nations level of tariffs and

trade are back to 1914, so it takes a while,

OK, but by 1960, the world economy is looking fairly

healthy in terms of trade tariff barriers.

We don't see returns post to pre-1914 levels of immigration

until much later, so people moving, that's more uh 21st

century, very late 20th century thing at the same levels

and certainly we don't see a return to pre-1914 levels

of capital mobility again until the end of the 20th

century.

So trade comes back first, immigration and international capital flows

more gradually, OK.

It takes longer to unwind restrictive immigration policies.

That's part of the story, but also for capital, there's

also policies that impose some controls on where capital can

and can't go.

So it's useful to think about this using the so-called

macro trilemma, where the idea is suppose you have a

few policy outcomes to consider that economies can only follow

two of these three following potential policies.

A.

Uh, fixed exchange rates, B, independent monetary policy, and C,

you can pick 2 but not 3.

OK.

You can have fixed exchange rates and free movement of

capital, but then your central bank has no role in

monetary policy.

Or you gonna have fixed exchange rates, your central bank

sets interest rates locally, but then you need.

From potential, um, other destinations.

OK, so a lot of macro policy can come down

to which choices do countries make of these three and

how does that tie into the sort of way the

international economy worked before the First World War, between the

wars, and again afterwards, OK, so pre-1914.

We have the gold standard, that's essentially fixed exchange rates.

So that's A, right?

Pre 1914, we have big international capital flows, that's C

for the previous page, but countries can't really engage in

independent monetary policy, right?

What do central banks do?

They're supposed to allow the price specie flow mechanism to

happen and also to play by the rules of the

game, OK?

So you can't really maintain an independent interest rates in

this.

Post 1945, right, with different economic arrangements, you want independent

monetary policy.

So post 1945 you have fixed exchange rates, the so-called

Bretton Woods system.

Well, let's talk a little bit more about that next

week, OK?

And then instead you sacrifice capital mobility.

So it's fixed exchange rates, independent monetary policy, capital, capital

mobility is gone.

OK.

Take these examples forward, right?

Within the Eurozone, it's a bit like the first A

and C and not B.

So within the Eurozone, you have a fixed exchange rate,

so what the currencies used to be, and certainly before

the Eurozone, right?

You have capital mobility around Europe, right?

But central banks and European nations don't have that cloud.

Other countries trading with Europe, like Canada, floating exchange rates,

capital mobility, and the bank has independent monetary policy.

So Canada's today gives up A to have B and

C.

OK, so I think I quite like, you know, to

pick two of three what's gonna work better for the

global economy.

OK, but immediately post 1945, it's A and B and

give up C.

Eventually countries give up fixed exchange rates, then it's give

up a, let's have B and C.

A, B, and C, being those from the slide.

OK, let's end by thinking a little bit about how

this matches into different country objectives.

So we think about the USA post 1945, what's its

role?

It is economically integrationist vis a vis Europe.

It supports, I wouldn't say free trade, but freer trade,

certainly more trade and volume.

And also is leading and offering Marshall Aid which is

essentially saying we will provide some financial assistance to European

economies that need to reconstruct in exchange for those economies

engaging in some economic liberalisation, OK, that is you will

agree to import American goods, you will export to the

US, you will set up multilateral payment systems, remember that

from last term with other European economies and so forth.

OK, so the integrate into the European economy, trade war

with the US, allow US penetration into your markets, you

can get martial.

Those are the conditions.

So again, it's funds from US to Europe for reconstruction.

It's $13 billion US dollars.

That sounds like a lot, right?

But it's only 0.5%. Of European GDP for 4 years.

OK, so it's got a big symbolic component, but maybe

what wasn't important was the amount of money, but it

was a conditionality, OK, conditional in the sense that you

have to do those things I just described trade war

with the US, integrate with your neighbours, multilateral payments throughout

Europe, etc.

You have to accept Germany being back in the European

economy, for example.

OK, so maybe it's those conditions that really matter.

So it wasn't the assistance, it was reintegrating Europe.

It was overcoming some of those barriers that persisted really

since the First World War.

Thinking about Britain also aims for freer trade.

Interestingly, does not aim for a harsh peace settlement with

Germany.

What's this famous quote by Churchill?

I think he told Roosevelt that he didn't want England

to be chained to a corpse after the Second World

War, thinking of the Morgantown version of deindustrialized Germany, chained

to a corpse, I think that's what he said.

Anyway, he saw the disadvantage of having a weak economy

in Germany will be also bad for them.

We'll talk a bit more about next week, but Britain

also adopts more of a Keynesian policy approach after this,

after the first after the Second World War with more

managed labour markets, with more direct fiscal policy which has

a mixed bag in terms of performance that we're gonna

talk about that one next week.

Why that doesn't work so well in Britain.

It's an interesting story.

If we look at France again, more free trade, good

unlike post 1918, 1919, doesn't aim for a harsh peace

with Germany.

It's accepted Marshall Aid, which is going to mitigate against

that.

And one of the interesting things in France and some

other economies is that they adopt what economists and.

Industrial relations scholars referred to as a social contract, OK.

The idea being that there's an agreement between workers and

their union representatives, management, uh, a facilitated by the governments

where you have a compact where workers accept wage moderation,

meaning if productivity goes up, not all productivity goes into

higher wages, some of it firms retain to invest in

the future.

OK, so it's supposed to be a beneficial spiral.

Workers accept more moderated wage increases.

That moderation means firms have some profits to invest in

capital, new technology, which allows for even more wage increases

in the future.

OK.

The idea is there's unions and and management of firms

agreed to do this in the post-war period and it's

something that have been argued to unlock lots of European

growth.

A really nice story Not just as much evidence it's

true, but it's a good story, we may talk more

about this next week.

Excuse me, Germany is a similar story, more free trade.

It accepts the peace and integrations with the Western economy

and also adopts a bit of a social contract model

where we have wage moderation and those extra profits go

to invest in the future.

And so workers say on slightly lower wage increases today

to allow more wage increases in the future.

OK.

And perhaps when growth rates are very high, it's easy

for workers to say, yes, I'll accept a 3% wage

increase, not a 5% 1 because of the future will

be good for me.

OK?

If growth is like 2%, maybe you don't want to

accept a.

A freeze for future growth, right?

That's be a different proposition.

As I said, whether that holds in evidence is a

good question to ask yourselves.

We'll talk a little bit about next week because it

relates to the topic.

Of course the bottom line, what happened?

Well, World War II was another really big bad shock

for trend GDP, but by the world quickly returns to

the trend fairly quickly returns to trend growth levels falling

so rapid growth in the 30 years right after the

Second World War, and then back on trend.

So the package, however it came about, seems to have

an effect.

One more thing to think about, right?

I thought it's important to add to this lecture a

few years ago is we think about the effects of

World War II.

There's this other big effects, right?

So that's Rosie the Riveter, right, the, the, um, icon

of the history department, our logo, OK.

So Rosie the Riveter went into work in American industry

in the 1940s because all the men are off.

After 1940, 1941 fighting in Europe.

OK, so one big idea is that when the indirect

effects of war is it brings women into the paid

labour force and they persist in those jobs after the

war.

So maybe World War II had a big effect at

making uh at sort of emancipating women in terms of

their paid work.

OK.

World War 1 didn't seem to have that effect.

Interesting question, why not?

But this is one little piece of evidence for World

War 21 picture to think about.

So this is looking at US states, the um Horizontal

axis is the percent of males in each state that

were mobilised between the age of 18 and 44, so

less mobilisation, more mobilisation on the uh vertical axis, that's

the change in weeks work by women between 1940 and

1950.

So states that globalise more have a bigger increase in

the organisation.

OK, so it looks like there might be some connection

here between the the war, the massive handed women through

this big labour supply shock and well after World War

One that got reversed to some extent in the 1920s

and 1930s after World War II, this may have propagated

sort of more gender equality beginnings of it at least

in the labour market.

So that's another interesting thing to consider for today.

OK, next week's a very positive lecture.

We'll talk about the golden age.

So thank you for listening and see you in 7

days.

Yes.

Go on.

Capital Cuban capital.

Um.

Yes, so during the war there's not much migration except

for things like directly.

You're the biggest, I see.

Absolutely, so a business migration is um people from.

East Germany and people from Eastern Europe, Eastern Europe who

are German speakers, they are expelled as what comes to

Poland and they all move to West Union.

There's a really it's really interesting.

Yeah.

So but during the war, the migration, but after the

war you get some big population moves, and they probably

helped Germany by bringing back a growth.

I'll, I'm gonna remember all about the.

Yeah, good question.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Lecture 13:

That you know how to train the thing, but you

don't know why the training produces the emerging capabilities it

does.

There's all kinds of stuff going on inside, inside the

black box.

And no one understands what It's quite scary in a

way.

did make that consciousness.

You too Uh, no, I don't think it would, no,

because you could have a dualist who nonetheless says, um,

computations are what allow consciousness to emerge.

You could think that consciousness was to do with yons

or something, mind particles or something, but you could still

think of what, what creates, what allows the the mind

particles to form a conscious mind.

Maybe it's the right kind of conversational structure.

Wonderful, great, OK.

I've got to try to give you a prize that

gave you a new conscious experience.

Um, Some new qualia, basically.

By being one of the darkest chocolates.

Were you in that group as well?

Oh right.

Yeah.

Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.

Yeah, I wanted to ask Blade Runner 2049 is uh

that one is like I, I guess I, I, I

never thought about like, you know, right.

And Yeah.

I I.

but um I I just saw that myself.

Yeah, thank you.

OK, thank you.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Welcome back to the line.

We're gonna continue our speech.

Your time in political work period we're gonna talk about

the gore.

From 1950 to 1973.

I just put the slides available on view, but I

realised there's one small correction we meet 13, not 12.

That's on my PC.

So I'll, I'll adjust that when I get back to

my office, but good and Mule, they're now visible.

So sorry about the slight delay with that.

I did make a few changes this year.

So we're gonna do today, we'll start with why we're

interested, hopefully not too much convincing necessary but nonetheless, then

we'll move to talk about the facts what happened in

the golden age, who grew quickly, who grew less quickly,

and I think it will do a nice job, I

hope, of um prefacing some of what we'll see in

the rest of the course this year looking at other

continents, countries, more contemporary economic history.

Then, how much of this is just a story about

catching up.

Remember we talked about good old Moses Abramovitz, thinking about

the 19th century last term.

Does that story hold here?

Countries that have more room to catch up did so

for some reason after 1945.

Yes, no, is what we're gonna say.

And to understand that we're gonna think about what we

might call the proximate.

OK, so we do a, uh, um, try to think

about productivity growth factor endowments, all the late great Angus

Madison or Nick Krats.

What does he uh suggest?

OK, and then.

It's gonna turn out that productivity growth is really the

key thing.

What explains the differences across countries?

OK, we don't have a smoking gun easy answer, but

there's some candidate explanations that I think you'll agree, have

some good, uh, stories behind them and probably some important

ways.

OK, so why do we care?

Some picture around.

OK.

So thinking about the post, the period 50 to 1973,

top left corner, I'm pretty sure that's Berlin.

I forget which street or square we're looking at.

Sorry, that's one thing I did forget to check.

Post World War II.

Early and late, so that's Wolzburg, right, uh, one of

the big, uh, automobile plants in Germany.

So going from a, a defeated, destroyed, uh, nation to

one of the leading world exporters.

Again, in the space of about 25 years and you

know the um frontier technology bless you, the goods that

are sort of now dominant on the world market.

OK, so understanding that very quick, uh, miracle of growth

that buildschasunder in Germany.

OK, we might want to understand what allowed this to

happen.

I like this book cover from France.

So that's the Bills Bill Francaise.

OK, I like it because obviously there's the nice consumer

goods of the post World War II era, the automobile,

the, the picnic stuff, but also they're on holidays.

OK, so the golden age isn't just about higher income

per capita and more consumer goods.

It's also about more leisure time, more holidays, OK?

So this captures the thing, you know, my friends and

my family talk about that a lot.

Well, here we go.

This is a post World War 2 growth industry everywhere

and yeah, uh, leisure time is a good thing, and

that comes along with the income growth and the productivity.

OK, so that's looking at Germany and France over on

this side of the channel, maybe not quite so positive.

So that's a, a, uh, Papier mache of Ted Heath

in the top left corner.

Bottom right is the good picture from the 3 day

week in 1974 where energy was rationed in this country,

you know, 50 years ago.

So while on the continent you have these looming economies,

lovely holidays in the south of France.

Or restored industries surrounding Germany and Britain in the 1970s

are a little bit grimmer, OK, not so interesting.

What explains this?

What does Britain sort of keep on carrying on, not

with the same wonderful growth of the rest of the

of the rest of the continent?

It's just about less room to.

Catch up or there are different things in Britain that

slow growth a bit at least to the 1970s, OK,

because this is the story of the time, you know,

looking back doesn't seem so positive and this connects to

another concept I think my colleagues don't like talking about

this.

Well, no, they don't like it.

They don't think it's so important for us to lecture.

I just like you to think about this, right?

Which is also the idea that you might have different

varieties of capitalism developments within Europe.

One model would be the so-called coordinated market economy, OK,

where it's not socialism or communism, it's a market economy,

OK, where, but government firms and workers kind of coordinates

the government has a big role in this in developments,

OK, so firms.

And employers bargain at a high level often with the

government assisting negotiations they have more long term arrangements.

OK?

Workers are more likely to stay their whole career in

a firm rather than move from job to job.

These firms offer more investments in like vocational and non-vocational

skills as part of a job, OK?

And it's a different sort of environment to the liberal

market economy of which Britain might be a good example,

right, sometimes successful, sometimes less successful in Britain you wanna

to get training and education.

You go to school, then you go to university, right?

General education pay for on your own, right?

The way to move up in the labour market is.

To go from job to job rather stay with a

firm throughout your career where they develop all your possibilities.

Yeah, I'm exaggerating the story, of course you see examples

of both in different countries, but Britain has more of

that type of arrangement.

Europe traditionally and maybe the 1960s had more of the

coordinated type arrangements.

OK, and so you know these models could be successful

or less successful depending on the context.

So the golden age sees the rise of coordinated the

market economy in big parts of Europe.

Is that part of the it's part of the story.

Is it part of the success?

OK, question mark.

I'm not sure I know what the answer is, but

maybe we should all think about it as we think

of the evidence, OK, but certainly a distinction between Britain

and the rest.

OK, so what are the facts of the golden age?

Well, good thing, good news first, and this is mostly

a good news lecture after some less good news ones

that you have widespread worldwide growth from 1950 to 1973.

So Europe.

The Western offshoots think about I couldn't move that us

sorry, I was trying to mess with this, uh, North

America in particular, Australia, New Zealand, Latin America and Asia

all see by the 20th century high rates of growth

right for Europe double what you see in any any

of these other intervals.

So it's the high growth period, OK.

Looking around the world, OK, that's the picture over time,

fits of what I showed you before, 1870 to 1913,

pretty good.

And then after that though, it's really, uh, ahead of

everything else.

It's really the golden age.

Now if we look at different continents and regions, this

will help set up the next few lectures.

So I'm not sure this is the best order, but

we've got Africa first, OK, which has an OK golden

age going with the decolonization period.

OK.

And of course, lots of development models applied in Africa

over this time.

When I was doing my PhD, some of the professors

at the time had been in Africa in the 1960s

or 1970s, working as consultants, right?

For good or bad, can't really say now, but this

is really a thing, OK.

Moving around to, you know, Canada, New Zealand, Australia, a

less exciting golden age relative to the rest, but still

a period of maximum growth and income per capita.

Latin America, OK, we know that's pretty well, uh, in

the 19th century.

also has a reasonably successful golden age.

It's also a period where some Latin American economies, you

know, they also like this, the story I was telling

from my professors who went to Ghana, drew on Western

expertise, and economic advisors, people involved in the Marshall Plan

were also interested in Colombia, for example, OK, maybe a

less interesting post golden age era than other locations.

As a contrast to here with the others, I also

quite looking at Asia, excluding Japan.

We'll come back to Japan a bit later, which, you

know, disappointing growth up through to 1950 doesn't really, but

then post World War Two, sees a takeoff in the

golden age.

Similar to world level levels as opposed to well above,

but there you see much of the most rapid growth

happening after 1973.

So when we move forward to look at Asia, the

sort of Asian economic history, we're we're gonna be thinking

a lot about what happens to.

1970s, what explains that golden age and how can we

compare it, contrast it to the European experience?

Were there lessons learned?

Was it a very different economic environment, therefore different solutions

were taken, etc.

OK, so get your brains worry around that a little

bit.

Uh, OK, finally, yes, almost there.

Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union actually quite high growth

post World War II like in the West, but obviously

post 1970, post 1973 things look grim, OK.

And finally, I think I may have this the wrong

way around, that's something to change.

Western Europe, which.

Roughly matches global growth trends through much of the period,

the big exception being the golden age, where we're looking

at, you know, 4 to 5% growth per capita per

annum, say 4% for the period, which is substantially higher

than anyone else.

OK, so the point is different growth trajectories in different

parts of the world.

The post-World War II era looks pretty good everywhere.

OK.

Post 1970s, that's a bit more of a mixed bag,

something we're gonna dig into in the following weeks.

Finally, like this one, Japan, OK?

That's the ultimate golden age, uh, what do people call

this?

Hyper growth sounds good on the cover of your book

in 1990 or 1980 whatever.

OK, has the most extreme golden age.

I'm not gonna talk very much about Japan today, but

a couple slide examples as we go, OK?

But again, wartime destruction, reconstruction.

Involvement of the US directly and indirectly, that like will

tell the story for Europe.

All right, so let's think about in per capita.

Going back to my French family sunbathing in the, well,

probably not the dodo, probably G or something.

OK, that's not just about income.

There's also big changes in leisure.

OK, so hours worked per person employed fall from 1900

to 2300 hours in 1950 to something like 1500 to

1900 by the 1990s.

This is working on it with my.

Michael Huberman many years ago, OK, but a lot of

hall is also happening in the period we're looking at.

OK, so increasing leisure is going hand to hand with

this growth right in the 60s and 50s, 60s and

70s, but also through to the next period.

OK, so it's not just higher income, it's also more

time not working, which is extremely valuable, right?

OK, so those are the facts, OK.

Then how do we think about this growth and convergence,

OK?

Thinking about growth and convergence, because one of the big

stories is, well, on the cost, on the, I should

have an extra slide on this, right?

Looking at the world in 1950, the US is now

clearly the economic leader.

It's the most productive economy, has the most advanced technology,

hasn't experienced the same wartime destruction as all the European

countries.

OK, so Europe is now lagging behind the US and

11 as is some of the other regions we had

up on the board a few minutes ago.

OK, and so an obvious question well that should imply

some catch up potential, right?

That you can adopt American technology, adapt it, whatever, and

close on to the frontier if your domestic economy is

set up right, whatever that might mean, OK, so then

we want to ask ourselves, well, this did happen in

some places, why, but it was a little bit uneven,

especially within Europe.

OK, so what explains why it happened.

And a bit what happened better for some places than

others, OK, so the, the basic story here is that

countries that have the lowest level of GDP per capita

relative to the US had the highest potential for catch

up growth, OK?

And if you run a regression of like.

The income gap in 1950 against growth something like that,

you're gonna find this did happen, OK?

There's a negative relationship between starting the starting levelling of

per capita and subsequent growth.

Runner regressions, you'll get a nice big juicy, statistically significant.

OK, so those who are initially poorer definitely grow grew

faster.

That's that's undeniable.

There's gonna be differences on that trend line, right?

But the average effects is very much like that.

Now what could explain it, right?

Here we want to think about the Abra Avician.

I can't remember what I said in last term stories,

right?

Well, we know there are large technological gaps to the

leader, especially after the capital destruction of World War II

and all the technology embodied in that.

So there's something, there's a leap to be made.

A, B, perhaps European economies have high levels of social

competence, OK?

Uh, and perhaps it's growing in the period we're looking

at.

Education of children is expanding school compulsory, compulsory school leaving

ages are going up in most.

OK, there's an expansion of higher education.

We're gonna talk a bit more about that later, but

you might think with that it's going to raise social

confidence and more generally there's gonna be favourable conditions after

the war.

OK?

Think about the American involvement and reconstruction through the Marshall

Plan as we talked about last week.

Some of that is money.

Or, or assistance, a, a lot of it is Conditional

on Europeans behaving amongst themselves.

OK, so countries who want to take that aid have

to sign up those, those conditions which could lead to

these favourable conditions, making it easy for US technology to

transfer to Europe through the form of foreign direct investment

or other things, but also for best practises to spread

across Europe right as European countries, at least in the

West, have signed up to integrate in order to get

Marshall aid at the beginning of this period.

OK, so that makes for good conditions for the most

advanced technology to get to Europe and then to potentially

spread.

OK, if we think about catch up growth rather than

showing you a regression, I'll just show you a few

countries, but you can see what's going on here, right?

So what this is is the red bars are the

growth in GDP per capita over the period we're looking

at.

So highest in Spain, here's the US, the leader, right.

And the blue dotty bars are each country's 1950 GDP

per capita compared to the US.

OK, so what do we see here?

The UK is in the best initial position, has the

slowest growth.

Spain is in the worst initial position, has the highest

growth.

That's an interesting story.

This is Franco Spain, right?

So we're not talking about so much, but it's in

this, it's in this picture.

But there's Italy, right, which is, uh, you know, different

institutional arrangements.

OK, um, but then you see this, uh, reverse correlation

between initial position in Europe and growth.

OK, so that's, you know, something we could do more

countries and have a regression, we get a very similar

looking picture, but also you see some countries are doing

better than the trend even on these on this.

Um, 5 country examples, some are doing worse.

So Germany is doing better than say Italy, which has

similar conditions and much better than France.

OK.

Britain looks like it's actually growing more slowly than the

UK despite we think some catch up potential.

OK, so there's a broad trend of of catch up

dictated on your initial position, but country conditions clearly seem

to matter.

OK, the thing I would say is, right, Italy, Germany,

France, of course, if we divided Italy up into north

and south, we'd also see different things, right?

So this is at the country level, but within these

countries there would be quite different trends as well where

technology gets a.

Adapt more easily where manufacturing and services grow, all that

kind of stuff, OK, so I like using the countries,

but it also hides some interesting variation.

So those are some of the, that's the catch up

patterns.

There's something going on, right?

But countries are also varying off the trend line, which

you might want to explain.

So how do we think of proximate causes for this

growth and potential convergence?

OK, our lack of convergence in the case of Britain.

So To think about proximate causes, the best place to

start often is with some sort of growth accounting exercise

to say, OK.

If we try to explain growth, how much of it

goes to like more inputs, so that's a bit like

extensive growth, right, or increase in total factor inputs after

World War II, rebuilding capital stocks, increasing labour force participation,

eventually the baby boom when my parents get the labour

force in the late 1960s doing the math, yeah.

That's gonna, that's gonna have an increase in factor inputs.

Young workers come in in the market, more capital investment.

On the other hand, is total factor productivity or intensive

growth by using factors and inputs more productively.

Think about the leading technology from the US coming over

or Europe dividing, designing, devising, inventing its own more productive

technologies, whatever the case, excuse me, whatever the case might

be.

So we might want to break things out into what's

happening on the input side and what's happening on the

total factor productivity side, OK, so for inputs we can

think about capital.

We can think about labour, but also think about like

human capital potentially if you want to.

OK, so education, the stock of schooling, as I said

before, that's when we find that the social capabilities as

well, right, or social competence, but something we could measure

and and.

OK.

And as we'll see, capital is a big part of

the story.

For TFP, what people have tried to do is do

a kind of ad hoc decomposition.

I, every year for this lecture, I go to reread

what Angus Madison did, and every year I'm not exactly

sure what he did, but the story is something like

this that maybe TAP growth is partly due to catch

up.

So the further behind you are, the more scope to

pick up technologies.

Some of it could be due to trade.

So if you trade more, you can have more efficient

allocation of resources that could contribute to TFP growth.

You get TFP growth TFP growth through structural change.

So even in Europe the agricultural sector declines, the industrial

sector grows, that could raise productivity, something we're to talk

about a lot more or a bit more at least

as we think about other economies in the rest of

the world, by the way.

And then the rest would be the unexplained bit of

total factor productivity.

OK, and what we're gonna see is the things you

can potentially explain by observed factors.

They're not unimportant, but the black box of unexplained TFP

growth is going to be the big thing we want

to try to implicitly get at.

So I like this picture.

Let me try to explain it.

This is a visual representation of these exercises for the

golden age, Angus Madison, and later Nick crafts it in

the 1990s and the 20, I can't remember what, OK?

These wouldn't have changed.

The data hasn't changed since, so they're, they're good to

go so where the, the sort of um dotted shady

bits at the bottom.

We are looking at the change in factor intensity, OK,

to account for growth over the period in the core

of these countries.

Everywhere there's a good hit from TFI, OK, for Britain,

more than half the growth growth comes from more factor

intensity, OK, although Germany actually gets more than that everywhere.

Capital dominance.

OK, so even so the US, it's the smallest effect.

Maybe not surprising given it's not rebuilding the same way

as a post-war economy, but everywhere capital intensity is the

biggest factor in the story, OK, then, you know, education

contributes to this for TFP, OK, we can see the

things we can try to measure in the capital exercise,

they're not unimportant, right?

So for Germany, catching up is important trade and structural

change are also important.

Similar story for France, right for Britain there's not so

much potential to catch up, OK?

And there's also not so much potential for structural change.

It's the least agricultural economy in Europe, right?

So getting people off the farm into cities and industry,

there's less room to do that here as well, OK.

Uh, foreign trade helps a little bit everywhere.

The US not so much is already at the frontier

in those things.

What you really want to know here is the differences

in the blue bars, right?

They're pretty good for the US, really big for France

and Germany, and quite small in relative terms for Britain.

So the parts of productivity growth we can't just account

for with structural factors or trade or initial position relative

to the US.

Those are the biggest differences across these countries, right?

And that's where the UK is looking particularly for, where

France and Germany much more, I know, exciting if you're

an economist, OK, we have to live in this period,

right, because it's good for you.

OK.

So, the country was the most rapid GDP growth also

had the most rapid TFP growth.

OK.

The US has kind of an even split between TFP

and TFI.

The UK is notable.

It has slower TFP growth than total factor intensity growth,

uh, input.

OK, so a different pattern in Britain versus the US,

but more so relative to its European neighbours.

OK, so again, what do we think about the British

economy versus say the German economy we'll talk about that

later that might, that might help account for this, OK,

just to, to whet our appetites.

One more thing to think about labour productivity, I think

another, and here I'll add Japan to the story.

That I'll show you some pictures in a minute, but

the bottom line is Germany, France, UK, Japan, in terms

of output per hour labour productivity, they all catch up

in the US again here, capital intensity is important in

explaining catch up everywhere.

France and Germany also sees some total factor productivity convergence

where the UK and Japan develop.

I think I need to actually show the pictures first.

OK, so this is looking at output per worker hour,

OK, and.

This is all benchmarking against the US.

So the US is 100%.

These countries are representing them as their as their relative

labour productivity against the American standard.

OK, 1950, they're all below 50%.

Maybe I should have the slide first in the election,

right?

They're all below 50%.

OK.

By 1973, Germany is up to 75%.

France has seen a good expansion as well.

The lines for Britain and Japan are flattered.

That Japanese line is interesting, right?

This is a period of mega growth in Japan.

Right, but that mega growth isn't driven by productivity of

workers going up very quickly at all, so a nice

little puzzle against that earlier picture of Japan having 8%

growth per year.

It's clearly not coming from labour productivity, OK, whereas Germany

and France rising labour productivity are a big part of

the story.

Britain's slightly sluggish growth, that's not so surprising when you

look at this.

Now what's happening in terms of capital intensity that's going

up everywhere against the US.

I don't think there's a big story to tell here.

Germany has a bit more of an increase in capital

intensity.

OK, that's common to these four economies.

Where the differences lie are the trends in total factor

productivity.

That's where Germany and France see convergence to the US,

UK and Japan do not.

OK, so understanding the UK's, you know, it's not a

bad time for growth in Britain, but it's a bit

disappointing compared to the continent, OK, and it's clearly products

to be growth.

Japan has mega growth, right, but these conventional statistics don't

suggest that there's that much TFP growth growth into America

so that would suggest maybe it's all about factor intensity,

right?

Not just increases in capital, maybe big increases in the

labour supply in Japan.

OK, so that's a good little puzzle for us to

think about, right?

How do you get really high growth without TFP because

that debate is gonna turn up when we talk about

understanding growth in the rest of Asia post 1960.

Is it all about, is it productivity based or is

it factor based just adding lots of capital and also

lots of labour to the economy?

This might suggest for Japan, adding more labour is probably

a big part of the story.

OK, I'm gonna put a question mark on that because

we're not gonna talk about much from here, but something

you might be interested in if you want to know

more about the Japanese, we, we used to have a

course about Japan.

We don't anymore.

OK, so in summary we see big capital deepening everywhere,

rapid TFP growth in Germany and France relative to the

US.

So that explains how it happened, OK, but not really

why.

So why did the UK have slightly lousy TFP growth,

at least in relative terms.

Right, we might want to know that.

Why did Germany do so well?

OK.

For that, we've got to think about the underlying causes.

OK.

So, One thing to repeat the theme from last week

is across Europe.

That applies to Britain as well, but maybe it'll distinguish

us, Britain from the rest of Europe.

Avoiding the 1930s were important, having some cooperative international arrangements,

maybe they have a continental Europe more than elsewhere.

We can also think about the role of government, so

government can do some useful things for growth.

Government can also despite best intentions, put sand in the

machine and slow down a bit.

OK, it's got other objectives, elections maybe cares about equality

and distribution, not just growth rates, right.

We can think about improved training technology flows, can we

demonstrate the story that American technology came over to Europe?

From what we learned about the Marshall Plan last week,

that seems possible.

Is there evidence that it actually happened?

And to take you through a nice contrast, I'm gonna

say can be made between Germany and Britain.

OK, let's start with number one, a boarding in the

1930s.

So we know on the left hand panel, right, left

hand from your perspective, all the bad things at the

end of our period, return to gold standard at the

wrong rates.

Eventually, tariffs follow.

The Treaty of Versailles was not conducive to a good

interar period.

And also, um, the fiscal side was different in that

most economies do not engage in countercyclical economic policies, OK?

You don't spend more in a recession, spend less when

times are good, OK, which might buffet out the shocks,

might also keep your population happier.

OK.

Not everyone thinks that's a good idea, right?

And Austrian accounts would, you know, turn over in their

grave thinking about this idea, but still others less so.

For the postwar period, things are quite different.

First of all, we have the Bretton Woods system for

the international monetary economy, OK?

So instead of a gold standard with a fixed exchange

rate and free capital flows, but countries don't really control

their own interest rates through monetary policy.

Under Bretton Woods, we have fixed exchange rates, but all

and monetary independence.

Remember that tri lending can only have 2 or 3

countries choose fixed exchange rates and and monetary independence, where

they give up is free capital.

So in the Bretton Woods period, central banks control and

constrained capital inflows, but instead of having capital that moves

freely around the world in response to investment opportunities, it

mostly comes in the form of FDR for direct investment.

OK, so that's what the world's giving up and maybe

that's better in 1950 than it than it would have

been in 1870.

OK, certainly it worked OK.

We talked about GATT and the Marshall Plan last time.

The point with these two is they encouraged economic.

Integration.

You want Marshall Plan assistance.

Europe, as Matt Schultz likes to say, they have to

behave with each other.

That's the condition.

They have to integrate, also integrate with the American economy,

allow exports from the US and trade in the other

direction as well.

Now, in the, in the pre-war period, pre-World War 2

period, we don't really have much in terms of countercyclical

policies post 1945 and post-1950, varying degrees of what we

might call Kes in demand management.

OK.

So using fiscal policy to keep the unemployment rate low.

That could be a good It could be a bad

thing, OK?

It might be good in that workers have had a

few decades of high unemployment and, uh, being having them

off your back is quite useful.

There's also evidence, at least in Britain, that spending was

very sensitive to potential unemployment increases because politicians were worried

about elections and the effect of unemployment on their ability

to get reelected, so maybe they overdid it a bit,

right, managing on the margins that weren't really necessary.

OK.

Let's talk a bit more about this.

But certainly it's a difference from the 1930s.

Now in terms of the role of the governments, OK,

one thing we can ask the question is what government

provision of services could increase the returns to private investment.

OK, so where, where government can have a spending can

have a positive role in development, we could think about

state investment education, for example, the extension of compulsory schooling.

OK, so that can be extensive building a set of

universities and paying professors really good salaries sounds good to

me, but that's a broad tax tax money, right?

Extending theulsory schooling, maybe that's not so expensive.

It could have a big effect in having a more

educated workforce, right?

Certainly in 1950 in parts of Europe where literacy rates

still are a bit patchy.

OK.

Something that the government can do and might not be

so expensive in in terms of policy in terms of

fostering competition and allowing the entry of new firms.

So there's lots of politics bound up in this, but

you don't need to spend a lot of money necessarily

to make your economy more competitive by, you know, uh,

allowing challengers to the incumbents to break down monopoly power,

that kind of thing, OK?

So that's where government might be useful, and the price

of this could vary.

On the other hand, taxation might reduce incentives to invest.

We could be worried about, OK?

And more pertinently, and this is something that develop people

at the time worry a lot about whether government crowd

out the private sector.

Is that the government engages in transfers, projects that the

private sector would do itself and you don't need the

government to raise taxation to do this.

That's probably not the best use of government resources, right?

This is what people, you know, policy advisor in 1960s

spend lots of time worrying about these issues.

So what can we say looking at the evidence?

Think about government spending as a shared GDP, OK?

It rises substantially.

Mostly after the 1960s into the 1980s, OK, so it's

obviously much higher than before the First World War, but

in the early part of our period when growth takes

off, it's probably not kicked off by the increasing government

spending.

I mean for Sweden and it's going, that's a bit

breaking the rules, but looking at France and Germany, this

period here isn't all about more government spending.

The post period where growth is actually a bit slower,

that's where the level of spending is much more.

OK, so it, while the government's probably important, it's probably

not just about how much they spend, right?

How does that break down?

We think about government purchases as a share of GDP,

they don't move that much, OK?

They're not flat, but they're flatish except for Sweden after

1937.

Where the big increases are are in terms of government

transfers.

OK, so taxing one group, spending it on another, OK.

You might think that's a good thing, you might think

that's a bad thing.

You might think it's good for equality for redistribution.

Those who have the least chances to get.

It's not obvious that's gonna be a pro-growth policy.

OK?

So, higher share of transfers, we don't want to slay

it, but it's unlikely to be linked to like a

growth strategy.

You see what I mean.

OK, so that's what government spending is doing.

In terms of the relationship between tax rates and growth,

these are older studies because people haven't looked at this

period so much since the 1990s, but when this period

was still sort of recent, uh, sort of macro apply

people, uh, ranks and regressions, and then we found that

a 10% tax rise in employees the economy would lead

to about 0.5%, uh, 1% decreasing.

OK, so at the macro level it's hard to see

taxes and growth going together.

That doesn't mean the government is useless and should stop

doing things, right?

Competition policy is cheap and some types of government spending

could be very pro-growth, but it's not just about bigger

government and more government involved.

You gotta think a bit more subtly about that, OK,

and what types of things the government could do that

are very effective.

Now, we can also think about train technology.

So with GATs, tariffs fall.

This raises worldwide trade within Europe and also outside of

Europe.

One thing we know is trade grows faster than GDP

in this period, unlike the interwar period, right?

And perhaps more important than trade, certainly in the first

decades of this period.

Is thinking about the transfer of technology.

So regional integration in Europe creates more multinational firms or

multinational corporations.

That's what MNC stands for here and also American firms

that set up in Europe transfer technology through their operations

so you get more.

Moving across European borders within the continent and also coming

in from council, OK?

And that's clearly could be part of our story in

terms of a catch-up story.

You've got a well a well educated continent.

The the spending on education is useful.

Good competition policy is useful for the markets and the

right technologies is flowing in.

That'll be one narrative we could tell, right?

OK.

So to go with this also in the golden age,

tariffs maybe unlike today, every day there's news about tariffs.

I don't know, um.

It's not 9 a.m. in the United States, so I

know in in the East Coast, so I haven't heard

the latest, but in this period tariffs are moving down

from 1950 to 1987.

I should say I should probably change this out a

few more intervening points because while Britain gets there with

its neighbours France and Germany, it actually keeps higher tariffs

into the 1970s, OK.

So I don't forget to say it that later.

But but over the period generally tariffs declined to a,

a low tariff region in Europe post golden age.

And technological transfer comes with these lower barriers to trade

and investments.

OK, so again, US firms can transfer tech to Europe,

right?

Partly the common market in Europe makes it also makes

it more suited to mass production.

So if we believe this story, those techniques that are

pioneered in America in terms of mass production now in

a bigger and.

Growing European markets, these things make sense.

There's gonna be economies of scale, right?

So a certain type of technology for that reason.

There's also gonna be markets for specialised goods, you know,

thinking about inputs used in the final output process, intermediate

goods, and so forth.

That's also gonna come with a bigger, richer markets.

OK.

For some evidence, this is for Britain, right, which is

not really the leader necessarily in picking up FDI, but

if we compare 1930 to 1948 versus 1949 to 1971,

there is a fivefold increase in annual new US owned

manufacturing operations.

OK, that's probably not the best picture of FDI, but

it's the one we've got to talk about today.

But it gives you a sense, right, uh, if we

think that's gonna bring higher productivity in an Abram Levitz

type story, this should help, right?

And probably that's, that's working to an even greater margin

in continental Europe, OK, without evidence, I'm going to say

that.

OK.

So that's thinking about, um, the government, which of course

matters for this trade story too, right?

The government has to allow and facilitate this, right?

Another side has to do with institutions and I guess

another way the government might avoid that matter, which is

this idea of a social contract which I talked about

briefly last week.

The idea goes something like this, right?

And this goes back to what I want you to

think about this idea of a, what's it called again,

a CME, a coordinated market economy back from work first

lives.

The idea is economies organised like that may have this

type of labour relations.

Where rather than having bargaining between firms and their workers

at a low level, you have high level of economy

wide deals between labour and capital.

In these deals, what happens?

Workers agree to wage motivation, OK?

I'll accept that my wages go by 3% this year

even though labour Party has gone up by 4%.

Why am I doing this?

Because it's going to allow employers, firms to take those

extra profits and put them into investments.

That investment's gonna be productivity growth in the future and

more moderated wage increases.

This is a sort of story of a virtuous circle,

OK?

So as long as growth is pretty good, workers will

accept some wage moderation if it means more security about.

OK.

For this to happen, you have like almost national unions

and national employer bodies and very often the government is

involved in facilitating these negotiations.

OK, so that's why it's more of a coordinated.

This story sounds really nice on paper.

It's Barry Eichengreen's story to explain partly explain the German

visha, right?

They got workers to agree to moderated wage growth growth

rather than try to extract every concession possible from employers.

OK.

A good question to ask is does that social contract

story about wage moderation, we actually took it to the

data what we find.

The evidence I've seen is encouraging.

So it's a really nice paper about Sweden and other

Scandinavian economies where there's absolutely no evidence of wage moderation

in this period.

It despite talk about in Scandinavia as well.

So maybe it worked in Germany or France.

I don't really know.

Other countries it's hard to see in the data, but

it's a great story, right?

But there are other things besides the potential social contract

that matter on the German side, and this came up

last week.

Some came to me after and asked about the war.

What about migration during the war?

Is that a factor?

Probably not during the war, but almost certainly afterwards.

So one thing Germany gets in terms of total factor

endowments is it gets a gift, rather a tricky gift

of labour coming from East Germany.

And the rest of Eastern, so my grandparents did this

move in the 1948, OK.

That basically lots of ethnic Germans were expelled from Eastern

Europe after World War Two.

They mostly ended up in West Germany.

My my grandparents went from east to the west, so

a different story, but so the process putting this all

together though, it led to a 17%.

Expellees, those who were expelled from Eastern Europe, accounted for

70% of the Western population by 1950.

They had pretty good human capital.

They mostly settled in the manufacturing areas in Germany, OK?

And this nice here by Sebastian Brown and Mahmoud.

Argues that this contributed a lot to German post-war growth.

So we talk about total factor productivity, but this is

a gift of human capital, right?

That surely shouldn't be discounted.

It might allow for more scale, things like this.

Yeah, other countries didn't get that.

Of course, the war came first, so let's remember what

the, the origins of this are.

OK, people talk about the social contract for for Germany.

Should we believe this or not, I'll let you decide.

Another piece of the story though also is that Germany

has effective vocational education.

So another part of the coordinated market economy story is

that.

Well, first of all, informal schooling has a better vocational

track, but once you're employed, that there's much more on

the job training as part of your career plan relative

to say, the UK, Canada, or the US.

These liberal mark these liberal market.

OK, and that might be particularly useful for Germany in

the post-World War II period to get manufacturing going again

and to get highly productive.

OK, that would encourage those technological transfers, right?

So the human capital we can account for in that

funny picture I had, but what if it encourages and

complements new technology as well that's gonna help account for

the blue bit that we couldn't explain, right?

So these indirect effects from human capital and from a

bigger labour force, let's not discount them.

Germany's got interment of Central Bank after the Second World

War and generally speaking, relatively market-friendly policies, OK?

Um, and to go skip to the last part because

I'm close on time, that European integration also is a

particularly big assistance for Germany in recovering and attaining those

high pros.

OK, that should be coordinated market economy, maybe, not social,

right, but there's a, there's a debate about how German

institutions change after the war that I'm gonna leave so

we get to the end of the election.

So that's for Germany, right?

So institutional changes, perhaps the right institutions at the right

time, lots of extra labour, big increase in capital, and

those things might complement new technology.

For Britain, the story is a bit different, right?

As you might expect from the early graphs in the

lecture, there's less scope for cattuar reconstruction.

So that's already going to slow things down, but that's

not gonna fully account for the low TFP group.

Here part of the story goes to whether Keynesian objectives

while they had some merit to them weren't the best

for generating rapid growth, right?

That's really about macro management rather than encouraging a supply

side that fostered innovation and productivity.

Here again, the idea is that maintaining outputs and particularly

employment goals was more important than productivity, competition, investment, education,

all those sorts of things.

OK.

Some more specific examples where Britain might not have done

so well, one would be particularly in education.

So again, I mentioned the German model of effective vocational

education circa 1970, 65% of German workers had high to

intermediate level educational qualifications.

Over here, the numbers about a third.

OK, so there are some highly trained, highly educated workers.

There are some workers with outstanding vocational skills, but there's

a bit of a hole relative to one of its

main comparison countries.

And again, that would be accounted for partly in the

growth framework, but if having that kind of workforce complements

technology, you might miss some of that here relative to.

OK.

Another part of the story goes with, well, maybe coordinated

market economies have their time.

The British economy wasn't set up like that, and perhaps

this really slowed technological transfer of productivity.

OK, so unlike the German case, Britain has relatively fragmented

unions.

OK, so no national level negotiations or national level wage

setting.

It's sometimes often multiple unions within the same firm.

You might have to negotiate.

What's this gonna mean?

It's gonna mean that setting up wage moderator to be

much more difficult.

Lots of unions are have to cord down and agree

to it.

With fragmented settings, you can't really get that moderation going

if you think that's the right thing.

OK, might be good for workers in the short run.

They get all the benefits of their productivity, right?

So you can see the trade-off here.

Individual unions would like to go for this.

You might need that coordination to push back and and

have some more long-term patient thinking.

In terms of um competition, that's also where Britain is

can if you look at Europe and Britain today you

uh today you might expect in the past you'd have

more competition and more dynamic.

Output market, but that's not really the case for much

of British economic history in the 20th century, OK?

There's quite a lot of market power to incumbent firms

in Britain.

The Restrictive Cracis Act, which was introduced in 1956, was

designed to like break up cartels and monopolies.

OK.

What do you see, you see quite a, quite a

quick quick spurt of productivity growth in response to this

act.

At least for a while it's an operation for the

late 1950s, very early 1960s.

So when Britain does introduce policy to increase competition, you

do see a productivity response.

What's that suggesting competition policy on the whole wasn't very

effective over this period.

OK, and that's gonna slow productivity growth.

It's gonna slow innovation.

The incumbent firms are gonna, you know, absorb their extra

profits through incumbency rather than through being more productive.

OK.

Almost there, so why the golden age and last slide.

OK.

Well, scope for most important thing, scope to catch up

to climb everywhere, OK?

And so part of the story is just that mechanical

fact.

Secondly, the 1970s bring new challenges.

Think about the oil price shocks.

Think about the combination of high inflation and low growth,

something you don't see so much in the early area.

That's gonna require new policy responses.

It's gonna.

To underpin undercut the effectiveness of what seemed to work

so well in the golden age.

And finally, people forget things, right?

The distributional conflicts and the breakdown of the 1930s by

the 1970s, that's ancient history, OK?

It doesn't seem so important to young workers there.

OK, sorry for running about time and for the slight

delay with the slides.

Next week, we're gonna, you are gonna talk about Soviet

Russia under communism with Judi Shapiro from Economics, a guest

lecture, she's a specialist on this.

Thank you for listening.

See you in a couple of weeks.

Thank you.

Lecture 14:

No Uh Yeah Yeah.

Oh I Oh Yeah.

Yeah Yeah I Yeah Sorry.

I can't do anything.

Um, OK, just a second.

Can I have Uh, while we wait for my Microsoft

Outlook to open, uh, I'm sorry, Angel.

I, I'm happy if you talk, but you talk or

I talk, you have your choice.

You still have your exam questions.

I'm sorry, I can't talk over this.

OK, OK, so wait, I've got it.

I was waiting for this to start.

Um I have to ask your indulgence about talking.

I can't talk over you.

The reason for that is that I now have hearing

aids.

I could take them out and just talk, I suppose.

Is the microphone?

Yes, it's microphone is on.

That's not the problem.

The problem is that everybody is talking.

OK, so actually I think the answer is I do

take out my hearing aids actually because I understand what

it's like going through a long lecture and talking to

the people next to you and excitement and all that

and boredom, but uh I hear you very loudly that's

my problem.

OK, so uh.

Today we're talking about what it says in your timetable

is Soviet Russia.

I'm not going to waste a lot of your time

on it, but I've been insisting before the Russian invasion

of Ukraine that Soviet and Russian are two related but

different phenomena, and I will briefly talk about that.

On the slides which are slightly new.

Uh, most of them, I guess 30 of them are

old.

I don't expect to stop on a number of them.

Their tables you can barely read them, but I figure

you want to have them, and it's a neat way

to have them.

The other thing is that there is a lot of

exciting material that I could add and personal stories and

so on and then you wouldn't get what you need

to answer exam questions and so what I am doing,

which you're invited either to come to or more likely

to click on, I will post it on the EH101

uh uh Moodle page.

Uh, is, uh, tonight where we normally have ouren club,

uh, they're not meeting this week.

Uh, that's at sort of 6 p.m. when there'll be

popcorn and chocolate and things and Coca-Cola and 6:30 in

room G03 in our economics building, so, uh, and I'll

post something on that too.

Some people may have seen it already, this announcement.

I, that will be recorded because you can also write

me to get, um, a, a Zoom link and Zoom

will record it.

More or less the main purpose of that talk isn't

for me to talk.

I want to present to you what I think of

as a whole bunch of movie trailers.

There are wonderful, wonderful things on YouTube if you want

to learn more.

about what was the Soviet Union, what's going on now,

but especially what there was to get some feeling and

you can do it enjoyably probably not during term.

You don't have a lot of spare time, but you

can try it on weekends and so on.

Uh, Moss Film, the main, uh, film, uh, company of

the former Soviet Union.

Uh, now has, uh, a whole bunch of Soviet era

films which I always liked but looking over at them,

what I'm interested in is to see that a number

of them won Oscars as best foreign film.

They're every bit as enjoyable as I thought they were,

and they show you the contradictory character of the Soviet

Union, but that's not.

What I'm gonna talk about today, it's such a huge

subject that I've collapsed it down into a much simpler

shorter questions.

You don't have to think that to study this topic

you have to do all of Soviet history now.

Peter Allen's article which is recommended to you by the

uh lecturers who run this, he's a leading historian, uh,

economic historian overall.

I know that they agree with me that it's not

that great an article, but it's very important that you

read it, uh, but it only deals with, uh, this

period in, uh, a little slice of it.

So I have other readings and somewhat to my annoy

annoyance but to your benefit, uh a very uh good

new reading was just recommended to me a blog that

came out on February 2nd, and I will suggest you

read it.

What's amazing is that this guy is not an expert.

He's just a good journalist.

And he discusses the the big question in a different

way, much more understandable, uh, about why Perestroika failed.

OK, uh, before I start on that though, I do

want to say I'm taking the grimmest part of Soviet

history, the, the end, the collapse.

And you might think from that, why did we ever

pay attention to this country apart from the fact that

it's so huge and it's not even huge in population,

it's very thinly populated.

It's just 1/6 of the world's surface.

It looks even bigger because of the way that Mercator

projections look.

It's giant.

But that's not why uh it was much more powerful

and there are periods in its history when it looked

like what Peter Allen emphasises in his story of the

great rise, uh, and.

I have an idea that would work very well for

people in economic history for some summer research in which

we really try to get together the materials I've mentioned

to give to your generation some sense of what it's

all about and what I mean by everybody can hear

I hope I'll yell outer.

But the the mic is on, uh, so you get

the idea that most of Soviet history had enormous drama.

But some was exciting drama and everybody looked to it

during the 30s when the Soviet Union seemed to be

forging ahead, the period Peter Allen admires because it seems

to him that it was worth several million dead to

have this economic growth um that during that period we

have the Great Depression as well in the West.

So the contrast is enormous.

So if you want to know why millions of people

in the West became communists, you have to look at

least at this broad sweep of history.

I'm just doing one that caught my eye on what

I think people don't maybe know.

I worry that a lot of what we write is

not accessible to your generation.

Uh, everybody said about deep sea that it was quote

a Sputnik moment.

And you probably thought, what is a Sputnik moment if

you know it, very good.

OK, some of you may have studied it, uh, on

October 4th, 1957, to everybody's great surprise, and I remember

this day very well this day, uh.

The Soviet Union suddenly was able to launch an artificial

satellite beyond the ability of the United States which tried

to emulate it and failed, a successful one.

I had a photographer there that confused it a little,

but that's the, the headlines, uh, which is the not

only did they set up an astronaut in 1961, but

shortly after that a female astronaut.

So again, if you want to know why my generation

had illusions that the Soviet Union was ahead in women's

rights, you have to think about Valentina Tereshkoma.

He's still alive and.

And I think unfortunately a Putin supporter, but uh she

uh they deliberately chose a female.

I have not time today to go off into that

subject, but I have a history of gender and the

Soviet Union if anyone is interested in that as a

research topic.

And so, uh, that was the Sputnik moment, this great

shock, and now we go to the less it's not

up there, is it?

OK.

What did I do wrong?

Sorry, I'm not terribly aware of the.

Does anybody know how to do this?

I don't get where it is.

Mistake number one, never go into an audience where you

haven't used the PowerPoint before and and do it.

It's different from it where it was.

OK.

Help.

Does anybody here know how to work this?

Uh, yeah.

Try it.

I only do what I do is just, uh, I,

I, I tap things until it works, but that's not

the best way to do it.

Yeah, yeah, and they're all different.

That's the problem.

I thought I didn't realise it was different from the

one.

I normally use.

Yeah.

Sorry about this.

OK.

Well, we're getting the audience.

This is great.

So these are the cameras, yeah, so, oh, there we

go, uh.

No.

The or they look more like they're on, but they're

not projecting.

Oh Those will be the circus.

Now we have the audience.

You can talk certainly.

It's not obvious.

It's not just my stupidity.

Uh, yeah.

OK, there we go, there we go.

Yeah, that's right, I think.

OK, well done.

OK.

As I said, a lesson on that if you have

a presentation to make, don't do it like I just

did it sneak in earlier in the day, you know,

before the classes start and work on it.

OK, so this is the focus.

And you can be sure there won't be sneak exam

questions on the October Revolution that this is the focus

of this chunk of Soviet history, that is what was,

I'm calling it Perestroika, but the Gorbachev era.

Why was it launched?

Why do anything?

Why not just carry on on the one hand and

then why especially why did it do so badly?

I think you'll be relieved to know there are not

right answers to this question.

There are arguments.

It's still debated, and I will post for those who

want to go more deeply than the exam would require,

uh, where the debate continues to go on.

Um, and in particular, was it inevitable?

Was Gorbachev is what, uh, recently put it, was he

helpless or reckless?

That is, was he overwhelmed by opposing forces, or did

he do things he shouldn't have done?

Tinkering with the economy without thinking of what we know

as unintended consequences.

And it happened very spectacularly.

I've mentioned the Soviet, uh.

So OK, this is to give you a picture of

Russia versus the Soviet Union.

The red is Russia.

Don't be fooled a little bit by it.

Uh, 80% of Russia lives west of the Ural Mountains,

which are considered the divide between Europe and Asia.

They're considered it so much.

But if you get health insurance for Europe, that's how

far it goes to the Ural Mountains, which by the

way, are not very tall mountains.

They're old ones, so there isn't much of a divide

and Russia spans that.

One of the reasons it does that is that the

natural wealth of Russia is out there.

Again, without any time to dwell on it, it's important

to understand that Russia is incredibly endowed with.

Gas oil before that coal, platinum, diamonds, we can go

on like that.

Those of us who think that there is something to

the view that there is a natural resource curse that

something goes wrong when you can just pick it up

like that.

Russia has it all.

And it's the Russian part especially, but the other republics,

some of them or most of them were part of

the Russian Empire, so the long history goes back at

least to the 16th century and maybe earlier.

Uh, with the other republics.

OK, so this for you, I don't have to walk

it all through.

You can read it later.

This is the story about what happened.

It's almost exactly 40 years, 4 weeks from today.

March 11th, 1985.

That Uh, it was determined that Chenko, who was the

elderly ageing, incompetent prime minister, uh, that is general secretary,

he had been, they had a little try at reform.

It didn't work.

They went back to him as safe, not to upset

anybody, and you could see him.

I was there at the time living in Soviet Ukraine

and you saw him on television every night sort of

propped up.

Another ageing bureaucrat who couldn't even, uh, talk, but when

he read the notes, he didn't read them correctly.

And everybody was pretty tired of this.

uh, I don't really know if he actually uh died

naturally or they just decided he died, uh, but I

will recommend to you as very interesting watching, uh, the

BBC had a wonderful series called The Second Russian Revolution.

And it's all on YouTube in 8 minute bits, and

there's even archives in the LSC library when they did

that because they questioned people on camera but often it

also.

And it starts with that very beginning deciding that Chenko

had died and very quickly having the meeting of the

Politburo, the highest standing body, um, which isn't, um, it

isn't in.

In residences all the time, right, uh, but it runs

things people might be familiar with this if they know

the Chinese Communist Party.

That's the structure that was a classic Leninist structure.

So the Politburo at the top and there are permanent

people on it and the story is told very well,

uh, just as I remembered it, uh, I will take

a minute just for this.

I was sitting there writing a lecture.

On that day it had been International Women's Day weekend,

but the weather, which was you expected to be springlike

wasn't.

It's a big holiday in Russia, uh, or in the

Soviet Union.

I was not in Russia but in Ukraine, and I'm

sitting there having to write this lecture and it's going

so slowly and I'm due to give it Wednesday at

10 and I calculate that at least one of the

nights, uh, Monday or Tuesday, I'm not getting any sleep.

And at 2 p.m. the secretaries came rushing into the

room because they heard there would be an announcement.

This is how a lot of rituals were performed, uh,

they knew and I hadn't heard it that they were

only playing Swan Lake, the ballet music by Tchaikovsky.

uh, that's a signal that someone's died.

It's sort of like telling you to sit down for

a minute.

I've got some bad news, right?

Uh, so Swan Lake, and so they rushed in and

they turned on the radio.

It was an old radio.

It started very slowly and all you heard was the

bright memory of Konstantinoinovich Shenenko will live forever in the

hearts of progressive mankind, which they knew was nonsense.

You hardly have heard of him, but that's the first,

uh, box, March 11th, 1985, uh, and in the hurry

that you can see, they did it quite deliberately because

opponents that is conservatives who didn't want change were away

and couldn't get back in time.

In particular they timed it exquisitely for the head of

the Ukrainian Communist Party.

He was on a visit to the United States and

his plane had taken off from Texas towards California going

in the wrong direction when they summoned the meeting and

you can see this there so it was seen that

he was voted in as a reformer, a modernizer and.

People tell the story of Russia as long having been

that way, that is uh that is and the Soviet

Union, both that some people look to the West and

want to hurry up modernization and others don't.

And Russia is trying to modernise by borrowing from the

West, whether that's true or not, historians can look more

carefully, but the general wisdom that you read is that

these are the long trends in the Russian Empire and

then Soviet history that Peter the Great, as we call

him Peter the first, uh, came to visit London to

learn how to make ships, things like that.

Uh, that was the general view about trying to modernise,

uh, so we have a modernizer.

He was immediately, uh, seen as different, not just by

Margaret Thatcher, uh, but also, uh, in fact, uh, the

immediate look is he's not wearing an old fashioned hat.

He's looking modern.

Uh, and, uh, it goes on like that, um.

But This is the end.

Uh, that's how it ends.

I'm not going through every stage here, but, uh, instead

I will suggest to you, and you'll see one slide

on that where it's written so you don't have to

hear me and take notes on what happened, uh, a

very important thing that I.

Did not emphasise here, uh, but, uh, we have a,

um, a professor in international history, Vlad Zubach, who lectures

on these things.

He's not a fan of Gorbachev.

Uh, he thinks of it as reckless, uh, but, uh,

he and everyone else who had a conference once on

that, they're all miserable.

Why did he have to start with the anti-alcohol campaign?

That's a very important thing to know is that in

the first couple of months, immediately, uh, there was a

great launch.

Uh, not just temperance, but making alcohol less accessible, not

24 hours, higher prices, longer queues, and that continued for

a long time.

And uh that's a separate issue unless somebody wants to

research it.

There's a wonderful book called Russia Goes Dry on this,

but basically, uh, the reason that he did it is

often not in the history books.

Uh, he had promised his daughter, who was a medical

researcher who did her dissertation on the damage alcohol was

doing to the health of Russians, and he promised her

this there already were laws ready.

And they went with it.

And then like a lot of things, especially in the

Soviet Union, when something is worth doing, it's worth doing

to excess.

And so it ended up with chopping down ancient vineyards

and so on, but I will tell you, having been

there in the beginning, that at first the population sort

of welcomed it.

They knew they drank too much.

They didn't mind the fact that there wasn't gonna be

24 hour liquor shops open, uh, but nothing till 12

o'clock.

It was all sort of a, a game.

But guess what that did.

Taxes had alcohol prices and taxes had been an enormous

source of revenue and suddenly there was enormous fiscal imbalance.

Uh, I have an article which argues that one of

the things that's missed out in looking at Perestroika is

the macroeconomic aspect, monetary and fiscal loss of control.

Uh, instead, people look at the small things and meanwhile,

money is being printed, uh, the money is not coming

in that was coming in, more is going out.

And in the Soviet way.

Uh, there are shortages.

Prices do not respond on the market.

Maybe they do underground, but on the market prices don't

respond to the difference between demand and supply.

That's a very important feature of the Soviet economy.

So what happens if there's a surge of demand because

more money is being printed but no supply, queues form.

And I tell it this way, but I can't think

of a better way.

Imagine there there was a McDonald's which opened famously.

There had been no Western things like that.

Imagine a McDonald's at the old witch and initially the

queue goes to about Holburn and after a while it

gets as far as Russell Square and eventually there's a

queue going to Houston Station.

It really was like that.

People had nothing else to spend their money on, and

these giant cus were the symbol of the unwinding perestroika

that uh Gorbachev started.

OK, I have those key dates, but you'll notice that

1989 is where it begins to go sour.

It's a very important dividing line between I call it

early and late perestroika, and I think again, uh, an

idea I had that I did not have when I

gave this lecture last time is that one of the

key things that's happening in 1989 is that as.

The Soviet Union is letting the Eastern European countries have

their own way.

And they're learning about that things unravel more quickly.

Some people have argued they didn't do it just because

in fact they were being nice and democratic.

They no longer had the forces to impose order on

Czechoslovakia or Hungary as they had done.

But what we see in 1989, if you a fascinating

year to study.

Uh, is that the rhythm of the, uh, anti-communist changes

or uh and market changes and democratic changes multi-party throughout

Eastern Europe is on the march and finally, you know,

the big end I think, but I'll emphasise it, it's

what we call the fall of the Berlin Wall.

A leading historian on this, Timothy Snyder points out the

wall didn't fall, right?

It got opened again.

There's a wonderful short YouTube presentation with live footage and

interviews from the people about what actually happened that night.

And uh I have written up a bit of it

because uh I saw the chain I decided the Soviet

Union was over two days before that I was standing

in the central square uh in uh what I then

called Herkov, November 7th always happens during reading week, uh,

and I was standing there and it was filled suddenly

spontaneously it seemed with yellow and blue Ukrainian flags.

And people were so new at it that not everybody

knew whether the yellow or blue was up.

The uh way to remember it is that it's the

blue sky above the yellow wheat field, sort of like

Kansas, but that was in the The context of both

the feeling that our nation wants to be independent and

also just being fed up with shortages of the most

basic things which were getting worse and worse, no one

quite understood, but the minute you think of the macroeconomic

imbalance we would have had hyperinflation they had hyper shortage

the most basic things became less and less available.

And uh the scale of that is hard to imagine.

The only example I know we've had it all if

people might remember the uh great toilet paper shortage.

Most of you are too young to have been the

ones to go buy it, but when lockdown started for

COVID, uh, everybody started buying up toilet paper when people

start buying it up, more people buy it up, right?

shortages feed on themselves.

And that's what happened.

OK.

This is a scene that I can show you on

YouTube.

There are several variants of it that people have posted

showing various people who are clearly not Russian crying at

this point.

This is the Soviet flag being lowered for the last

time over the Kremlin on December 25, 1991.

By that time.

and in the autumn of '91, 1 by one, all

the republics pull out.

This doesn't go through the very interesting time of uh

the August coup and the coup that failed because the

events there are political more than economic, but they are

also uh really riveting watching.

No I'm not sorry, I've got to go.

These are black socks, that's, that's good because.

OK, so in other words, why are we doing this

focus?

It's because that flag coming down remains one of the

most dramatic points in history.

So did the opening of the Berlin Wall.

I happened to miss it.

I was on a train that night in the Soviet

Union, but if you read about it, it was remarkable

just listen to the television saying.

The Berlin Wall has been opened.

That means that people from East Germany, the GDR, can

go over to West Berlin for the night and come

back.

Which they couldn't do And That event itself as the

television says is the most important announcement in Europe since

the end of World War II, so get some sense

of the drama that it then.

Presented because all of us are familiar with the war

going on, but not with this great uh sudden drama.

And this is the thing.

Nothing about communism ever established the world so much as

the manner of its exit from history.

And a very interesting bit of research that some students

and I did last summer, two summers ago, was on

the reaction around the world and in particular the lessons

that were drawn in China.

Which were not necessarily the economic lessons, uh, from the

sudden collapse, but as I said, a lot is missing

there, so, uh, just, uh, let's look at some of

the.

OK.

Now, I use this to try to remember.

Who did what to whom, but you can find uh

short sketches of the overview if you haven't studied them

in school.

Probably a lot of you did history and did study

broad strokes in it.

I hope anyway, uh, but if not, um, there used

to be a very good website.

It's still a great website for historians.

It's called 17 Moments in Soviet history.

It has all kinds of great archival material just like

Wikipedia, it's fabulous now.

It's pretty accurate Wikipedia compared to how it was, but

it's too long.

It no longer is there a short summary, so my

memory on this, I joke is that I don't take

this seriously.

People say it's the year of the snake that's important.

In Russian instruments.

So what is going to happen.

So it's, you know, watch this space.

We could freak out Putin by pointing this out.

It's not quite accurate, but there's some truth to it.

You might be surprised that Russians are saying this, although

they don't follow the Chinese calendar in that way, the

average Russian or Ukrainian that I knew was very aware.

Of what year was coming.

Um, I remember Everybody thought the year of the dragon

was going to be good, 1988 and instead things went

downhill.

So those are the things you have the February and

October revolutions.

It's easy to see how far behind Russia was.

I'm talking about modernization as a theme.

Uh, it's very easy to see that because the February

revolution.

in March and the October revolution.

happened on the 7th of November by our calendar.

Because Russia was still and the Soviet Union, uh, changed

that was on the old calendar and in February of

1918, people went to sleep on February 2nd and they

woke up, uh, 12 days later.

1929.

So we have Lenin, who dies early, we have Stalin.

And it's still pretty quiet installing until 1929 when there's

a sudden surge towards both collectivising the farms and going

way out.

To industrialise.

And again there with these 5 year plans, you'll find

enormous shortages and repressed hyperinflation.

There's no easy way to measure hyperinflation in that way,

but we could say what good inflation we like.

If we allow prices to rise, and instead, you have

enormous shortages.

1941.

To somewhat to Stalin's surprise on June 22nd, 1941, uh,

the Germans with whom they had a pact, crossed the

borders and began to go to Moscow.

They thought they would get to Moscow as easily as

Putin thought he would get to Kiev.

Uh, what got in their way, uh.

Uh, was different than the Ukrainian invasion.

Uh, there's a famous saying Stalin had that the most

important of my generals is guarding me, General Winter.

And in fact, um, The German army expected to have

reached Moscow uh by wintertime.

Winter came very early that year.

We have data going back centuries on the day that

the Moscow River fro froze over, and we know that

there was no earlier year than 1941.

And therefore, the German army was stopped, as people say

at the gates of Moscow.

It surrounded it in different directions.

Uh, it's estimated 24 to 26 million people died in

the Soviet Union against the German.

I've always thought of that as a waste of you

want really, but I have recently read that uh Hitler's,

uh, top researchers had calculated it was going to cost

40 million.

Uh, Russian laws, uh, to, uh, march everybody away from

the land they wanted.

That was the purpose of the invasion was to get

this elbow room that is room for agriculture to use

the resources to take it over.

Uh, a little like what Trump imagines in the Gaza

Strip.

Uh, and Stalin dies is a very good and winning

film on the death of Stalin, and then we have

a period that I think we've now forgotten.

I call it the Red plenty Years because it's a

wonderful novel worth reading in your spare time on those

years.

That is after the death of Stalin.

And before Khrushchev was voted out.

There is rapid growth.

The um data.

How tall children grow, things that you are, uh, economic

historians like, they confirmed that this was the bold in

the era and probably Peter Allen, who's a little older

than me, that's what he remembers and gets sentimental about.

uh, but it's very important to know there was this

period and then why, why did it stop?

My view isn't necessarily the correct one, but in a

nutshell, the Soviet Union did not, was not an efficient,

but what it did do was throw everything at it

campaigns, more labour, more of this, more of that, and

it just ran out of more.

There were no more.

Uh, workers to be transferred from farms without hurting agricultural

production.

Um, one of the reason that Tereshkova was chosen to

be a female in space, I understand to be to

encourage the last remaining reserve housewives, stay at home moms

to go out there.

And so once that was used up.

They were the system was incredibly inefficient.

And one of the arguments you can read about what

Gorbachev was up against is the argument that There were

lots of managers who had an interest in being inefficient.

Uh, I think that's a little odd, but nonetheless, it's

worth reading the idea that people certainly did not have

an interest that was similar to profit maximizer.

And then we have what came to be called the

years of stagnation behind all this.

The world price of oil changes.

So another thing that's very important in the launch of

Perestroika is getting hit in 1984 by a decline in

the world price of oil.

There is some argument made historically not settled that the

United States goaded the Saudis into producing more oil, uh,

in order to do that.

That's not proven, but it's an example of what happened.

And the world price of oil is very important.

So instead of having good luck.

With low oil prices, the Soviet Union was having a

big problem, and the chaos continues and the Eastern European

countries to the West want to be more independent, and

they are.

So, uh.

In 1989, it's really when it ends, but there's a

year and a half more going through this complete chaos.

Almost nothing on sale.

Everything under the counter.

Nothing when you say there's nothing in the shops, you

really mean nothing.

Um, and private channels are the way that people do

it.

So in the last period, I, I've added some figures

here which I don't have to walk through on this

question of whether it was a success or a failure.

You can see where that's the US, where it looks

OK and then it just doesn't get anywhere and the

United States and the rest of the world, by the

way, do much better.

I What you've got Is Russia and the USSR keeping

up for a while?

And then That's running away.

Here's another way of looking at it.

If you can look at this more slowly.

This is what's happening.

Chief.

That's why I carry stria.

Right?

It's getting slower and slower.

Uh, I have another way of looking at it because

I study mortality and life expectancy.

And it stops improving.

One reason for that is that it's very easy to

do things like getting a sewage system, getting basic cleanliness.

Those are easy health things.

Then when you start getting to more delicate things and

to what's called the cardiovascular revolution.

The Soviet Union doesn't join anymore.

So life expectancy falls behind.

And again, I don't have to walk through.

I think you'll find the char's useful just as facts,

OK, uh, to browse through yourself.

And this is the, the end again uh I've mentioned

uh '89 as a turning point after the Czech Czechoslovakia,

Hungary, everybody else is splitting off the next group are

the Baltic republics who were added to the Soviet Union

after 1930.

That's Gorbachev trying to explain things in Lithuania and you

can see again the sort of characteristic hat and modern

things.

Right?

Younger, smoother, and probably formidable.

And that's the, that says very story, but that's the

idea that somehow.

Where's the world price of oil.

One more shot.

Just not related the kind of thing that happens in

history.

That can't necessarily be predicted.

In 1986, uh, trying a cute little.

nuclear power station outside Kiev.

They set off a nuclear reaction which is still lays

waste and they didn't were not honest about it.

The way the world found out.

About Chernobyl was that the wind was blowing to the

west.

We got more of the radiation than most.

Uh, but it also blew to the north to Sweden.

And Swedish atomic energy workers had little badges that set

off something when they had too much radiation.

And suddenly they were saying it off and nobody knew

why, and the answer was this meltdown and then there

was certainly no.

And afterwards but coming to me.

OK, so we've got Perry, but the Sinatra doctrine is

the fall of the wall.

It's all, uh, very logical, but this is what I

began to look at.

satisfaction.

OK, I've got a timeline for you so you don't

have to look it all up, but I do recommend

that you can read it all.

You can read more somewhere I other things.

And the other thing is you get some sense.

Of From the things that I suggest here of the

ways in which whenever you have a difference between market

price.

That is supply and demand.

What they will tell you and the official price, somebody

gets in to make a.

Right, we have people selling tickets like that.

And it was built into the system and was not

telling the truth because everybody had to report their plans.

And it was, uh.

A fundamental.

Nobody even expected to do it.

OK.

These are things I suggest you can read.

Uh, again, if you want to go into it more,

you.

This level of agreeing to answer the question.

I will, uh, you need, uh, basically one more.

OK, and this is the idea of this, this itself

was the official.

Russian line that I quote here, uh, I don't know

what they're saying now, but Russia beyond the headlines was

and is an official government Russian government thing.

OK, that it was a hoax and the final thing

on that which I can end with I think is

that um the uh symbol of all that which your

parents or grandparents will remember if they knew about the

Soviet Union was that as a symbol of Western individualism

and lifestyle everybody wanted blue jeans.

But for reasons that I have not myself ever found

out.

The Soviet factories could not produce blue jeans that were

even as good as the very cheap ones you might

get at allies or whatever.

Asda.

They just didn't make it, so everybody bought blue jeans

underground.

Giant, uh, uh, conglomerates were formed of people who imported

them.

And there's a quote that I will finish with that.

I have never found the source.

I believed I read it in The Economist, but it

isn't there.

It said right after the end, it said thus perished

the Soviet Union.

It promised the earth.

It could not deliver a pair of blue jeans.

If anybody can find the quote I'd be grateful because

otherwise I have to claim it myself and I didn't

make it up, but that idea that it promised everything

going to uh space technology, but it was unable to

be efficient as opposed to why, OK, um.

I think I haven't left enough time for questions, but

if you have them, I'm happy to answer them.

We can have a Q&A.

You're very welcome again to GO3 this evening or to

uh get the Zoom and listen to where you can

find out in a literally entertaining way more about this

incredible country and this attempt to break away from the

capitalist.

A world which didn't make it.

OK, thanks very much.

It I'll have a meeting.

I mean, I will do this tonight.

I'll explain it tonight and you can write for the

recording.

Is there a I have yeah.

Um Silly boy.

So Nobody shows up Show distinguish Look at But to

Not

Lecture 15:

So honestly, we should just think.

I might just have a question.

I Yeah The conclusion was that the education.

Yeah generally.

I guess that would, would that necessarily undermine Neil's idea.

Hello So This is gonna be the coolest thing.

you guys gambling.

Yeah that.

I mean, it's just engaging in.

that.

Uh Thank I OK.

Yeah Oh OK I.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Welcome back to PH 101, where today we're gonna look

at Latin America part two.

Before we get into the content again, as I mentioned,

I think maybe week one of term week two, we

have a public lecture host of our departments this week,

Thursday at So Cormac O'Grada, the legendary.

Karrada, which you'll hear more about our department if you

if you're a student in our department or take more

of our courses.

He's a professor at UCD over in Dublin University College

Dublin.

He's gonna talk about his new book The Hidden Victims

Civilian Casualties of the Two World Wars.

So 6:30 on Tuesday, I think it might be harder.

Um, he is a Really good speaker.

How many people can talk to?

I Cormack from the few people I think can do

that.

So it would be a great talk, really good talk,

and Right, because he's gonna talk about some of the

context of the costs of war and ways in which

we may underestimate and also get maybe the distribution of

those costs across countries wrong.

So it'll be good.

I recommend it.

OK, today though, Latin America, and we're gonna talk about

the import substitution.

I hate saying this, ISI import substitution industrialization that are

being that are being experienced.

OK, so for today, here's the, here's the plan.

Why are we interested in this topic?

Why is it worth having a second week on Latin

America?

What does it tell us in our tour of the

world of growth models successful and less successful?

And to understand this, we're gonna think about two sort

of time periods.

One is to set up the the later 20th century

looking at Latin America's future war debts and economic crisis.

mesh in nicely with our talk of the tour.

The Latin American model of import substitution, industrialization.

That's fine.

So why do we care?

good place to start?

One thing we might want to think about is whether

I don't know if I believe this, OK, but I'll

let you think about it.

These ideas of reversal and fortune we're very rich prosperous

societies move down the ladder of or at least the

world ranking of economies, OK, so by some measures as

we saw, uh, last term, Latin America has a very

high, uh, economic outcomes in the 19th century, maybe into

excuse me.

Maybe into the very early 20th century.

Later on, that's less the case, certainly in the 21st

century, and maybe we can sort of understand some of

this process by looking at the 20th century developments we're

gonna study today.

It's also an important topic because we're gonna think quite

a bit in the next few weeks about the role

of the state in economic development, OK, what, what policies,

what government perspectives work well, which ones don't work, or

is the government work irrelevant.

You'll find people with the different position.

But one thing we might think about today is that

story we told, I think it was me who told

you about the idea of substituting for missing prerequisites, the

idea for Gerschenkron.

Well, didn't Latin America did they try to do this

and it was unsuccessful as opposed to other development models

of the 19th century we saw earlier in the course

or the ones we'll see in Asia and and a

bit elsewhere in the world following up from this week,

OK.

So that's I think good reasons we care now.

What were the sort of economic trajectories of Latin America

circa 1930?

This should sound familiar from last term, OK?

We are largely land abundance and capital scarce economies in

1900, as we talked about earlier in the course, scar.

Argentina is not like, you know, further north and.

We know some Latin American economies have high wages due

to labour scarcity, think of the Southern home, Chile, Argentina,

and these economies also to go with large scale migration

have large capital influences, OK, as we saw earlier in

the course this leads to a challenge of demographic burdens.

You have a very young immigrant intensive population.

It has high dependency ratios.

And there's not a lot of domestic savings either, OK?

So if you want to get investment and capital flows

and infrastructure to go with migration, you need to bring

in laws.

Works for a while prevent depression all that crisis period

we talked about a few weeks ago, the late 1920s

or early 1930s, and that's really gonna throw a big

challenge to the Latin American development model in the most

successful parts of the region but also in the less

successful parts of the region.

OK, where did they end up?

I know I had some stuff earlier in the course,

but I, I like this map too as a separate

thing.

This is looking today or 2022, so I haven't updated

this slide today, but a bunch of the other ones

I have.

Um, which is asking the looking at uh gross national

income per capita around the world.

Purple is low, green is high, dark purple is the

lowest, dark green the highest, you get the picture.

OK.

Latin America is a mix of mostly light purple, uh,

light green with a bit of purple and just a

couple dark green.

OK, so as we saw, you know, last term that

this was a big destination for migrants, right?

People left Europe to go to Latin America in large

numbers, but today those economic ranks are flipped around, right

from the from this picture you wouldn't expect many Europeans

to think my fortunes are gonna be found in Argentina

or Brazil.

OK, so we think about reversal that gives us some

idea, right?

It's fallen behind North America and Europe has gone from

being poorer, at least in some parts, to being richer

almost everywhere in Western Europe.

I think also I like these numbers.

I should probably make a figure with this instead, but

remember again last term we talked about Latin America being

incredibly migrants intensive in the late 19th century, those immigration

rates per decade above those of the US or Canada.

OK.

If we take migrant stock as a share of population

in the late 20th century and the early 21st century,

Latin America and the Caribbean is right at the bottom.

So it's gone from being a part of the world

that is incredibly.

To one where it has very little.

OK, so that's none of the big sort of changes,

right?

So it that has a bit more of an inward

looking feel already, which is gonna be one of the

themes that comes out of this, this, uh.

This lecture today, OK, so it's fall in the income

ranks and gone from being immigrants receiving to receiving relatively

few migrants.

Let's put it that way.

OK, so let's, that's serves some of the background facts

should sound a bit familiar.

What about the historical episodes we want to consider today?

So the first one is the interwar crisis.

OK, and again, the starting point, Latin America's capital sparse,

capital scarce, which should mean good investment opportunities.

So it is a lot of capital around.

It should mean I and.

You have We are bringing in foreign capital.

What we know already in Latin America is has relatively

low domestic savings.

OK, so demand for capital high, domestic supply to domestic

capital.

In the UK and elsewhere in Europe to some extent

in the United States towards the end of this period,

high savings rate, so there is money around to invest

and investment in infrastructure, the kind of things you're doing

in Latin America, building railroads, developing ports, that kind of

stuff looks safe, it's familiar.

And the returns on investment in Latin America are higher

than I hope.

So should I buy some bonds in a British railway?

Should I buy some bonds in an Argentine railway?

Well, the.

Returns, I kind of get the idea about railroad investments,

so I might choose to sink my money in that

rather than domestic.

So it looks like there's good opportunities for boarders.

Right, the lenders need capital.

There's a good supply in Britain, Europe, OK.

The borrowers, uh, sorry, the, the borrowers need capital, pardon

me, good supply in Britain and Europe.

The lenders are looking for good places to park their

money for the future, and these railroad bonds, well it's

just like what we've done in Europe for the last

few decades, right?

So it's very familiar looking.

What happens then international debt foreign investment is what funds

capital accumulation in Latin America.

OK, important to think about the nature of this foreign

investment.

It's mostly small individual dispersed bondholders.

It's not like big banks bonds big states mostly because

it's.

It's mostly not big banks on big stakes in companies

or backing governments.

A lot of this investment is small scale bondholders, your

mom, your dad decided to put some of their savings

in this vehicle.

That's important for the story that's going to emerge.

So Latin American countries and corporations, they borrow quite heavily.

OK.

Capital is mostly raised through bond issues which as I

said a moment ago, mostly I think.

Mhm.

So again, not the banks, not institutions, not government.

And the ideas.

to invest in capital and this enhanced infrastructure, these new

railways will open up our potential to raise export earnings,

and those export earnings, right, coming mostly through primary products

are gonna be the mechanism to finance repayments.

So we'll invest today, boost our exports that foreign exchange

that can then be used to repay these debts.

Whether it's governments that are directly involved.

South Just Repayment of capital through their exports.

OK, so that's kind of the economic model here.

Nothing very surprising, right?

You'll find this kind of model elsewhere in the world

or today, OK?

But perhaps there were some issues, right?

So one person who was really a bit sceptical about

whether this was all such a good idea was Keynes,

right?

So there he is, uh, discourse from his chair, the

professor's chair.

Uh, who said to lend vast sums abroad for long

periods of time without any possibility of legal redress if

things go wrong is a crazy cost construction, especially in

return for a trifling extra interest.

So he's pointing out the downsides.

If you're a lender, a lender, yes, you know, you

might get a better return.

But what about the risk?

K Kansas saying these are higher return but also much

higher risk, OK?

Just the railroad, just like you have in Britain.

be sure of the same.

If he was people live for higher returns but underestimating

the risk of A bit more interest, but if things

go wrong, you're gonna lose your shirt.

As the saying goes, OK, so that's the risk so

Keynes, I think describes nicely the risk to those who

are lending out the money by buying bonds because that's

what you're doing right with this investment from borrowers, the

risks are a little bit different, right?

You're gonna need foreign currency to pay at least the

interest on your foreign denominated debts and ultimately to repay

the principal of those loans as well, OK?

And as I said, it's going to be export earnings

are the main source of.

But what's gonna happen if something messes up your potential

to receive export earnings where there's a global economic crisis.

That means no.

You're gonna a pretty hard time, uh, not defaulting on

these debts, losing all your reputation, your firm going bust,

your country being shut out.

So they're bearing a big downside risk in the demand

for their output and their ability to get to market

perhaps as well.

OK?

For lenders, it's a bit like Keynes described that foreign

countries and firms could default on the interest in capital

and as Keynes identified, there are few protections for creditors

as overseas investors, so you'd be the last person to

get your money back.

I put it that way, OK?

You could.

Imagine institutions to solve the risks to lenders problem.

They weren't there yet in this market, OK, so it's

much more like a, you know, unrestrained capitalistic dream world

markets where that's good or bad, you know, sometimes good,

maybe not good in this case as it turned out.

OK, just to reinforce the point, right?

These, um, uh, export-oriented economies, what were they trading, where

were they trading with?

Argentine exports, a lot of grain.

You know, wheat, maize, linseed oil, a bit of meat,

that's 3/4 of exports.

It's going to Britain, US, France, Germany, counts for more

than half of it.

So if those countries either have demand problems, they become

more protectionist, anything like that, you might be a little

bit screwed in terms of getting export earnings to repay

your debt.

If we look at Chile, it's even more exposed, right?

And Chile is like a good example.

For the primary plants.

Its exports are really heavily in two things.

S For those, OK, so again, if trade to the

US dies, stagnates for any reason, Chilean firms and Chilean

government are going to have big financial problems to solve.

So what happened in the 1930s in a nutshell, what

Keynes worried about and what maybe the borrower should also

have been worried about all happened.

First, primary products fell, right?

Why is that the case?

I think a few weeks ago there's a glut on

the world market.

joining that.

Then That's a big demand shock.

What happens to the demand shock?

Demand for primary products falls further.

So it's a huge supply, a suppression of demand.

If you're exporting primary products, this is really gonna hurt.

To add to the indignity, countries also become much more

protectionist just at the same.

So I think we talked about smooth.

For the lecture When the US imposes large tariffs on

its but also elsewhere, lost the protection focused on primary

products.

So in addition to low prices, a world glut, now

you can't get your your products into the US.

So if you're Chile in this situation with these large

debts, right, to fund capital investment, that sort of thing,

you'll be sweating.

Right, and of course they're sweating for a reason.

What eventually happens is many of these Latin American economies

experience large scale debt defaults.

OK.

I've got some old graphs.

I've left these in me a lot.

I'll explain why these old pictures not updated in a

minute, but uh, a former colleague helped B these, so,

but.

What's, what are the trends then in terms of trade

of Latin America so that this first graph is giving

you the picture of export volume, so that's the quantities

going out from Latin America is a more thick, uh,

magenta-ish line, whatever colour you want to call that, and

Chile is a lower one.

So in terms of volumes, there's a slump across the

region, OK, in the 1930s, Chile, right, being so heavily

concentrated in a couple of commodities, sees an almost 75%

fall in exports between 1929 and 1932.

So those export earnings are the thing you're using to

repay your debt.

Ouch, right?

Ouch.

It's even worse, sorry, Chile and the rest of the

region if you look in terms of value.

So what do we think about the value that is

the price of, you know, taking the price changes and

the quantity changes together and here we really see all

the regions heavily affected by a big decline.

Exports, you know, in terms of foreign currency, certainly, and

with Chile, there's a real collapse in terms of how,

what the proceeds from exporting should be relative to.

Export proceeds fall by 9% and that's the main mechanism

to repay these debts on investments.

Uh, I thought it's gonna work much longer, right?

You can see the, you can see the, you can

see the big problem.

Why are these export values so why is this why

is the decline so striking?

It's partly the demand side factors I mentioned which affect

price and quantity, but it's also that the currencies in

these economies experienced a sharp decline between For Why does

this matter?

Remember when I said a few slides over here, right?

These deaths are denominated in foreign terms.

So the next case falls on the dollar, then that's

not even bigger.

Why those value, uh, relative value of export just in

such a big hit beyond what just happens to quantity.

OK?

So if you're an export intensive crime producing nation, you're

on the wrong side of these trends, big trouble.

OK.

Uh, my colleague, he used to teach this course so

he loves these stretched flags.

I don't know if I love them as much, but

I kept them as a tribute to Tim because, you

know, he was a really helpful colleague and we wrote

some papers together.

It was great.

OK, so these are stretchy flags.

I'll keep these stretchy flags so I stopped teaching the

course.

I think I've taken the other stretchy flags out, I

think, in the we're just trying to estimate debt delinquency.

So what share of US debts by 1935 had different

economies defaulted on Chile, Mexico, Brazil, it's all almost all

gone.

OK.

Interestingly, China's also a big defaulter, don't have a story

for you to tell about that.

To make clear that default isn't just.

OK.

And, right but European debts about how Interestingly, urgent.

Diversified structure a bit richer than some of these other

Latin American economies doesn't default on as much.

A lot also experiences big negative negative shocks of the.

OK, but some of these Latin American economies, all the

debts defaulted on, right?

And this is not uniquely a Latin American experience, OK,

that's what this picture tells you, but it's perhaps the

best laboratory unfortunately for those who lived through it to

see how this unfolds.

OK, so stretched flags tribute to Tim Wick.

He loved this, um, he still does, I'm sure.

So, um, so they defaulted.

Now of course looking at the numbers, the graphs I've

shown you, it's pretty obvious they didn't have much choice,

these companies, these governments.

We could also think in this period, maybe it was

easier to do this than it might have been, OK,

as I said a few times, the creditors, those who

bought the bonds are dispersed individuals.

They don't have a.

P rescue perhaps or putting pressure on governments we Because

you have these dispersed creditors, the governments and the bondholders

don't agree.

So there isn't much um.

Those who lost their shirts in this debt crisis, mostly

in Europe and a bit in the United States, they

didn't have much bargain.

They couldn't get their governments to step on their behalf.

So for the, for the lenders side, that's why this

could happen.

From the borrower side, you might be saying, well, it's

really bad for our economic reputation to default on our

debts, but it's the 1930s, the global economy is collapsed.

It doesn't matter what our reputation is right now.

Right?

So perhaps the cost of defaulting weren't as big as

they would have been in a period where the global

economy is working much better.

OK, so there's not much pressure for default not to

happen or to come up with an alternative solution, and

defaulting looks like maybe in at least the next little

while it's not gonna matter much if we're our reputation

is mud.

OK.

And also that defaulting on debt burdens almost certainly stimulated

some short term.

Certainly the worst that all happened.

There are points about The shop for who and that

may help.

In the medium term, not so clear.

This experience in the 1930s is something that policymakers, governments,

officials remember, right?

It's almost certainly helps motivate a different development model getting

out of primary products and into more industrial development through.

Import substitution industrialization.

OK?

So default gives a bit of relief, but the memory

of this crisis means we can't go back to being

on the product specialists because we'll just be open yourselves

up to the same risk sometime in the future.

OK.

So that's heavy in the memory in the 1950s when

ISI import substitution, industrialization really becomes a thing.

I love saying that free, free word combo.

OK, so why would you do this, right?

Why would you engage in, uh, so the idea here,

I should say first what it is, right?

Uh, which is to imagine that an alternative development direction

would be instead of specialising in primary products and trading,

you know, or copper or red.

Goods he type story.

We're gonna encourage diversification and do things to replace the

main imported goods through domestic production, to stimulate our own

industry to do those things.

To produce those So why would you, why would the

government or policymakers think this is a good idea?

First of all, the experience of specialisation for the 1930s,

the early 1930s was a bit of a failure.

OK, first thing.

Second thing, economists and development scholars around the world looking

in 1950 and certainly into the early 1960s once the

war recovery is over will cannot notice that the industrialised

nations are richer.

OK, so maybe in 1890 Argentina offered high wages and

opportunities.

By 1950, 1960 it's the industrialised nations that are offering

the best opportunities, and the US is now a highly

industrialised nation.

It's not a mix of rich farming and industry in

the cities anymore.

The third reason is a lot of people associate development

with structural change, right?

The kind of story you heard in the course, I

think for me.

glasses and, and we often associate development with moving resources

out of We talked about last week and into more.

The agricultural sector gets smaller, the manufacturing services sector gets

bigger, especially manufacturing.

We associate those changes with being on a high income

path and maybe ISI import substitution industrialization could be a

way to encourage that structural change.

OK, so there'll be some reasons to think it's a

good idea.

The other idea out there is this this thing.

I used to hear about this a lot when I

was your age, um, if you're, you know, when I

was at least a 20 year old university student, the

pre singer hypothesis, right, which is the idea that one

of the traps of specialising primary products is perhaps they

can to decline in the long run.

So they The income elasticity of demand is.

Larger for manufactured goods, meaning, as you get richer and

richer, you consume more manufactured goods at a higher rate

of increase than for primary products.

OK.

So, higher incomes, bigger share of consumption is based on

manufacturing type goods.

OK?

If that's true, you might expect the demand for manufacturing

goods to be more sustainable in the long run.

And he specialised in The So now let's predict that

worsening terms of trade, the price of farmer products declining

relative to manufactured goods could slow the development peripheral nations

if they specialise in farmer grows.

OK, so that's the idea of preish Singer.

Different price trends for primary products versus manufacturing.

If you specialise in the one that has less positive

price trends, you could accidentally put yourself on a path

to lower economic, uh, lower living standards and less economic

developments.

OK.

Now, good questions to ask.

Do these trends, do we actually see them in the

real life data?

Do primary product prices actually decline?

I say the question is not about.

I don't know.

Some people say yes.

Most econometric studies don't find much in this, OK?

You some periods where it's true, some periods where it's

not true.

There are breaks in relative price trends, but, uh, the

most recent paper I found thinks that there is a

long term trend, but all the other ones I found

are very sceptical.

OK.

So whether this actually is true in the data is

a good question.

But even if it is, What is there a good

solution?

One solution is, well, let's foster development by diversifying our

economies by getting more and more activity into the manufacturing

sector.

That will beat Kravis Singer.

How will we do this?

Well, if our industry is small, inefficient, you know, consumers

can rather buy imported machinery, rather chalets.

One solution would be very thoughtful today, cars, right.

The character Used for try to stimulate the transition out

of our parts.

We're stimulate this transition by protecting our investments, at least

for now.

Eventually when they're more productive and they can take on

world markets, we could lower tariffs remove protection, and we'll

have had a structural change.

We have gone out of primary product specialisation and now

be a productive, competitive economy.

OK.

This model was appealing partly in a sar to avoid

a rear of the 1930s.

But a good question is, does this type of development

actually work?

Can you have today?

Productive, profitable.

Or if you have tariff today, your infant industries end

up being weaklings forever.

They don't have poor competition.

There's less incentive to be productive, all that kind of

stuff.

If you have tariff protection, is it the case that

industries, rather than worrying about productivity, they worry about rent

seeking?

I'm going to lobby the government for this type of

protection.

Right, so my outputs protected, but if I need inputs

from overseas, I'm gonna ask for tariffs to be low

on that.

OK?

That type of strategic behaviour instead of product productivity enhancing

investments.

So, uh, some quotes and faces.

So this is Prevish, a prevish singer who wrote in

1949, formerly before the Great Depression, development in the Latin

American economies was stimulated from abroad by the constant increase

of exports.

There is no reason to suppose, at least, at least

at present, that this will occur to the same extent

except under very exceptional circumstances.

Industrialization has become the most important means of expansion.

So he's not saying this is how we're gonna do

it, but he's saying the future is going to be

a transition out of farming products, out of exports.

Of those and into industrial development, which you say is

gonna be less internationally or, but it's kind of between.

Right?

He doesn't say our industrialization is going to be.

Trade focused, which is a difference to what we might

see in Southeast Asia in a couple of weeks or

next a couple of weeks, yeah, that's right.

So how does this work out in the short run?

Well, if we take the so-called Latin America 6, the

largest, richest, most industrialised economies at the beginning.

Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Uruguay.

These economies largely start with what you might call the

easy stage of ISI where, you know, um, instead of

importing consumer goods, we encourage the mass production of those.

think Processed food, clothing, shoes, that sort of thing.

Excuse Not durable goods, perhaps not messy goods.

That easy stage of YSI does actually happen.

Whether it's productive or not, we can tell by these

numbers, but by 1950 in these six economies and all

of them, over 80% of consumer goods were domestically.

So that type of manufacturing can switch to being domestic

and it does.

Is this efficient or not?

You can't tell from these numbers and I haven't seen

numbers assessing that part, OK?

But this wasn't that costly or that expensive to do.

Uh, shortly after the 1950s, here's a quote from Chelso

Furtado, a Brazilian economist.

I like this quote because you can see some of

the ideas elsewhere in the course of it, OK?

So he writes, by now, 1960 after they've done the

first stage of ISI, right?

The Brazilian economy could count on its own dynamic elements,

industrial investments supported by the internal markets.

Each new impulse forward would mean an increasing structural diversification,

higher productivity levels, a larger mass of resources for investments,

a quicker expansion.

the internal market and the possibility of such impulses being

permanently surpassed.

OK, this might sound a little bit familiar.

It's kind of talking about spillovers, right?

If our market gets bigger, that's going to raise productivity.

OK, as our market gets bigger, we're gonna have a

more diversified economy.

He's talking about linkages, right?

So he's saying but that through this development, the Brazilian

economy, industrial part of the economy will get bigger, it'll

get more diversified, and that's gonna raise productivity all around,

a better, more efficient, more.

Don't say anything about being a world leader.

So that question still remains.

Can you actually become efficient on the global level by

doing this, right?

Don't say anything about that.

And even what he does talk about really doesn't pan

out in the medium term from 1960 onwards, OK, because

replacing consumer goods in the domestic market isn't too complicated

if it's, you know, processing foodstuffs, making shirts and textiles,

that sort of thing isn't too capital intensive, doesn't require

a lot of new knowledge, OK.

Advanced industry is a different story.

Any big capital.

You not just make shirts for the best economy but

make your own machinery.

you probably do want technological transfers.

to adopt the best technology.

If your policies are inward and towards protectionism, that's not

gonna encourage foreign transfers of ideas and your domestic firms

might not be that interested, right?

They're protected.

Productivity is less important to them than capturing the domestic

market and that being profitable.

OK.

The other problem is for these domestic-based manufacturing, you still

need import imports.

So you're making shirts, you're so important.

Depending where you are in for.

Rents or farms.

And you know, because domestic manufacturing doesn't produce export goods,

you still need primary products to trade, right?

If you need to import the inputs, you need some

foreign exchange.

How do you get foreign exchange through export markets?

How does Latin America export this period?

Primary products just the thing they want to get out

of.

OK, so you need that foreign exchange.

We've got an anti-exports policy.

And you're still exposed to but there you go I

need kind of singer.

A So they bounce around Also.

But here you need foreign exchange, you need to export

stuff, it's still gonna be primary products.

So you're still a bit bad, right?

Because you have inefficient industry that doesn't export, at least

at this stage, not yet, right?

The stuff you are exporting are the commodities your policy

is pushing against.

OK?

So it's like trying to send water uphill in, in

some sense.

So what has to happen as a consequence, you have

high tariff protection, OK, that to protect your markets from

You have innovation industries with high costs of full.

The only way consumers will buy your domestically produced products

in the longer term is you, if you have high

tariff.

So Furtado's dream of the spillovers doesn't really work when

you have to input import lots of the inputs, at

least in the first place.

Those linkages don't work so well when that's kind of

a condition at this stage of development.

So some evidence on these two things, oh, timing is

OK.

This is just uh estimates of average nominal protection to

the average advaorum tariffs in 1960 for the uh Latin

America 636 and the European Economic Community, OK, uh, those

are.

Really high levels of protection, you know, uh, over 100%

for all of them except Mexico and Uruguay versus much

lower tariffs in the EEC, OK, so for sure these

were heavily protected industries that's when.

you would think.

It also means that consumers or as they have You're

gonna be buying expensive, unproductively made Argentinian goods rather than

cheaper, more efficiently made.

Inputs for the rest of the world, your capital costs.

The cost of the intermediate goods is gonna be massive

in these countries relative to Europe in Europe when it's

got to bring in imports in inputs from the rest

of the world.

OK, so high levels of production, implications for consumers, for

welfare, also for industry that needs it, that needs inputs

that are imported.

In terms of welfare, we don't have good unemployment statistics.

That's the share of workers who like to.

4 hours a week.

OK.

Those are pretty high rates for most of these economies

in the area of 20 to 50% through 1950 to

1970.

So that's substantial under.

One thing you might see is for many of these

economies numbers.

time.

Don't focus so much on that.

What's happening there is it's going to be mostly To

mostly Unemployment is gonna tell you something I think about

inefficient industry working below capacity as well.

So underemployed labour in agriculture in 1950, but more and

more in urban areas that are industrialised towards the 1970.

So that fits, I think, quite nicely with the inefficient

industry story.

It's not a smoking gun directive connection like we might

have for graduate seminar, but I think it gives you

the idea.

And by 1962, Ralph Prebis wasn't smiling anymore.

Then he said, and he was after the fact he

was quite wise, as is well known, well known, but

not in 1949, the proliferation of industries of every kind

in a closed market has deprived the Latin American countries

of the advantages of specialisation and economies of scale, and

owing to the protection afforded by excessive tariff duties and

restrictions, a healthy form of internal competition has failed to

develop to the detriment of efficient production.

So all the things Furtado was hoping for in his

quote two years earlier.

Doesn't sound so good here, right?

OK.

So that's the story about ISI and almost certainly it

was a problem, but was it the main problem?

OK.

So what, we'll keep this in your mind when we

talk about the sort of development model in In the

next one Which is more, which is more, which has

government and state intervention, but it's more outward looking.

Yeah, so maybe they learn But another question I'm gonna

call this a question because I still don't know I

think the answer is, is whether Latin American development also

is a legacy of history.

There's a group of economists who think, yes, there's other

economists I know pretty well think that's a load of

rubbish, but let me give you some of the ideas

here, OK?

So one story would be is there a connection from

colonial inequality to the early 20th century to stagnation today?

OK, some famous economists have sort of made quite quite

on paper compelling compelling cases for this.

You might remember this slide.

I think I had this up a few months ago,

where in the in the late 19th century, early 20th

century, there's much less enfranchisement and less investment in human

capital among for children in the Latin America 6, yep.

Versus say the US and you might think, well, these

things are going to carry forward, right?

This is going to be a high inequality, low human

capital society, and that could be transmitted over time, OK?

and famous people like Engerman and Sokollif have made that

arguments.

Look at Gini coefficients from 1970 and 2017.

They are substantially higher.

In 1970 in all these economies in the US, which

is not a low inequality society, right?

And they're all except for Uruguay, at least on the

same level or higher in 2017.

OK, so you might say, aha, high inequality in the

past, not much for franchisement, not much human capital for

the masses, high inequality today.

Another way to think of this, and this is a

bit more damning, is I just took the top 10%

of national income shares in 2022, so I'll update this

next year, maybe I should end this year, every 3

years, it should have been this year, whatever.

I guess the 2025 data aren't out yet.

OK, the dark red means the top 10% get the

most, and Latin America, except for Argentina and Uruguay for

the most part, it's pretty dark red.

OK.

So why might this be the case?

On another story of of a policy failure is really

like there's a sort of gap between private investment and

capital formation, right?

In the early 20th century, we told a story about

unfavourable demographics for the later 20th century, other scholars tell

a story about elites who either consume more or they.

Well standards in Latin America.

Higher quality means you have some, the top 10%.

So those top 5% could in theory invest a lot

in the economy.

Here the argument is it's more consumption.

Investing in safer markets in Europe or the United States.

In the early 20th century, as we saw foreign capital

flows fill the gap.

Under ISI, the state tries to fill the gap with

them.

OK, so if elites, if there's not enough capital investment

in Latin America post 1950, the state can try to

fill the gap.

The state doesn't have a great tax base to do

this, and there's a financial crisis in the 1980s that's

going to unwind that as well.

That crisis has a probably better resolution than the 1930s,

but also really.

That'll be another question so I leave the rest of

that.

At least the financial side, but in terms of the

long run legacies, another story goes, so one would be

to do with capital right at institutions.

Another could be to do with labour, so I was

kind of interested in this idea.

That if you uh read publications by the OECD and

also the ILO, they suggest there's still lots of informal

employment in Latin America, so more than half of employees

at medium income or below have informal employment.

OK, the ILO in various reports argues that you get

lots of labour.

That these informal employees, they Players have lots of power.

Work tasks, work time, all sorts of stuff like that,

OK?

So what our argument is, well, if Latin American economies

have a weak social contract, does that help explain coercion

today?

And does that weak social contract has some historical needs?

I'm not sure I think we may ask you this

question, but there's a really new paper by Leticia Arroyo

and Bill Lauer who kind of opened the debate.

Does historic labour coercion is that a cause of high

labour coercion in Latin America today?

Some economists would argue yes.

They argue no that the way labour was coerced in

Latin America actually disappeared.

Water issues a lot more.

I World War II policy area.

OK, let's sum up, we got 4 minutes to go.

So What we see here, the evidence suggests that Latin

America has a long decline from partial prosperity in 1900,

right?

Again, the richest Latin American economies aren't that poor by

global standards, right, but still they're not, they haven't kept

up with Europe or the rest of the Americans.

There are these development constraints, right?

Capital scarcity and a demographic burden was a big constraint

in the early 20th century.

Right?

These constraints are reinforced by the 1930s debt crisis, which

raises.

OK, in developing for domestic markets rather than for international

markets.

OK, that's gonna be a big challenge given these initial

constraints, right?

That's one lesson.

ISI was unsuccessful.

It tended to lead to inefficient and small scale industries,

and it didn't get rid of those developments.

Latin America still have a problem getting invested in.

It's still not an issue.

It's still we talk about so much investment.

But the lack of success and also here's what you

might wanna ask yourself, right?

There is some variation around the region that may also

reflect like initial factor that is.

I will leave that with a question mark because I,

as I said, there's a strand of social scientists who

are very much in that camp.

Others much more sceptical that the post-1950 failures is really

about the decisions made after the, after the Second World

War.

OK, right, that's where we're at with Latin America, so

thank you for listening and in 2 weeks we'll talk

about growth in East Asia and Southeast Asia.

Thank you.

I was like.

Thank you.

Good.

Yes, um, I was just thinking, I don't know a

lot about it, but it might be ignorant.

Probably not.

I was quite If you get You're not going to

see less, but the share of consumption, right, so if

your if your consumption of manufacturing gets double, your share

of required product consumption goes up by 1 relatively so

that would be it's always better to be a manufacturing

is because the demand is going to go faster.

For relative that's important.

OK All right OK, well then, right.

Good question.

But then, but then is if you're, if you're, if

you're buying a bag of crisps, is that a manufactured

good?

It's us.

So fires are still.

So.

This might be, well, if you're producing goods that are

inputs into manufactured goods, does that also mean less demand

than producing the final manufacturing, you see what I mean?

So yes, so maybe that's kind of embedded inside too,

right?

I don't know if I.

And people used to In development studies over here.

Because Because I think it, uh, maybe it looked better

in the data if you ran a regression in 1980.

I don't know.

I think the logic appealed to people.

That you look around the world, manufacturing nations are the

richest, so why would you specialise in the other thing?

Um, no, no, I was teaching my first job, one

of the other professors was like, all the students knew

about this because he would teach it, teach it to

me.

This was like 2000, right?

So.

I didn't learn when I was an undergrad.

I, I, when I was, when I was a lecturer

in my first job, some of the other students knew

about from this other course.

They would, they would use it on their essays.

I was like.

Yep.

Lecture 16:

I Well.

Yeah.

Oh.

I think.

Yeah.

I you Yes.

I, I.

Oh.

And I.

Yes.

I.

Yeah.

I got out.

Oh.

Yeah.

Yeah Yeah We have to This is.

You have this right, so I mean I'm here.

You.

Yeah.

OK.

One I.

I It.

No.

Thank you.

Oh, that's loud.

Um, Welcome back to EH11 on this.

Unusually beautiful sunny day in London.

Nice change.

And today we're gonna continue our like tour of looking

at growth and development outcomes, historical ones by turning our

attention to try to understand growth and development in Southeast

Asia.

So the part of the course where I get to

learn, oh, I didn't take these splits out, uh, where

I get to learn along with you.

So to to structure today, here's how we're gonna play

it.

We're gonna start by.

Revisiting a bit from before but also thinking a little

bit more about Asia's growing record, OK.

How's compared to other regions, how important are the leaders

within Asia, that sort of thing.

Then we wanna think about the approaches to growth.

So is this a state-led model?

Yes or no?

How are the contours of what's done in Southeast Asia

compared to, say, uh, sort of Soviet communist approach or

what goes on in Latin America?

So what are the sort of strategies you might see

for development in this part of the world on the

ground?

How similar are they?

OK, and then what does the evidence say?

So if we look at sort of actual practises and

outcomes, how does that match up?

One of the big things I sort of have my

mind today is what's the role and what's the effect

of this perhaps of the so-called development state.

So previous lectures, big state functions, the economy looks like

a mixed bag.

Southeast Asia has got a much as we'll see, as

you probably already know, has a much more positive growth

path.

Does that mean the government got more things right?

Did they get more things right just at the right

time?

Those are the kind of questions I'd like to think

about as we proceed today.

OK, so that's just to set the table.

So again thinking about Southeast Asian development we're talking about

really humble beginnings, OK?

So again, Madison numbers always taken with a pinch of

salt, right?

There can be quite imprecise estimates, but I think this

would hold up even with more precision and modern and

better, better methods, but circa 1950, Asian income levels on

average are low, right?

On average below Africa.

Compare South Korea and Ghana in the 1950s, right?

It's not who you might expect to be the leader

in terms of GDP per capita, right, for instance, maybe

other things there'll be some hints of future development as

we come to a bit later.

That's really changed by 2000 even more so to today,

OK.

And if you want to think about the history developments,

there's a sort of set of countries that lead and

then follow.

So for the post 1950 period, it's really first led

by Japan, OK, then a set of four so-called Asian

tiger economies.

Then a smaller, uh, similar size set of follow follower

economies elsewhere in the region.

So it's sort of growth that seems to spread throughout

the region from the leader of Japan eventually to some

of the other follower economies.

So we might wanna think about well what type of.

A growth mechanism or framework or policies that could get

you this staggered growth.

OK, what, what um factors could explain that?

So again, just to start with the basics, OK, if

we compare GDP per capita, uh, remember how I did

this years ago, uh, in, uh, 5 regions, so we've

got the USA on the left, uh-huh, Western European 12

country composite, the second bar on the right that we

have, uh, the former Soviet Union in Eastern Europe.

A composite combined Asian 56 country basket and 42 for

Africa.

OK.

Point B, OK, these bars are very small, the green

ones a little bit smaller than the African one, so

let's go with that, certainly very similar.

By 1975, the red bar for Asia is now substantially

ahead of Africa, I would say no, it's ahead, and

certainly by 1998, well on the way to be much

higher across a very large region levels of GDP per

capita GDP.

Levels of GDP per capita.

OK, so we can start to see the beginnings of

the transformation a little bit, maybe in 1975, but certainly

more substantially by 1998.

OK, so there we can see, but that's gonna smush

together the fast growing countries, the Tigers, Japan, which is

already pretty rich by the 1970s with a whole bunch

of economies that haven't got anywhere near that yet.

So again, to think about the leaders and the eventual

followers from 1950 to 1973, as I alluded to a

couple of weeks ago, Japan is like the source of

hypergrowth.

From the 1970s to the 1990s.

You first start with 4 economies, the so-called Asian tigers,

Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea.

Two of these are very particular economies.

They're like city states.

OK, so again, we're thinking about growth lessons from this

region.

Hong Kong and Singapore aren't like Britain or the United

States or Canada or Paraguay, right?

They have that feature of being urban, small, particular kind

of locations.

OK.

Of course, those kind of places might be very important

and grow stories than other countries too.

Following those, those four initial tigers, you get 4 substantial

following countries Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, we could add to this

list, many development scholars would.

OK, certainly post 1999, and we're gonna talk a lot

about China next week, but we can also think of

that as part of this.

OK, so at first, a leader, a set of four

initial well studied followers, and then another group of countries

that come through towards the end of this cent of

that century, not this century, the previous one.

So again, I showed you this before, GDP growth, GDP

per capita growth in Japan is phenomenal between 1950 and

1973, solid from 1973 to 1998.

As we talked about a few weeks ago, one of

the interesting things with this, it doesn't look like it

goes with a very rapid TFP growth, right?

That it's something we want to keep in your mind

when we think about the rest of this region.

Is that feature we talked about for Japan, was it

3 weeks ago now, including Reading Week?

Do we see that elsewhere in this region of maybe

a lot of factor intensity, but less productivity increases?

I'm hinting at that because we're gonna see that pattern

again.

Now, like I like I alluded to, that 56 Asia

composite or combined GDP per capita is smushing together all

kinds of countries with different experiences.

If we break out, um, Japan, China, and the four

tigers are typically classified over the period 73 to 96,

think this picture shows nicely the uh GDP per capita

growth that's Mm, 2.5 times what we have say in

Western Europe.

That's for China and the four tiers.

Japan, of course, has done most of the hard work

in the previous decades.

So again, within the region, there are very definite clear

growth leaders on a similar path to Japan like in

the previous generation.

OK, of course on the right we've got India which

starts to grow quite well in this period as well.

Latin America and Africa which struggles we've talked about and

we'll talk about more perhaps we could talk more about

India in this course that's an interesting question for your

lecturers.

Certainly in the 20th century.

OK.

So again doing these funky bar graphs, are they funky,

I don't know, for these countries you can really see

the sort of staggered pattern of takeoff and timing across

these countries, South Korea, you know, substantial GDP per capita

by by 2000, as is Taiwan and Hong Kong, from

really very, very modest initial positions, right?

You wouldn't pick out South Korea or Taiwan from the

statistics relative to say Thailand or Malaysia.

OK, so something allowed some of these tigers to take

off from the 1970s.

Others who had oak similar looking initial positions, at least

in terms of income per capita, were able to take

off more post 1970s.

So what might explain some of the differences in this

time?

That's another thing I'd like you to think about.

So timing differences, extent of growth differences across a rift

differences across this region, and how can we link that

back to some of the likely explanations.

OK.

So One way to think about this, uh, I hate

these brakes.

I And this is really crude and simplifying, but maybe

it's useful for us, is to imagine a couple different

ways of thinking about development.

One might be what's been referred to as the Washington

or used to talk about, right, it's a bit old

news now, but still, the Washington Consensus, this is based

on those institutions in DC, the IMF and the World

Bank, who generally prescribe liberal market-based development.

Some would call this neoliberal thinking about growth and development.

OK, that's one school of thought that the way to

grow is through this liberal market-based approach.

Contrasted to what others would think about as a development

state where there's a much bigger role for the government

to direct economic activity and what I should have put

this slide but I didn't perhaps is to solve market

failures and various problems that the market by itself won't

do, OK.

Which of these models is gonna work better?

Is there a right time for one versus the other?

All the things I'd like you to think about today

and also in your classes on this topic.

So we think about the Washington consensus might go something

like this and to argue for a limited role for

government activity, right?

So one role for the government is to strengthen macroeconomic

fundamentals.

We might think about the role of the central bank,

uh, fiscal policy perhaps on that side, certainly with the

central bank is being part of that feature.

Uh, a Washington consensus thinking would advocate for investments in

public infrastructure, something that very obviously the private sector may

not be able to do very easily.

Of course, law, order, property rights, all those things associated

with good institutions will be where there's a role for

government activity, OK.

Are there historical models of this?

Some would say British industrial development of the 19th century

is an example of working along these lines, OK, where

the government sets the right institutional frameworks, the right conditions

for private development to happen, but doesn't really get.

Closely involved in US I put with big question marks

because of course we know as we're finding out again,

tariffs are a big part of US historical policy.

OK, there's a debate between development scholars and economic historians

as there was about whether the US was a bit

like a development state protected industry rather than a liberal

developing market economy.

I think there's features of both, right?

I don't think it's a good paradigm for development state.

But certainly in some ways not a sort of liberal

outward looking economy the way Britain was in the 19th

century, so I'm not sure it's a great historical model,

but I also don't really think it fits with the

development state.

We could talk more about that some other time, OK,

but good to think about.

Now what about the development state?

What will be the kind of features we would think

about here?

OK, so here we'll think about direct government involvement in

many aspects of economic development, not just the obvious ones

in terms of, you know, um, property rights, law, etc.

Infrastructure that would be common between a development state approach

and also the Washington census we can think about other

factors where the states can be quite important.

One would be education and human capital formation.

I don't think the I don't think.

Neoliberal thinking would rule that neoliberal so-called neo liberal thinking

under the Washington Consensus would rule that out of the

basket, but potentially gonna be quite important in seeing uh

what uh state led development would try to achieve, right.

Where development states definitely will be different would be the

role of the government in terms of savings, investment, and

credit.

So is the government going to try to channel savings

to investments?

If the state isn't generating enough savings, is it gonna

to try to bring an investment from abroad?

Think about the story we told about developments in Latin

America in the late 19th early 20th century, right?

That was more private market based, OK, that firms in

Latin America sought capital from Europe and the United States.

Here it could be that states have a much larger

hand in this as well.

We can also think about states having a big role

in like allocating credit.

Will it be strategic in terms of making it easier

to invest in some sectors that are important versus other

sectors, OK?

So there the the government could put the thumb on

the scale in terms of making certain investments more attractive

than the market would suggest.

Maybe that's got some good strategic growth implications.

It's gonna distort the markets by making credit very scarce

in some sectors, but maybe as part of the development

strategy, it's worth that tradeoff.

Development states also associate potentially with uh diverging in terms

of labour market institutions from the liberal.

Uh, Anglo-Saxon English speaking world standard.

OK, so where the states involved in negotiations, setting wages,

dealing with unions directly at least as a third party

in discussions between unions, workers and deciding about wages and

a whole range of conditions of the labour market.

That just sounds familiar from our golden age story, OK.

And finally what development states seem to do and here's

a contrast to the Latin American story is a real

export orientation, OK?

So to develop export oriented industrial production, these other features

in terms of education, in terms of getting credit to

the right industries, in terms of maybe something like wage

moderation to help things work are.

Part of that export drive, OK, so there's a focus

on certain economic activities.

There is interventions you might call it in the labour

market, in capital markets, and in human capital support.

OK, that will be a development state sort of paradigm.

OK, and you know this should sound familiar, right?

Because what it's doing is they've been listening to Alexander

Gerschenkron, or at least the reading his lecture notes from

the previous generations about substituting for missing prerequisites, right?

So an East Asian state without a model is essentially

that where the market is not working, where the prerequisites

aren't there, the state's gonna intervene and set conditions to

solve those problems, OK?

And if that's done well, maybe that works, OK?

So we're gonna see some examples of how this might

work and where it might be less effective in the

longer run.

What I'd like you to think about also is well

is there really a single unified model here?

Do the countries we're gonna talk about this region actually

have common policy paths or is there quite a bit

of divergence based on their initial conditions and other things?

I might forget to come back to that so I

don't keep thinking about that as you listen to the

lecture.

And also, is it really the key thing or are

other features of Southeast Asia, maybe particularly those countries I

showed you having those big red growth bars, is there

something else about them that explains the timing and extent

of their success?

What are the other explanations?

And do they just sort of, you know, this development

state model is something that was done but not a

real key to underlying success.

Already.

So we want to think about what East Asian states

got done beyond big GDP growth.

We could focus on, I think 3 things.

Factor accumulation, both capital and human capital, expert orientation, and

the last one to talk about, it's a little bit

different the two as we'll see I get to is

employment.

These are where these economies raise their game and that

clearly is a proximate relationship cause of the development success

that follows.

OK, so we start with uh these sticky sticky slides,

oops, if we start with investment, one thing we know

for sure is that East Asian tigers, right, generate very

large investment shares.

How they did this was different across the country.

So again, is there a unified model or not?

You reading will talk more about this because we think

about it here already.

The sources of investment varies.

In Japan, Korea, Taiwan, it's savings that are used to

channel into investments.

What does this tell you?

These are also locations with very high savings rates, which

is something external to the model, right?

So there we can think about is it the model

or is it something else about the savings culture, put

that in quotation marks, let you think about that.

So in some countries savings is really important, in others

it's more FDI, OK, that is bringing investment from outside.

The two best examples of that, of course, are the

two small city states, OK, there are also different other

ways.

There's a reason perhaps why they beat FDI magnets, but

their investment is driven by capital coming in from abroad

rather than marshalling domestic savings.

OK, so in terms of gross.

Investment we take I put China here too and the

four tigers, no Japan in this picture.

The gross investment rates 60 to 94.

They look pretty match pretty well.

I I do have Japan.

What am I saying?

They match pretty well to Western Europe and Japan from

60 to 73.

So a golden age of investments in the post-war world

of the Vishas winter or the lawyer.

We see that for a longer run perspective for these

countries in 1960 to 1994.

If this data was timed a bit better to be

more post 1970, these bars would look higher, OK, because

that's where all the action is happening.

So over a longer window, they have similar uh gross

investment shares which is going to apply very high ones

at the peak of activity, OK.

So this was a success, right, as an outcome.

What about, so that's thinking about investment.

Where's the investment coming from?

Well, if you look at the stock of foreign direct

investment, that's the total amount.

None of these countries look particularly impressive compared to, especially

the US but also Western Europe with the exception of

China perhaps.

But if you think about this not as a stock,

but per capita terms, you can really see how some

of these locations are huge maggots for FDI.

So Singapore, Hong Kong, as I alluded to, these big

city state this is some data from 2000-ish, as I,

uh.

They're big banks for FDI and they dwarf all the

other countries here except for good old Belgium, OK?

And of course Ireland is a bit like, you know,

telling a Hong Kong or Singapore story for Ireland maybe

isn't so crazy, right?

A third of the population are Dublin-ish, right, so it

really dominates the Irish economic landscape, not in other ways,

right?

You go to Ireland, but the economic landscape in a

similar way.

OK, but those are impressive per capita accumulations that have

to.

They're real magnets, right?

Despite distance from Europe and the US and despite the

initial conditions.

So that's again FDI going to where I told it's

gonna go.

So how about human capital formation?

So not surprising, human capital formation has risen everywhere.

It's risen everywhere though from different starting positions.

So some parts of Southeast Asia have good initial conditions

where human capital is high relative to living standards or

GDP per capita about Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan also depend

on.

Initial conditions are much poorer elsewhere, Malaysia as one of

my late running tigers from an earlier slide, also Indonesia.

One of the interesting things I don't have that much

to say about it right now is this is a

mix of public and private sector, especially at the post

primary and even more so postsecondary level.

OK, so how Southeast Asian economies get human capital quantity

to rise happens differently over the landscape.

So if we just think about quantities, this very famous

data that everyone uses Bauer and we can trace out

the implied years of schooling over time.

Here I put on this graph the UK in light

green, Japan in blue, they tracked pretty well since 1950,

OK.

Korea with good initial conditions, right, converges by 1990 to

the two leaders.

Singapore, Indonesia, catching up from behind, but still like pretty

clear, very clear convergence for Singapore, some evidence of convergence

for Indonesia certainly to 1990.

OK, so rising and converging human capital from in some

cases low initial conditions, that's just thinking about the amount

of education.

It's also, I don't know I think about this, but

we should talk about it.

It's interesting to think about the quality of education, OK,

so two graphs to stimulate your thinking here.

OK.

Oh, I've got Tim's name.

When I make these slides, Tim's name appears.

I got to fix that.

OK.

Um, because he never had this.

Um, what am I showing you here?

This is the quantity of schooling against the growth rates,

OK, and what we can see is there's a positive

relationship as you might expect, not saying this is a

causal relationship, of course.

What's interesting is for many of these Southeast Asian economies,

they're above the, the, the line, which is telling you

that they're growing faster than you predict just based on

the amount of schooling.

So it's not just about increased quantity of education.

There may also be a story about quality.

Quality of schooling is hard to quantify, but one way

you might do it is by looking at say test

scores.

If you ever looked at these PISA scores, you will

know Southeast Asian economies historically and today do really well

on these.

So that's a measure of quality that seems to maybe

have some resonance here.

So better test scores in education go with more growth.

Of course that doesn't have to be a causal relationship

either.

But it's something to consider, so there's definitely a school

quantity increase and probably I'd say almost certainly an increase

in the quality of education that goes with it, OK?

What do you like this way of showing it, I'll

let you think about it, but I think it's one

piece of evidence.

OK, so on the factory side that's what's going on

in terms of export performance that exports become a large

share of national income certainly relative to other developed and

developing economies.

So this shift towards export orientation in the post World

War II growth environment, the opposite of what we see

from some of the other cases in the course, this

definitely happens.

Exports as a share of GDP in 1998.

OK, of course the city states are always exceptional, but

even the larger populist economies elsewhere in the region have

very high exports national income shares.

OK, so these, these lately growing late.

That's going with mega export performance, OK?

So more human capital, better human capital, lots of investment,

and it's fueling this export orientation.

That's quite different from the other from the other growth

stories we're gonna talk about in this part of the

course, OK.

And that's also, you know, we're talking about East Asian

development story model, but exports are for the world market,

right?

So while the government's intervening, it's not like purchasing the

goods or you know it's not the local consumption, it's

things that go into the world market so that's already

quite different from other state led models might be like

ISI we talked about a few weeks ago the.

I don't want to think about and I, whether this

is success or not is slightly more tricky to think

about, which is employment, right, which is you have baby

booms in the region followed by fertility decline, and this

leads to a big rise in labour force participation rates

through two things the babies grow up, so it's more.

labour and the workforce, OK, around the right time for

many companies from 1965 and as fertility rates fall, more

women also enter the labour market.

It's not just about shrinking family size.

They're also government wants in some countries is actively interested

in raising female participation, not everywhere, OK.

But still, one of the facts is that the female,

the share of women employed in Hong Kong, for example,

rises from about 40% in 1960 to over 60% in

1985.

So think about a factor intensity story, it's more labour

into the economy.

OK.

The other feature is on the intensive margin.

I'm sure I showed you a few weeks ago evidence

on how work time has declined historically, people consume more

leisure, etc.

Well, the big international work power differences today.

About rich countries are in this part of the world

and Europe and North America long work hours have persisted

and so on the intensive margin there's also lots of

labour input.

So getting more participants into the labour force, having a

bigger labour force that works longer, OK, so that could

generate quite a bit of growth even without productivity increases,

right?

So you can start to see where we might be

going with this potentially.

OK, so whether that's success or not, I'll let you

think.

This is like growth, this could be growth through sweat,

rather than growth through productivity, OK?

So that's a very different sort of way of thinking

about success.

OK, so those are some of those stories is the

East Asian Development safety explanation.

Well, for some of these things, people made good arguments,

uh, let you decide what you believe.

That the answer is yes, but elsewhere it seems the

answer is probably no.

OK, I'll start with a nose that preconditions and initial

conditions almost certainly that, OK?

I'll show you some of the arguments, some of them

I buy some of them I'm not sure, but.

OK.

And it also looks like government's got some things right.

Maybe learning from the experiences of all around the world.

Certainly it's a different growth strategy and it seems to

work at least in the period of very rapid growth

we're talking about here.

OK, so one of the preconditions, this one, I don't

know what I think about it, but I feel like

I should tell you about this anyway, is there is

this argument, it's a fairly recent, recent-ish paper.

That argues maybe these countries have this experience of rapid

growth then sort of returning to the norm and not

that high persistent TFP growth as we'll see later that

this is embedded in sort of confucian values.

I don't know what I think about this, but you

think about it.

These might include diligence, I'm, I'm quoting Lean here, frugality,

family solidarity, group harmony, stress on education.

OK, she argues that she, yes, that this, these values

have precedence in much of Southeast Asia, China, Japan, most

obviously, also the four tiger economies elsewhere in urban areas

for the late followers where there's, uh, you know, Chinese

culture has a presence for a large ethnic Chinese.

So the argument here is, well, if you have Confucian

values in these places, maybe that goes with the high

savings, that seems like a power we talked about before,

save Hong Kong.

And perhaps goes with a culture and a model of

development, uh, imitation rather than innovation.

So these countries have a rapid catch up as they

imitate technologies and methods in the rest of the world,

OK?

I'll later slow down because they aren't on the frontier

in terms of innovation, and this piece argues maybe this

fits with with the distribution of Confucian values around Southeast

Asia.

Don't know, you can read the paper and think about

it, but it certainly wouldn't explain all the story we're

talking about today.

It wouldn't explain perhaps educational quality as opposed to quantity

and certainly wouldn't explain how the region was so successful

as attracting FTI or really why the region become so

export oriented.

OK.

Other parts of the world have savings cultures that people

used to talk about that no longer seem to exist.

OK, so I'm a little bit sceptical, but it's an

interesting idea nonetheless to put out there.

That would be an initial condition, right that that could

maybe explain some of these things not sure to explain

the timing of development everywhere either, but think about it.

Now in terms of preconditions, one case where we can

see this matters would be Japan.

It's the older brother of the Asian tigers.

It has rapid growth from 1950 as we've seen, and

clearly this builds on ajar and Beija.

So after the Meiji restoration in the 1860s, Japan embarks

on a programme of rapid industrialization, OK, uh, extensive rail

railroad networks are constructed.

Foreign experts are brought in to instruct, uh, Japanese, uh.

Workers, agents, whatever in terms of frontier production techniques, OK.

Interestingly, some scholars like one of my former colleagues argues

that the major focus on industrialization and adapting Western best

practise.

I that way as majors in that Japan is relatively

decentralised before the restoration, which makes it easier for ideas

to be picked up locally, OK, so they have that

heritage as well, but certainly post World War II Japan

engaged in industrial promotion.

Commercial developments and sort of a Japanese model of industrial

production if you wanna put it that way, OK, so

this again may have some historical legacies, almost certainly it

does, and of course a lot of some of the

growth is just recovery from the devastation of World War

II as Japan was the region's industrial leader before that.

OK, so that's maybe less surprising, but certainly those historical

industrial conditions do matter for you.

If we move around the region a bit towards Korea

and Taiwan, OK, here, educational attainment circa 1950 is relatively

good, which makes it think that these maybe are a

bit like impoverished sophisticates, the kind of story might tell

about Scandinavia.

So while GDP per capita in South Korea is by

most accounts below GA's in the 1950s, educational attainment is

not.

So maybe there's some latent potential to pick up this,

uh, these educational patterns for growth later on.

Another way some have argued initial conditions might matter is

low initial inequality in contrast perhaps to other later developing

parts of the world like Latin and South America.

OK, so those initial conditions could be quite important in

giving you an easier trajectory when other features required for

growth come to play.

OK?

You don't have these like hurdles as well as others.

OK.

Um, so what kind of things do people argue governs

got rights?

And there's 4 main arguments.

First one is that when governments are intervening in markets,

they're also creating missing markets, allowing activity to take place

that wouldn't in the absence of governments sort of, uh,

filling the gap.

Related to that, there's a strong argument that governments fostered

cooperation between firms which could have good effects in terms

of solving some of these missing market problems but potentially

also later on bad effects in terms of there being

excess market power, you have cartels, it's maybe not very

competitive, OK.

Well, sure, we'll talk about how the government engages in

labour market management.

Again, that can affect wage levels, employment patterns.

It might make the economy a bit less in some

ways, but it could also solve some of the problems

of rapid development.

And finally there were definite strategies we'll we'll see to

promote export industries.

So these are the things governments focused on and to

the extent they got things right across these four dimensions,

I'd like you to think about as always, but I

think we'll see some good cases why there were useful

policies at the right time in many cases.

OK.

Let's start with creating markets.

So here the idea is that one of the big

problems in development is what economists might call coordination failures,

OK?

And what I mean by that is that the returns

to individual investments may be lower than the returns to

coordinate investments.

What would be a story that would fit with this?

Suppose you want to invest in the modern export oriented

side, OK, because you see demand for goods abroad and

that would be attractive.

To produce export oriented goods, you're gonna need specialised inputs

to go into your production process, right?

And unless some other firms jump in and start producing

the specialised inputs, you're not gonna produce the export goods.

The same goes to the other side of the market.

I've got some capacity to produce inputs into say the

automobile industry, but there's no uh domestic producer automobiles yet.

Why would I make this investment?

OK, so if both the input producers and the expert

good producers get into production together, right, or not together,

but simultaneously, the sectors are productive, but just if one

of the sectors can't switch on by itself.

OK, so that's an example of coordination failure.

You need both markets to be active and functioning for

the investments to be profitable.

If they're not, then the industrial activity towards the export

market won't take off.

OK, so what the government could do is try to

solve these coordination failures.

How would you do this?

You would subsidise private investments in the right industries, OK?

So there you are trying to pick the right ones.

But here the idea is to focus on production of

intermediate goods for the leading sectors that are export oriented.

OK, so the export oriented production will take off as

long as the infant producers are also engaged, OK, neither

sector can do a separate.

So you could incentivize the production of those intermediate goods

through subsidies, through making credit cheaper, and various other mechanisms,

OK.

So Yeah, so again, uh, oh, this is a bit

repetitive, OK, so the returns, so again, promoting the intermediate

goods sector will allow the final goods sector to take

off.

Parts for the automobile industry is a classic example.

Danny and others often use astronomers, maybe to think of

some better ones, I don't know, um, microchips and, you

know, laptops might be what we can think about, OK.

And of course, um, yeah, of course, this is not

the only way potentially to skin this path.

Either domestic economy isn't producing those specialised inputs, can't you

just buy them on the world market through trade?

Right, so you wanna think about this strategy of coordinating

investments versus a liberal strategy of just importing those other

goods and specialising in the final product.

OK, that would be the alternative model and in some

conditions maybe the alternative model would work better.

OK, so I'd let you think about that too, but

what happened in these economies was a focus on coordinating

to allow to allow the, you know, multiple sectors to

thrive due to their interdependencies.

Cooperation, so this is again one with pros and cons,

OK?

And so one there's a focus on the importance of

cooperation between firms with employees and also within corporate groups.

So one way to think about evidence of cooperation is

these uh Asian conglomerates.

So in Japan, I'm I'm not sure my pronunciation here.

I didn't have time to check my uh.

Linguistic checks Caretsu in Japan, which are like interlocking conglomerates

of different firms that often hold shares in each other,

OK, and typically these conglomerates are sort of um based

around a common bank used for finance, OK.

South Korea has a parallel ball, the Cha ball, that's

where I'm not sure about the pronunciation, which are essentially

family firms that are both horizontally and vertically integrated.

So you have, you know, uh, obvious compliment producers, maybe

less obvious ones, they can co-finance through this network of

firms that are integrated and connected to each other.

OK, so it's less centred on a bank relative to

the Japanese model, but it has the same structure of

a big conglomerate that could in theory cooperate internally.

So, You could easily imagine why these types of models

are a mixed bag.

So conglomeration can lead to kinds of scale.

It could lead to cooperation internally, OK, think about that

coordination failure story I told you.

Maybe you could solve that within a conglomerate, right?

That they'll do both the export production and what the

other firms in the conglomerate produces the intermediate goods or

the inputs, OK.

So allowing conglomerates could be a way to let the

market solve some of these coordination failures.

The downside of conglomerates is they're big in the markets,

right?

They won't be so interested in competition perhaps are conglomerates

innovative?

That's not very clear, OK?

And you know, we don't often don't associate that structure

with innovation of.

OK, so the pros are that cooperation can solve some

of these problems.

OK, you can internalise the solution to coordination failure and

also might be a policy that works at the right

time.

Early stages of development maybe coordination failures are more important

than giving up the product.

losses of a less competitive cartel type structure, OK, maybe

during a boom time if logs also like shared information,

reducing those information costs can be relatively really important relative

to the loss of competition or other ways you might

think of the cost of cronyism.

OK.

You can see the trade-offs, right?

There's a debate whether some of the success is embedded

in Japanese or Asian culture, right?

Or is this just sort of another example of long

term relationships that solve some economic problems of my careers.

I realised a bit late on time.

I wasn't expecting that, OK.

So that's cooperation within industrial structures that can solve coordination

failures and do other things in terms of labour market

management this should sound familiar.

Singapore is a famous example of what people call tripartism

where.

Negotiations in the labour market involve unions, employer organisations and

governments, so that's the triangle three party structure, OK, where

the focus often on cohesive, long term, I should mention,

employment wage.

OK, this sounds like a wage moderation story we told

for the European golden age before.

Here there's a lot more evidence of these practises actually

being applied and having an effect perhaps than the European

case, OK?

So that tripartisan model in Singapore is sort of a

wage moderation story.

If we think about the Japanese management system, we also

see similar long term structures, right, that if career employment

employment structures tend to dominate.

What comes with long-term career employment?

Well, your employer typically has some market power over you

if they know you're gonna stay in the firm for

the rest of your life.

That might be bad for your wages.

On the other hand though, firms are willing to invest

in training if they know they can get some of

the benefits of training.

If a firm trains immediate and I walk away to

a new job tomorrow, that firm's investment is lost.

OK.

So in the Japanese type model, firms are willing to

invest in jobs specific skills for their workers or general

skills and job skills for the workers knowing they'll stay

in place.

OK.

Of course, the downside of this is it's a less

competitive, less flexible labour market that comes with costs.

So again, it's a model and mechanism that can work

very effectively in some contexts.

OK, finally think about labour market management in the Japanese

context, shares of salaries are typically based on firm performance,

so that gives incentives not just to get your wage,

but also to manage uh firms uh output and median

productivity.

And Japanese productivity councils typically or historically limit the wages

differentials between top managers and the lowest paid workers.

OK, so there's a structure of wages that applies.

There is incentives to keep on firm performance and another

emphasis on these.

Long term relationships and making co-investments in human capital on

the job so it's not just about schooling it's an

environment where firms also want to invest in workers because

they'll know they'll get something back, OK?

the the trade off for that is it's a less

competitive market which as a worker isn't always the most

attractive thing.

And finally we think about promotion of export industries.

There's really 4 key policies, and Stiglitz talks a lot

about this in the reading you're gonna look at.

One is the provision of infrastructure.

Singapore is a good example of export oriented infrastructure, ports,

roads, electricity.

OK.

Second example terms of the promotion of export industries is

preferential access to capital.

OK, so capital and investment markets are constrained to promote

industrial development.

And particularly export oriented industry.

Two more pillars to consider and again as good examples

of this.

One is engaging in the development of new export markets.

Lots of economies do this today, but these economies are

quite, I'd say, um.

Proactively doing this in terms of the time as well,

so Singapores do not.

It's a really good step of an early proactive example

of trying to develop new export markets for.

Goods produced domestically.

And finally, and you know, through my lifetime, this has

been quite important that governments did engage in not sure

publicity campaigns is the right story, but efforts to improve

the reputation of the quality of export goods.

OK, so Japanese exports went from being seen as low

quality, unreliable to among the highest quality manufactured goods in

the world.

That wasn't the case when I was a kid.

It certainly is the case now.

OK, so people's impressions of Japanese made cars from the

1960s to 1980s to the 2000s have changed substantially, and

that's again it's partly because the quality has gone up,

but governments can try to engage in like, uh, getting

that information out there as long as it's backed up

by the outcomes.

Let's put it that way.

OK, so there are those some limitations of the East

Asian Development state model.

Hopefully you've got a sense of this already through my

discussion.

Lots of these policies, they try to create markets and

solve market failures, but they also distort markets in other

ways, and some settings, that's gonna be worth it, others

may be.

There's another more broader limitation we might consider which is

what the GDP per capita gains are really impressive.

If we look at labour productivity or we look at

total factor productivity, it's a lot less exciting.

OK, so how much of this is growth through more

intensity, more capital.

More investment, more labour, more education.

It's really a neoclassical ghost growth story of raising factors,

not of raising the sort of productivity to which they're.

OK.

Work by Alvin Young argues that market orientation seems to

matter.

OK, so TAP growth looks higher where in the more

market oriented economies that would again point to again a

bit of a weakness of this model that it's not

really generating productivity growth and you know, maybe in the

early stages of development there's huge gains from this model,

but in the later stages you need to become more

market oriented.

But that transition is really hard to.

Potentially really hard to make.

So just for some evidence before we come to the

end of the lecture, if we look at annual growth

output per capita from 70 to 85, got some, uh,

your, your 4 tigers on the left, followed by Japan

and Egypt and Italy, that's kind of what we've seen

before, but if we look instead at um.

Output per worker, that's already less exciting, right?

Japan and Egypt above the Tigers except for Taiwan, maybe

not what you'd expect.

And then we moved to estimates of TFP growth, and

these are a little bit controversial that some scholars don't

accept the current estimates.

It's a big debate about them.

There's enough evidence like this to suggest TFP growth is

OK in Southeast Asia.

Singapore is an unusual economy, so maybe we don't too

much into that one.

But compared to Europe, even other developing countries, not exception.

So it's not maybe not so much a productivity story,

more an input and sweat story.

Think about that as you go through the readings as

well, so let's end with some final thoughts.

OK, why did Southeast Asia differ from the other state-led

economies?

First of all, we don't have that ISI import substitution

industrialization orientation here, right?

It's export oriented production, trying to get intermediate good production

to solve coordination failures, so not about, you know, making

an intermediate goods sector and protecting it from world markets

until it grows up.

There isn't as there is very little picking of winners

in this model, at least for the sort of final

extra on goods, OK?

It also differs from other state-led economies in terms of

low initial inequality.

So perhaps there are fewer elites to try to capture

the rents from whatever policy direction is taken.

That's again perhaps a big contrast to the story we

tell about Latin America through the second half of the

20th century.

OK.

That said, what is the future of this type of

model?

So what worked well for Japan up to 1985 or

so looks about David through the 1990s, 2000s, and into

the 21st century.

OK.

So once coordination fairs are resolved, should the role of

the government change?

Well, the answer might be yes.

But as you can probably imagine, it's really hard to

unpick these institutions once they're vetted and everyone responds to

the incentives that they creates, OK, I think also we

could ask the question to what extent is this a

product of initial conditions in the region?

If we took the same policy frameworks, development models and

applied them to Paraguay, Uruguay, would you get the same

experience?

I'll let you ponder what I think the answer to

that question is.

All right, thank you for listening and next week we'll

stay in this region and look in detail at the

Chinese.

Yeah.

Hey.

Well Yeah, this is right.

Which.

Let's have a look.

I'm Market orientation matters, right?

So the, so the.

Some of the evidence suggests that East Asian, South Asian

economies that are more market oriented have higher TFP growth.

Because they're oriented towards the market and maybe so exactly

why those studies that say think about that, but because

you know they're just maybe they're market oriented, they're more

dynamic in terms of innovation, productivity gains from the rest

of the world can be.

Yeah, I think the readings for this week's classes, I

think go through some of this debate about understanding the

evidence on productivity and.

Because there was a really big debate about this when

these studies came out, so you'll see that in class

too.

Yeah, yeah.

Hello.

And.

Uh, did a call come out?

Are you, what department are you in?

Wasn't there a call in the department to apply for

internships in it was OK.

I don't know when we'll put up the next call.

Um, sometimes what happens is if you did an internship

and it worked well, the person who hired you will

give you another job.

That's what I've done before.

Um, if they have money, right?

There's less money in the apartment than there used to

be for this.

Who did you?

I, I, you know what, I don't think we should

do unpaid ones because I feel even even with the

best intentions that can go lead to the wrong outcomes.

Yeah, you can other people feel differently about that.

I don't know the policy about it, but I personally

don't like doing it.

Like people who I hired who become my co-authors, I

don't pay them because we're running a paper together.

That's different, you know what I mean?

I always feel I should pay the interns, otherwise I

shouldn't be doing it, but I know I might not

be so I'm not criticising them, but I'm gonna, I'm

gonna tell you they might be willing to do it,

but I don't think the department will like have a

call for unpaid interns.

Probably we'll do another call next academic year.

So you did like your 20 hours for someone so

oh cool.

Lecture 17:

Yeah Now, now we'll do the right and I know

that I needed to do that.

Yeah.

Why?

I Yeah.

Yeah.

I Yes, yes you do Yeah You're not capable.

I.

I I I.

Yeah.

Oh, I I OK.

you Thank you.

Learning how these controls work on this new technology, it's

good.

All right, welcome back to EH 101.

All 6 screens, 123456 are running, um, and today we're

gonna talk about trying to understand the Chinese economic miracle.

So nice build on from last week, moving further and

further away from areas I've researched or have that kind

of knowledge, but that's OK.

Um, a good topic to give an overview, I think

of the main points.

So, all right, so what's the way how we're gonna

focus today?

Uh, first of all, what happened?

Try to think of the fairly long run changes in

living standards and developments over the course of the 20th

century, OK?

And then I'm gonna focus our our thinking about sort

of three periods, OK, and you can imagine a course

about each of these periods we have a full year

course about China's economic history, right, mostly from the 19th

and 20th century, so.

I'm gonna give you a brief overview of some of

these and a bit more detail on other aspects, OK,

but lots of good questions and material in your readings

and also whether you're an EH student or another programme,

you can take our second year course if this fascinates

you, OK?

So the situation before 1949 of stagnation.

The slow growth with some very obvious challenges we'll talk

about, right, 1949 to 1978 and then the more bit

more time on rapid growth from 1970 to 2000 and

indeed beyond.

So most of the story I'll tell you about is

for that third period is the late 20th century changes,

um, but we'll also think a little bit.

I don't like predicting the future, but sort of where

we're at now and what the implications might be for

the next decade or so.

I was a bit reluctant to do that, but, you

know, maybe it's good, I good thinking anyway.

All righty, so what happened, number one, where are some

of the facts?

OK, we start with the pre-1949 period.

Hard to argue one way one way or another on

average for the typical person, we're gonna see some arguments

that there's some differences within as we go, but uh

for the average person living in China but wide, it's

a story of stagnant living.

Standards.

A couple of facts.

1949 in per capita terms, China is more than India

or Africa as a continent wide.

OK, reading those Madison type comparisons, OK, we look at

countries in Africa, the story would be different, but the

continent level comparing China to Africa, that's what you get.

And moreover, income per head in 1949, 1950 is only

1/20th of the case of the United States, which we

think of as the world among these big countries of

world leader in GDP per capita income per head.

So in a picture, OK, we're here, uh, going to

$49.

The red line is Chinese real GDP per capita expressed

in $2011.

This is data you can find on our world and

data, right, slightly older version of it.

Is the red line.

The blue line expresses Chinese GDP per capita as a

percentage of the US, that's the axis here on the

right.

So, sort of stagnant around $800 US dollars in 2011

terms, but falling from about 40% in 1820 to less

than 5% of the US debt.

So that's a relative decline you can't help but notice.

It's really continual through the period, there's a little bump

here, but other than that, it's all going one way.

OK, so in other words, the things that are allowing

the US and Europe to engage in long run sustained

growth haven't happened yet.

Although this little bump period is really interesting, um, won't

say that much about it, but I think it's fascinating.

Um, I did supervise one PhD student working on that

area, so.

So how about the story from 1950 to 1978.

Here the Chinese economy writide grows at 2.5 to 3%

per year, so 2.7% being that long term average.

Now, that sounds pretty good compared to what what comes

before, as you might have seen.

But given the high catching potential for the lowest division,

given you might think the possibilities of borrowing ideas, transferring

technology, learning from the leaders, all that Dersh and cronian

stuff that we saw for Europe and other parts of

the world, this isn't that impressive in a way, right?

It's OK growth.

Not really catching up particularly though with the rest of

the world, and that's really shown by the fact that

China actually falls further behind countries like the Soviet Union

in this period and most of Western Europe and indeed

the United States.

OK, so that growth looks good until you compare to

how everyone else is doing and then it looks quite

a bit more disappointing.

So then from 49, we see the red lines going

up.

Note the huge dips, OK.

So there's also events in China that clearly have negative

repercussions for development.

I'd want to say too much on the great leap

forward of the.

Cultural revolution, but they're going to be part of those

explaining that that jagged perspective we're seeing and again we

compare Chinese GDP per capita relative to the US, the

blue line or relative to the Soviet Union, the yellow

one, you can see really, you know.

It's holding steady at best, OK?

So that's better, but not particularly impressive in and certainly

nothing like what what we know has happened since 1980

or since 1978.

OK.

So from 19 in 1978, there's still this huge catchup

potential.

GDP per capita is still very low compared to the

leaders.

Since 1978, growth is close to 6% annually.

On average, there's There will be lots of variation over

time as we'll see the per capita terms, OK.

And so of course with rapid cash up growth, there's

convergence which you start to see at the end of

the last century and continuing through to this one, OK.

And a further point to add to this is that

there's well there's a good average growth rate, there's clear

convergence, this growth, I'm not gonna say much about this

as we go, but it's a good thing to think

about.

This growth is fairly volatile year on year relative to

some of the other comparator countries.

That's a point I could maybe expand on in the

future of this lecture actually.

So that's the sort of picture I showed you before.

So the blue line is relative to the red line

is the growth takeoff, the blue lines relative to the

USA, the yellow lines relative to the Soviet Union, and

then afterwards Russia.

OK, cause obviously that's what it changed over this period.

OK, so that looks that looks a lot better.

It does come with these bounces, right?

So this volatility is a real substantial thing, so we

can pretty much get why things like the Great Leap

Forward and the Cultural revolution could lead to big swings

in growth, OK, but they're doing things to the way

they're allocating.

Resources that might not match with concerns of economic efficiency,

OK, but here these might be a bit more surprising,

might be worth thinking about a lot more big big

1990 we see other smaller ones throughout the period.

So there's good average growth rates, but a lot of

rendering up and down, OK.

Volatility is not a desirable thing perhaps, so that's not

to to talk down the growth record, but to know

there in the background, OK.

All right, so that's kind of the growth story.

Now, of course, thinking about last week, we might want

to say, well, OK, if we take this growth record

and you'll see this in your readings this for your

readings this week for last week's lecture will dovetail nicely

here, I think, is to think about well of this

amazing growth experience, how much of this is extensive growth?

OK, but what we mean, OK, it's growth in income

per capita, but is it coming through more capital, more

labour versus growth coming from productivity, innovation, all that kind

of thing.

And again, it's the inspiration, perspiration debate.

We could have with the with the Asian tigers.

So is this factor led growth or is this productivity

led growth?

OK, what does the decomposition of growth typically tell us?

OK, in a nutshell, here's what growth looks like from

the 1970s to the 1990s.

Good point again, I gave you the story of sort

of 1978 to 2000-ish, but within that period, there is

also a break, right?

Now that average growth rates are rising over time, OK?

Uh, maybe those volatility dips are less important.

That'd be a good thing to think about actually and

try to break that down as well.

If we then try to say, well, OK, how much

of the growth comes from the extensive side versus the

intensive side, OK?

So what clear extensive factor is the increase in profit

to worker with chunk of those bars, OK, that's most

growth to 1980.

It's a big chunk of growth afterwards, but certainly declining

as a share.

OK, I've also got this yellow little bar in there.

That's a contribution of education, so that's raising human capital,

OK, of course.

That's, you know, um.

Gonna have these ties to workers being to rising labour

productivity with the same capital stock, OK, but clearly education,

increasing educational stocks also make a bit of a dent

to growth.

OK, but the big change over time is what's happening

to TFP.

OK.

So our story up to 1980 would be one of

extensive growth without much productivity post 1980, then you start

to see much more sustained and large TFP growth.

OK, whereas by the final period, or maybe both periods

I'm looking at the right, TFP growth exceeds total growth

after TFP growth after 1980 is higher than total growth

in income per worker before 1980.

OK.

So a clear increasing rise to 2000.

In the extent of TFP growth, so this isn't just

through, um, you know, more savings, getting to capital, more

education, raising rates clearly something about also just productivity is,

is being lifted, OK, so that's quite a positive assessment

if you will, OK, because it's not just catching up

by filling in the investment gaps gaps, it's a lot

more than that.

That's gonna be hard to understand exactly what's behind it,

but we'll see what some of the good candidates are

as we go.

Uh, I think another useful way to think about this

is by looking at like poverty measures, OK, because we're

interested, of course, we're often talk about income per capita,

right?

But income per capita average can hide lots of the

things that matter for, you know, the typical person, right?

And so looking at the extent of poverty is a

good way of capturing that, right, in addition to inequality

alongside inequality statistics perhaps and one thing we certainly know

for China is the number living in absolute poverty.

We might define this as $1.90 per day at exchange

rate, market exchange rates has fallen dramatically over the period

we're looking at.

So this line again.

Evidence up to 2014 for our world and data, uh,

we can, I should probably extend these further, but they'd

be even less interesting because look where we've got to.

So the share under $1.09 per day is pretty much

down to very close to zero by 20 2012, 2012

2013.

The share living under $3 per day, so that's when

we got $1000 US dollars per year.

That's down to about 10%, right?

Look at that, how that was in 1980, OK.

So this is growth that is lifting people out of

true hardcore poverty as well.

So it's productivity growth and it's working through the distribution,

OK, so those are like very um.

What's the word I wanna use positive attractive features of

this experience, OK?

It's not just all being captured by a few, uh,

elites whether they're industrialists or political, whatever the case might

be, OK?

It's changing people's lives in a real way.

I don't think that should be surprising to the room,

but um it's good to see that in data.

One thing I think it is interesting also is that.

Um, if we look at this, get away from income,

get, uh, and the sort of poverty metrics, I think

in terms of health, by 2000, life expectancy in China

is higher than the Philippines, Indonesia, and pretty much level

with Thailand, which at least in 2000 was then far

richer in per capita terms, but I think this is

an interesting one.

The health data looks quite good, despite some of the

things that were almost certainly bad for health in the

period before 17 years, OK.

As I'll tell you, there are big issues with food

avail availability.

There is a famine, right, with a great leap forward,

but the actual measured health outcomes are surprisingly good.

OK, so, so one would be that other aspects of

improved Chinese health dominate the food, the food availability.

Another is, are those health measures, do we trust them?

I'll let you think about that as well a bit.

But if we look at the data we've got on

life expectancy, OK, which probably isn't going, it's hard to

like um fake that one, OK?

That rises from about 30 years, this is from birth,

OK, to Over 60 years, by 1970 and up to

75 years by 2015.

And again this is from birth, right?

So some of this is going to be adults living

longer, a lot of it's going to be reduced infant

mortality.

OK, you're more likely to make it out of your

first year, and that uptick happens well before many of

the other positive economic actions we're gonna talk about today.

So that's an interesting one to think about.

Lots of people have documented this, OK.

I don't sure I understand exactly the timing of this.

It fits with the way I think about Chinese historiography,

but it's definitely there in the data, OK?

And you'll see it in your readings throughout.

So that's just thinking about life expectancy from birth, and

clearly reduced child and infant mortality is a big driver

of that.

Also maternal mortality, that also improves a lot if you

look at Chinese health statistics over the 20th century.

So also interest interesting to think about this, how it

contrasts like to the rest of the region over the

period.

So this is sort of a curve linking life expectancy

at birth is on your.

Uh, vertical axis, sorry, I was gonna think about this.

The horizontal axis is GNP gross national product per capital,

another, another measure of income per person, right?

And you know, uh, that's sort of the curve that

sort of fits these data, although not so well really,

it's sort of older data, right?

And you know, China lies above that curve, so it's

doing better than you expect based on the table in

terms of like.

OK, so don't say that much about why this is

in the rest of this lecture.

I think that's something.

I'm gonna maybe think about more in the future, I

think that's an interesting fact that I feel is uh

maybe a bit under discussed, OK?

So that's a good one to ponder.

All right, so let's think of these three periods, and

here I'm gonna try to summarise, uh, several lecture courses

of history into 30 minutes.

So get, get, get running, not get running, but I

can, I can only say so much, right?

I'm gonna give you, uh, it's gonna have to be

a little bit superficial because what can we say in

30 minutes, but some of the features, OK, here we

go.

So I'm gonna roll back to like 1911, the end

of the Qing dynasty, OK?

All right.

So, uh, what's the story circa 1911?

The Qing dynasty is what is about to collapse, OK.

Under the Qing dynasty, what does the Chinese economy look

like?

It's very centralised.

It's very internally focused, OK.

The chain is a highly central, it's a very centralised

government, if you want to put it this way, but

at the same time it has weak administrative capacity and

also very limited fiscal capacity, so it's centralised but can't

do much in terms of policy levers, OK.

Another big feature of the late period of these these

treaty courts, right, which exposed China to the rest of

the world as a result of treaties from initially the

first Opium War but also later treaties with Western powers.

So these treaty ports allow like Western influence into these

port cities in China, you have these International concessions that

allow commerce, foreign merchants to set up residences in these

locations, OK?

And what they do is they start to open up

China to exposure to these Western peoples, OK.

So that starts in the 1840s.

It takes a while to build these treaty ports though.

that kind of rupture, if you want to use that

term gets wider over the late 19th and early 20th

century.

OK.

One of the big keys in this rupture is the

Sino-Japanese war in 1894 to 1895 where uh it becomes

it becomes obvious that the industrialising Japanese economy now has

this, um, industrial and become superiority to China at least

for capita terms.

And so that really exposes people to the idea that

the Chinese economic model and state model isn't delivering the

results that countries that are adopting more from the West

and innovating have taken up, OK?

What are the other consequences of the.

Sino-Japanese war is post the treaty that ends this war

allows the treaty ports not just to be commercial centres

but also to engage in industrial production.

So that's gonna like increase their influence on the direction.

Uh, and the demand for change in urban China, OK?

That's really glossing over lots of details, that's one way

to tell the story, OK.

The Qing dynasty collapses in 1911, then you enter this

very unstable, I think from my limited experience, very interesting

period, so you can start with a.

So-called warlorder from 1911 to 1927 when there isn't really

an effective central government in China, there's lots of conflicts

dispersed around the country and continent, OK, and effectively most

regions fall under local military rule.

You might think that's not really good for development outcomes,

and you're probably right to think that, but also makes

China much less centralised, much more decentralised.

That leads to different locations, experimenting with different ways of

governing.

It leads to different locations deciding to invest in schooling

locally that wouldn't happen under a central government the same

way.

OK, so it's unstable and bad for growth on one

hand, but also decentralisation has benefits potentially.

OK, so I can't say much more than that in

a 50 minute lecture, but it's an interesting period, a

very unstable one.

From 1927, the the Kuomintang sets up a central government

in Nanjing that is a little bit more effective at

least in terms of urban areas, but struggles to impose

much control outside the cities.

OK, so still, while there is a slight.

The more effective central government, one that has some like

developmental ideas, OK, lots of China remains for this for

the time being decentralised and sort of, you know, local

gentry, local officials continues to matter a lot.

The other feature of the period post 1927 is that

the treaty ports become more entrenched and in some sense

more important, OK?

They get bigger in terms of the number of residents,

including Chinese folks who live there, connections between Chinese merchants

and European merchants increase.

There's industrial production post 1895, so they become a much

stronger and more visible part of the economy, OK.

Uh, and then to end this chaotic period, if you

will, it's the Japanese invasion of China in 37, and

then of course the civil war that follows the end

of the Second World War.

OK, so this looks like a tough time, it is.

That said, some would say.

That you start to see the beginnings of modern economic

growth or these are things that might underpin it, OK.

So one thing we know that happens in the tour

in this period is a big expansion of factory production,

mostly in textiles in the lower Yang Sea in Manchuria,

the places where foreign influence was the strongest.

So industrialization comes to China to a much larger extent,

despite the sort of really difficult backup I I just

think um.

The difficult backdrop I just painted for you.

We also know that China starts to attract lots of

FDI in this period.

So in 1938, that's a tricky year to look at,

but it's where we have some evidence.

Uh, about 8% of world FDI goes to China to

these treaty ports, right?

So it's starting to be a magnet for capital, OK,

and that's gonna matter in this period.

It might also question mark have some legacies for later

as well.

If we think about investment industry, there's a big expansion

in like railroads across China 21,000 kilometres by 1937.

I forgot to check the starting point in 1906, but

it's very small.

And the other thing that's really interesting is there is

a big expansion, especially at primary and to a lesser

extent secondary schooling, and that's something that happens locally, right?

So that becomes much more decentralised after the chain.

In the warlord era, as I called it, local governments

make these school decisions, right, or Give out the governments,

the gentry and local areas.

Oh, I've got Eric's name on this slide.

Go delete that, uh.

Make these local decisions.

Some evidence on that comes through the number of primary

schools.

This is from a PhD written at LSE that I

was one of the advisors on actually about um 10

years ago.

Yeah, that's when Pei wrote this paper or published it

as a working paper.

So this traces the number and the composition of primary

schools in China from 1916 to 1946.

So big increase in the number of schools from about

12,000 to over 30,000, and also a big increase in

the share of like public state schools.

So it's a shift from traditional Chinese education, she would

say to a bit more modern.

Schooling provided locally at sort of local um public expense,

OK, and again that's an underpinning of growth that we

see happening despite the chaos of the of the republican

period.

So it's a fascinating period.

I can only talk about for 10 minutes or so

in the lecture, but that gives you some of the

like key things for long run growth we we might

want to talk about.

I always feel like one lecture in China is a

tough one, but hey.

It's a tour of the world, right?

OK, so then we can move forward to the sort

of communist window era, if you will, and slow growth,

uh.

Yeah.

OK.

Are there a question mark?

Are there successes in the early communist era?

Well, maybe there are, OK.

First of all, there is an expansion.

Don't know how impressive it is compared to Europe, but

it's not zero of industrial and technological capacity.

So, so there is building on the bits that are

begun in Republican China.

Whether this expansion is rapid or not, maybe when you're

doing the reading, uh, I should have thought about this.

Ask yourself that question, but there is expansion.

It's not zero, OK.

We do know that the expansion of education does continue

at a somewhat more impressive rate.

OK, so that also seems to build on the pre-World

War II period and to me, surprisingly, considering some of

the background developments, there is consistent evidence of improvement in

health in terms of life expectancy, lots of that coming

through, improved maternal mortality, OK, although there are also, there

are also health period we're talking a bit more about

that.

That said, the growth is mostly on the extensive margin

and increased share of GDP is invested.

This isn't there, when they, to the extent there is

any growth, OK.

We saw it about 2.5% per year.

It's mostly coming through more investments, more labour into the

production process, a bit more education, not much productivity growth.

So scaling up but without becoming more efficient and more

productive, certainly the way it's happening elsewhere in the West

and eventually elsewhere in Asia.

OK, so this is limited success, and we'd have to

put that against.

Failures or big challenges and again we could have a

whole course about these right and evaluating this failure success

of the PRC, which is some of the things that

come up as big potential challenges.

One has to do with certainly the early period like

as we talk about the Soviet Union with Judith, what

are the um are these quote unquote do we see

anti-an?

In other words, there is a focus on planning.

What is planning do incentives and does that destroy the

possibility for productivity gains?

So again, planning, uh, enforces targets, takes away incentives to

do things more productively perhaps, OK.

Planning also affects resource allocation.

So in a market system, if the labour or capital

is in the wrong place, right, prices signal that it

should.

That's not gonna happen in this environment, right?

So those are the most obvious things we talked about

in any plant system, they apply here too.

OK.

Another feature of again other and it's not the only

sort of um communist economy period is limited labour mobility,

which also affects resource allocation for neighbours.

So it's a sohuku is a system of family registration

that limits particularly migration to urban areas and again in

terms of getting labour to the places it's most valued,

that's gonna put quite a bit of sand, a bit

of uh limitations in the system.

OK, so getting labour capital to the right places to

respond to incentives, that's gonna be really um Diminished by

the way the system works, especially through to the mid

1970s, OK?

And again, um, that's what we see, that's one reason

we see GDP growth not really being matched by consumption,

OK, and particularly if we think about food consumption, so

if you try to look under the hood of GDP

per capita, set aside the life expectancy data, the evidence

on food consumption is kind of almost concerning.

OK, there's evidence that in the early 1970s, food consumption

in rural China was probably no better than the 1930s.

OK, and we know of course as well and this

also matters for uh leaving these other barriers aside, right?

This matters for an economy, um.

Yeah.

Are you happy still?

OK.

Good.

This matters for an economy that might want to switch

from rural agricultural based to being more urban based.

If food production is an issue, food consumption is a

challenge, that's gonna make moving to the urban areas much

more challenging where you can't like grow the subsistence in

order to survive.

OK, so lack of food markets and lack of a

surplus to distribute is a problem.

And of course we have the big on cables, right?

So the great leap forward.

It leads to a subsistence crisis, right, that will certainly

cause the great Chinese famine which left 20 to 45

million dead.

OK.

So again those health statistics are quite surprising, you might

say, but we have this happening on the on the

on the side as well.

We can also think of the cultural revolution inducing again

labour misallocation, right, but also leading to political instability as

you know, views, knowledge become uh contested and a source.

Of potential imprisonment, to put it in one sentence.

So again I'm getting this something we talked lots about

especially with an expert they give you some sense of

the issues, right?

Planning is a challenge, resource allocation is a problem, food

and and food supplies are a big barrier to personal

development and also to making the economy more urban and

more industrial, OK.

So that's the story to 1978 in a very small

nutshell.

Let's now focus a little bit more on the post

178 period where we we'll sort of spend most of

the rest of the lecture, OK.

I always feel like I could, should say more, but

hey, can't do it.

Correct.

So if we think about turning points, one might be

1976 when Mao Zedong dies, and the reformers led by

Deng Xiaoping come to power.

What are the reformers who follow Mao interested in?

There's really two main concerns which fit with the discourse

we've had and also mimic the issues that arose towards

the end of the Qing and the beginning of the

20th century.

First of all, is food security.

Levels of food consumption are low.

Surely they have health implications, right, which, yeah, but also

they limit your ability to have the economy transition into

higher value activities, right?

Whether it's planned for the markets, lack of food is

a huge challenge, right?

It encourages very conservative behaviour and life strategies.

Second is there's now a big economic gap between Taiwan,

Hong Kong, and indeed other places in the in the

in the in the region.

It becomes harder and harder to ignore that, and those

big gaps threaten the legitimacy of your approach to governance.

So the changes required so that we can develop more,

you will put it that way, through food security, but

also because alternative modes of development are doing well in

our region and so something has to change or we're

gonna get changed out, put it, put in those terms.

And those changes do happen, so I like this picture.

I think Eric found this a few years ago.

That's Pudong District of Shanghai.

The top picture is 1987.

The lower picture is 2013.

It looks a bit different.

OK.

So what sort of things allowed for this change, which

really fits with the many of the long-term aims of

the reformers from the mid to late 1970s.

OK, so we're gonna focus on a series of explanations,

some easy to explain, some harder to, OK.

So from savings, OK, that is, that is, it is

a big, big chunk is built on investment, OK.

Secondly, facilitating central shifts, so getting the economy out of

being mostly agricultural and into a much more urban and

industrial.

Economies of scale matter, and then we can think about

things related to policy, both direct policy initiatives, OK.

Ways in which the Chinese economy became more open, at

least more uh attractive to FDI, OK, and also right

in a planned economy, the state enterprises are really important,

right?

They're run and managed by the state.

They have soft budget constraints.

The managers don't have that much authority.

is sort of new enterprise forums that return some incentives

to those making the decisions or return decision capacity to

those running the firms, but for the ongoing state enterprises,

they've been a big part of the economy and what

happens to them?

There's a big debate about that, uh, but I'll give

you one side of it perhaps towards the end of

the century.

OK, so we start by thinking about savings.

Importance.

Circa 2000 Chinese savings rates are among the highest in

the world, OK, and you know, a huge chunk of

these savings can be recycled from state banks to state

enterprises.

So even if those enterprises aren't super efficient or incredibly

productive, they are becoming much more capital intensive.

So maybe even for the least innovative part of the

economy, at least have benefited from.

Growing capital labour issues.

So why does China have this high savings rate?

And high capacity to save.

We talked last week about this idea of culture Confucianism.

It's not on my slide, but maybe you can entertain

that too.

But there's some other more tangible ones we can grab.

What might be a response to life expectancy, OK, as

people are living longer, they're killing income over a longer

time period.

The idea of saving now for the future becomes a

more realistic and pertinent objective.

Another demographic factor has to do with like very small

family size on the one child policy.

OK, so if we have lots of adults, not many

children, adults are living longer, they don't have many dependents,

and so consumption needs to keep the family going and

running smaller.

There's a more capacity, more savings coming on stream once

incomes are high enough for people to be able to

save, OK.

So again, you know, instead of leading on your children

for retirement, you need to save for retirement because life

expectancy is higher, you start to actually maybe retire, OK?

So these demographic changes combined with the changes in income

that need to have to support this are gonna potentially

generate more savings and of course savings means investments and

that's gonna lead to capital deepening and more capital for

work.

So similar story to elsewhere but like the the the

stock and the increase in the stock of savings to

mobilise for this in China is quite remarkable.

OK, so we can't ignore that part.

OK, uh, mm.

Yeah.

OK, another big part of the story is this transition

out of agriculture and into industry and services.

So in 1978, 70% of the workforce is 19 in

agriculture, that falls to about 50% by the early 1990s.

By the late 2010s, only a quarter of the workforce

on agriculture.

So it goes from most workers being in agriculture to

only 1 in 4.

Very quickly, OK, so this structural change, you're taking workers

out of lower productivity activities and into industry and then

services where productivity is higher.

So this sectoral adjustment is going to do a lot

of work for raising income per capita.

Also, you're shifting out of low productivity activities into high

ones.

Think about those structural changes and how they might fit

into a TFP calculation as well, or a TFP decomposition

as well.

So part of the story is about agriculture to industry

and eventually services.

I don't know about the slides, but I think we

can also think about that.

A second part of the story is going to be

within the industrial sector, that there's a shift from less

productive to more productive industries.

OK.

The sort of traditional, the big old state-owned enterprises become

smaller relative to these other slightly more nimble firms we'll

talk about in a few minutes, and those reallocations within

the industry also raise productivity.

Uh, also lead to productivity improvements and, and most uh

conventionals would say these sexual shifts could account for about

30% of TFP growth.

OK, so that's substantial, right?

Just changing what the economy does and what work labour

is doing in the economy is a big story of

this, and again this has a bit of a catch

up convergence flavour, right?

It's making the structure of China look more like say

Western Europe or North America.

OK, so perhaps not surprising you get lots of really

nice growth convergences out of this.

Um, We can also think about economies of scale, so

the sort of the uh earlier communist economy features quite

a bit of small scale production, OK, uh, some of

these, these really um disruptive.

Experiences like the great before actually tend to lead to

production, uh uh sorry, a fall in the size of

production units on average that gets reversed post 1978 and

you know, as the size of firms and industry rises,

unit costs also fall.

So bigger firms and bigger plants are not necessarily good

big firms go to a cartelized not very competitive economy,

right?

So we would, we might be sceptical about that in

a market-based economy.

In this context, the advantages of scale probably exceed the

the potential costs of cartelization.

I think we talked about last week, right, in the

context of last week.

The stories we tell about size and scale here seem

to be quite important again if you do a sort

of TFP decomposition that could also count for about a

third of the year.

OK, so scaling up into more productive, more productive size

enterprises also seems to be a big boost to um

productivity.

OK, so getting workers to the right place, making those

remaining enterprises bigger, OK, and then we can think about

how policy fits in on top of this, OK, yeah,

mostly through the way policy.

Changes and strengthens the incentives to uh engage in the

productive activities.

So we're gonna focus on these acronyms, OK, the household

responsibilities or HRS Township village and Township Village Ed Township

Village Enterprises, or TPE, the Contract management responsibility System CMRS.

I love acronyms you can tell.

Uh, we'll start with those because they actually share quite

a few similar features, as I think you'll be convinced

by the end, and you'll also see your readings too.

OK, um, then we'll sort of think about sort of

openness to globalisation more generally and then finally the remaining

role for state enterprises.

OK, let's start with the uh these acronym policies and

I always have to make sure I remember these rights

and how to explain them.

Whoops, OK.

So start with HRS, the House of Responsibility system.

What's the what's the idea here?

I've got some extra notes here just in case, OK,

yeah, good.

Essentially, this gives agricultural households more um management control over

what they do, OK.

So under this model, farm households, they don't own the

land or have tenure, but they have the slight up

for 15 years, OK.

So having a slightly longer time frame on which you

will own, not own, but operate the land, creates some

incentives to improve it.

OK, this is a good point of contrast to communal

agriculture before 1978.

So under your communal system, the land, you don't have

a like ownership or management connection with it, your incentives

to improve the land for the future through fertilisation, changing

the crops, all that kind of stuff, uh, is much

more blunted, OK.

So here we're giving the households uh the ability and

rights to make some decisions over what they do with

the land that they're assigned, OK?

It starts in some areas from 1978, becomes a national

policy from 1981.

The share of rural households exposed to HRS, it's, you

know, above 50% by 1981 and pretty complete by 1983.

So it gives this, it has these long term land

assignments and and also through this gives some incentives to

make productivity enhancing investments, OK?

Perhaps not to the same degree as private ownership where

you own the land forever, can sell it, give it

to your your children can inherit it however you wanted

to manage this, right?

Here you don't have quite those incentives, but still it's

a contrast to collective ownership.

The other part of HRS is that there is a

degree of market liberalisation, so this is a markets are

good story as well, OK, in that farmers, there is

still under a collective farm system, right, collective farms are

given a quota of stuff to produce for the state,

right?

The state pays them a procurement price for that stuff,

whether it's grain or rice or whatever the case might

be.

Under the HRS, now once you produce above quota, you

can sell those on the track market at the marketplace,

OK?

It also means if you satisfy the state quota of

grain, then you want to grow fruits or raise animals

to do something else for the rest of your allocation,

you can do that.

OK, so it's incentive there to change what you do.

HRS also made it easier to purchase and to trade

inputs between farms.

OK, well that.

And while there was still a large outlook of procurement

to a national plan, there's also a rise in procurement

prices that gives more income, whoops, more income to farmers

operating under this system.

So we think about the effects of the of the

household responsibility system right and this is important because this

is the number one problem right?

solving the food shortage, right?

That's the first thing you gonna solve you're one of

those reformers, right, because you might think who cares about

farm systems where this is, you know, growth is about

industry, right?

But the first thing you gotta solve in this case

are these food shortages.

OK, first effect, that's the number one thing where the

farmers wanted was a big increase in grain output which

rose about a third in just 6 years from 1978

to 1984.

So it really looks like giving farmers more responsibility in

managing their land leads to more output on that land.

That's productivity, right?

Second, there's an even more rapid rise in cash crops,

so they don't just produce grain more productively, they also

shift activity into higher valued, um.

Outputs, OK.

In other words, reallocating labour from collectives stimulated productivity growth.

Here's the evidence, OK.

This, I, I need to find a way to trace

this back to '78, but the red line is, is

grain from 1985 to 1995.

So that's got a nice steady upward trend, and it

will be much lower down around 250 or so we

could trace back to 1978 based on what I just

told you.

I look for that number.

The blue line gives you the amount of fruit production

in tonnes, and that rises much more sharply, especially after

1990.

So it's partly responding to consumers who have more income

to buy alternative foodstuffs, but clearly people are allocating more

time to higher value agricultural production.

That's productivity growth, right, through changes within agriculture as well.

So this sort of addresses the first problem farmers wanted

and also leads to more persistent productivity effects through changes

in activities within farming.

OK, how about these these township village enterprises Again this

is a model where instead of having um all enterprises

run and managed by the state, local communities now get

the right to make responsible decisions for the.

Rural industrial enterprises.

So again, I think it's a bit like the HRS.

I don't have much detail to show you, but the

story is instead of the central state deciding on enterprises,

now communities can locally control and manage their enterprises.

They're still subject to working with the centralised state.

OK, but they get, they get lots for management responsibility

at the local level and through the system these TVEs

see a hundredfold rise in employment from 1978 to about

1993.

So this is collective, this is going from collectively owned

to locally owned and managed and it's much more flexible

at the local level.

OK, so it becomes an alternative to the traditional state

owned enterprise.

CMRS is like HRS for industry, OK, and a bit

like the story for Township Village township village enterprises or

under the CMRS or CRS you sometimes you refer to

firm managers now have more discretionary power, OK.

So the firm can decide about employments, including to some

extent salaries, about how to plan production at the cell,

also more autonomy in terms of what to do investments,

where to invest, and what to do with retain.

So again, it's going for a very centralised top down

system to in both rural and urban industry.

Allowing managers in this case, communities in the town to

village enterprise case to make local decisions based on a

responsibility based on local economic signals.

OK, so it's a bit going from a pure planned

economy to one where market signals right about who to

hire, how to produce, and what to do with their

savings can be made locally.

OK, for the CMRS, the autonomy and responsibility varies by

location in China also across firms, OK, but eventually this

by the late 1980s, this becomes a system that predominates

across China's industry as well.

OK, to move on a little bit, right?

In terms of openness, the best example are these special

economic zones.

First one set up in the 19 in the late

1980s, sorry, late 1970s in Guangdong and Fujian.

There are more special economic zones around China set up

in the 1984.

These again provide someity in terms of independence in approving

foreign investments and also what to do with the earnings

that result from them.

So these special economic zones become FDI magnets.

They're built like the treaty courts of the 20th century.

Often the FDIs are coming from overseas Chinese immigrants or

ethnic communities, OK, and when these special economic zones are

set up in the late 1970s, they're quite, um, they

have a labour intensive orientation, OK.

And that's really good timing, right, because the other Asian

tigers start out producing labour intensive goods like textiles, shoes,

and so forth.

When labour costs are rising in Singapore, Japan, Taiwan, Hong

Kong, those type of activities shift to the SECs where

wages and labour costs are still quite a bit lower.

So they come on stream just as the advantages of

the other locations are no longer as pronounced.

OK, so they can move into those markets and of

course eventually move out of labour intensive production into much

more capital intensive activities as we get into the 21st

century.

OK, um, about FDI, we know China is a leading

FDI destination in Asia thanks in part to these SEZs.

However, the per capita endowments aren't so exciting, so this

is still quite concentrated in a few places.

So again, we saw this picture last week of foreign

asset stocks, right?

They're big or FDI, they're big in China relative to

the rest of the, the rest of Asia.

If we take this oops in per capita terms, there's

something wrong with this.

Oh sorry, if we compare this to the west, that's

not quite as impressive, OK?

I should have taken these slides out.

In per capita terms, however, this reminds you that these

locations attract a lot of FDI, but per capita terms

they're not as pronounced as elsewhere in the region.

So that could be a small part of the story,

but, you know, a small part that's focused in certain

locations.

OK.

I know I'm getting a bit late on time.

I have too many slides today.

It's unusual actually.

Finally, for state owned enterprises, they account for about 80%

of industrial industrial production in 1978, and they have really

no market experience.

I like this quote.

You'll see in your readings.

Our job is to produce sewing machines.

Costs are the concern of the general company office.

In other words, they're not looking at prices, market signals,

what's demand, all that kind of stuff.

So how do you modernise these behemoths that dominate the

market?

Well, one is these things we talked about CMRS and

TVEs which eat away at the edge, but for those

remaining state on state owned enterprises, there is an increase

in autonomy without privatisation.

One of the challenges for state owned enterprises, they have

what we call soft budget constraints, right?

So if you go over costs.

Doesn't really matter.

There's a sort of the same constraints on using resources

officially that happen in a market-based firm.

So one way to tighten it up a bit is

to shift to a system of bank loans instead of

state grants.

OK, the way workers are hired changes a shift from

lifetime employment towards more contract, uh, more contract work and

also.

Allowing state enterprises to retain some of their profits for

investment.

So again, a story about allowing more management control applies

pretty much across the Chinese industrial and across the set

of Chinese industrial and industrial activities.

Let me conclude in one minute.

So, uh, I'm gonna skip this quote, OK, and think

about the future.

So what looks positive, what might look less for you.

First of all, um, there is still scope for continued

factory allocation and more factory accumulation, especially human capital.

We expect the state to get smaller and also perhaps

become more market focused and market exposed.

So some of the long run transitions we I've been

telling you about today, some of the easy games China's

enjoyed since 1980 or 1978, they can continue to some

extent into the next decade or maybe in the next

decade or two, OK, I'll let you think about how

long, but there's still more scope for those games.

The future is also gonna come with challenges, right?

Demographics were a boon for savings.

But there will be a challenge in the future in

terms of labour supply, paying for retirement, all these features

are set to decline.

The productivity growth through the Chinese well we might wonder

how certain that is, OK.

These large state firms, the biggest ones remain quite inefficient.

OK, so how much more can you leverage productivity gains,

uh, building off the existing system?

And finally, there's a question about like maybe the political

system, how will that affect the extent of reallocations in

the future?

OK, and again, the classic problems of state management right

that the state managed economy encourages rent seeking, picking winners,

is the economy market oriented enough to avoid those problems?

And finally, what about institutions?

Or is the institutional framework for China rights or sustained

growth?

I think I'll leave you with that for today.

So thanks for listening.

Next week we're gonna talk about another part of the

world, my last lecture.

Uh, African economic development.

Thank you for listening.

See you then.

The taxes Yeah Yeah

Lecture 18:

I thought Yes OK, everybody, um, just before we begin,

so where is everybody?

Is this normal attendance?

No.

Does anybody know what's going on?

Usually, usually we're full, right?

Yeah, OK, um.

Well, I guess it's a mystery, um.

With a, with a smaller group feel free to raise

your hand and ask questions that, that will flow more

organically.

Um, first off, uh, welcome, welcome to the lecture.

Um nice to see you again.

Uh, remember me.

Um, so I'm gonna take you through the last two

lectures.

Um, today's lecture is going to be on something called

deindustrialization.

We'll talk through that and it'll.

Develop into A discussion of inequality, regional inequality today, but

next week we're gonna talk about inequality more, more generally.

So, um, a large part of the focus of what

I talked to you about last year, last calendar year,

this academic year was the origin of economic growth during

the industrial revolution.

And that involved a Productivity advance typically Typically in manufacturing,

manufacturing industry, it's in cotton, textiles, specifically, but also other

places more generally and other industries more generally.

But what tends to happen over time is that countries

that have an industrial revolution experience high rates of growth,

tend to go through a phase of deindustrialization.

That is their industrial or more specifically, their manufacturing industry

tends to shrink.

As a proportion of their GDP as as proportion of

their labour force.

So that's what we're going to look at today.

And what I'm going to develop for you though is

why is this interesting?

OK.

Well, I think it leads to a lot of very

critical.

policy issues in relation to places that just get left

behind.

There are places on this island, but also in America

and in Europe, where you get these kind of uh

reversals of economic fortune.

So what you see is the emergence of places that

get left behind, and this creates a huge kind of

policy issue, and we'll finish off with some research on

this as well.

So here we have a hulking old ship being being

taken by a tugboat to be dismantled on the kind

of declining days of the British Empire.

Um, and as I said before, the, the evidence is

actually from a perspective, if you look at uh or

if you tour the north of England, um, which is

quite You know, interesting, um, for those people who don't

know it, there's quite a lot of scarring from the

old industrial architecture, the old abandoned factories, old abandoned mills.

Um, and what you see in say countries like the

United States and say the russels, say, even in downtown

Detroit, you see a lot of industrial room.

OK.

And what's interesting about this is that these places were

once thriving places where people were, were, were getting rich,

were being productive, inventing new technologies, and these are real

engines of social mobility.

But today, these places are Like basically pockets of despair,

OK, these are places where dreams go to that, OK.

There's a real social problem in many of the rust

belt, uh, the north of England, and you can see

this because you look at something and face it as

how long people are in.

You can see huge variation, decades difference in terms of

the age at which people are, but we think that.

a lot of poverty, if they're smoking, if they're drinking,

if they're taking fentanyl, OK, so a large plan.

Uh, you know, slice of contemporary economic delays pain is

actually going to be covered today in terms of where

this comes from, at least in a kind of associative

sense.

We see this, we see these places emerge out of

nowhere.

North of England, the industrial belt, uh, you know, Michigan,

Detroit, all these places in the US we can see

across Europe as well.

But then what happens is that these places tend to

kind of rise and fall, and it's a bit of

a mystery as to what's going on, but we'll talk

about it today.

So we, we, we started the course by looking at

this, you know, very simple kind of summary of all

of the economic history, and the summary goes something like

this.

For a long time, nothing happens.

And then suddenly you get the industrial revolution and we

get modern economic growth and something happens, OK?

So deindustrialization, as we'll come to in a moment, is

kind of this phase that we're going through right at

the end of this graph.

But remember that in the Malthusian era.

Demography determined living standards.

Basically there was no long run sustained increase in incomes,

and these are primarily agricultural economies.

And we get the industrial revolution as being the origin

of growth because you get growth in English, OK, particular

manufacturing, which we'll talk about today.

So this is what we'll talk about today, we'll talk

about what is deindustrialization.

We'll have a go at explaining uh what deindustrialization might

be, er why it might have happened, and then what

I want to take this information for you and kind

of process it through the lens of regional inequalities, OK,

we'll talk a bit about that and then there's a

kind of a, So to speak, research postcard, uh, from

my own research on the inequalities between the north and

south of England, but the lessons from that, I think

apply to other places at other times.

And forgive me for my kind of uh lack of

elegance today.

Um, I've been hit hard by allergies recently.

I don't know if maybe that's affecting everybody else that's

why they didn't bother coming in.

Um, but, um, yeah, so if I, if I've got

the snuffles, I'm fine, thanks for asking, but it's just

allergies, OK.

Um, OK, so let's keep going.

And as I said before, because we've got a relatively

smaller group, do, do stick your hand up if you

want to ask a question, um, that's fine.

So what is deindustrialization?

Well, it's the relative decline of industry relative to other

sectors of the economy, OK, that could be primarily services

and we'll look at that in a moment.

And when we see it as I've alluded to before,

we see observe it in the UK and the US

in over the past few decades, particularly since the 1970s,

OK.

And and as I've said before, um, the most interesting

part of this is that it creates these persistent regional

inequalities.

So as we looked at in the world economic history

in one picture slide, we saw that growth was slow

before the industrial revolution, and the industrial revolution was driven

by growth in labour productivity in uh manufacturing industry.

And if you recall our lecture all the way back

uh years ago about the Allen thesis, a lot of

it was focused upon technological advance, uh, being kind of.

You know, impulsed by relative factor prices, but this technological

advance was happening primarily um in industry, OK?

So basically, we saw in that lecture that textiles were

the classic growth industry of the industrial revolution.

And a large part of the story for England is

the decline of textiles from the north of England and

being replaced by imports from the rest of the world

and principally China, OK?

So that's a huge part of the story, globalisation.

And in the US I guess you have the decline

of the automobile industry, but also a myriad of industries.

So what you had was high growth in the relative

share of the economy doing manufacturing industry.

Then it stops and actually reverses, such that it looks

like there's a systematic relationship between, you know, industrialization and

deindustrialization and wealth.

So as countries get rich, go from being very poor

to rich, they industrialise, and as they get richer and

richer, they de-industrialize.

Basically export all their industrial sectors to the rest of

the world.

OK, China is doing is making our clothes and uh

all the all the kind of manufacturing industries while the

UK and the US specialise more and more in services,

OK?

So we saw this in the example.

Uh, of the British Industrial Revolution, it was a much

broader change than these pictures which we looked at before

indicate, but what you had was sustained productivity advance.

OK.

What does that mean?

It means that people got better at making goods per

unit time, OK, per worker or or per worker.

OK.

So with the same amount of input, you got more

kind of output.

OK, and you can see how the spinning Jenny kind

of Got together a lot of spindles here in the

bottom graph, replacing the The one spindle by the, the

spinster, um, you know, uh, in the top picture.

We'd see this weaving as well as we saw before,

and we also saw the emergence of the factory system,

and we saw a new urban landscape dominated by cold

smoke and the kind of world documented.

By poets and writers of the industrial revolution era, such

as Charles Dickens.

But remember, a crucial part of this picture is that

often this industrialization was very regionally clustered, OK?

And we'll kind of recap that a little bit as

we go through today's lecture.

You're going to see how the industrial revolution was generally

clustered in the north of England.

And as you go through the 20th century, those industries

declined.

They're basically outcompeted by Chinese imports and other dynamics we'll

talk about in the lecture.

But these places decline, but they don't replace them with

anything that can actually uh make the region rich again.

And these regions have become very poor, people die young,

and they have huge social problems.

They, they have huge drug and unemployment issues and uh

it's a persistent policy problem to understand what to do.

So The sectors of the economy, uh, we've got primary,

secondary tertiary, primary being agriculture, farming, fishing, mining, secondary being

the the indu industry, manufacturing stuff, things, construction, food processing,

refinery, tertiary services.

As countries go from being rich to poor, they tend

to specialise in one of these sectors when countries are

very poor and the Malthusian stagnation.

Uh, they basically specialise in agriculture.

Productivity is low, people need to eat, so 80% or

so of the population is devoted to producing food, OK?

As countries have an industrial revolution, it's called an industrial

revolution as labour goes to, uh, industry, there tends to

be productivity advanced in industry, but also agriculture as well,

OK.

But there's also a scope for trade, and then as

countries get richer, as I've already alluded to, there's greater

specialisation in services, OK?

And you can actually see this in the data.

So here is basically the, the picture, this is from

1801.

To 2011 for the United Kingdom, and you can see

that the UK, um, you know, has generally had like

an early industrial revolution.

So it's very heavy into services and industry, even in

the 19th century.

But you can see that basically by 2011, you can

see that the industrial part has really shrunk an awful

lot from I think this is about 45% to about

like, you know, 15%.

And you can see that agriculture here is just shrunk

away to be, to be absolutely, like to be very

close to zero.

So we see this, this decline from 50% in 1960

to 24 in 2011, this is what we call deindustrialization.

So the definition of deindustrialization is just the declining relative

of share of industry, whether as a proportion of GDP

or as a proportion of the labour force, OK?

This is uh people where people are employed, and you

can see that people are either employed in agriculture or

industry.

Um, or services, and you can see that these shares

are changing over time, very dramatically so in agriculture, but

also in manufacturing industry, and services are becoming a greater

and greater share of the economy as we go through

time.

As I kind of hinted to you already, there seems

to be a systematic relationship between wealth as proxied by

GDP per capita at the country level, and the degree

of manufacturing, er, and the degree of industrialization.

Here's proxyed by the share of manufacturing in total employment,

so labour shares, and you can see that when countries

are very, very, very poor.

Ethiopia, Tanzania, perhaps Nigeria being examples.

You can see that there's very low proportions of these

populations in industrial employment, but look at the mid-range, China,

um, and other places here that basically you can see

that as countries get a bit richer, they move a

greater share.

Of their population from agriculture to industry.

Think about one of the dynamics that's involved here.

Moving population from agriculture to industry, what does it also

imply?

It implies urbanisation.

OK.

So you're getting much greater urbanisation at this stage as

well, OK?

But then you can see that this is today's lecture

is that there's a point when countries become richer that

they start to de-industrialize, OK?

They don't deurbanize, by the way, they actually still, the

urbanisation thing still goes ahead.

But you can see that this process seems to happen

almost mechanically.

As a function of um of uh.

Of the kind of growth of the wealth of nations.

And you can see this in, in bunch of different

metrics.

The last one here was the share of industry in

employment, and here we have the industry as a share

of GDP.

So crucial to kind of think about both of those

measures.

And you can see here that the, the, the, the

shape is kind of a little bit.

slower going down, but even more sharper on this side,

going down at the top levels of GDP per capita.

And this is just to show you this kind of

great stylized fact of of of economic history, that the

higher the labour share is in agriculture, the poorer the

economy.

And you can see that that's, that basically these countries

have such such kind of technological advance in agriculture, they

can either import it or produce enough agriculture or very

low labour shares in there.

And then you can see the rise, the very kind

of almost 45 degree line between how rich country is

and how much uh labour is employed in services.

OK.

So that's just a very basic snapshot of a bunch

of stylized facts, OK.

It doesn't tell us anything about why it's not hasn't

got, we haven't gone into intellectual anyway.

But there's no real model today, we'll think about models

that could explain this, but basically we're just setting up

some stylized facts, OK.

So why does this happen?

OK, so.

I think it's kind of open to.

Debate as to examine the exact plans that are driving

this.

But let's look at 3 primary reasons, OK?

The first one is prices, the second one is consumption,

and the 3rd 1 is going to be globalisation, OK?

So the first one, what's happening prices.

Well, prices of things, of things that we make, TVs,

computers.

They have declined hard and fast over the past 50

to 100 years, OK?

Whereas the prices of other things, like services, like going

to college, like um getting, getting yourself checked out with

the doctor.

Getting your dental care, all of these services have actually

risen.

And there's a great chart that kind of illustrates this,

and I'm sure you might have come across this chart

versus formulations.

It's uh it's something that appears on Reddit like every,

every couple of weeks, and there's various different forms.

Basically taken from price indices from the United States, but

they apply to the UK and the rest of the

world as well.

What you've got is just since the round about the

year 1998, 1999, uh, just seeing what's been happening.

In terms of relative prices, and you could, you could,

you could push this back 20 years, 30 years, 40

years, going back to 1950, and you'd get the same

kind of picture.

What you see in terms of becoming much more affordable

are things like televisions, um, And anything to do with

computers, OK, becoming much cheaper.

OK.

Take toys, OK.

These are physical things that you make in a factory,

OK?

And they're physical things that you can make in a

factory in China, which we'll talk in a moment, OK.

But look at what's become much more expensive.

What's become much more expensive are things like um Uh,

college textbooks, uh, you know, housing, um, but also college

tuition and hospital services.

So basically what you have are these price effects.

And why is this happening?

Well, the reason why these things are becoming much, much

cheaper is myriad.

One is that they're less subject to, say, government regulation

than health and education.

And they're in competitive markets, and they can be outsourced

very efficiently.

Do you care where your TV was made, right?

Who cares where their TV was made?

Like really, like if it's a good quality TV, try

to do make great TVs, right?

Do you care where you go to college?

Yeah, you know, like there's kind of things that matter

a little bit more at this different end.

So as economies get richer, they tend to do slightly

different things.

So it's not just making things, it's also making, you

know, something else.

So you have all these price changes and these matter

um.

I think what it indicates, as I was just alluding

to, at the kind of this kind of, this kind

of change in the cost of manufactured items, is that

this is capturing productivity increases, OK?

So what we've had in a competitive traded sector, member

services are not necessarily traded the degree to which internationally,

they're not traded internationally the degree to which er TVs

or manufactured items are.

So what you've had is uh competitive international markets really

drive down the cost of production, and this is driven

by productivity advances, OK?

And this is just some evidence that we looked at

before from the 18th century, looking at how the price

of watches, um, reflected the, the how, you know, for

over a given quality, actually got a lot cheaper during

that initial period in the industrial revolution.

So what we find easy to do is to drive

productivity advance in making things in factories.

What we find hard to do is to make productivity

advance more rapid in things like healthcare or universities, OK?

They're harder to kind of make more productive.

OK.

And so what you see, this is, this is a

slide that I, so.

I took, I, I took the old slides and I've,

I've made them very different as you might have noticed,

but basically this is manufacturing productivity growth, um from uh

a paper Brobury I believe is on the reading list.

Productivity growth was just much more rapid in manufacturing stuff

things than these services.

Services tend to be, have lower productivity advance, OK?

And the evidence is very clear on that.

So, why have some of these prices declined?

Well, productivity growth, and manufacturing has been much more uh

rapid than has been in services, OK.

And this drives many aspects.

If you think about deindustrialization.

Well, you know, TVs are going to be less of

a share of GDP because they're cheaper, right?

The, the price level has gone down, OK?

But it doesn't explain why manufacturing.

Has left the UK and why are the US and

the Rust Belt and why less did the labour force

work in manufacturing, OK?

So we need a little bit more to get there.

The second reason is changing patterns of consumption, OK?

It turns out that as we get richer, there's diminishing

marginal returns.

To how much stuff we buy.

OK.

So when you're very poor, and you have a very

skimpy wardrobe, you've got one shirt, you maybe don't have

a good winter coat, as you get more money, you're

going to start to fill out a wardrobe, OK?

Eventually you get to the point where you get some

snow goggles and you know, um, You know, Gore-Tex reindeer,

but at a certain point, you're going to stop.

OK.

So as you get richer, there's diminishing marginal returns to

buying stuff, OK?

And you tend to kind of substitute.

Um, for, for other things, OK?

So there's this thing in economic history called Engel's law.

And Engel, er, you know, obviously related to Frederick Engel,

the communist manifesto, but basically the idea is, Engel's law

states that as income rises, the proportion spent on food

declines.

And it's the same idea.

So if you're very poor, you're constantly hungry, and you're

constantly craving fillet stake, but you can't afford it.

As you get a bit more money, you're going to

spend a large proportion of that on probably getting higher

quality, better quality food.

But if you're already rich, and you're already probably, you

know, you've already had your fill of of food, if

you get richer, you're gonna, you're not going to necessarily

spend more money on food, right?

So there's diminishing, um, a diminishing propensity to purchase food.

The richer and richer you get, OK.

So what we do to explain this, the industrialization phenomenon

is thinking about Things.

It's the same with like the example I started with

with the example of, uh, you know, buying cars or

buying TVs that as you get richer and richer and

richer, you might spend a large amount of your extra

income on a car, on clothes, but as you get

beyond that point, once you've satisfied that basic need, you're

less likely to spend more and more on, on these

things.

So as countries get richer and richer, they're going to

spend less and less on manufactured goods, OK?

And so what you, what you, what you see here,

this is just an illustration of Engel's law to kind

of get, you know, and then augmented Engel's law applies

to all manufactured goods.

And you can see that when countries are very poor,

they spend a large proportion of their income on food,

OK, as they get richer, they spend a lower proportion.

These guys spend more food, these guys are not going

hungry.

It's just that like you can only eat so much,

right?

And it's the same thing for consumption of items, so

We emphasise as people get richer, they might buy one

TV or PlayStation 5, a car, whatever.

OK, maybe they get richer, they buy another one for

the, for the spare bedroom.

But you know, at a certain point, you're there's only

so many TVs and cars that you, that most people

want, right?

And so the key idea is diminishing marginal returns, and

then what people do spend to spend money on are

things like eating out at restaurants, perhaps some conspicuous consumption

as well, like consumption just to show off their status,

um, taking expensive holidays, getting, you know, selfies on Instagram,

having experiences, OK, but also education and health seem to

be things that people spend a lot of money on.

Uh, uh, and, uh, you know, they are things, as

we saw in the price section, that have gotten more

and more expensive over the past generation.

OK.

So we have these two effects that kind of lead

to deindustrialization.

One is that productivity advance is much more rapid in

these sectors which we have observed, and another is that

like just us as a species, as we get richer,

we just buy less stuff, we buy more kind of

services, OK?

The final reason for this.

there could be more, I'm absolutely, you know, not, not

saying this is, this is exhaustive, but the final reason

is globalisation and primarily the replacement of the manufacturing sectors

of large numbers of rich economies by er manufacturing in

China, OK?

So, the aforementioned kind of old slides had this interesting

fact upon them saying, and it was Tim Loiny who

wrote those slides, since 1900, Britain has lost all of

its 500,000 cotton textile jobs, and this connects us back

to the picture of the spinner and the weaver and

the technological advances in that sector, the Allen thesis.

But today, around about 25,000 workers in China can produce

the same amount of output.

So it's not just productivity advance.

In textiles, it's not just like consumption patterns, it's the

fact that these things are being made in China, you

know, um, so there, there's a really important globalisation story.

And if you actually look at the data on, on

this, it's just stunning.

I know we had a period of globalisation.

You know, you know, before the war, but the one

in the past generation has been completely extraordinary.

And you can see here that growth since um, Since,

like the, the 1960s has grown like 5 times.

It's just been spectacular.

And you can see that this is happening primarily as

a result of Chinese uh industrialization, Chinese uh innovation in

terms of the production process, and both happening not at

just producing low end contexiles, low end electronics, but actually

all the high-end stuff as well, OK, so it's really

an extraordinary kind of Value added high productivity story as

well.

You know, iPhones are made in Shenzhen.

Nobody thinks that they're low quality uh items.

There's where else would you make them?

You wouldn't be able to make them for at that

quality, at that price anywhere else in the world, it

seems.

So it's a great story, and that has driven down

the deindustrialization of the West, OK?

So They're the three reasons, prices, patterns of consumption, and

China.

So it leads us to describe this process of deindustrialization,

but it's kind of frustrating because, you know, it's nice

to think of models, but let's think about the spatial

aspect of this, OK?

What are the consequences for the west of this deindustrialization?

Well, we haven't had history play out yet, so we

don't really know, we can speculate, um.

I don't, we won't talk about it, but one aspect

that I would like to kind of flag right now

is that deindustrialization, I wonder if it gives us, A

sense of what future developments in the AI will leave

us with if we have AI replaced both myself, accountants,

GPs, so, uh, you know, you can have a personal

tutor uh that doesn't have suffer from seasonal allergies.

Um, I might be slightly more efficient.

Um, You know, uh, does the industrialization give us a

roadmap for how that's going to play out?

If it does, it's a tale of woe.

But as you know, the kind of the kind of

social problems of the north of England and the Rust

Belt are are profound and seem to be immune to

any government intervention.

So, um, let's, let's kind of look at that for

a moment.

The industrialization.

Seems to have caused large regional inequalities, both across space

but also across class divides, OK?

You might ask yourself, where did the British working class

go?

It's a great question.

I'm not entirely clear.

um into services, I'm not entirely clear.

Industries tend to cluster, and we saw this, um, in

our agglomeration lecture.

So I've actually got some slides to kind of recap

for you.

We're at the stage where recapping might be handy.

Um, but you see this in a lot of places,

you see this almost everywhere.

You can see it in the UK with the north-south

divide.

The north is a lot poorer than the South, even

though it was the crucible of the industrial revolution.

You've got an historic north-south divide in Italy.

You've got the west and east of Ireland, the east

is more developed than the west, and then you've got

east and west Germany, and then of course, the aforementioned

quite a lot, rust belt in the US.

And we'll talk about debts and despair in a moment.

So when you look across Europe, you see these regional

measures of GDP.

And there tends to be kind of regions, the red

regions that are much poorer than these blue regions which

are much richer, so the north of Italy, Central and

the south of.

Germany and South West Germany, the the Paris region.

The capital of Catalonia, um, and the south of England

around London.

Um, and then of course you've got that east-west gradient

as well.

You've got these regional inequalities.

So, you know, you might ask yourself, is the country

the appropriate level of observation if you've got such wild

inequalities?

And I think this has real kind of consequences because

we see that social problems cluster.

Places that have experienced severe deindustrialization.

So Angus Deaton and Case um were looking at this,

this kind of demographic plan.

You know, we could see that there were very kind

of, um, you know, uh, clustered kind of deaths from,

um, they call them debts of despair.

These are kind of people dying in their in the

prime of their life.

They should be decades away from dying, OK.

The death rate for these demographic men and women ages

554 is typically very low, but these are kind of

deaths of despair, the death rate per 100,000.

And you can see that these were.

Basically rising from 1990 to 2010, from like, you know,

35 to nearly 80 per 100,000.

And these are typically things like alcoholism, but primarily also

fentanyl and heroin overdoses.

Very easy to do, um, but it's very hard to

get the dosage right.

Um, but typically thought of as the, the consequences of

having an industry that gives people the chance to have

social mobility.

In life and then taking it away, OK?

So there's nowhere to go, and that's why alcohol and

drugs take over and people have these debts and despair.

So deindustrialization has scarred the US and the UK with

like intractable social problems.

OK, so it's it's very, it's it's very pressing.

And the reason why this happens is because, uh, exactly,

this is a recap of what we looked at uh

last year.

We have clustered economic activity, these are cities, but we

noticed that like some places tend to cluster for various

different reasons because of different kind of agglomeration effects.

This is a recap, you know, Marcellian economies.

With economies of scale.

So basically an industry like an automobile industry cluster in

Detroit and surrounding regions, because they can have the industrial

spillovers, OK, they can be specialist suppliers.

You see this absolutely in Detroit region, managers can talk

to each other, workers move.

Local colleges specialise, OK.

So you've got all these agglomeration effects, and we can

see them all over.

But what happens is you get these things rise, and

this is very much a story of the British industrial

revolution, and then the rug is pulled, OK?

And you get a cohort of people who are left

behind and suffer.

And you see this, we see this in watchmaking in

England, which was decimated by cheap Swiss imports, as I

told you before, and this was like Marcel and externalities.

These were where you had, you know, specific industry decoding,

and then Jacobs externalities is where you had a bunch

of different related industries, not just one industry, and we

talked about that, um, you know, uh, last term.

So, Deindustrialization hits these specialised regions very hard, and the

and the example we look at is the worth of

the Rust Belt in the US and these people, uh,

uh, places become left behind.

So that's where we get these pictures that we started

the lecture with.

That's where we get these debts of despair.

That's where we get people dying in their mind from.

Alcohol and fentany.

OK.

So, a problem, as I said before, that seems to

be immune to government or social intervention, so very intractable.

So the puzzle is what on earth is going on?

So I guess it's, it's, it's, it's, is it, I

guess people want to know is.

Is it the people or is it the place?

So I think in economic geography, there's very much, this

idea that something has gone wrong with the place, OK?

But there's another hypothesis.

That it's the people, OK?

And the reason why it might be the people.

It's because of selective way.

What you get when you have a booming industry in

the north of England or in the automobile industry in

the 1920s in the US around Joy mission is you

get the inflow of all sorts of people wanting to

experience.

Well, sociable.

Fear and dream or whatever you.

These people flooded When the economy downturns, when production gets

exported to China.

Some people leave and some people stay.

But what if all the very ambitious and smartest and

well kind of capable people left and just left perhaps

people who are lower productive.

So it isn't the case that something is wrong with

the place itself.

It's just that you've got these migratory flows that are

selected along different lines.

OK.

A lot of people, people can't go all the time.

But it's not clear whether these migratory flows themselves could

be as reflecting.

You know, the dynamics of selection in the economy, OK.

So another way to phrase this is, why don't people

leave?

OK.

Well, the answer is that people do leave.

And I suspect what's going on with the rust belt

in the north of England is that people who leave

are different to the people that stay.

The people that stay tend to be much more likely

to be on social welfare, they tend to be much

more likely to be unemployed, they tend to be much

more likely to er be alcoholics or or or or

take fentanyl or whatever, and they tend to be much

more likely to die young.

The people that leave tend to do very well, you

know, somewhere else.

So what you have in a way, is not necessarily.

A failure, which is surprising to the state, and if

you're kind of finding that surprising, you, you're right.

But there's no real, what we would say economic failure.

What you've got is the appearance of failure.

But you've just changed the composition of the population of

these places by picking out all the top half, top

half viability that put them somewhere else.

So these people would still be kind of, there would

still be problems, potentially.

But they just look a lot higher because of these

selective migrations, and that's what I'm going to finish on.

I'm gonna show you my research on the north and

south of England, which suggests that what is happening in

these places that are left behind, yes, they deindustrialized, yes

industry leaves, but so do uh the best people, OK?

So when you look at the north of England and

you see that it's much poorer, OK, that's because there's

selective migration.

Of the best and the brightest out of the north

of England to the south of England, OK?

So, it's not that the north of England is economically

sick, it's just that there's been a migration out of

that, and it makes it look, look bad, OK?

So, when you look at, say, the two Englands, and

we've called here uh Wales as part of the North.

You can see that there's differences in life expectancy.

They look relatively modest in the region of 2 years.

You can go down to a, to a much finer

like postcode level and find gaps of 10 years or

more.

But the reason why they're close is because, remember, the

South has a lot of poor areas as well.

The poorest areas in this country, in England are these

seaside towns, OK, where accommodation is very cheap, where the

local economy never really recovered from the introduction of cheap

flights to Spain in the 70s and 80s, Thomas Cook

and whatever.

So those places really suffer.

But you can see that all these measures, metrics, life

expectancy, how many people go to Oxford or Cambridge, the

offers, the average house value is like double in the

South, less share of public employment, and this is a

measure of productivity, gross value added per person, where look

at the South is, in terms of these metrics in

2015 is about like uh 50% higher than the North

of England.

So look really spectacular economic differences.

And the north south of England is like a case

study for us, OK?

Think of the Rust Belt, think of the east west

Germany, but it's a big persistent feature of the UK

economy.

It's so persistent that the Guardian, when I wrote this

slide, which was for like when I was touring this

paper for talking to the Bank of England a few

years ago, The Guardian devotes a permanent section to the

north-south divide, right?

And One of the kind of backgrounds is this regional

inequality has resulted in transfers of like tens of billions

of money from the south to the north, OK?

And they've thrown all this money at it and it's

completely failed to do anything, OK?

It's all, it's, you might as well have put the

money into a bonfire and burnt it, OK.

And um you know, maybe you could have got a

nice tick tock out of that or whatever for the

kids love all that kind of stuff.

But anyway, you got, they got absolutely nothing.

And the failure of this regeneration investment where they've kind

of said billions like doing new town centres, this was

something which um my predecessor in EH 101, uh Tim

Loinning wrote an article saying that like instead of sending

any money to the north, they should pay people to

just reloc.

to the south and build more homes in London.

This was during in August, um, in about the early

2010s, and uh this is usually known as the slow

new season in England.

And so the tabloids went completely mental over this.

And so Tim got like, no, he got, he was

called the barmy boffin, you know, and there was all

his pictures, but he's quite an academic looking man and

and so they, it was good sport for the tabloids

during a slow.

New season.

But what's interesting about this is we know about this

failure from a policy perspective, we know about the bare

facts of deindustrialization.

We don't really have much academic work on what on

earth is actually going on here, OK?

But what I'm going to show you just very briefly

in the last couple of minutes, is that the decline

of the North.

is explained by the selective outmigration of the educated and

talented.

There is no economic failure, because remember we had price

changes, we had consumption changes, we had China, but why

didn't the North just shift into doing services?

What's explaining the failure of higher value added economic activity

to not take place in the north of England or

the Rust Belt or in Detroit?

That, you know, you have to, you have to work

that part out too, yes, question.

Sorry, could you repeat the second half?

I got, I got the first half.

Yeah, no, it's a good question.

I I think like people, people kind of like why

do people move?

I think, and what you see from the north of

England is like you're gonna see, I'm gonna show you

some results where people who come from the north of

England and come to London, do really well.

They do really well.

They do like they, they end up like in the

region of twice as rich as people from the south

of England.

And I'm not suggesting that people from the north of

England are twice as smart as people from the south

of England.

I think that everyone's the same, but the problem is

you're getting the kind of the best from the north

coming to the south.

That, so it's selective migration, so that's the idea.

But think about it, what would it take to have

someone go to the University of Manchester and come to

work in the City of London?

What, what would it take to to have them not

do that?

Well, you'd have to create something that could, Give them

the life and um income and also cultural opportunities that

they get in London that that aren't existing in Manchester.

So Manchester has a lot of famously has a lot

of culture, but it doesn't have the kind of cluster

of economic activity at the level that London does, particularly

over the past few decades.

And so I guess like the regeneration money that you

said is just not is is a drop in the

ocean, relative to the life that people can live in

London, particularly people who are ambitious and have the ability

to kind of do as well as they do.

It's, I, I think that's a valid interpretation.

But here's, here's the kind of, here's the kind of

counter, here's the counter argument to say, imagine a counterfactual.

I imagine you couldn't leave Manchester, you couldn't leave the

North Moon if you kept people there.

Well, what, what this paper suggests, and it's an interpretation,

which you can absolutely disagree with, no problem, but what

my interpretation would be, if you made people stay.

They would create economic activity, they would create the opportunities

there, right?

So it's basically about the people.

And the reason that London is growing and has been

the source of all productivity advance in the English economy

for the past like 50 years essentially, is because it's

gotten the best of all of England and Europe coming

to London.

So I think it's more of a selection effect.

So like, you know, so people come here, it could

be because people want to cluster, you know, they want

to go to coffee shops, they want to go to

like cocktail bars, they want to go to the Opera

House.

It could be a cultural story, but for whatever reason

these dynamics are emerging.

So the counterfactual is, if you force people to stay

the same, they would actually be, be, be rich in

Manchester as well.

OK, um, I, I, I hope, I hope I addressed

that to 1%.

OK, so.

The puzzle is, as we kind of wrap up, the

North was the crucible of the industrial revolution.

Some time between the industrial revolution, the economic geography of

England changed, and when did that happen.

So what I've got is 100% samples of birth, marriage,

and death data all the way from 1838 to 2007,

and every single person in England is in that, in

my data, right?

And I've got their names.

And I've linked that to a 100% record of everyone,

1858 to 2020, and how rich they were at death,

the probate registry.

OK, so I've collected all this data, that's kind of

what I do.

I'm kind of a data guy, and I've produced this

graph.

This is like, this is like um a couple of

100 150 million births, OK?

And it's just looking at where people are.

You can see that the North.

The proportion of people born in the North as a

share of all England is declining over time, and the

South is, is, is increasing.

So what we do with the name data is basically

use English surnames to track ancestral origins.

So this is very much paper just about the, the

English, uh, not the Irish, not, not any of the

migrant communities that are that are playing an important role.

I've got a separate paper on that if you're interested,

using names as well.

But this paper just looks at English.

And it looks at names that are just happen to

be unusually concentrated in the north or south, and then

we can mark them as being northern names or southern

names, OK?

And then what we do is we see is there

a penalty for having a certain kind of name as

you go through time.

And the idea is that if you look at where

people are living.

OK, you're going to get this selective migration effect.

But if you kind of allow people to move and

just look, compare ancestrally north to ancestrally south, you're basically

able to take out this selective migration issue, OK?

So what the paper suggests is the interpretation is that

when you do this, you see the north side effect.

People in the north are poorer, they die younger.

Um, and are less educated than people in the South.

But when you look at the ancestral north and the

ancestral South, those, those things are actually equalised, OK?

And the interpretation here is that this tells us that

selective migration is actually a huge part of the story

behind the decline in the north of England, and we

think by extension of all of these left behind places

that we see around the world.

So the detail I leave to you to you to

look at, but here's kind of a takeaway.

Basically, one is where the ancestral north and ancestral south

are exactly equal, and this is basically comparing based on

your ancestral surname, it's a lot more equal, closer to

one that is based on location.

And the difference is that people are allowed to move.

And the story is, is that people who are northern

moved to London, made London grow, and that's, it's, it's

really, that's kind of the interpretation here.

So, as I said before, If you look at this

green line, these are Northerners coming to the South.

And you can see there's a bit of jumpiness in

the series.

This is individual level data of all wealth passing at

death 1892 to 1996.

And the people who come from the north and settle

in the South are 2 to 3 times richer.

Than everybody else in the South, OK?

1892 to around about 1950, and then you see it

equalises, but this is evidence that the North loses its

best and brightest, OK?

And this is driving a large part of the regional

inequality story, and it's the reason why these regional problems

are immutable to any government policy.

It's a much bigger selective migration problem, it's much deeper

um and uh.

You know, this explains why all the tens of billions

of pounds flowing north have had no effect on the

economy.

So, uh, yeah, um, that summarises what I said today

and uh thank you very much.

Thanks for coming to the lecture, and uh I'll see

you next week for more on inequality.

And uh say hi to your colleagues in class, remind

them there's a lecture on Tuesdays at 1 p.m. Thank

you.

OK Yeah F It Yeah.

the Well, it's yeah.

Lecture 19:

Yeah.

Oh Oh Yeah.

interpretation It's definitely a matter of interpretation, yeah.

I, I mean, I read it more in a very,

very elitist way of just being a tiny, tiny elite.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Yeah, um, I, I'll just not take up too much

of your time.

It's likesche says like he wants to maximise like.

Oh Yes.

OK, folks, let's uh crack on.

Um, so today we're gonna talk about inequality, um, and

so.

What I want to do with the short amount of

time we have to talk about this topic, um, is

to maybe introduce some measurement and stylized facts of inequality

and then think about the narrative that we assigned to

the trajectory.

Uh, of inequality over time.

And then we're going to basically do a little bit

of a deep dive into um the very long run,

uh, inequality from something called social tables, and then we'll

look at the 20th century, and then we'll actually look

at some, um, I guess kind of more recent research

which is kind of, uh, you know, really kind of

Changing the way we think about these things.

So I think the motivation is pretty profound because narratives

around about the empirical trajectory of inequality uh over time

have really shaped a lot of not only contemporary political

motivations but also, you know.

The motivations for revolutions, um, and something that I think

permeates all human cultures, uh, you know, a division between,

say, a more kind of innovative liberal kind of dimension

and perhaps another.

You know, split into a more conservative and traditional um

dimension.

One of those sides seems to kind of think that

perhaps the hierarchy that existed in the past is somewhat

uh legitimate, the way things have been done.

Another beliefs perhaps more in um social mobility um so

if you think about the left and right division in

the political system.

A lot, a lot of it comes down to, um,

you know, different philosophies regarding the morality um and practicalities

around about redistributing gains, OK, so we live in.

Economies that have basically been the product of 20th century

dynamics, uh, we typically pay a large proportion of our

paycheck in taxes which are primarily used for redistribution, welfare

and transfer payments, and then there's some other things like

defence, but they're much smaller proportion of that bill than

they used to be in the past, so the kind

of the trajectory of inequality over time and its interpretation

is just really central to both.

Like popular economics, but also um academic economics.

So think about, say, what was the most influential, you

know, economic theory of the 20th century.

OK, you might think about, oh yeah, well, free markets,

you know, Adam Smith, all that stuff, even that was,

that was the 18th century, but you might also reflect

upon.

The communist uh economies of of of Soviet Russia and

Eastern Europe and think that they were very much influenced

by the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, OK,

and embodied in their in their works was this interpretive,

this narrative, right?

We tell stories to each other and the story was,

you know, um, we used to have this primitive communism,

a much more equal economic system where things were shared.

Then we had the rise of civilizations, um, the subjugation

of women, by the way, in patriarchal systems, but also

eventually the emergence of industrial systems which were basically, you

know, very exploitative of the vast majority of workers, OK.

And that was the world which had to be changed

by revolution, right?

And so, um, that's where the kind of the narrative

really matters.

And if you kind of think about like uh the,

The forces that we see unleash in our world today,

um, let's forget about the UK because the UK is

just so confusing right now.

I don't really know what's going on, but you think

about, say, uh, Trump, uh or you know, before, you

know, Bernie Sanders, there's kind of these populist movements that

are kind of driven a lot by this feeling that

something has gone wrong, right?

And so what is the state of the economy, you

know, in it's, it's in its natural kind of order.

Is it like wildly unequal?

Uh, are we all benign sharers and, and so forth.

So, you know, right at the core of it is

this.

The idea that capitalism itself is on trial, right?

If you have economic growth that comes as a result

of the industrial revolution, the origin of modern growth, you

know, how is that shared?

And I think that at the core of some contemporary

kind of like intellectual movements, um I think calling them

intellectual is uh a little bit.

Flattering, but like say the degrowth there's people who think

that growth is bad, it's gone too far, we should,

we should reduce economic growth for, you know, maybe environmental

reasons, but also for equity, right?

And at the core of that is this idea that

like, um, growth has been created winners and losers, and

the average person is perhaps more of a loser than

a winner.

And I think people have this um.

Nostalgia for a romanticised past where things, the imagined past

where things were perhaps better.

I think one of the key takeaways from economic history

is that the past was pretty rough, right?

And that's right back at my first lecture, uh, if

you remember, so long ago, there were many more people

in the room.

I don't know where all those people have gone.

Uh, I had longer hair and a big scraggly beard,

if you recall that.

But anyway, um, what we're going to do is kind

of basically talk about, All of these aspects behind inequality

and think about where the field is as a science

in terms of actually kind of putting a more critical,

kind of empirically based, science-based kind of.

narrative on things that are just so bloody like charged,

right?

That that really drive people crazy.

A lot of people pin their kind of emotional kind

of life on, on, on the history of inequality.

It's a really big deal.

So I think one of the kind of um First

things to dwell on, and I don't know if I

mentioned this in my introductory slides to the course, but

you know, the primary source of all global inequality, inequality,

unequal kind of income, say in terms of economic dimensions

is going to be this growth story, right?

Where you have growth take off in Northwestern Europe, what

we talked about all those months ago, this kind of

distribution of um.

Of, of, of industrial and economic performance by countries is

actually giving you the primary distinction in terms of inequality

uh in the world today, and this inequality has exploded

since what we call the great divergence, whatever that is,

rather in the art of growth in Northwestern Europe, these

economies pull ahead.

And more recently we have China and India kind of

catching up, but still at a much lower level of

GDP per head than the rest, but catching up fast.

And that gives you this kind of contemporary distinction, and

I want to show you this visually, you know.

When we talk about inequality, we, we generally mean within

a country, within a country, like the difference between the

rich and the poor in the UK and the US,

the wealth share of the top 1%, for example, or

something like the Gini coefficient, which we'll talk about in

a moment.

But, I want to emphasise that most inequality in the

world today is between countries and not within.

And you can see it by just looking at the

data.

So here you can visualise 200 or so different countries

in the world today, like just stack them up from

poor to rich along this, this axis here.

OK, and this is from the handbook of, of, of

income inequality book used, you know, as the as the

kind of graduate training book for, for economists studying this

thing.

Um, and you can see here that, like, this slices

each country into 20% cuts between the very richest 20%

and the poorest 20%.

There's 5 cuts, 12345.

And you can see that in terms of the geography,

if you're like, uh, if you're climbing a mountain and

you want to go up the mountain, you've got to

walk along.

On this axis more than you need to walk on

this axis, OK.

So going along this dimension is where the kind of,

where the kind of greater share of inequality is.

Now we can, we can do the math on this

and we can decompose this, but I think like, you

know, I think I'm a big believer in just, you

know, when you visually see something.

that's where you can get more of the intuition.

And a lot of like really good mathematicians are very

good at visualising things.

So that's kind of what's driving it here.

So what we're going to focus upon in the lecture

is the narrative of within country inequality, but I really

want to emphasise this again, an entire in many ways,

the entirety of the course was about this between country

inequality.

That's what we spent our time upon trying to understand,

um, you know, with all the fun we've had.

Can think of all the fun.

And anyway, OK, so that's, that's a key point, and

that's what in many ways parts of the court has

been the course has been.

But what do we think about defining the within country

and equality?

Well, there's lots of ways to do it, and you

can see here, this is a, this is a country

where It's relatively equal, right?

Everybody's poor, but equal, you know, so if you, if

you, you believe in equality and equity, this is good.

Here you have, and it's the US by the way,

right at the top, where you have like a very

big income share of the top 20%, and the bottom

20% are a lot poorer, but the bottom 20% is

the US.

a lot richer than the bottom 20% of anywhere else

in the world.

So if you're going to be poor, where do you

want to be?

You want to be in the US.

OK, now you know there's all the healthcare and all

all the bad things about the US and the bad

orange man.

We, we know all that, but like, you know, it's,

it's just the data are very clear, right?

Um, so what we want to think about though is

thinking conceptually about how we Like measure inequality within society.

We're going to talk a lot about these top percentile

shares, and they're pretty good, right?

Um, and we often talk about the top 1% and,

uh, it's kind of nice because you can kind of

think about the top 1% or the top 10 of

a% or like maybe one individual.

You can say, well, how much of US GDP does

Elon Musk command?

How much does Bezos command?

Maybe if we've got the top 100 guys and added

them together.

And that would come to around the top 100%, and

that would give you um a nice interesting metric to

look at, and that's kind of pretty obvious, and we

will look at it, don't worry, in this lecture later

on.

Um, but what people typically look at is a measure

that just kind of summarises the complete distribution, not the

top part, but the complete shape of the distribution, right?

So wealth and income are typically not normally distributed.

They're not like a Gaussian bell curve.

They typically have some sort of power law property.

What people typically look at is something called the Gini

coefficient, OK, and Genie is this Italian mathematician of the

mid-19th century, and so you have this nice idea here,

um, that basically in this number, you can have 0

if everyone is equal, OK, and 1 is where there's

this one person that's got everything, OK.

So, a society that might resemble a very highly unequal

Gini coefficient, more or less equals one society, is the

first image of EH101, which was an image of the,

of the Great Pyramid in Egypt of Kara, you know,

where you have this huge kind of monument that costs

like a huge portion of that economy's productive capacity to

build, but get it's basically more or less kind of

neutralised by one person.

I guess you can look at it.

You get utility that way.

But ancient societies were often characterised by extremely high levels

of inequality, just abide by god kings and like religious

structures.

That's where civilization kind of comes in, you know, you

know, you have to have a kind of reason for

why you have to give me, you know, 1020, 30,

40% of your agricultural yield, you know, because I'm gone.

Right.

So there's a lot of those dynamics and if you're

interested in that, William McNeill, Rise of the West talks

about these kind of things.

But basically, um, getting back to inequality, all of these

things measure, measure the just the shape of distribution, and

this is actually from my PhD thesis.

These are wealth.

Wealth measures for different villages in 18th century France, Cari,

Saint Paul, Saint Charlie de Acha and Rosney sous Bois,

which is now a suburb of Paris.

And this concept, this is another Italian concept, but it

tells us about the Gini coefficient.

This is wealth, OK, where 0 is.

0 and 1 is all wealth, OK.

And then you've got on the X axis, the proportion

of the village, OK.

So let's look at this 45 degree line.

Here you have a visualisation of inequality and the 45

degree line represents perfect quality.

Everybody has the same amount of wealth.

And here, if you just go along the line, you

can see that, that, that, that, that the bottom 20%

of the village have 20% of the wealth, OK.

The bottom 40% have 40% of the wealth, the bottom

80% of the village have 80% of the wealth, and

it's all red from that 45 degree line.

If we said look at the At the zero point

here, you can imagine a world in which.

Nobody earns, owns anything apart from one person who's right

at the top who owns everything.

So in that world, the Lorentz curve is not the

line of quality.

It's, it's this kind of line of perfect inequality where

you're just tracing out the kind of the X-axis and

then you're going straight up at the end.

And the Gini coefficient is the area underneath the line

of um of perfect equality.

OK.

So basically, the Gini coefficient kind of captures the shape

of this distributional curve relative to the zero area, 0

to 0 area underneath that equality, and this is normalised

to be 1, OK.

So there you have these are, these are empirically observed.

Wealth distributions from 18th century France, um, where you see

uh wealth and debt being recorded for absolutely everybody including

people who have nothing, and um what you can see

here is that basically these kind of D coefficients are,

are very high.

They're very, very high.

They're like 0.7, 0.8.

OK, so really kind of close to 1.

And you see that they're kind of uh lower in

Rosne and Care than they are in Saint Paul and

Saint Shelley.

And so then you can see that basically this is

how we study and visualise these kind of um inequality

measures.

But you know, one of the kind of interesting things

is that it's actually very hard to study inequality because

typically what people observe is the rich and then they

make a lot of assumptions to, to back out what's

going on.

But that's an intuitive visual explanation for what the Gini

coefficient is.

And when you look across the world today, you can

look across at things like wealth inequality, income inequality, uh,

primarily income inequality.

Income inequality, if you notice, this is like.

Uh, these all these values from Mexico to Denmark and

Japan, Greece in between, ranging between about 0.25 to 0.45,

right?

A heck of a lot lower than wealth inequality, OK.

That's for two reasons.

One is wealth inequality always tends to be higher than

income inequality.

OK, inequality of asset ownership, financial assets, um, all of

these things tend to be much more unequally held.

Then income earning, OK, but then also inequality has declined

over time, OK, over the past century, and we're going

to look at that today.

And you can see here, this is, this is like,

uh, this is the slide, you know, showing that like

basically between 1985 and 108, maybe there's more earnings inequality

seeping into the system.

And just to give you a sense of it, this

is Gin coefficient 2023, and just to give you my

read of it, the stylized fact.

There are some places in the world such as South

Africa, which just register incredibly high kind of pre-industrial kind

of Europe levels of wealth and equality.

Mexico and South America famously unequal.

Europe more, more unequal than than um than the sorry,

the US more unequal than Europe and Scandinavia being the

most unequal equal of them all.

Forgive me.

I, I, I'm, I'm suffering these days.

It's, it's the last week of term.

I, I'm, I'm forgetting important things all the time and

mixing up words.

I am, I'm, I've got flesh and blood here, so

apologies.

Um, and you can see here from the map what

how these, how these kind of numbers vary.

And also you can think about the Gini coefficient both

before and after taxation, OK.

What you see is, um, Various economies implement more or

less redistribution.

So in most places, the 4 Gini coefficient is somewhat

moderated by redistributive tax policies, which which are a choice.

So, why this is important is that it gives us

concepts and measures that we know about, that we can

talk about, and they can feed into our characterization of

how inequality has evolved over time, over the long run.

And the chief organising concept in economic history for the

time trend of inequality, uh, you know, like, uh, from

economics I guess from the field of modern economics is

the theory of Simon Kuznets.

OK, so we have all their theories on inequality from

in particular.

Frederick Engels, um, who, who has a lot to say

and it it it it's, it's, it's absolutely fascinating.

But the Knit's hypothesis involves, um, a kind of a

lot of borrowing from Engel's theories, uh, but it basically

supposes that in the deep past.

This kind of primitive communism, uh, this idea that sharing

is caring, all the rest of it, that the, the

inequality measures, um, even though we can't measure them very

well, uh, we have to guess them, were a lot

lower than they are later, OK?

With the origin of civilization and especially so with the

origin of industrialised economies.

You see huge spikes and inequality.

This is because you have things like urbanisation that where,

where a lot of the kind of gains from trade

and development are being concentrated upon, leading to maybe the

industrial sector accumulating wealth faster than the rural sector during

a phased transition, say, an industrial revolution.

It also could be where you have entrepreneurs, um, who

maybe are fast movers, maybe they don't sleep, maybe they're

smart, maybe they, they're, they're, they're not smart, but they're

lucky, but you have a few individuals during the industrial

revolution and during our time period who move very.

Fast and create huge monopolies and create huge fortunes, OK,

that are basically a result of the dynamically changing economy

and basically one shot deals to make a lot of

money.

So if you're investing in building a US railroad, like

the Vanderbilts or you're, you've got like um A huge

kind of movement in terms of trade, like the the

the the very wealthy families in Venice, um, if you're

kind of right in the right place at the right

time as uh as, as, as populations switch from gas

rolls and cars to electric vehicles and, uh, you know,

if you're in the right place at the right time,

you were kind of doing a PhD in a field

that was going nowhere for 50 years, and then suddenly

there is a huge advancement in AI.

You know, suddenly, you know, you are going to be

like basically living off like, you know, uh, like, um,

grant science science grants and and and an Oxbridge salary,

which doesn't get you very far.

Let me assure you that.

And then suddenly you're, you're a uh a gigilaire, you

know, like, uh, so these things are kind of somewhat

random, but they result from phases of change.

And I think like that's me just elaborating quite a

bit actually.

So I'm, I'm, I'm putting my own spin on this.

But basically, the idea is that inequality will go from

being low to being really high, and then it'll fall

again.

OK?

And Kuznitz admits that this was a speculation.

But it's a nice kind of organising.

narrative to kind of investigate what the trajectory of inequality

is.

And I can tell you that when people have done

this, they go back and they ask themselves, well, isn't

equality like an upside down you, like an inverted you,

or is it like some other?

Is it just flat or is it rising linearly over

time, or maybe it's declining over time, or maybe it's

going up and it's going down.

So it gives you some sort of something to target,

right, uh narrative to say.

So when you look at the world today, you know,

you can kind of look at GD coefficients, and you

can see that it, it, you know, it's relatively low,

you know, somewhere like the Congo, relatively higher in a

place that's a lot richer like Namibia or Brazil, and

then it's, it's, it's much, much lower in say the

S in Sweden.

And so is this tracing a mechanical causal trajectory over

time?

Well, you know, this isn't, what, what, what's, what they're

doing here is there's an X-axis with GD coefficient measured

here, and here's the, the income per capita, the natural

logarithm, that's what LM is, it's gross national income per

capita, right?

And what you've got here.

are the dots, the coordinates of the, of these various

moments, and then you've got like a line that's just

draw, right?

And the, and the kind of explanatory power of the

of the line is not impressive, yeah.

So there's just a lot of like movement around the

noise.

You could draw another line.

Right?

A straight line that would, that would look very different.

Um, or you can draw things like, you know, um,

you could draw like, I don't know, like a gun,

you know, uh, you could draw like a constellation of

Orion, you know, uh, you could, uh, basically this is

kind of, could, you could think of this as kind

of like a Rorschach test, you know, like where you

look at inkblot, and what you see is telling you

more about what's going on in your mind.

So anybody who tells you they see a gun or

a knife in there, you should be very careful.

is there OK.

So, no, the point is this is not, not particularly

good science.

But I can tell you in this field that a

lot of it is just measurement and narrative.

Like it, it's, it's kind of, um, it's, it's like

the field is just really about trying to measure this

correctly.

So for England, you get lots of different measures.

Here's the Lorenz curve, which is good.

Uh, this member of the Renz curve, remember what the

Gini coefficient is?

There's the line of perfect equality, and then you can

see how, how.

looks, and if you just compare 1688 to 1962, you

can see that the Lorenz curve is going towards the

line of perfect inequality over those centuries, which is really

interesting.

OK, you can see it, it kind of bounces around

a bit.

There's stories to tell in these different moments.

The graphs kind of somewhat hard to read, but we're

just kind of looking at it and you can see

that he's This, this guy has kind of calculated Gin

coefficient as we called it R for some reason.

But anyway, um, you know, you can see kind of

rough kind of sketch of this.

And then if you actually take those Gini coefficients, remember

which relate to the Lornz curve, the same concept, and

plot them over time, you get this idea from say

1688, that there's this rise over the period of the

industrial revolution and then a decline as you go through

the 20th century.

And I mean that's pretty much the accepted trajectory of

the GD coefficient.

But what's kind of interesting about this is that.

These economies are very different at different moments in time.

So in the 20th century, Great Britain and England and

Wales are a lot richer than they are in 1688,

and the reason is because in between they've had the

industrial revolution and the origin of modern economic growth.

So, imagine this, like, you know, you might have thoughts

and, you know, I've been talking to my other students,

my master's students about this topic last week.

You know, many people have very strong convictions about redistribution

and equality, right?

But don't you think it's different if everyone say has

a.

The poorest person in society has a minimum income of

100,000 pounds, right?

With today's prices so they can buy nice things, they're

OK.

They're not buying super yachts, right?

But they're doing OK, right?

But if that's the poorest person, what do we care

if there are mega billionaires buying.

So what's the problem?

How can you just unleash capitalism and there's going to

be growth, there's going to be innovation, and it doesn't

really matter, right?

Well, if you live in a world in which minimum

income is maybe at subsistence, meaning that you're just surviving,

just about, there's not much joy in your life, right?

Um, that's a kind of different, a different world.

And that's kind of part of the problem with telling

narratives about inequality over time.

If you're just looking within the kind of economy, you

need to somehow think about how you operationalize how poor

or rich that economy is.

So that's what we're going to look at now.

So that's this slide is just, I've mentioned this in

the background from the Engels kind of story, but also

I'll I'll skip it.

For your, for your notes, um, the kind of data

on inequality for England is approximated by as best we

can from a bunch of different sources, but the primary

one, and this is the one for 1688, comes from

these sources known as social tables.

And this is Gregory King's.

Social table for 1688, and Gregory King was a contemporary,

and he basically was a smart guy who made an

educated guess of what the class composition of England was

at the time.

So there's about 31 different classes here, and what he's

got here is these different classes, temporal and spiritual lords,

gentlemen, persons.

of the law, freeholders of the better sort, freeholders of

the lesser sort, farmers, military officers, labouring people and servants,

vagrants, beggars, gipsies, thieves, and prostitutes.

OK.

All these different classes, and then you've got the number,

the estimated number of people that are in these classes,

and an estimate of their yearly income.

This is enough to give you an information to construct

a Lorenz curve.

Obviously you've got to assume that there's no variation within

these groups, and of course there is, um, and it

could be the case that, you know, there's a lot

of variances within these, but you've got to make these

kind of working assumptions.

And you can see that they're just ranked by who's

the richest here.

So this is what gives us this um Gini coefficient

for 1688.

But what's interesting about this source is that it exists

by other people for other places and times, including over

the very long run.

So this is a table from the paper that analyses

this in the Economic Journal by Franko Milanovic, Peter Lindert,

and Jeff Williamson, and so what you see here is

they've collected all of these social tables.

Look at the one for 1688, England and Wales, 1688,

31 classes, we just looked at it.

Um, and, and, but they also collect these aspects of

the economy.

The economy, uh, urbanisation rate in England in 1688 was

13%.

Uh, we got the population, uh, 5.7 million, the area

and then also crucially the, the, the gross domestic income

per capita measured in.

1990 gearche is purchasing power parity adjusted dollars, OK, it's

equivalent to the Madison numbers which we've actually looked at

a lot in this course.

And what you've got though is look at the, the

variety of the data.

You've got like first off, the Roman Empire from the

year 14.

The data is not quite as like, um, detailed.

There's 11 classes, uh, and you know that the Roman

economy is a lot poorer than England in 1688, but

enough to kind of give us a guess of what

their genie code.

OK.

Byzantium in the year 1000, OK, uh, poorer than Rome,

uh, less detailed data, uh, but good enough.

England in 1290, but then you've got things like Castillo

in 1752, um, the Kingdom of Naples in 1811, and

then a whole bunch of, uh, like, like, uh, late

19th century places like Java, Japan, um, Kenya that we

can compare these kind of places that you haven't had.

Modern economic growth occurring just yet.

But the twist is, remember I was telling you to

think about that example of inequality in a world in

which the poorest person has at least 100,000 pounds, right?

Very different from a world in which the poorest person

has next to nothing.

Well, they've operationalized that idea and what they think of

is that inequality actually has a mechanical.

Relation to how rich an economy is.

If an economy is very, very, very poor, you can

only have so much inequality, right?

And the reason is, is that inequality often involves a

redistribution of wealth from one person to the other, whether

it's through capitalism, right, and labour efficiency, whatever, um, and

the ownership of capital.

Um, or, or, or however, depending on the economic system,

um, the role of God kings that I alluded to

as well.

But basically, here you have this income level, and it's

operationalized this, this is, this is kind of bringing this

idea of subsistence, which I foreshadowed earlier.

This is just enough income.

To survive the year, OK, and we do observe places

that have less than one, and if you remember back

to the Bob Allen lecture.

There were some places like Renaissance Italy, well, like uh

maybe 17th century Florence, maybe slightly later than the Renaissance

period, where subsistence was less than 1, right?

But the idea is that if you've got a very,

very poor economy or subsistence um where wages and income

is close to subsistence, you can't have much inequality because

there's not so.

so much surplus to expropriate to the kind of king,

the emperor, the oligarchs, the, the doses, it just can't

be done.

So it's only when you get income growth that you

can have these high levels of inequality.

So this kind of, this is kind of the kind

of inequality possibility frontier, and it relates, as I said,

Income to inequality and I think having this twist on

our observed G coefficients helps us construct a narrative over

time that's kind of more coherent and clearer than just

looking at the time trend of Gini coefficients, and this

is what it looks like for England.

So if you look at um.

You know, the Gini coefficient, and here it's just done

0 to 100 just to irritate you and me shifting

with 0 and 1.

you can see that going from 1290, um, it's 36.7,

rising to 45, 45.9, 51.5 by 1801, rising as you

go through the period of the industrial revolution, just like

Cz it said it would, and then declining into the

20th century to more or less our own time, OK?

But the operation, the, the kind of key point is

that England in 1290 is a lot poorer than England

in 1999, and they're changing over time as the growth

takes hold.

So these are the maximum possible genies, given the level

of income in these years.

And so what they do is they divide.

The the observe genie by the maximum possible genie to

see how much.

Is being extracted.

How close are you to the maximum possible genie, right?

And that seems to have a, a, a nice interpretation

and the the the the the story here is very

clear, and it tells you that inequality has been falling

over time, right, just clear, going down.

Growth, capitalist economic growth has been good for human societies

by reducing inequality massively.

OK.

Now this is surprising, OK, to a lot of people,

but it's very clear from the data.

So look at this, England in 1290 was extracting 70%

of what was possible, the lords, the kings from the

peasants, OK?

By the time you get to our high tax.

Uh, uh, 1999 period, it's actually a fraction, it's 50%,

it's like 38% of what it was, right?

You know, 38%, 38 points relative to 70%.

So, uh, falling by, by that proportionate amount.

Sorry for switching units, uh, in the same sentence, but

you can see the numbers.

If you're downing my, you know, what I'm talking about,

the numbers are are there.

So I think this is really profound and interesting.

And you can see that if you sketch this, this

is a genie, uh this is uh income per person,

this is the income possibility frontier, and remember this, they

reckon that $300 per person in $1990 that's around 1.

OK, and then you can see that the maximum possible

GD goes up as income goes up, and you can

see this red line, that's tracing the England observation, and

the reason they do that is because you've got just

more data for England than anywhere else.

The others are kind of spotty.

And you see that England has been moving away from

the frontier, and the interpretation is that extraction measured this

way is going down over time.

And so if you compare.

This income possibility frontier, you know, uh, you can see

here they've got these solid dots and these kind of

hollow dots, and these are comparing pre-industrial economies with uh

I guess like industrialising or or post-industrial economies like the

USA and Sweden very much post-industrial service based, very rich

economies clustered at high levels of gross GDI uh gross

domestic income per capita.

OK, but even places that we kind of think of

as very unequal in the end China are are are

relatively unequal, but they're nowhere near relative to this frontier

measure.

They're well, well away from the frontier.

It's possible given India and China's wealth that inequality could

be a lot higher, but it's not, OK?

And another observation is we mentioned that Brazil and South

Africa.

Are, are, are, are, are contemporary places where you see

uniquely high Gini coefficients, but relative to their extraction, inequality

is actually much more moderate, OK?

So, so, so that's kind of um.

A cool takeaway and I think like, the reason I

kind of emphasise it is that the time trend of

genies just observed without doing this little twist where you

adjust it for the wealth of the economy might give

you a mistaken interpretation, it might give you a cousin

style interpretation when really this is um very much uh

I think a different story.

And it's up to you guys to interpret it.

OK, uh, any questions?

It seems like I should I should I should I

should pause for questions, I don't know this is like

this is big stuff that I'm talking.

Um We can just enjoy the moment for smell the

flowers.

Um, OK, so in the last little section, I'll, I'll

develop this a little bit more.

Um, you might have heard of, um, the work of

Thomas Piketty, who's uh an economist based at the Paris

School of Economics, comes here a lot and talks a

lot about inequality in the 21st century.

Um, and he made a big splash with his book

in 2014, Capital in the 21st century, very much like

name checking Karl Marx as capital from a century ago,

right?

And so what his big contribution was, was to pioneer

and lead research on characterising Income and wealth inequality from

say the late 19th century to today, OK?

And one of the big takeaways is that inequality over

the 20th century has been declining massively, OK.

And that's just in terms of Gini coefficients, in terms

of wealth shares.

You don't need to do any of the clever and

Milanovic and uh Linder stuff, it's just observed inequality, right?

And this is very much being the kind of dominant

kind of narrative in, in the, in the economic study

of inequality led by people like Piketty, but also his

co-authors, Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zuckerman out of Brook Berkeley.

Berkeley, California.

Jesus Christ.

Sorry, I'm losing the ability to talk and jumbling.

Um, so the stylized fact that's most important for you

to realise is that inequality fell rapidly after the Second

World War, OK?

And, uh, reached a kind of a low point around

about.

The 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and then since the 1980s.

It's at least stayed the same, if not risen.

In many Western economies, perhaps it's gone up in the

US and the UK, maybe it's flat in Germany and

France and the US data is hotly contested because again,

it's actually very hard to calculate this stuff.

Here is some data from uh this website from Paris

School Economics showing you the decline in these well shares.

I'm sorry, these are the income shares, and then here

uh you can see it just collected for all these

different countries.

Look, look, it's hard to see, but look, post 1940.

Post 1940, big decline.

If you take the average of your mind's eye there,

sorry about that, um, it just declined rapidly, OK, uh,

to the, the middle of that of that cluster point

and then it's kind of either flat or rising, as

I said.

So this is the top 1% in these 26 different

different countries.

So that's the really important kind of style it's far

too important to understand about that.

You just in case, you know, why did, if we're

looking at top 1% income shares, why, why did we

talk about Gini coefficient?

Well, they're, they're arguing that the top 1% share captures

it's like that you you see this tail is wagging

the dog because that's, that's kind of been the what

moves the distribution about in these, in these kind of

power law kind of um.

Power law obeying kind of economic properties is the top

shares.

And so they just plot here just for your curiosity

that the top 1% share and the GD coefficient seem

to have the same, tell the same story.

OK.

Um, and this is kind of given rise to, like,

if you think about that right, left, left political divide,

you might think about the right, uh, conservative, maybe more

the interests of, of the rich of landowners, uh, want

less tax, maybe less redistribution, um, when you, the other

side, maybe it's more labour, maybe you want more tax

on capital, more tax on land, more tax on uh

high earners, and more redistribution.

Um, so you can think about all these, these, these,

these forces, you can think that like the capital share

of the economy was falling at a time when um

the European economy was growing very rapidly.

And it's that fact that leads to this little kind

of thought experiment which we'll talk about and then make

one more point and then wrap up, but basically over

the 20th century, Piketty proposes that the economy was growing

rather rapidly.

And you got the European golden age.

I think you guys talked about that, perhaps with Chris,

for sure, but basically, uh, in this world, you had

like a rising tide for Labour to increase its share

of the economy, and AK proposes that this represents a

law of capitalism, right?

You've got two properties, G, the growth rate in the

economy, right?

Um, you know, wages go up, you know, we've got

more money flooding into into government and be more spending.

Things are good, people are happy, uh, like exactly what's

not happening in the UK right now or for the

foreseeable future, alas.

And then this other property which is R, which is

the return on wealth.

OK, let's call wealth capital, wealth interchangeably, capital, buildings, land,

assets, right?

Let's call it wealth, just interchangeable wealth, right?

When R is um less than G, when when G

goes really high, you get this equalising trend, and that's

kind of what was happening in the 20th century according

to PK.

But for most of the time, for most of human

history, growth rate of the economy is close to zero.

Remember the Malthusian discussion, right, back in lecture one.

Growth economy is close to 0.

The return on wealth is going to be historically about

4 or 5%, right?

And so in that, in that world, you get fortunes

accumulating, um, and you get like very high inequality, and

you don't really get people who don't have wealth to

begin with actually becoming um rich themselves.

So this was quite exciting, it's quite a new law

of capitalism.

Like, don't worry about this slide.

I should have deleted this.

But here is actual some data that that you can

sketch for yourself.

This is, this is our, and this is the percentage,

so that's 5%, that's 10%.

You see it goes sharply negative during the wars and

stuff gets destroyed.

But you can see it's generally positive, averaging around 5%

here, and then uh post 80 going to even, you

know, like 7, 8% on average.

But you can see that G is always lower than

R, right?

What gets you towards this equalising trend.

Is this variable T?

Now.

Who wants to guess what tea is?

It's written on the slide, it's taxes, OK, and tea

is not a law of capitalism, tea is a choice,

right?

It's a policy choice.

If you look at income taxes, wealth taxes over the

20th century, they peaked in the 1950s at marginal rates

in the region of 85%, right?

So, you know, the equalising trend um basically was kind

of.

Associated with this like very rapid increase in in taxation.

So um I think that's a key point for Piketty,

that it's really the taxes that are kind of doing

it, and I wouldn't interpret this as a law of

capitalism.

OK, so the last few minutes and like anybody wants

to ask questions, questions are good, but um I wanna

kind of just show you some figures from my own

data.

So I think I might have shown you some of

my work on Probate Records.

So basically what I did was I went back and

looked at this issue of inequality over time, but I

created an individual level data set that actually had, Names

and how rich every single person in the country was.

And you could do some several things, interesting things about

that.

First of all, you could start to look at like

ethnic groups, whereas ethnic groups sometimes declare themselves in a

very nice way through their names, OK?

So Germans, Italians, Irish, uh Jewish groups, Bangladeshi groups, like

declare themselves.

In the data, because you can just, you can, their

names are very good predictors of what people's ethnicity is.

So I have a paper that looks at like the

ethnic inequality uh in, in, in wealth, and that's also

been, you been work from the US doing this for

the black white gap, very, very brutal just black, white,

no, not so I've got much.

I've got hundreds of different ethnicities, um, and also been

looking at the Irish in England, but Within the English,

which I think is more connected to kind of the

thematic conceptual ideas we're talking about here, within the English,

within, with everybody, ignoring ethnicity, this is just kind of

showing you the decline of the top 1%.

So at these.

Together and so the top 1% in England in 1892

had 75, 80% of all the wealth, top 1%, and

it's declined to kind of less than 20% or about

20%.

And you see it's kind of like this is a

top 10th of a percent, this red line.

So this is a small group of people.

So there have been massive changes in um in the

kind of in in the wealth holding of the English,

and this is the kind of, like, great kind of

equalisation that has formed the kind of dominant empirical uh

background to um inequality discourse over the 20th century.

Uh the 20th century has been.

A phenomenal period of equalisation, right?

And you can see in my data, I don't see

anything, I don't see a rise, uh, post 1980, but

um it's more plateau.

Well, first thing to say is that when you have

the data on everybody, you can see that the top

10% share has gone from being nearly 90% to being

kind of say 70% here.

But most of those gains have not been distributed equally.

They're going to the rest of the top 30%.

They're not going to this bottom 60% who still more

or less owe nothing.

And that's very common in wealth studies.

Most people just don't own stuff, right?

Or they own stuff that's, um, you know, not, doesn't

add up to much.

And so that's one thing.

The other thing is, uh, is this, and I'll leave

you this, this, this, this observation for you to think

about.

I've told you there's been a big decline in income

and wealth inequality.

What matters the most is the wealth inequality.

Wealth is more unequal than income and wealth is more

responsible for, like, the influence of money upon politics, and

also for what we care about consumption and inequality.

There's a lot of people living very good lives off

inherited wealth or ill-gotten wealth in this city, as you

might have observed, um, when you work in certain parts.

Um.

Um, but what's interesting about the 20th century story is

that, as I said, a lot of the wealth movements

are associated with tax increases on wealth.

So if you increase tax rates, what could happen is

that people reorganise their portfolio so they don't pay 85%

tax anymore, and they either set up taxes trusts like

the Grosvenor family.

Are they, um, uh, not technically taxes and they do

pay some tax.

Are you set up offshore bank accounts, not completely illegal,

but, you know, uh, a little bit dodgy, or you

just give the money away before you die, right?

So what's going on, I think in this, in this

pattern is across the Western world, because there were these

really high tax regimes after the Second World War, um,

that a lot of extremely rich people just rearrange their

portfolios to not pay these taxes, and all of our

wealth inequality data.

Seems to suggest that uh that the wealth inequality has

declined, but it could be just that elites have rearranged

their portfolio.

So I have a paper on this called Hidden Wealth.

There's, there's the, there's the tax rates, by the way.

I'll just show them very quickly because we're over time,

uh, going up to like, uh, you know, like 85%

or so for these big estates.

Hardly anyone paid this, by the way, no one was

ever that rich, and it was harmonised to 40% here.

Um.

By the way, when, when it was harmonised, that's when

you see wealth inequality starts to rise again.

OK, so it could be just an observational effect.

So I just summarise a paper here and the idea

is I take all this data with these family names

and I look for suspicious families anonymized, you know, in

the data that I can link all their members over

time, where they die super rich, but then that inheritance

just disappears suspiciously.

Over the next 100 years.

And then there's a whole concept, but what you can

do is, to cut a long story short, is that

you can take a bunch of families and find systematically

hidden wealth in the region of 35% of all of

their wealth, and that's a minimum.

So it could be, uh, could be a lot more.

And I just kind of skipping over these slides.

I didn't, I, yeah, I don't know how the heck

I thought I'd have time to do it.

But basically the takeaway is that once you do this,

you can find the wealth and other sources, including those

offshore bank accounts, including attendance at Oxford and Cambridge University,

and it could mean that those wealth inequality declines of

the 20th century are illusory.

OK, um, I'll finish there.

Good luck.

I'll finish with an advertisement.

If you liked my teaching, do my course at EH

238 next year, where we do a lot of this

material again, but in more depth and obviously we do

more stuff than just this, but do sign up, um,

and you can listen to me drone on again.

OK, in the meantime, thank you very much and good

luck.

Thank you.

It OK, I, I don't know.

I, I don't use it.

I, I shouts worries.

OK.

Yes.

Oh

