Lecture 1:

The Court recently voted yes on the.

So I think one of the things I think I

think this book.

It seems to work together as running.

We have other.

Good morning, people.

Now is it time to be quiet?

So far.

Silence.

So, of course, this is your first course quarter.

First lecture.

An LLC.

Is.

Awesome responsibility for media.

And by the way, the events today make this course.

I think perhaps to an extra interesting piece was happening

with a pound at the moment.

But just keep in mind, if you watch the events

today and if you want to find a job, you

should be it's not.

The exchange rate that's most important is the price of

government bonds.

And I think that rate hit this morning at six,

about 4.2% for ten year bonds.

That's the rate to watch.

We need the and we get into that later on

in the course because what's happened with accounts, of course,

affects a huge number of other countries as well because

of all of the strength of the US dollar at

the moment and we get into that few weeks into

the course.

So the way this works is I'm going to do

a brief introduction to the course first until the now

and see your questions.

Technically speaking, the way we do this is.

We had 3 hours.

And for the first 2 hours we for the first

2 hours, we had lectures, more or less awareness of

grief questions along the way.

And for the last hour, we have several questions.

And of course, I forgot to bring them with me.

But if one of one if you can people can

let me look at your laptop, because I can be

reminded of the questions as you should have them.

One of you.

All of you should have them, by the way, so

I can just know which ones are covering.

And in the last hour, we'll do this whole seminar

style.

Now we start based on LSC traditions of 5 minutes

after the hour, which is Portimao.

We finish 5 minutes before 2:00, all to allow you

time to get into whatever place you might have to

be next, because the campus is fairly big.

I'll take breaks in the middle, around the level and

around this ride, around and around one.

I do not promise to do it exactly on the

spot because I'll find the appropriate time.

But a break is around 10 minutes and I do

not promise to make it exactly 10 minutes.

It might be shorter, but it should give you enough

time to go for a coffee in the middle.

Regardless, we'll take two breaks during the breaks on all

of us here, so you can always have a chat

with me for anything you're interested in.

Can you please look at this cover located so.

But it's not just.

And remember, this is technology.

This is the government.

Technology never works the way technology is supposed to work.

So, of course, is called global financial systems.

To give you the technical administration pick first, you know,

you had my email up here and here's the rule

about email.

I am very good in responding.

You might sometimes think you get the answer before you

hit enter.

I am.

But however, two things about email.

First, you have to use your LSC email address.

I filled to that.

Please.

A student uses a demon or something else.

I would probably not see it and most likely I

will ignore it because I see in email address and

that allows me to prioritise emails from people.

But keep in mind all of us use LSC email

address.

If I haven't responded within the day.

I get to hops in excess of 200 emails when

the term starts.

If I haven't responded within a day.

Feel free to chase me the day after.

Don't hesitate.

I would not be offended, I promise, if I haven't

responded.

Always send me a follow up email on the following

day.

The all these slides and everything in the course is

on the book website.

Global Financial Systems talks of the slides.

You have a model.

Exactly the same content.

So you don't have to.

And if anything, we slightly put whoever the more up

to date because I think that first I'm going to

have to let you watch here copied onto Moodle afterwards

so so just keep that in mind.

Our point of contact for administrator is making her email

as you saw her just here.

So if you have anything administrative for the course not

to person to contact.

My office is upstairs on the seventh floor.

739.

My office hours are Monday afternoons.

230 to 330, right after the course.

If you need a Zoom meeting, for whatever reason, I'm

always happy to accommodate that.

And if you want to meet me outside of office

hours, I'm always happy to accommodate that also.

The way to do that is someone in that person

is saying this John an see today can you meet

me given a three timeslots and if I can, I'll

meet with you.

Or if you want to meet on Zoom, I'm always

happy to do that as well.

So just keep that in mind.

Maya should have put the should put the put this

link for the meetings on the on the on on

Moodle.

So if you want to know a little bit more

about me, I have a blog page and a Twitter

account and even LinkedIn.

So if you want to connect to me on LinkedIn,

by all means it is up to you.

I will follow the textbook globally called Global Financial Systems,

but I will also have extra content here.

Why is that what you think?

Not sticking to it?

So you never trust Apple?

Is it recording this recording?

You can never trust technology.

The course is recorded, as you can tell what this

means.

We have a red light here.

This means the recording in the green is not recorded

and it should be posted on to the model.

I think within a day or two.

Basically what happens is it gets on the zoom and

I have then it gets into the course content system.

I have to approve it, so I might be late

with that.

I'm not very good at paperwork, so but I tried

to approve the video recording and it should be up

there, but we shouldn't need that anyways.

So the theme of this course is this a huge

number of facts available about the financial system, what the

rules are, what the players are, what happens, the outcomes.

And I promise you, everybody is lying to you.

Everybody.

Promise the following.

If you read a public statement from a government official,

from a hedge fund manager, from a bank or from

a regulator, from an opinion maker, they like to.

In the sense they have an agenda.

And if you want to and if you want to

be successful in this business, you have to know why

they allow you to.

So people who are successful, they know the context.

Why he is someone making the statement they're making.

If you know why they are saying if you have

an apprentice.

So this is why this is what I aim to

give you in this course, the ability to read between

the lines in what you're told.

So we have a deeper understanding of what actually is

happening.

That's a key element in being successful in the financial

business generally.

The topics of this course.

We have a plenty of topics every year.

If you've heard about this course before, every year take

about ten 15% out and do some new stuff.

Financial crisis.

Financial stability.

That includes, of course.

No, I think it's just give up on that because

not speaking, no idea why this is like the.

Do you have a backup recording?

For my own benefit.

So the royalties and of course that exclusive war in

Ukraine, which is not quite topical, what is happening with

the UK at the moment and the US dollar specifically?

That has happened since I made my slides in July

but are connected to real events as I go through

that will certainly get into the as we get into

the relevant topics, we'll do financial regulation.

So mostly the macro prudential financial stability part of them.

We'll discuss sort of financial markets and financial instruments in

the context of all of that.

Politics is hugely important to understand finance, and that means

China, Europe, U.S., Brexit, Italy, Trump or what happened to

Italy in this in the election yesterday.

All of that is relevant to to the caution bill,

which will end up being so a lot of politics

mixed in with the content.

I discussed individual countries and so I hope you won't

get offended by it.

Actually the only complaint they got was someone says and

then talk about my country.

So if I don't talk about your country, it means

it hasn't had any crisis.

And that's a good thing.

Canada.

Is is cannot and India are the two countries I

just never mention in this course.

For that reason, we will discuss foreign exchange markets quite

extensively, allowing us to understand what happens with the pound

and the euro and the yen and everything else.

COVID 19 will get into a lot of fintech, blockchain,

cryptocurrency, smart contract, central bank, digital currencies and such things

will do the theoretical background liquidity into sovereign debt crisis.

Why do countries fail and get bailed out liquidity?

What is happening with interest rates connecting all of us

to inequality?

Inequalities is arising because of government policies.

As you will discuss, the poor have the biggest risk

today, which is rising inflation and how that feeds into

everything.

Questions?

Anything else?

Anything interested on the shopping list before one?

Yes.

And one one.

Things that I don't know.

But I don't know these people.

So what?

The enrolment keep getting better.

Well, so enrolment key here is the rule for the

by the way, all the contents of the book website

is downloaded from there.

The rule for enrolment in this course is really simple.

If your department and my department allow you to take

the course, you can take it.

If not?

If not.

I had no private room.

So you can take them close enough so long as

you meet the requirements.

I'm happy.

Maya was a person.

Just came in a similar situation because she doesn't do

it in real time.

Obviously she's other things to do, but she goes through

the enrolments quite frequently and she picks a sec.

If you meet if you meet the regulatory requirement, that's

basically all we can say about them.

So technical level.

This course is essentially non technical.

You may or may not know.

I teach two masters courses.

The other is called Quantitative Methods.

You start from this.

Who is technical?

And I found to my great surprise, there is zero

overlap in student interest in qualitative methods and this course,

like different people take this course, is perhaps not a

surprise, but that of course is highly technical.

This was completely non-technical.

There are exceptions to that.

But by and large, if there is anything technical, you

could opt out of it in the final exam.

And this means.

If you have.

So I don't quite know what the rules this year,

but if you come from a department that is like

law or one of those departments, they sometimes even open,

sometimes not.

You can no problem doing this course from a from

a technical point of view.

So you should not worry about anything mathematical in the

course.

And if you're curious about this excerpt or this cover,

any other course you can download all the excerpts from

the library website.

It's a link on the mobile page of always the

best way to identify whether you think this suits you

or not.

The old exams always tell you more or less.

And under reality regulations, if it causes new structure changes,

they have to give you a mock exam.

And if they don't give you a mock exam, then

the structure of exams unchanged.

I'll talk about the exam in the last week of

the course in much more detail.

So the way this works technically is we have lectures

in the first 2 hours.

I just move sequentially through the content.

The last hour is dedicated to seminars and seminar discussion.

I know two important things about that.

First of all, I will not talk for 3 hours.

Then I will lose my voice and I'll feel miserable

by 2 p.m..

That means I expect you to participate.

What I've learned in previous years and I repeat this

then what I learned in previous years, students taking this

course tend to be opinionated.

And remember, I will tell you again, nobody cares what

I will forget what you say within 5 minutes, so

nobody cares what you say.

So this is a relative safe space to I.Q., important

concepts.

We're sort of working.

He could just.

You're not just here.

So by all means.

And I found that students take advantage of that.

I also found this a lot of people take this

course, end up seeing the topics discussed in jump in

you some highly topical.

So therefore if you participate in classes.

That gives you a leg up when it comes to

talking to recruiters where European is actually quite important.

So we get into that.

So take advantage of this for your own benefit.

If you're really shy, but you don't have to.

And by the way, if nobody says anything, I tend

to call people probably front line.

Your line of sight.

No, no.

Now they can really do this.

So if you don't want to be called up, then

find that place where that gentleman is and the fact

that they can't see him.

He's the least likely person to call on in this

room.

I don't know if he tells it otherwise.

And also, Stephen, that was always in the back, by

the way, for exactly that reason.

But remember, is that the probability of being called upon

if nobody says anything is directly correlated to the distance

from me.

So therefore, I think you really should be in the

back in the corner.

Okay.

So who does this cause benefits and who does it

not benefit?

So I have now been through this course for quite

some time.

I heard quite a lot from previous students about what

thought was useful, most useful, any political financial analysis to

policy work, central banks, regulators, politics.

If you get into sort of that sort of ministers

of finance, minister of finance, a lot of ministers of

finance analysis degree, of course, this is perhaps not a

surprise.

Regulators trading in investment really useful if you want to

get into macro hedge funds or that sort of asset

management, quite useful on a go to media career.

Similarly useful if you want to be a craft.

So computers and statistics and mathematics do something else.

The way this is the roadmap through the course.

It's like, so this is, this is the order in

which I would cover the material.

So today we have systemic risk a multiple of slightly

into the Great Depression quite quickly credit markets.

This includes things like short selling and others with technical

bits connected to credit.

It's all there.

Then we get into more theoretical things and tortuous risk

liquidity.

Every year I say to myself, John, this year, unless

there's less time on this central bank and by 2019,

yes, but I taught a course in 2019 is central

banks got less.

Space.

And then COVID happened and now inflation.

So central banks are still on this other thing and

never be able to get rid of the central banks

banking crisis.

Why do we have crises?

Why can't we stop them?

Bank runs.

We'll do technology.

FinTech.

Blockchain.

Crypto.

Smart Contract.

Central Bank.

Digital Currencies.

Quite a bit of foreign exchange markets and currency, which

seems we do a fair bit on financial regulations Basel

three type things and macro Pru in like the bailouts.

So basically anything from up from here downwards depends a

little bit on how much are left in the course.

Because this is the first one done this course in

person since before COVID.

I'm not quite sure about the timing.

I would expect to be able to cover those two

bits.

I might not get into 22 on Lichfield to 15.

And by the way, if anybody's worried, if I don't

cover it, it won't be on the extent.

So it'd be it would be completely obvious what I

do, what I don't do.

So.

A really famous person, a former M.I.T. professor, he says,

who studied financial crisis.

When I visit the country, they always say, here it

is different.

Well, it never is.

And if someone says a culture, our national characteristic us

people explains what's happening.

But then it's time to leave the country.

Is all of this the same crisis, economics, instability, the

politics is the same in every country in the world

has always been that way.

I can't speak to the future, but until now.

So we when we talk about these things, it is,

of course, the place, everyone.

To a different degree, but it's everywhere because at the

core of the financial systems, people have the money and

people people exactly create the same system.

So.

This is what I said in the beginning to really

creating all the material I cover is on the slides.

Everything.

I see everything in the slides.

So basically, here's the rule about extending examine ability.

So most lights that divide intersections, it becomes clear want

to get to if I tuts or mention one slight

in a section, that whole section is examiner.

Full stop.

I mean, that's just.

Just be very aware of that.

If I don't mention a section I go through sequentially,

that whole section will not be on the exam.

And everything we do.

The classes were the seminar parts in the last hours.

Also.

Examiner So if one of you says something very clever,

that might end up on the exam.

So just keep that in mind.

The discussion we had was also examined.

So the main textbook for this is a book I

wrote with the same name as a course called Global

Financial Global Financial Systems.

So I published that for ten years ago.

So slightly outdated in some parts of parts of it.

Basically, the the sea was about 80% relevant.

I just kind of book out.

So I came out a couple of months ago called

Illusion of Control, which is more general interests, not academics,

which is just basically for.

What they call educated leadership is what a lot of

couples have called couples who consider a lot of the

topics I discuss is cause I discussed in the book

that is.

But I mean, the, the.

The night you required neither of them.

You can.

All you need is a slight technique and they are

for free.

But both of these books could possibly benefit you.

There is no outside material you need to meet because

basically are so topical.

There's nothing really out there.

And and but however it is, all this benefits you

to keep your eye opening.

Google can be a best friend in the search for

things.

And by the way.

Unless he gives you a sense, you know, unless he

gives you a free subscription to the Financial Times.

You can do worse things than go on to the

FTA website on your iPhone every morning and check the

news because it helps you in the course.

But it also helps you to jump into this because

a lot of jobs require knowledge of the world, so

it's beneficial to know what is happening.

And sometimes I will send you an email saying really

interesting item in some news media.

You might or might want to pay attention to that.

So on occasion or something almost in the class meeting

as well.

Any question on the structure of the course before we

jump into it?

He didn't want to leave.

No, you said this is not for me.

Look, what is this.

Like?

Why do you want to eliminate this utopian consensus that

the 22 selected people?

Because I want to eliminate populism.

Because in 2012, we have lost to a sovereign debt

crisis.

And there are so many questions about the survival.

Of European Union.

Okay.

So where you are.

I'm not going to eliminate the basic.

The problem is there are so many interesting relevant topics

in this course.

And what is happening in Europe has become less important

than it was five years ago, 60 or 70 years

ago.

But this and if you're European, of course, this is

super important.

But if you're not European, why would you care about

something that is basically.

Because of financial stability?

I promise I'll get into it.

I promise you.

I promise you.

The only thing is that it is.

The problem is, of course, like this.

I have this secrecy material.

I have.

I can't do so until I covered politics.

This is really the problem.

So if I get into this topic, I need a

lot of stuff happened before before I could get into

it, and therefore it ends up being towards the end.

My expectation is I'll end up covering 22 but not

15.

Or 15, 20, 14, 15.

I miss you, but your instruments out of the central

financial hub.

However, however, however you can read all of the book

issues issue in financial instruments.

Why I need to do that?

It was at the core of the crisis in 2008.

I have a whole chapter on it, but it is

less important today.

I mean, it's more about relative importance, just basic Europe.

But we get into financial instance.

I mention CEOs and all the other stuff.

So anything else?

Let's jump into it.

So.

This is the first chapter.

So roughly speaking, what is what the purpose of this

chapter is to give you a roadmap of how I

feel these things.

This is about a roadmap.

And.

So why?

Why do we have a financial system?

Well, I mean, I'm not going to get into that,

but I have one slide on that.

But first, it allows us to make productive investments, and

certainly it allows you to see this inequality from Peru,

because one of the best books on why you didn't

find this was written by a Peruvian economist called Hernando

de Soto for the Mystery of Capital.

This is awful.

Why?

How the world capital plays in countries developing.

That's why you need without because without the financial system,

you will end up being very, very poor.

It affects everything.

It affects economic growth, opportunities, inequality, poverty.

And it's a little bit like the plumbing in your

house.

If it doesn't works, you're happy if employment does not

work.

You look very, very unhappy.

But you don't want to think about it.

So fine us is a little bit like the plumbing,

but it's absolutely essential.

But.

It's been highly regulated for crisis to make sure it

does what's supposed to do and to finance a sovereign.

Sovereign.

Of course, means the government.

It's just a language used in this context.

So is it good or bad or evil?

The financial system.

If I was doing this course in the Economic Development

Department at LSU, a sociology said to me, the main

focus would be on the better than evil.

I'm going to try to be more balanced.

But here, the roughly speaking hope people see finance one

of is it's a casino for the rich.

This, in effect, savings and investment and innovation muscle and

regulated.

Really.

Heavily.

That's one view.

The other view is it's an important part in allocating

resources.

To quote a person who wrote about this 100 years

ago, Joseph Schumpeter said the banker authorised this enterprise in

the name of societies to innovate.

And then if you take that view, you regulate with

a view to reduce damage crises and abuse of clients.

But you try not get too much in the way

of that.

One place where this really, really comes up is in

innovation.

You might have heard of the term web3 or defi.

Decentralised finance to get into that.

That's exactly what this is quite isn't defi and web3

because let me get into that to discuss that.

You see where that becomes super important.

I don't take of you, but you can have a

view.

So one problem is right.

One problem in all financial, as some would call it,

back government to look.

So the thing is that so you see a lot

of the sort plots and of course, I'm going to

I'm also just previewing the type of graphics you see.

So there's a feedback between banks and banks and governments.

They have a symbiotic relationship.

They depend on each other and happy.

So crisis can happen either because of banks misbehaviour or

government misbehaviour.

Since you mentioned a European context like crisis, had a

government misbehaviour at its core in Ireland, at the Bank

of Spain, the bank that caused the crisis, both governments

and banks can cause a crisis.

So what happens is they trigger something.

If you start here, the banks get into an increasingly

difficult situation.

Then they can't lend to small and medium sized enterprises.

The engine of growth that is the economy contracts.

If you make a bailout that puts government finances under

constraint because of the strain, both because revenue goes down

and expenditures go up, that can lead to austerity and

the economy contracting and that then affects the banks.

So if you get into this feedback loop between banks

have difficulties and government has difficulty.

That's a typical symptom of crisis.

If you want to think about the budget in this

country of private power today.

That's exactly the context to put this into.

So so this type of argument is something you see

again and again and again in this course when you

get into it.

Now, how big are banks?

And I'm going to you should be surprised by this.

So let's take a meeting of developing countries like Brazil.

So 30 years ago, the banks in Brazil, the kind

is 20% of GDP.

By the latest numbers, I saw how big the state

updated the banks in Brazil, 120% of GDP.

You take Germany, the banks are three times GDP.

Japan, two times GDP.

UK four times.

And if you are from any country in the world,

I promise you you are somewhere here except the United

States.

The size of the entire banking sector in the United

States is less than.

If you're not from the United States, you're going to

be up here somewhat.

But if you're from the U.S., you're done.

And I'm going to answer the question on the next

flight to Singapore, why?

Why is the U.S. so different?

Well, if you take this is this data is really

hard to come by.

But in almost every country in the world, financial intermediation

moving money for both pockets.

One another happens via banks.

People put money in the bank.

The bank loans it out.

In this country, 84%.

92 in Germany, 96 in Spain, which is the most

bank heavy country I know of.

If you go to Latin America or Asia, you will

find exactly the same numbers everywhere.

The United States is 34%.

The reason is that in the United States, there's a

lot of different alternatives to do financial innovation for small

companies to borrow from banks.

They borrow from investment funds.

So I always think about dentists, like dentists, because I'm

looking at a relatively successful middle class person.

If your family is full of dentists, no offence meant.

But someone who makes a decent amount of money.

Where does a dentist put her money into?

In Germany, into a bank in the United States to

buy a fund that lends to companies?

And that means in Germany, the dentist gets less and

the company pays more.

In the United States, they tend to get more and

the company pays less is a cost of financial intermediation

is much cheaper.

Huge advantage to the United States and we get it.

So this issue, as I saw, told you earlier, that

a settlement is going to be filed, web3 and all

those topics.

Exactly what that feeds into.

Let me get into it.

So what about regulation?

So I call this the regulation put into them.

So on the x axis you have the intensity of

regulation from low to high.

On the two Y-axis, we have financial stability and economic

growth.

Before the global crisis 15 years ago, we emphasised little

regulation and high growth.

The Blue line.

Then after the crisis, we regulated everything that could move.

Growth suffered, but we cared about stability.

We moved into that direction from here to here.

There's also an end to the 19th deliberately chosen.

Now the peninsula is swinging back.

So what if you pay attention to what's happening?

And sort of this is one of reading between the

lines between two in the year 2022, you see deregulation

happening again.

You won't notice it if you read the financial press.

But it's really it is really visible if you know

where to look.

So now we assume back to more growth, less regulation,

because all of those policies and in finance and the

way I talk about all this trade offs, this is

why in so many issues in this course and the

real life, there is no correct answer.

You might personally, personally believe you prefer a lot of

regulation below growth, stability.

That's a perfectly valid view.

Or you might prefer high growth and little regulation.

Also a valid view.

And in an extreme, I will tell you, justify your

views, whatever your view is.

And this is exactly the type of thing we discussed

in the seminar part of the course.

Systemic Risk.

The topic of this chapter is about the possibility of

a serious crisis causing a deep recession.

So this is how we quantify it.

This is the terminology to use.

It is connected to the stability of the financial system.

And one thing that is very clear in all, everything

we discussed is systemic risk is created out of sight

when nobody can see it.

You created.

Basically, if you can see it, it's not dangerous.

What is dangerous is still not visible part of the

system.

And therefore, to understand what's going on, we have to

find what I call hidden mechanisms, a mechanism of takes

some stability to one space, into something back in another.

And these hidden mechanism is what matters and.

If you want to be a successful hedge fund manager,

that's exactly what how we think.

With success with private equity managing a successful central bank

closing second quarter your job.

This is what I said earlier this is of course

for those types of jobs is for exactly that reason.

Questions.

So what drives Miss?

The crisis of 2008 did not happen because of a

bad decision made in the year 2008.

It happened because of bad decisions made years earlier, let's

say 2003.

In the year 2003, everybody said we are safe, but

if you think we are safe, you take more risk.

And this was a really wise person said 50 years

ago, stability is destabilising.

If you end up creating a stable system.

That creates incentives to misbehave, that undermines the stability.

So therefore.

I mean, and I have really liked in the debates

of people, but this is about this one should never

want too much stability.

It's just something that will come up again and again.

And again.

And, of course.

And.

It's all about the unknown unknowns.

So imagine this afternoon, I mean, the U.S. stock market

hasn't done really well this year.

I think 50% completely aside.

I wrote a blog piece, too.

I wrote a blog piece three years ago about the

iPad market the previous year.

A friend of mine asked me to update it.

So I might I might add I might do some

analysis on the stock loss and stock market this year

in an historical context to see how bad it is.

But it comes down to 3%.

But imagine this afternoon, the U.S. stock market goes down

by 23%.

And remember, in finance, the most important country is the

United States by far.

They are the most important by some margin.

If the U.S. market goes up to 205 this afternoon,

nobody really cares.

Some people do, but by and large, we don't.

In the year 2008 and subprime mortgages with losses of

less from $200 billion.

Same amount.

And oh, my God, the world is almost ending.

So what this tells you is the differences.

Stock market risk.

We know it's in front of you understand the risk

in the stock market for good and bad.

You can manage it.

You're not surprised by it.

And therefore, big losses in the stock market do not

cause any damage.

Subprime losses happened when nobody was looking.

They exposed significant weaknesses in business models of banks and

other institutions.

And those weaknesses in business models exposed by the subprime

mortgages caused the crisis in 2008.

The hidden mechanism.

So the unknown unknowns are always the most damaging.

And I have a whole chapter on this or this

just previews the chapter risk is can either be exorbitant

is flawed and dodges.

Exogenous risk is risk that comes from outside the system.

Imagine an asteroid hitting Earth.

An asteroid came to the dinosaurs 65 million years ago.

The dinosaurs did nothing to cause their own demise.

Exogenous shock from outside.

And in this 2008, because it was the interaction of

human beings that make up the financial system of cost,

it outcomes all serious risks and options.

And so there's also in a ways all of what

people and this means and this is really the context

you can think about.

We pound in the UK of what's happening in the

UK at the moment.

This is roughly speaking of the psychology of crisis.

So in good times, plenty of money.

Liquidity.

Liquidity is another word for money.

So if you if you want to some sophisticated security.

If you look smart.

She won't bend, won't benefit of the course.

Plenty of money.

Prices go up.

Exogenous risk has gone down.

Confidence is high.

Everybody's happy.

Everybody's frantic.

You go to bed.

You wake up the following morning.

Prices are collapsing.

Confidence is going away.

Liquidity is evaporating.

We'll discuss how money can evaporate.

That's the this is how a crisis is manifested or

stressed in.

So if you are in charge of stability or if

you are running a macro hedge fund, this is what

you think about.

This is where you make money and this is where

you lose money when you go down.

If if you if you are a macro hedge fund.

So we use as a context to talk about these

things.

And what drives the economy?

Politics.

Well, the economy.

When Bill Clinton, a former president of the United States,

was running against and you stop polls, he said the

campaign theme his campaign theme was it's the economy, stupid.

The reason he became president was because of an economic

recession in the year 2022.

It's politics, stupid.

The primary driver of bad outcomes in the economy and

the financial system is politics.

It's a political risk.

If you want to be technical, you call it political

uncertainty.

But I.

I am not very pedantic, so if I have to

be pedantic, I can be.

But I try not to be.

But take the Muslim biggest basket.

Anybody here from Minnesota?

Okay.

Believe me, this is almost identical when you talk about

country's biggest basket case in the world economically spend a

lot of that is because of this outcome entirely political.

Major financial and economic crisis caused by politics.

So what is driving the economy?

Brexit, Trump, Ukraine, China, Qatar, Turkey, Venezuela, etc., etc. Politics

drives finance.

I'm going to show you a video about systemic risk

here.

For that, I need to go to YouTube.

Well, I if I had really good, I would have

planned this, set it up.

But I didn't.

I'm not really good at this sort of thing.

Oh, Jesus.

Why can't you just.

I have a question.

Get along to go to YouTube and then and then

ask ask us.

This is working and your question you.

So.

Yeah.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Yeah, yeah.

Yes.

What's your question, sir?

So please stop using bullet points in your cousin.

He's an idiot.

So of course you use of course you use bullet

points.

Yes, sir.

Your question?

Yeah, I wanted to ask why.

What is the reason the US financial to termination is

so much lower than all the other countries.

Is it because of financial regulation?

So why is the United States on of the recent.

Without getting into too much too much detail.

So the US is the last country to have a

central bank of the major central bank of the United

States was established in 1913.

The you could not do banking across states in the

United States until like 20, 30 years ago.

So the United States because remember, it's called the United

States.

And each state is a sovereign entity equally.

And this is a complicated thing.

Right.

But it's so fragmented.

So historically, they just didn't allow big banks so much

in seeking out a New York license.

You couldn't operate in Pennsylvania.

His banks could not bear to operate across state lines.

So he ended up with a huge number of smaller

banks instead of the big banks drowning everybody out.

But also because of the fragmentation, they didn't use regulations

to prevent all the waves of genetic mutation happen.

What do you from?

Port.

And Poland, typical country banks.

They are so powerful that they prevent anything that's called

competition.

I'm half Turkish as well.

So I have a case study in Turkey.

Turkey is a fascinating case.

Most recently.

I wrote a paper about Turkey.

Okay.

So I want to show you this.

I'm going to shoot a small video about systemic risk

of this comes from.

So in my part of my job, I run what's

called the Systemic Risk Centre.

So this is a video we put out and I

want to just a little bit of a slightly more

polished way of saying the same thing.

Not many people.

What we want is to this.

The answer coming from the Super Bowl, from the financial

section in the city of London.

The you think.

To the needed to open for the chance to do

some of.

The reason this place is a mystery to the individuals

and to some.

He says.

Now.

The reason is because of this piece of the puzzle.

It turns out that this is a single, systemically important

financial system to collapse.

Now, this was a systemic risk.

We.

The system at.

I'm hearing that right now.

And so especially long breaks like this one here so

that when they have to get out of lockstep, otherwise

they would take all of your breath and wildly off

the brain.

But you've got a lot more time for that to

happen here.

A lot of people would walk up the great global

marketplace of and old people like, you know.

We're working with.

Investment groups as a folks on that.

This is leaning against this way, which we respect.

So we're going to keep this for a while with

the business, maybe more.

And more very quickly.

All of these people, we didn't know each other.

We're watching a lot of it on collectively as.

Individuals trying to stabilise itself and make the principal.

Unstable, systemic event or the little away from the.

And it's just the fact of doing the right thing

for everyone individually that is creating systemic risk to all

of and better any failure is everywhere at home after

watching that.

This question is a perfect example.

The flash crash was increased from an asset the which

is fairly closely and very quickly.

So there was this big investor who was going to

sell the city.

The investor used an ad that decided to sell more

and more action going on in the markets this morning

so that we can hide behind all that aggression and

not be found out.

It was sold initially, but actually more than half of

the forest traders bought from the investor because nobody can

get past the past around something to each other.

And that's where the action became very large trading going

on.

But as I'm afraid, the market price added a lot

to the business.

That is interesting.

I have to sell even more and then prices fall

even more and we have this vicious feedback loop until

the prices go up so much that through the money,

investors look at that and say this is too crazy

and the whole market was pulled off the game.

The risk of that day was inadequate.

As an individual, do I think that yellow can create

new formations and gyrations in the market far away from

having what?

Systemic risk?

Working with businesses.

You can work with these policies.

And mitigate systemic risk.

On this incredible something that you said.

You learn to love somebody.

You increasingly become restless with everything eventually end up in

crisis.

The reason why we can't prevent families in crisis.

Is that we need to get stupid every single time.

We all know what happened after that.

We can't do that.

Systemically is dysfunctional.

Interaction.

Interaction.

People and companies and markets.

The worst possible time all come.

Together to.

Behave in the same way.

Also, the same.

Assets are crossing families and markets depressed and that is

exactly.

The same thing.

The alternative?

The best common sense.

We all try not to fail.

That's exactly what the greatness of America is.

Don't get carried away by this.

Think also that people don't get how you want to

put this.

You should also say, and that's how people on the

base will behave.

So what was it?

So the thing is so the point the point of

this call is also this.

I know we get into a lot of this as

we get into it later on.

Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.

This is this is YouTube taken down the rabbit hole

of increasing YouTube videos.

In these cases, by the way.

So that's a horrible thing to stop it.

So.

We are going to get into it.

So we discuss this question as is part of the

course.

What is the biggest systemic risk today?

Is it the issue of rising inflation?

Is it the war in Ukraine?

Fragmentation of Europe.

Political instability.

China.

Well, something completely different we haven't thought about.

So I will call on you in one hour to

answer that question.

And that's a tool to the if nobody says anything

is foolish you people close to the front and guy

hiding in the back you know you call them.

So now is it has to move if you if

you're an escape that you're going to take a quick

break and then you come back to do the rest.

And during the break, I'll be here to ask your

questions if you have any.

Thank you.

Always, always remind me.

So this is not a course on history, but I

picked my samples to illustrate something relevant for today.

So there's a lot of historical examples, but in all

of these they're because they illustrate something relevant.

And that event is quite interesting what's happened today.

So in 1914 was when the world's globalism was at

its peak, the world was even more globalised than it

is now.

The financial system of the world was highly integrated.

And by the way, for those of you concerned about

conflict, everybody's poor because everybody has an economical interest in

all the countries.

Nobody can stop a war.

Yeah, right.

That turned out to be a dream that didn't quite

materialise.

Then all of a sudden, somebody decided to assassinate the.

The the.

The heir to the Austrian empire in June 20th, and,

poof, all of a sudden a crisis happened.

But here's the interesting thing from my point of view.

The global systemic crisis happened immediately, but the war didn't

start until a week and a month later.

So the financial crisis happened one month before the war

started.

Well, that's the interesting part, because the crisis happened in

anticipation of that tells you something.

I'll tell you couple of things that are quite important

here.

First of.

All.

A big, bad outcome can happen without actually any real

economic reason for it.

This is only anticipate what would have happened.

But still, you've got a crisis.

And the anticipation of the war caused confidence and consequently

liquidity, tremendous money to disappear.

And the mechanism of that is what matters to us

here.

The mechanism is expectations of what built the.

Cross-border creditors, meaning if you lend money across borders, you

try to take your money back home.

This meant initially the British pound and friends franc appreciated

the Russian ruble and the dollar depreciated so quickly.

Changed, by the way.

And this was run on the Bank of England and

the stock markets and credit markets closed for six months.

So today's context to this, the only country closing in

this market to cope with crisis was China was closed

to for seven business case.

Everybody closed their markets a half a year earlier.

The severity was much, much, much worse.

Widespread bankruptcies in the city of London.

The nobody cared about the value of money anymore.

That is, money was picked to go to.

Nobody cared about that.

The government printing money.

On a massive basis.

They lived because this is before it took money.

So they hired printing presses all over the U.K. to

print money.

As it turned out, you from Germany.

Germany prepared for this.

So they had money in reserve and nobody else did.

They closed the markets, moratoria on theft, meaning if you

owed money, you could.

This was like a creditors could not collect from doctors.

All credit agreements were suspended for six months, and this

here was the biggest intervention by governments in financial markets

in human history, and that prevented a worse event.

So basically the lesson from this was the massive government

intervention.

The liquidity is needed to protect the economy from bad

outcomes.

But ultimately, keep in mind, the financial system is based

on trust.

And we really, really quickly switched from trusting somebody to

not not trusting somebody.

That's why I didn't.

That's why you don't need anything real.

All you need is for the trust to go away.

If trust goes away, you could end up with a

crisis.

And that needs.

And finally, the cobbler.

About three years ago, I did an event with the

Department of Defence in the U.K..

I think the YouTube show's topic on exactly how would

your tax return if in a hostile country.

That's exactly that's a key element to that is you

have to trust by false news.

This is why this is why when you see what's

happening in Russia, Ukraine today, the control of information so

vitally important for exactly these reasons.

Questions.

So systemic risk.

I want to ask you a question about.

And the answer to that is a it says.

Yes.

B Which is no.

C i.

I hate.

K k no.

AK enemies.

I know nothing.

How many people want to live in a country with

no financial crisis?

Raise your hands.

One, two, three, four, eight.

How many people don't want to live in a country

with a happy to live in a country with this

financial crisis?

See what I see here.

I didn't quite comfortably head, but I guess did.

Right.

So.

Eight people, approximately, wanna live in a country with no

crisis.

15 people are happy to live in a country with

crisis, and 15 people know nothing.

I'm happy to be put in a group.

Why did I do it this way?

Imagine you have a job interview.

You people who don't answer will not be invited back.

You are supposed to have a pencil.

Everything.

You're better off just guessing.

And guessing wrong saying I don't know how to think

about this problem.

If you're smart, you can always talk your way out

of any possible answer.

So if I ever do this again, don't end up

bankruptcy.

So I going I'm going to I'm going to answer

that question and a little bit later on.

But.

Before I get into that.

We have to make a distinction between the term systematic

and systemic.

If you are taking a finance course, you have learned

the term systematic risk as in non diversifier for risk

in markets.

Like the stock market index could be systematic risk in

keeping buying stocks.

So a typical plot is on the x axis number

of stocks you own.

The Y axis risk.

As you keep on buying stocks, risk goes down into

the plot holes.

You're left with systematic typical of principal finance plot.

Systemic risk is nothing to do with the issue it

relates to, and I'm going to define it to the

danger of the entire financial system collapsing.

So don't confuse systemic and systematic.

Even if it would sound all of you saying it

is so, the financial authorities only use this term financial

authorities quite often.

And of course, financial authorities means government authorities in charge

of things.

Finance.

So that could include the International Monetary Fund and Washington,

the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland, the Financial

Stability Board.

This is in charge of most regulations when I get

to it.

Or it could be a central bank.

Or it could be a regulated financial authorities.

It's a term I keep on, you see, in this

course.

They define systemic risk in disruption to the flow of

financial services that is caused by an impairment of the

financial system and has the chance to have a serious

consequence for the real economy.

Two things to that definition a.

Bad financial outcome.

B that might affect the real economy.

So if you end up with a bad outcome that

cannot affect the real economy, it is not systemic.

And so remember the example we give you about the

known unknowns and the stock market.

$200 billion loss versus subprime losses.

Same magnitude loss.

But in one case, it's not systemic, but in other

cases, it is systemic.

And it's the by the way.

Here's an exam answering it.

If I put a couple of things about how not

to answer some questions.

If I put on the accent, what is systemic risk?

And the answer arises from Interlink.

It is at the failure of an individual institution, the

cost spill-overs and even cascading failures.

You will probably get a civil.

Don't memorise answers is nobody who as a cushion likes

to sit on words back to back to them.

Word by word is doesn't work.

And by the way, this is not as this is

the answer, not this is a lot of people give

this as the answer, but not the first part.

It's a very typical exam is the taxi.

It happens because everybody's connected to everybody and it's amplified

by what is called pro cyclicality.

And I wanted to find that a little bit later

on.

So I'm not ready to.

So you see that definition of crossing of colour to

late run.

And key to this is conditions for systemic risk are

created when we think everything is fine.

No, I don't want to get in too much into

this.

I mean, people disagree on what, but on this term.

Some people think systemic is more severe than other people.

I don't I don't I don't want to.

I'm just putting this light up to let you know

what happens.

If you read something from somebody else, you might see

a slightly different take on it.

Doesn't mean nobody's right or wrong, but I tend to

see systemic risk as a fairly serious crisis causing a

recession.

So should we be concerned about systemic risk?

Well, it depends on where you're from.

So if you take this this slide that is so

painful to admit, this data that I just haven't been

able to bring myself to go to the ECP website

to update.

You have to take into account the data on the

on the ECB website.

So in any case, the country in Europe with the

biggest banking system is Luxembourg.

The financial system is 27 times GDP.

Can someone tell me what is the other distinguishing characteristic

of Luxembourg?

Love tax?

Nope.

Not if you live there.

It's the richest country in the world with per capita.

Then go to the other end.

Small financial systems.

Czech Republic.

Hungary.

Greece.

Lithuania.

Latvia.

Poland.

Romania.

Relatively poor countries.

So this seems to be a correlation between the size

of the banking system and the size of the economy.

If you just go by that observation.

So that means you might believe you might want to

if you're in charge, you might therefore conclude, ah, if

you were if you were in charge of your country,

you might then say, ah, we should have a big

banking system is good for the economy.

But of course, if you take, say, let's take West

Germany here.

Oh.

Why is this alphabetical thing to your four, four, four

times GDP?

3 to 4 of Germany exports finance.

So therefore, therefore, the reason in Germany is so high

and Luxembourg is so high for our exporters.

The reason why Hungary is so small, it imports finance.

So therefore, Germany and Italy in other countries sell financial

services to other places.

So that means, by the way, the global crisis in

2008, Luxembourg was not affected.

So the size of the financial system does not mean

you're more vulnerable to a crisis either.

It's a bit tricky to think about these things.

Yes.

Cyprus is interesting.

Why is the ratio?

So while their total loss is pretty high.

We just Cyprus talked a lot.

Cyprus.

I want to get into Cyprus a little bit later

on.

The reason why Cyprus is a relative haven this is

2015 is the site people's offshore detention centre primarily for

Russians.

So this is this is predominantly Russian money.

But the simply fun to revisit the Greek government bonds,

which is why I say it is quite a crisis.

I'll talk about only from the Cyprus's offshore centre.

So basically the Cypriots taking money from the Russians and

also from Middle East, sort of places like ships and

is basically place in an easy flying distance.

Time.

So he does a count?

Yeah, no question.

Oh, I.

Was just wondering.

It's interesting.

The total.

And so when you're again going back to Cyprus, the

domestic is quite high compared to the total does not

reflect whether or not the attitude is being used to

see where the money is actually domiciled there.

So like where the Russians owning properties or like letterboxes

to support them, I mean, it's much worse.

What this means is so domestic means essentially.

Are you looking at banks owned by are you looking

at.

So domestic basically means banking services by own banks for

your own country.

Take Luxembourg as the extreme example.

The bulk of the Luxembourg assistance is foreign banks servicing

foreigners.

That's really what it means.

What this means is that what this means is the

some part of the Cypriot banking system is foreign financial

institutions servicing foreigners.

I figured if he calls Bulgaria, forbid Bulgaria.

So I'm trying to see if a country with a

right to speak or not.

But the problem is this is this is a it's

a technical, difficult technical definition.

Domestic and foreign.

So here is an argument often being made.

So how important is the financial system?

So a detente like this is really difficult to come

by.

So this is why my take on it.

And since it wasn't in mine.

But I think.

So if you take this country, this is economic growth

from 1995 until 2009.

Global crisis.

The reason why I'm ending the almost the entirety of

British economic growth was caused by finance.

Manufacturing basically flat.

And he is seeing this in a lot of countries

like the UK, where services and financial services are the

predominant part of economic growth.

So this is really the part of manufacturing taking place

in low cost countries and services taking place in virtually

countries such as what exists.

So that also means.

If you are a manufacturing country, you are less vulnerable

to systemic risk.

And if you are finance based country, I want to

come back into that.

So who's vulnerable?

So before I'm going to give you a hypothetical thought

exercise.

So imagine two countries had the same sized banking system.

Country has one bank.

Country B has ten equally sized banks.

Country is more vulnerable to crisis for two reasons.

A Because the failure of a single bank is more

damaging of the failure of few people all of the

time.

And equally importantly.

The central bank is likely to have more political power,

lobbying power on all the small ten banks combined.

And this becomes film this year.

This becomes, quote unquote, the very top of fintech fund,

which is lobbying power of banks and how we how

the financial system get into later on.

So here's the question.

Should we eliminate systemic risk?

Well, Cuba and North Korea do it quite well.

All you have to do to live in a country

without a banking system and voila, no systemic risk.

You might want to live in Cuba.

North Korea.

I didn't know.

Planes.

Problem is the real problem is that if you were

if you fell into the yes, I want to live

in a country with no crisis.

What you're saying is I want to make my banks

so safe.

Economy cannot grow.

That's the trade off.

Because if you want growth, you have to someone who

makes risky loans.

Lens through companies and lens to make more kids news,

etc., etc. And that means we can end up with

a really bad outcome which causes a crisis.

You can not get high growth and safety.

And this also means, by the way, that the countries

most vulnerable to systemic risk are the most developed countries.

Developing countries.

If you take most of Latin America or most of

Africa or most of Asia, for example, the poorer countries,

they are predominantly caste based, even non faith based, meaning

that even if there's a big financial crisis, the people

living in these countries are much more insulated.

People living in London today.

So therefore, systemic risk is Sweden affects the wealthiest, richest

countries proportionally worst.

So here is what I talk to policymakers.

I love to kill in this plot because it upsets

the.

So imagine a hypothetical GDP growth over a century.

And I'm going to say you get 3% a year.

So.

83% fuel accumulated over a century.

You've grown quite a bit.

So if you want stability.

Do you get a stable 4%?

Biggest stable 3%.

But do you get a stable 2%?

The to trade traitor.

I'm sure almost everybody would be happy to go from

the red to the blue more growth and more stability.

You might want to go from the red to the

purple.

Same growth, more stability.

But few people would want to want stability and lower

growth.

So this is the trade-off.

And the problem is we do not know.

We have no idea which of these.

So if we decide to stabilise the financial system, which

of these three is most likely?

We have no idea.

I mean, you might be onto that and you could

also argue the green and the glue.

So therefore, just saying, I want stability.

Without convincingly arguing you end up with if what you

see is the blue or the purple.

It's not a convincing argument.

So when I talk to policymakers, central bankers and the

like, this one argument that often upset them a bit.

I think you might even end up here as a

queen if you try to staple as much.

So I think instead.

If you think about systemic risk from a public point

of view, understand the fragility of the financial system, try

to document the danger posed to society, try to identify

the benefit it risk to us, and try to develop

sensible policies that mitigate the severity of crisis and balancing

out the benefits.

Now.

I'm not going to ask you out loud, but do

you come from a country that is able to go

through this process?

I can think of one country that was actually good

at this, which is Singapore.

That's exactly what Singapore that's you know, perhaps no other

country can can really do this.

But this is really fundamental to how Singapore does financial

policy.

And this is a fairly big key to replacing a

person so successful as a country.

Nobody else has been able to manage this properly.

So how often do systemic crises happen?

The IMF or the World Bank.

They have a database.

If you have to do a thesis in some of

the course and you look for data to work with.

This is a nice database.

It's a database of all financial crisis in the world

of all categories.

The explanations which are some nice source for a project

or for thesis if you need to.

So they say a systemic crisis happens every 43 years

on average.

And that means.

For a person with a typical life span, they are

likely to experience two crises in their life.

If anything, this is an overestimate.

And I think there's a life cycle to crisis.

So we had a Great Depression.

Our next chapter that was in 1929 when the person

who was 20 year old in 1929 then retired in

1970.

That's when we deregulate everything we could possibly deregulate.

Bretton Woods ended, what's known as the Washington consensus emerged

deregulation liberalisation that culminated in a crisis in 2007.

And the generation that was sort of in the around

20 year old around 2007, they would push for increase

in regulations until they retire.

And that means the seeds of the next crisis are

born.

Keep in mind, from a policy point of view, the

events.

In your life.

What happened when you 20 year old?

They affect how you think about the world for the

rest of your life.

So if you are in life, if you are a

neoclassical deregulation fool, when you are 20 year old, lots

of political you hold on to.

And if you are 20 year old in 2008, in

the middle of a crisis, that's if you you hold

on for the rest of your life.

By the way, if you live in this country and

then you could think about who runs this country, then

it explains the decision we made on Friday.

But I think we are seeing major crisis once you

get to 15, you know, because in 1997, you have

a banking crisis and then with the USA in that

period and then you had Great Depression.

And then in the post-war 1970s, we have the big

crisis because of the inflation from 60 to 70.

I didn't like it.

So when we had the Asian financial crisis.

But then other countries lined up for the bailouts.

No, no, no.

You are talking from the 1920s.

I mean, the fact that most countries.

In the world.

Was practically no crisis in the world from 1949 to

19 seventies, almost no one.

You're talking about inflation, not financial crisis in the seventies

or some banking crisis in the seventies affecting some countries.

The Asian crisis affected South Korea, Thailand, Malaysia.

Indonesia.

Four countries.

All a huge number of countries in the world.

In the 2007 crisis did not affect any Asian country.

So the Asian countries were not affected by the Latin

America.

Countries were not affected by this, not called a systemic

crisis.

There is no Ukrainian president.

So you have to think about having 150 countries in

the world and not all of them are in a

crisis.

But if you don't trust that they're running to solve

it for everybody to see.

Oh, sure.

I find that video.

Give me a sec.

You know, I.

Look, look, look.

I'm just trying to.

Last month I pulled.

That's a wrongful death again.

I have this a video I wanted to show you

here.

And I don't have.

But I really, really want to show it to you,

so I'll try to remember to do it.

Yeah, do it next week.

Do my best to copy it.

I have them on computer.

So this discussion relates to the video.

So I can't I can't discuss the problem.

The systemic risk is you cannot measure it properly.

I'm going to show you what the ECP tells us

about systemic risk.

ECP means the European Central Bank.

And they measure systemic risk with something called the compulsive

indicator of systemic stress called KISS.

Let's walk through this number.

There's a global crisis in 2007.

The indicator of systemic risk told us everything was fine

in the ten years before.

Remember what I said earlier?

The conditions for the crisis in 2008 and created in

2003.

In 2003, systemic risk was measured to be very, very

low.

That's why you make all the bad decisions.

The measurement of systemic risk should serve at the same

time as the crisis and falls with the crisis.

So technically speaking, it is impossible to measure systemic risk

in numbers.

It's a non-issue, a phenomenon.

Lot of people titrate, I think, to more than one

or two central banks discussing this very topic but you

it on.

So how costly a crisis.

So the same database, the IMF World Bank database, they

quantify the cost of crisis.

And so therefore, this all of this could be being

a time just to say today is the worst year

ever.

Well, if you look at the worst crisis, economic crisis

in human history as recorded by the database, you go

from Greece, Germany, Austria, Japan, Netherlands, France, Chile, Lithuania, Italy

all a long time ago.

Within your lifespan.

The only the only one who might possibly is possibly

close to on the top 30 list is the Greek

crisis.

Ten years ago, the missing, the luckiest in your life.

But we have not experienced any of the world's most

damaging economic and financial crises.

These are the worst ever recorded.

Long before you were born.

If you go more recently, this will take your lifetime.

And the Greek crisis is the worst, followed by the

Estonian Latvian.

But you're talking about 25, 25% of GDP, which is

fairly small.

So there have been no I would think if I

put Ukraine into it, I would probably end up being

quite high.

But those two factor, that is one of the questions

before everyone.

So I'm going to ask you a yes or no

question.

And for this one, there is no correct answer.

So you have no excuse for anything.

Don't give.

This is your opinion.

So is systemic risk primarily caused by the private sector

or the public sector?

Governments of banks.

How many people say it's the private sector?

Private sector.

How many?

About 25.

How many people say the public sector?

There is some overlap.

By the way.

I used the book.

I said, primarily, you have to decide.

I didn't give you a chance to look up and

nobody told you.

However, the gentleman is right.

It's both.

So let's run through both arguments.

The market first was the market profit maximising evil bankers?

Right.

Well, create subprime mortgages that for short term make long

term loans, take too much risk.

And when everything goes wrong, they get bailouts from the

rest of us.

As if bankers deal tough, like in all the governments.

The reason why the crisis in 2008 happened at its

core was a political decision by the US government to

provide subsidised mortgage is to the poorest people in the

United States.

That's why you got all these subprime mortgages, all the

instruments that led to the crisis.

Politics.

Governments like to have key feedbacks.

My next slide is here.

Big systemically important banks.

Com.

Remember the slides with Luxembourg, how big this banking system

will be in the richest country in the world?

That's right.

Those numbers are known to people.

They say, I want to be like Luxembourg.

We'll still have a big banking system.

So the governments would like to have a big, risky

banking system.

And every government I know, they want the banks to

make risky loans to small and medium sized enterprises.

So therefore.

Both governments and banks caused systemic crisis.

The person, one of the two creators of the Black,

shows the creation Fist of Black, he wrote 25 years

ago.

What do you hear the government talking about?

Systemic risk?

Hold on to your wallet.

It means they want you to pay more taxes or

more regulations, which are more likely to create systemic risk

in some way to think about systemic risk even closer

to the truth.

If you think of the government as causing it rather

than protecting us.

By the way, if you pay close attention, you can

see how the English grammar has changed.

So.

So you would not write it this way to tell

you would write you wouldn't you would you would do

the English slightly differently.

This is still archaic, but both are responsible.

So CDFIs.

So one of the problems of this course is we

have a huge number of acronyms.

And you can't avoid them, by the way.

So here too.

I've been avoiding it so far.

But no, I will no longer protect you.

Safety means systemically important financial institution.

And a subset of that is global systemically important.

Bank G-sap.

So if in the future, in this course, I'll use

it to see fit.

Well, gee, now you know what it means.

The difference between these two is that an insurance company

can be a civil.

But it's not a bank or BlackRock asset manager.

It's a simple but not a bank.

Let's talk about this category here.

Thanks.

So a systemically important financial institution is one whose failure

is likely to cause a systemic crisis.

Before the global crisis in 2007, nobody thought they were

dangerous.

This is a highly diversified class institutions with loose money

somewhere and a business model.

Most losses are offset by losses elsewhere.

Therefore, the prevailing view was that large banks are safer

and smaller banks.

Then we got several CDFIs that failed in 2008 and

we learned this is wrong.

So you might find your country on this list here.

From taking the world's largest cities.

So what all this is doing is taking largest.

So basically, let me let me tell you what this

is before we get into it.

The total global, systemically important bank is defined by the

Financial Stability Board, FSB.

And it's a list of about as simple as thanks

to the movies.

So you.

So if you come from a country without a bank,

at least you might have a systemically important bank, but

you're not in use of local banks.

These are the countries, countries with suspects.

So the countries are the biggest danger to Switzerland.

They had 200 total assets.

So these are the total assets to GDP of the

largest city bank in each country.

So this is U.P.S..

U.P.S. is almost 40% bigger than the GDP of Switzerland.

If it was Spain, Santander.

30% bigger, Netherlands 111, BNP Pop, Pop, Pop and France

106.

This country, HSBC, 96% go down to Germany.

Deutsche Bank is a third of the German GDP.

Biggest city in Germany, ICBC.

In China, 31%.

And J.P. Morgan in the United States, 16%.

So this means they follow it.

If it biggest bank in the United States Jp morgan

failed.

The United States would have no problem deal with.

If the biggest bank in China ICBC fails.

I must admit, I'm missing Japan.

I don't know of all countries.

I know Japan should be here somewhere, but it's not

on here.

If you take I have ICBC in China, they found

that China has no problem dealing with it, but a

bigger problem.

Germany can handle the Deutsche Bank without any fairly easily.

Italy.

If UniCredit fails, Italy will have will certainly have a

crisis.

ICBC in China and Canada, they would have a crisis.

We would fail and all those countries.

So basically, the biggest bank in each of these countries,

with the exception of these three films you will enter,

is the sovereign defaults and the mother of all financial

and economic crisis.

So that's a problem is seafood banks to some countries

can have them all this country.

So then you can ask yourself the question, why would

Switzerland and Spain and the Netherlands and France want to

have such big strings?

So it's a rhetorical question, both.

Ezra But think about why would this country want to

have these two things?

Well, it's even worse than that, because if you have

a bank.

Thanks are an incentive to become C5 X Y.

So if you're a bank, you want to become CDFIs

because it lowers your funding costs.

Why does it lower funding costs?

Because you're so big, you're more likely to be bailing

out the banks.

And that means if you lend money to those banks,

your money is safer.

And if you lend money to smaller banks.

So being designated a c ft is a good thing

for a bank.

So there's an economic there's an incentive to become a

c ft.

And then we have politics.

Governments like to have that.

I don't know where you come from, but unless your

country is really, really unusual, your country likes to have

national champions.

And if you're a national champion, it's called named after

your country like Deutsche Bank.

It's even worse.

And then you get into all of these species arguments.

What is good for the national champions is good for

finance, is good for the country.

So therefore, the reason you can't deal with these really

dangerous, systemically important banks is because the politicians, the political

leadership likes them.

No other reason.

So how do you adapt the virus if you back?

But the FSB has a classification scheme, but you basically

look at amount of leverage, how much borrowed money they

use, how much money they have off balance sheet, how

interconnected they are obviously with this system.

If they fail, how do they affect the economy?

And it's a fairly straightforward classification for banks Christians.

Before I move on.

All clear.

He was all to the left to make it more

difficult.

Because you're not supposed to see it as.

Let's make it slightly trickier.

Two I mentioned before and I will continue to discuss

throughout the course is pro cyclicality.

And I want to therefore I want to really nail

down this concept.

I want you to want it.

If you're paying attention, you should know what this term

means.

Imagine three processes made by me in the computer APEC.

See how they move A moves opposite to B and

C move sorta independently of A and B.

Sapolsky at A and B together I entered with a

fairly flatline.

If I add a C together, I end of that

very big movement, a process that is also actively correlated

with and amplifying the two processes that are both correlated

with each other and amplifying each other are said to

be parasitical.

So let me start by the last one here and

then come back to the to the to come from

the banking private consumption.

And economic growth are pro-cyclical.

Because if I spend more money, consumption goes up and

the economy goes up.

And because the economy goes, of course, and Rich and

I spend more.

Because I spend more.

The economy goes up.

The pro-cyclical.

The temperature outside and cost saving from heat is not

pro-cyclical.

The reason is the cost of heating does not affect

temperature.

Temperature affects cost of heating, but heating.

But heating does not affect temperature.

No pro cyclicality.

You need causality in both directions.

Banking is inherently pro-cyclical.

And this is super important to understand stability because when

things are good, banks have lots of extra money, they

can lend this money out.

And the economy booms.

And then in a in a crisis or downturn, banks

have too little money, therefore, they can't lend money out

and therefore the economy can't grow.

It's a simple, simple example of pro cyclicality.

For the context of this slide, I'm using the term

capital.

I will define the term capital in chapter 13.

I do not want to define it.

No.

So for the purpose of this slide, capital means money.

Well, it's actually not money, but it's good enough for

this flight.

Okay.

So now you know what?

Constantly coloured qualities.

And if two processes dampen out each other the countercyclical.

So if you ask the authorities, what do you want

to get out of financial policy, they will say, I

want policy to be countercyclical, to dampen out cycles.

To which I say yes.

I would also like to be really, really rich, but

it's not going to happen.

It's wishful thinking.

To which say, well, then you can have a long

argument.

Well, it's what I'll discuss in more detail a little

later on, but it is too early.

The second mechanism is firesale externalities.

The electronics.

An externality means this is an outcome whereby the cost

of benefits.

Incurred by someone who does not make a decision.

So imagine you have travel insurance.

And you don't have iPhone 14 like I have here,

but you have iPhone ten like I had last week.

So I was in New York last week and supposed

to have dropped this on the hotel window onto the

pavement in Manhattan and up my hotel.

And then I called my insurance company said, Oh, my

iPhone got destroyed when I was travelling.

Can you please pay for a new one?

This my travel insurance?

That's an excellent article.

Your financial insurance is a typical example of externalities.

Fire sale externality is where the sale of an asset

in a crisis is forced by some circumstances.

Now you there's a lot of feedback watchers cause here's

another one.

And I want to go through this very carefully because

I found students tend to get very confused by this

policy.

So I want I want to go through it carefully

here with you.

Imagine external shock.

Or exhaustion is shock.

It does not matter.

This is something that happens and I don't care what

it is.

It could be Russia invading Ukraine, but that's a bad

thing.

Or it could be something else irrelevant if something bad

happens.

Because of that passing, some financial institutions get into difficulty.

Therefore risk increases because only these banks are more likely

to fail.

So they are more risky.

Risk goes up.

But because of this concept, they have to sell certain

assets.

Why would you sell certain assets if risk goes up?

So I would have to do the roundabout way.

Do you know the primary reason why retail investors underperform

professional investors?

And if it's not about the.

Because retail investors, they buy stocks.

So the news is good and sell it when the

news is bad.

Professional investors tend to hold investments through the cycle.

This means retail investors buy when prices are high.

So when the price is low.

This is a well-studied phenomenon.

This is why most people should not try to invest

themselves.

For that reason.

But that means you choose to sell when things are

bad.

But a lot of regulations stipulate that.

So if we get into this in much more detail

later on, but I'm just going to do this in

a fairly general way.

Now, if you had rules on how risky you can

be as a bank.

And the value of the risk goes up.

We have to sell some of your risky assets because

we have a rule imposed on say you can't be

too risky as an institution.

So the five to a hit by the shock forces

you to sell things.

And by the way, since most of your accountants, you

can imagine an accounting rule that makes exactly that happen.

Very common.

Forced sales that makes prices fall.

But because prices fall.

The banks are in what difficulty?

And because in what difficulty?

Risk goes up even more.

They sell more.

Prices fall.

This is called the fire externality.

Fire sale externality is a forced sale of assets in

a stress scenario.

And the reason why crisis gets so bad.

He's always sort of almost always because so many people

are trying to sell at the worst possible time in

all of us.

They are behaving like this week ten investors will underperform

the professionals.

But they had little choice but to get into this,

to get into the details of a dead trunk.

And, of course, all of this is amplified by leverage.

So technically speaking, what do we invest with?

Borrowed money, we amplify profits and losses.

Financial institutions use high leverage to boost profits.

That means good profits in good times, but spectacular losses

in bad times.

And by the way, banks are allowed by current regulations

to be 12 times leveraged.

I'll show the numbers.

I'll show you the mechanics of that little bit on.

Third reason crime.

The third mechanism is information asymmetry.

You don't know a lot about your counterparts.

You don't know everything about them, certainly.

And that means it is really hard to evaluate the

quality of things like loans and other investments simply because

you don't know enough.

I'll show you.

That can create a crisis of confidence on slide after

next.

And every party is connected to everybody else, whether they

like it or not.

Financial institutions have direct and interconnected interconnections.

So imagine right now you sort of recognise the style

of my plots.

Bank A is connected to bank and Bank AIPAC.

Think he has no connection to the.

But because.

PSC is connected to D, therefore A and D are

exposed to each other.

It's called the network connection of this system.

This means that everybody's connected to everybody, whether they like

it or not.

This means even if you try to beat trough the

truth that.

Well, man, it's nice.

Good.

Thank you.

Still a danger from the misbehaviour of big, awful banks

of the.

Because everybody's connected.

And then we have this because this is finance.

Everybody has bad incentives.

A lot of people have an incentive to increase the

stress, the life crisis.

So one is I'm going to show you an example

by the size of the next slide.

But here is an example that happened in 2009.

A theme park operator filed for bankruptcy.

And the reason why they filed for bankruptcy is that

the bondholders refused to restructure the debt.

So if you go to bankruptcy, you lose more money

as an investor, as a lender.

And if you restructure.

Typically.

Why would you then choose to bankruptcy?

Because Fidelity Mutual Fund had bought CPS insurers against Six

Flags failing.

So even so, their losses on pushing six like bankruptcy

were lower and the profits from the insurers are paid

out if they went into bankruptcy.

So therefore Fidelity has a financial instruments to cost more

tens.

And here is an example that is really cute.

And there's also a reason why I am very nice

to you protecting myself by talking about where I got

the example from.

Since I do not want to get this wrong.

Very large investments called Blackstone.

They would deliberately.

They would call it in by a CPS contract on

companies in difficulties.

They would then call the company and say, Can I

lent you $5 million?

The company will say yes, but then you have to

default on this payment, on this date.

This was designed to trigger payout under the CPS contracts.

I mean, this is sort of the definition of being

abusive, by the way.

And they pissed everybody off, but they made enormous amounts

of money for the survival of the kid.

So we'll discuss a lot of examples of systemic risk

later in the course.

What we'll do next is we'll do the seminar part

of this course.

I want to take a quick break before can one

of you people close to this show me the questions?

I have a question on more than one of you.

Your next to me.

Pull it up for the.

And show it to me.

So you forgot to bring it this way.

So let's take a quick break and we continue.

I'll maybe see you next week if you decide not

to drop this course.

Then supporting our book.

Lecture 2:

To.

They were introduced to.

Yeah.

It's been.

Yeah.

Reporting ready?

Reporting and ready.

Well, I had everything set up.

Yeah, there were.

I might as well.

You can always go acoustic side wise.

So what movie format is the play?

This video and I believe it's on the fastball.

You know, I only just want to use the interesting

part.

Oh, that's it.

So I'm a mac user.

Okay.

Thank you.

There's no songs because there's not a lot.

Okay, people.

Well, come again.

I told you I would show you a video last

time, but I couldn't find it on my system, so

I copied it on.

And the client is the point of this video is

that imagine a damn first time.

Like this time Here.

This stuff is copied out of some movie.

When is the risk?

Highest is the risk highest after the ten firsts or

is it highest before?

And if you just think about it, think about it.

The risk of a dead person is highest one second

before it costs the lowest one second afterwards, because it

comes first twice, Right?

Completely logical.

But think about imagine this is financial risk.

When is the risk of a crisis highest?

One second before the crisis and its lowest 1 seconds

after the crisis.

Right.

Completely logical.

But if you look at the newspaper headlines and all

the analysts screening, all the risk, that's the risk task

force.

Everything is quiet until afterwards.

And then it says, oh, my God, the world is

coming to an end.

So the way you talk about financial risk in theme

is that this is us.

In the video, you react to it after the event.

So this video's really good.

Just to nail down the point of when the risk

is highest.

One minute before the bad event, not afterwards.

One thing I forgot to do last week I brought

a copy of the two books I'm using.

You can take a look during the break if you

want to, to see if you know what you think

about this.

Otherwise, do you people have any questions before I move

on?

What I will do today is because events in this

country have been quite interesting, especially what happened today in

the bond markets and pension funds selling government bonds last

Wednesday.

And talk about this after I've done.

The next chapter might get to is towards the end

of today because it's typical of this type of feedback

loops we discuss in this course.

So let me get to you.

I finished, I finished.

Didn't finish higher sales.

I think this is.

This is where I was last week, isn't it?

Correct.

I'm going to assume it is unless you tell me

otherwise.

And of course these things and of course, this thing

doesn't work.

Let's see you make it work.

No.

This is a poor man's remote.

We don't have a clue.

You could keep it close to you.

What is common?

I do not want to be told what to open.

Thank you.

So we are continuing through this.

We had we don't have a lot of time left

in this chapter.

This chapter.

And just this is just an overview.

So basically the road map is right now I want

to discuss a little bit on the structure of the

system.

And if you want to classify who makes up the

financial system, it is three entities those who provide services,

government and others like you and I.

So the service providers in the financial system traditionally.

And all of us.

Wrong view on the banks.

The banks are institutions that take depositors money and lend

it out.

That's always been the wrong view, but that's the traditional

textbook view of banks.

One reason is that the banks always borrow elsewhere.

They don't only collect deposits.

Banks borrow from the interbank market.

Interbank market means one bank lending to another.

The way this works is at the end of each

day.

Some banks have too much cash.

All the banks need cash, so they lend to each

other.

At the end of the day, just to manage the

cash efficiently, the US interbank market.

Or they might go to the white to financial markets

to borrow.

I think an important element in the crisis in 2008

was the interbank market.

Is it banks pumped in long term assets with overnight

borrowing?

This is this has now been effectively prohibited by post-crisis

regulations.

Some banks are broker dealers, meaning a broker dealer is

a bank that facilitates financial transactions on behalf of somebody

else.

Now, this is this is primarily a North American or

United States term, but a broker dealer is.

If I buy a stock from this gentleman, I might

go to a broker dealer as an intermediary, someone who

sits between.

Some banks engaged in proprietary trading.

What this means is you buy and sell assets for

speculative or investment purposes on your own account.

Now, this used to be much more common, but now

has to meet.

It's been severely restricted after the crisis in 2008 and

the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States, for example, prohibits

American banks for doing so.

It still does put on a much smaller scale.

And to make things complicated, most large banks own small

banks and to make it even more complicated internationally, banks

operate across borders.

They can't have subsidiaries or branches.

Now, there's a very important distinction between these two.

Approach is.

So if I go to the if I go to

one of my banks and loan to NatWest, I go

to a London branch, I'm doing a business with a

British entity.

If I go to a branch of NatWest abroad, I

also do business with a London entity.

I just have an office abroad.

If I go to NatWest as a subsidiary, it's a

separate company separately regulated abroad.

And without making it too complicated for the global crisis

in 2008, subsidiaries caused a huge number of problems because

and Lehman Brothers, most famously because they swept all of

the London liquidity to New York so that all the

money was in New York for American creditors, not for

British or European creditors.

And a lot of these examples.

So no updates.

Normally, if you go to a foreign bank abroad, it

is illegally a domestic bank.

It's they might be called snake bites.

A bank might operate in London, but it's a threat.

This bank owned by Fox.

This is how it works.

And I have an account, the Citibank in the United

States.

But that is still a British company with British regulations.

I mean, I know I'm belabouring this point, but it

is important because I would mention these things as I

go through this service, provide this also include had funds.

The hedge fund is always regulated.

Partially, it depends on the jurisdiction for a hedge fund.

It is always regulated.

We have pension funds, which is exactly the entity last

week, similar to the example between the British pension funds,

the Bank of England put a 55 billion into the

into the common bond markets and banks.

That's an intersection between pension funds, commercial banks or broker

dealers and the central bank sovereign wealth funds, which is

of course a fund that invests on behalf of a

country, asset managers and insurance companies.

Lisa and I could continue on, but this is not,

of course, on infrastructure.

I'm simply making a case of multiple entities in the

system.

And one concept that comes up quite a lot is

something I used to known as shadow banking or parallel

banking, depending on who you are.

Why those two terms?

Shadow bank is a negative term.

Parallel is a positive to sustain equity and the regulators

sometimes call the non-bank bank.

This, by the way, is a horrible non-bank bank.

If you see a non or even non-bank bank institution

and BPI, it's a horrible acronym.

But keep in mind you run into this, you often

see the same multiple terms for the same thing, what

a shadow bank is.

Is a financial institution that provides some or all of

the services of a regular bank.

But for legal reasons, it's not called the bank.

And the distinction is in every country there are regulations

pertaining to banks.

And it means in practice you are regulated slightly differently

or you don't have a banking license.

So if any of you you have a son, does

anybody have up to do to painting with Revenant?

Yes.

Well in Britain.

The report.

Go back.

Okay.

Revolution.

Britain is not a bank robber.

The fraud is a bank because they don't collect this

banking license.

I think that Estonian bank.

Mm hmm.

So they have an EU license, but they don't have

the British Bank, which is interesting when it comes to

previous banking activities.

If you do, if you have a clue why this

would need to be in first place and say to

a local businessman, they are not a bank.

That's an example of something that looks like a bank,

but it's not.

They might give you a credit card, but they look

at it.

So unstructured credit.

Financial technology, you've got some of the things are not

on the list here, but just keep in mind that

there are things that look like a bank.

But I'm not a bank.

And these are complicated things.

We'll discuss some of this later on.

And then, of course, we had the government, a key

player in all of this.

And as it becomes clear later on, especially when we

get to sovereign debt, there's a distinction between central government

and local government.

Yeah, they're different legal entities with different things.

And then you have government agencies, regulators and politicians in

the middle of all of that.

And then we had the restaurant.

Restaurant.

That's the structure of the financial system.

Just a shopping list so that when I get into

it, you know what I mean?

Questions.

This was simple.

What sort of crisis?

What's it called?

The crisis.

Now, I've written quite a lot about this, but.

Hey, I gave you the definition of exhaustion as an

unfortunate risk last week, and I have a whole chapter

on coping.

Wasn't it?

Sumptuous?

Shock.

He came out of nowhere, hit the economy.

The financial crisis in 2008 was then thought to just

shock.

It was created by the financial system itself.

And if you think about a stress event.

Whether Assad.

From the point of view government or from the point

of view of investors, it matters hugely whether the shock

comes from outside the financial system or outside the economy

or is created by it.

And the second type is much, much more damaging.

So that allows you something to think about.

It's a classification mechanism, if you understand, it gives you

a much clearer understanding.

Colbert Also, dimension could reduce demand for certain goods.

And by and large had a very little economic affect

outside of those sectors are provided to those services, entertainment,

sports, restaurants and things of the past, things of that

nature.

A relatively small part of the economy.

That means, hey, Cole did have a minor economic impact

in aggregate.

P and B, it was never a financial crisis.

So therefore, COVID is not a systemic crisis.

It does not really talk about boundaries a little bit

later on because there is something known as the form

of exchange swaps given by the United States.

I've discussed those.

Want to have a chance to give you more background,

but by and large it was not a financial shock.

And that means COVID was not a systemic crisis.

Stop.

Christians.

What about the war between Russia and Ukraine?

So I wrote an article in February talking about what

might happen.

Fortunately, that was just what I was like, and that

hasn't happened by a lot.

There has been no threat to financial stability arising from

the war.

Well, if you live in Ukraine.

Yes.

If you live in Russia, Yes.

But if you are.

But that's local, not global.

And outside of these two countries, the impact of the

war has been on financial stability has been trivial.

And it's the same reason it's an excellent Tunisia, excellent

to the shock.

Haiti, a relatively resilient financial economy, and therefore, the disruption

has been small.

Now that might change, but by now we know much

more about it.

So that I don't think that is likely to change.

Anybody with an interest in that question will come into

us in the closest next week.

What are you doing today?

If you want to.

You got a question?

Enough so we can get to abuse on that.

And keep in mind.

When you think about this is.

You should not.

You should not.

This is where you have to know how to look

beneath the surface.

A lot of newspaper headlines and commentators screaming about the

impact.

But by and large, it has been quite content to

just keep that in mind.

Like I say, outside of these two.

Countries.

I think the biggest threat is inflation.

So when I wrote this, like last July this summer,

inflation is around 10% and I spent a lot more

time on it later on.

But the really important question today is.

Is this inflation permanent or is it transitory?

And I'll look into that and much more detail when

I've had a chance to discuss monetary policy and all

these things to keep in mind, that's where the boundaries

lie.

And it's quite possible that in thi we might end

up with something systemic as a consequence.

And then we have other things that might be systemic.

And you always have to keep in mind that systemic

risk is not about that lightly, but about the plausible

what might happen if things go seriously wrong.

And here are three scenarios.

I picked one for each of the three major economies

in the world, and we can discuss these again in

the class if you're interested.

The first is the Europe.

And by the way, this is not an exclusive list,

but it is certainly the least often discussed for Europe.

It is European fragmentation, which is of some economists in

Europe are doing really well economically.

Poland, Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia are the best performing economies in

Europe, Czech Republic or Chechnya.

And then on the other hand, we have countries really

badly.

Greece, Italy, Spain, France, even if you going to go

down that road.

And that means in the long run, that puts an

increasing strain on the EU in how it can deal

with things.

And if you it's a systemic it's certainly signalling systemic

risk.

And for the European Union to deal with this, they

have to find a way to get it put back

to performing countries at the same level as the low

performing countries.

That's one that's a European scenario.

The United States scenario is polarisation.

I lived in the United States.

I got my PSP in the United States.

And what I found out is not all of my

friends from university that used to be friends with Facebook,

they are no longer friends on Facebook.

It is bizarre.

So I'm the former.

I'm still friends with friends of the moment, but they

completely unfriended of own.

Depends on where they are in politics.

Now, that's just sad.

And what you're seeing is the United States is having

a very hard time dealing with these challenges because of

the extreme polarisation.

And that means that if some bad shock comes in

the future.

They might not be able to respond sensibly.

Of course, to quote Winston Churchill, you can always count

on the Americans to do anything wrong.

Until at the last minute when they do it right.

Some words to that effect.

And finally, in China and there we mentioned this last

week, public debt and private debt in China is very,

very high.

We just don't know.

This lack of transparency and the problem with mistrust, lack

of transparency is if you believe everything is right, that

works with you.

If you think everything is bad, it works against you.

So if the people in China start losing faith in

that, then that can certainly escalate out of control.

And especially if GDP growth slows down to China, which

is now doing quite severely and it has to slow

down at some point.

Then that can cause escalating defaults and because of lack

of transparency.

That can become a self-fulfilling crisis prophecy, regardless of whether

it is true.

So these are three crisis scenarios for the three major

economies in the world.

All of them are unlikely, but all of them are

plausible Questions.

Yes, sir.

China and GDP.

My understanding is that a lot of their GDP growth

is come from real estate and expansion of buildings, cities,

housing, all those types of things.

Isn't that directly tied to the debt as well?

So those things, does that turn into the cycle, the

doom that we talked about last week?

Of course.

So the the issue there is magnitude.

I mean, some countries have ended up in a crisis,

serious crisis because of real estate.

Ireland, for example, is one example.

United States have a crisis in the 1980s.

Undiscussed.

Want to get to it?

Certainly the same.

We just don't know how big it is in China.

As a transparency issue, we don't know.

And therefore it's hard to tell.

But you're right.

You're right, of course.

Yes.

Sir.

You put it well, you can see that this 1008

crisis was initially because of things that we're really seeking.

I will discuss the other committee later.

This United States crisis.

I'll I'll I'll I'll go to the main crises in

the United States in more detail later.

And of course, I have a nice case on that

to limit delay until we get to.

This is just terminology at length.

It's just all of this.

So I can.

I'm just giving the language like they discuss it consistently

in the course first.

The economic cycle is the fluctuation of the economy from

doing well expansion, growth and contraction, recession.

The economic cycle is at its core, GDP going up

and down.

But remember, GDP is measured as a lag.

So this is what leads the economy.

This is what's happening in real time.

The financial cycle is fluctuations in credit.

Credit meaning the amount of money being left.

In this context, housing, the equities, markets and loan book,

the global financial cycle very much dominated by the United

States.

I have a paper that all the people on paper

love about 50% of global financial cycles.

The risk appetite is US dominated, and that is not

some movement.

So that means the world economic cycles are more domestic,

financial cycles are United States, and they are increasingly correlated.

So the whole world is going up and down at

the same time.

Well, the economic cycles are much more domestic or national.

So of course, if you and this, of course, has

very interesting consequences for a lot of countries.

Government policy.

The government has three policy objectives.

Policy must apply in our context.

Three Fiscal policy is the government spending money out of

the Ministry of Finance, taxes of government expenditures.

Fiscal policies.

How much do you tax?

How much does the government spend monetary policy is?

How do you control inflation and interest rates and things

like that are used for that?

And financial stability Is is the financial sector being destabilised

or not?

All of these are done simultaneously and all of the

sudden continuous conflict with each other.

Sammy, you see a lot of accents.

This is just to give you a shopping list.

So if I use these terms later on.

Now, you know what I mean?

Questions.

What I wanted to next is I wanted to give

you a case study of the biggest financial and economic

crisis the world has ever seen.

And way to repeat something I said last week, this

is not a course in financial history, but history.

I only use historical examples to illustrate the world today.

And the reason it's so beautiful doing it is because.

Recently this.

So the reason I am doing the Great Depression is.

It has its most influential economic and financial impact humanity's

ever seen.

It is still reverberating today quite strongly.

And there was very clear mistakes made in economic policy

and they changed the way we see things and the

way we dealt with the crisis in 2008, the Great

Depression, the euro crisis and COVID and even the Ukraine

crisis is very strongly influenced by lessons.

And the one thing that is this is not, of

course, into your politics or politics, but one lesson out

of this is.

Countries move to the middle politically and economically as a

consequence of these events and are now seeing polarisation to

the extremes.

And by the way, as we do not be able

to see no distinction between far left and far right.

It didn't it don't do it now.

And we are seeing increasingly nationalistic or extremist views on

all sides of the spectrum.

And that is that was one cause of the Great

Depression as it played out.

One slide I always find interesting is which countries were

the richest countries in the world at this point in

time?

Argentina used to be the richest country in the world

in the year 98, 196.

Now, it's certainly not the richest country In 1929, before

all of this, that was the United States, Switzerland, Netherlands,

United Kingdom with Argentina, high up and Venezuela, up of

Norway and Japan.

If you are thinking about a country to move, to

live, to live for the rest of your life, you

think about whether the country a seat can afford is

likely to be less Switzerland to stay at the top,

be like Venezuela, go to the bottom or be like

Norway, go to the top.

And what drives that movement is politics and economic policy

of the type we will discuss if you're interested in

the data collected by a.

You call Matheson and you can conclude the Matheson dataset.

If you want to find this updated.

The 1920s used to be called the Roaring Twenties.

It's a phrase you see repeated again different language for

the same meaning.

I'm not sure I understand.

I found a series responding really badly in the last

stretch after the new wireless upgrade.

I don't know what happened, but it's just two times

what you shouldn't.

This is quite good.

You should talk like some people I know, but to

the system or not.

But it's a different issue.

The Roaring Twenties rapid economic growth, very positive economic conditions

after World War One of the Spanish people.

And one key element that any of you, especially those

from developing countries, is this was the first time most

people had access to financial markets.

Of course, the top level in society always had access,

but then people who were not at the top had

access to financial markets for the first time.

And that meant rampant stock market speculation and buying stocks

on the march, meaning you borrowed money to buy stocks

extremely high levels of leverage, borrow money often ten times

and recession.

And of course, all ended badly.

One topic highly relevant today is monetary policy and the

gold standard.

So let's talk about the gold standard again later on,

because it is such an interesting setup.

But basically what it meant is that from about 1874

until 1914, most countries involved the exchange.

The exchange rate was tied to the price of gold,

and that meant for most of the world, the exchange

rates were fixed for 50 years.

Never seen that before or since.

If you're a cryptocurrency enthusiast, that's exactly what you look

at.

What is the good thing about crypto?

And what is really interesting is how two countries did

things differently.

The United Kingdom.

Everybody had inflation during the war, but the United States

was a clear winner.

So you had that when the United States ended up

on the talk.

And then.

United Kingdom decided to go back to the gold standard

with two strong opponents.

And France decided to go back on the gold standard

week to week upon franc.

But if meth was and you could see the echoes

today, that meant Britain persistently overvalued currency.

The economy was suffering.

Labour market strife and political unrest, etc. until they devalued.

But everything fixed.

So if you keep your currency too high.

And that costs a lot of families.

And you see echoes of this debate is this Emily

had too strong a currency for Greece or Spain?

That's exactly what you see then.

Now.

This is especially pertinent when we get into the interest

rates, because now the dollar has become so strong.

Countries connecting themselves to the dollar are really, really suffering

today.

Exactly the same reason.

So this historical events are nice because we know how

it played out and nobody has a stake in it

on anything.

Today is muddled.

France was the best performing economy for its own one

third of the world's gold for a while and everything

went pear shaped.

Because after the rest of the world.

About the fixed exchange rate.

The French industry couldn't cope with the increased competition and

they had a major economic crisis.

So if you if you keep your economy, the too

weak a currency for a long time, you can also

end up in a bad place when you have to

fix a leak.

Discuss something.

Trump.

This is people are just shut up about Britain.

Big problem was deflation.

So I keep on talking who is cause for cycles.

And now I want to discuss the deflationary cycle.

Which of course, in a year when inflation is hitting

10%, sometimes it's silly, but.

You get, you'll get faster.

It's just like what I've talked about inflation in this

course.

Two years ago, it looked quite academic.

Now this looks quite academic since useful things always come

around.

Imagine the crisis, Paul.

People are money credit to a benefit because the value

of your money in your pocket is higher tomorrow.

And it is today simply because prices fall that cause

people to borrow.

They're in difficulty because the real value of the debt

is increasing.

Both of them delay spending.

That's the problem.

Because if you see, your money would be worth a

lot more tomorrow, you are much more likely to delay

spending.

And if you see your money not.

So that is.

Love causes them to fall.

And they feel that because demand falls, prices go down.

This is called the deflationary cycle.

So the only reason.

Some of the central banks want inflation to be fixed.

2% and not zero is the danger of this.

Is so highly it damage caused by this is much

higher and the damage caused by inflation.

So this is why the central plan for Black Reason

is why to target inflation of 2% a year.

Agriculture was hugely important and there was a lot of

overproduction as often is the case.

But now we get to the really interesting parts.

And we're going to discuss this new class in much

more detail as soon as I do want to walk

through the numerical example in class.

But here's the issue.

Should you devalue your currency if you are in difficulty?

Why would you devalue?

You would, given you your currency, so that the value

of exports goes up in domestic money?

No.

The problem is.

And I want to I want to walk through the

America in the class and I want to get to.

The problem is when you do that, especially if you

sell commodities, agricultural goods.

It's a buyer's market, not a seller's market.

And the.

You lower when you devalue the price of export forms

in global terms, the same in domestic terms, so you

get worse off.

I don't know what I want to work through the

example of Trump.

And the second problem is if you do, everybody else

will do it.

And then get into competitive devaluations and that is highly

destabilising.

The reason you never hear anybody today talk about devalue

your currency.

If any politician says it, they can slap down really

quickly is because of this example.

Anybody who follows the follows the policy, the policy domain

knows exactly the time.

It's cost.

And that's one big lesson from that time is nobody

discusses competitive delineations on the politicians.

Donald Trump talked about it but didn't do anything about

it.

We see a lot of that.

And finally, another example is.

United States.

Because the United States had become the dominant economy, the

one with the biggest stockmarket money flow.

Money flowed into the United States all over the world,

and the central bank would worried that all this money

going to the stock market was destabilising the economy.

And now you get a really interesting policy.

If you see the real economy suffering, manufacturing, agriculture, the

stock market, the financial markets are falling.

You raise interest rates.

If you raise interest rates, you slowed down activity in

the financial markets, but you hit the real economy.

And which country today has this dilemma?

It's absolutely worst.

There's one country of a crystallises this problem.

China.

That's exactly is the is the serious public policy dilemma

facing the Chinese authorities, how to deal with speculation in

the financial markets and still feed money into small and

medium sized enterprises from another.

But for the last seven years, China's financial markets have

not very well fed the stock markets.

Yeah, that's.

Yes, but there is the the the the money fund,

the real estate, which is now coming to an end.

But so there's more to China from the equity markets.

And there are various other alternative investment vehicles.

It's excited the families and it's more to come for

equity markets.

So.

And then, of course, the problem is the United States

decided eventually that they would cut interest rates.

So the Great Depression and data is hard to come

by, but I want to show you the damage caused

by this in numbers GROSS National product.

GDP didn't exist at the time.

GROSS National product basically went from 100 billion to 55.

So the size of the U.S. economy halved.

I mean, the worst country, worst affected in the European

crisis was Greece.

Their economy went down 20%.

So this is like almost three times as bad as

the worst of the European crisis is said.

And a lot of countries experienced that.

So if your economy goes down for half.

You can imagine the political and economic and the consequences.

Unemployment went from 0 to 25% for some of you.

25% unemployment.

It's actually a good number if you're from Spain.

But for the rest of the world, that is quite

shocking.

And again, very destabilising.

The stock market.

The Dow Jones index went from 370 to 50.

If you have put thousands of dollars into the US

stock market in 1929, at the peak, you would have

to wait 35 years to make your money back.

It took 35 years for the stock market to recover

from that.

With the global stock markets have gone down by 25%

this year.

And the world.

They must surely continue on, continue falling.

And then how long would it take to recover all

these signs?

For A very long recovery time.

But still the same.

What we've seen this year is minuscule by comparison.

I can't do math in my head, but if lost

in percentage terms of three 7250 is quite high.

75%.

18.

I used to be able to do math in my

head, but I can't do the.

And now there's a fantastic German work called Shopping for

Them.

For some reason, German has worked almost everything that nobody

else has, which is why for us, schadenfreude means pleasure

at misfortune of others.

When they find when they us.

He is started suffering.

The prevailing view was that they deserved what happened to

them.

Let them fail.

And now.

In 2008, and since with it banks were failing, we

bailed them out.

So why are we bailing banks out now?

While it is celebrated, the bank is going bust.

Because what we learned was that when the banks go

first because they provide the plumbing for the real economy.

If you take the oldest economy, the real economy suffers.

And then people have to.

People have to.

You might enjoy the suffering of the banks, but not

if it hits you yourself.

So you end up having to bailout banks just because

the alternative would be much more costly.

Which is why if you follow these people to bail

out Silicon Valley, if you follow the bail out narrative,

that's exactly how that discussion goes.

And another another thing that happens is liquidity support.

When the stock market so crashing the central bank of

the United States.

The New York Press.

The New York Fed.

They provide $1,000,000,000 in liquidity support quite high from ten

1% of GDP.

But they oppose that generally for political reasons, because it

was believed that the government should not have backed.

I have my kids.

But because the government did not support the markets within

the crash and.

That made it much worse.

And that's what led to the economy half.

Milton Friedman wrote a very famous book in 1962 when

he claimed this.

This decision not to provide liquidity for the crisis became

as bad as it did a lot.

That's because super influential study.

The reason we got all the liquidity in the crisis

in 2008, all because all the liquidity coded was exactly

because of this mistake and the subsequent analysis of it

and recognition.

It was a mistake.

I was method governor of a central bank.

I can't tell you the country, but it's a large

country and it told me of the dinner.

This was in 2009.

You said.

John, When I go to my meetings, I look at

the portraits of my predecessors on the wall.

And I pointed to the person charged in 1929 and

said, What would you have done?

I would do the opposite.

Because it was just a bad mistake.

It was so bad.

And.

Then.

You've got a lovely situation with some governments deliberately creating

a crisis.

France, as I told you, they hold a third of

the world's gold.

They believe they will have the most security of any

country in the world.

Well, that meant they were lending the money out to

other countries because credit to the world.

And they decided to use that for political purposes.

And a lot of people say countries with big foreign

reserves should do today.

But with France decided that when Austria and Germany were

discussing customs union in 1931, they wanted the French banks

to stop providing liquidity to the Austrian banks.

The technique was a bank run in Austria.

And indeed, the consequence of that was all the banks

in Austria went bankrupt.

And very quickly afterwards, all the banks in Germany and

all the banks in in Czechoslovakia went bankrupt, ultimately spilled

over to the whole region.

This made their crisis much worse.

It certainly fed into subsequent political events.

So countries using abusing such a power can be quite

damaging.

Yes, sir.

But the crisis in Australia should.

Wasn't it in the first place because of the structure

of the banking, structure of the steel?

No.

There's more to it than that.

But the primary trigger for that is that the Austrian

banks have been borrowing from the main creditor, but it

can liquidity liquidity from funds.

And if you are having to fund the issuance of

money and the creditor decides to stop rolling all the

money you make to make it really simple, you make

a ten year loan to a company, you fund it

with a three month borrowing.

Is the person providing the three most stops funding you.

You go post.

But that's based on the information age, right?

I mean, I mean, if if the French had had

any information that the Austrian banks didn't have.

No, I mean, it wasn't it wasn't a threat aspects

to us that people decided it was the French government.

The French government wanted the.

We want to show that they had the power to

cost us.

It's a really good study if you're interested.

I mean, in my in my book, I read the

main paper on the books by a French French historian,

wrote wrote an article on this 40, 50 years ago,

I think as I cite the article, so you can

find the definitive study of that in the book.

But it's a relatively well known episode in all of

this.

Crime and chaos is commonly accepted by historians.

I think I have the citation in the books on.

So you see here that this is exactly is a

danger that if you start using politics, if you start

using economic levers to execute political objectives.

And you could certainly see the sun, both this United

States and China, which are both of them, sort of

moving in that direction.

And then we get.

If he get the United States suffering a banking crisis.

Another element we learned from.

So one bank failed the Bank of the United States,

which was.

Semi fraudulent.

And what happens is that when one bank fails, remember,

the financial system is based on faith.

When a big fan fails, everybody asks themselves and the

rest of the banks safe.

Well, if you're not convinced, you take your money out

of all the other banks, you cost them to fail.

That's what happened.

What happened is everybody the money out of the banking

system and in this and stuffed it under the mattress.

US.

To give a vivid image of what happened to the

money, and that meant liquidity straight out of the system

into cash.

Nobody could borrow to make investments that made the crisis

was so.

Another lesson from them is that you do not want

banks to fail and you do not want the public

to lose faith in the system.

In the European Union.

In 2008, they were 4 hours away from running out

of cash in several large Europe, like in times of

southern France, Italy and some other parts of the system

almost ran out of euro notes.

Everybody was putting money up.

Is that what happened?

If you went to the banks and the bank would

not supply notes on demand, that would have made the

crisis much, much, much worse.

This is why the central banks have large warehouses of

printed money ready to be supplied on demand in a

crisis.

Exactly for that reason.

And if you want to understand the Chinese response, you

can certainly look at that in the lens of these

events.

Then we get into the central bank and what they

didn't do, they they were demoralised.

They contracted money supply, which used money supply at the

height of the crisis.

They refused to meet.

And the refused.

When the president asked them for advice, they refused to

respond.

So if you are a central bank, you do not

have the choice of not responding what the United States

did after this.

And every country today has its own laws.

The central bank has to respond to a crisis, what

it wants to or not, and they have to give

advice and make recommendations even if they don't want to.

Again, very influential in shaping central bank legislation.

So what happened?

What were the causes?

The causes of this calamitous event were trade policy, monetary

policy, and a bunch of other small things led us

to trade first.

Let's take off.

We can take a break now.

Maybe then continue on the trade.

As get.

Nothing that.

As far as the.

Money being physical, money.

Is actually.

In the central banks.

They have zeros when they see the population.

That was acquired by the.

Government in Nassau.

I'll give you an example of.

Recently.

We got into the fact that this decision was for.

Let me.

Just give.

You something that you see.

I won't go into this race.

This proxy for the ballot is going to have to

get a lot of people.

Lots of people out.

Of the.

Way.

If you kill me, it's more complicated than that.

So in that simple scenario, you're going to come up.

With the simple vote.

And then, of course, the central parts of the central.

Government in.

The centre.

Of the country.

It's been created.

It's not increasing the money supply.

The bank is just converting that the closet into.

So that it actually is neutral.

Know what the Bank of England did on Wednesday that

increased inflation?

But I look, I need to discuss what I discussed

in the context of the money for the significance, in

particular the.

Subject of argument.

Sure.

Yes.

Was it a baby?

I have no idea.

I have.

I have obviously my homework.

I wish it was just just on those which is

on growth and the needs of the people.

And they deserve a little.

I don't know.

I have to like you there, I.

Another question from last week was.

He says if they were worried about how they.

We actually.

Imagine a very, very well could.

Do.

But has no plans.

Everybody, the farmers go to the local market.

We sell the stuff to all the farmers and people

in the area.

Whether the banks exist or not is not important enough.

Okay.

Just imagine if this is not good for you.

The lesson for the banks, the fight is there's no

systemic risk is available if you hold them to the

other extreme.

As you mentioned, everybody in the country, Brooks or banks.

Yes, that's right.

I think the country is the bank.

Faced with U.S. admission that bank was pushed.

Everybody is suffering.

So those are the two reactions, which really I think

will be commonly if people think, for example, if you

take for some.

When I go and find my lunch, my life, my

life that is called right before.

Me.

20 years ago.

I would be interested to know what it takes.

To.

Go home and trying to buy food, make some important.

But Luxembourg.

Luxembourg is the richest country.

Once you send, the financial system.

Is totally.

On involved.

But the issue in Luxembourg is most of the first

place.

Is with.

Foreign companies.

I consider this is two foreigners.

But it's not much less.

I think you know the questions.

I think I need to discuss this central question of.

Talking about my ambition.

So I have to my.

My answer.

I got it right there.

But, you know, I was thinking.

Using again like this.

Let me go.

Three or four.

Okay, people, are you already.

You know, I wonder if you can frame this one,

please.

So people, tariffs.

How often do you see countries proposing to increase tariffs

on imports to protect their economy?

But it working?

No.

It's locked.

Please help me.

I know I hate technology.

You have.

No, no.

And tastic.

So how often do you see countries now proposing to

use tariffs to protect themselves against imports?

Almost never.

Donald Trump complained quite a lot about certain countries increase

in tariffs, but these very small amounts.

And the reason is what I'm about to show you.

The reason is what I'm about to show you.

The United States passed a very famous law called Smoot-Hawley

Act in 1929 to protect raising tariffs on imports to

the United States.

The consequence was that most of the countries immediately did

the same.

So every country in the world, they responded by raising

tariffs at home.

But that meant trade disappeared.

So this is off to spite the plot.

A lot of people dislike is I like this type

of plot.

The clusters for me to start here before anything happened,

global trade was $3 billion.

And as we move through the crisis, by the end

of it, global trade had collapsed by over two thirds.

So global trade went down by a factor of two

or more than two thirds.

And for some certain countries, more than 80% of Chilean

exports went down.

COOPER Lost between 17, made to China, Peru, the same,

Netherlands, 60 to 70, etc., etc..

So the consequence is that tariffs became the global crisis

transmission mechanism.

So even if this started in the United States, because

it was so big and they decided to restrict imports,

that allowed everybody else to do the same, and that

transmitted what was essentially a United States economic crisis and

turned it of global crisis.

And.

This is why nobody today talks about trade.

This is why today we have WTO, whose purpose is

not to repeat this.

And any time today when someone talks about restricting trade

when they can, they might talk, but it doesn't happen.

In reality, it's just politician.

And Donald Trump did something they did on a very,

very small scale.

And every time the topic is raised, everybody points to

what I just said.

And finally was the issue of I already discussed about

liquidity, but the top line is the contraction in the

United States and to money supply liquidity, I am not

ready to discuss this is one to these terms and

see the right one of them two yet but want

to get to it.

You can come back to this plot and you will

understand what it means.

And finally.

We get to the question of transparency.

Some years ago.

I'll tell you the country private, but I wanted to

do the recording.

I was in a closed conference from the European Central

Bank governor and a few other people on the issue

of transparency.

They had experts from the security services, the food agency,

the I.T. agency, all talking about how important transparency was.

And then me, I said, no, transparency is overrated.

You can see everybody in the room if face is

dropped.

How can someone criticise transparency?

But in the crisis, this was the reason they asked

me, by the way.

So to see them.

But the reason is this is an example.

It's a very famous example.

When the bailouts started in the United States, the government

announced something called the Reconstruction Finance Corporation as a government

agency providing bailouts.

The speaker of the House, meaning the person in charge

of the Congress of the United States.

He insisted that all bailouts be publicly identified, transparent.

The problem is if you let everybody know.

The HSBC is receiving bailouts and everybody takes money out

of HSBC and they will collapse because of that reason.

If you provide bailouts, you do it quietly.

You don't help anybody.

Now, then, of course, you can start worrying about corruption,

which is another issue that arises.

But in this country in 2008, it was so paranoid

about it.

But when they started supporting banks in the market in

2008, they insisted every bank borrow.

Even those not in difficulty.

So nobody could identify those in difficulty.

So nowadays if you provide support, you announce it later.

After everything has subsided, you do the required and then

you can ask yourself the question to repeat myself.

This is not very good for corruption.

But.

I have to pay that price.

I mentioned this earlier, so I'm not going to repeat

that here.

Finally, global cooperation for the crisis was started, starting with

the lot of meetings between two global powers.

And here is a really nice quote from the Swiss

National Bank on one of these meetings.

So he said, Almost all the great powers have negotiated

for months about how many pays a year should be

paid for Germany and thereafter until 1966 and 1988 by

a country that could not pay civil servants.

Tomorrow.

So this is I do all that in a political

objective, preventing a solution to a real problem in front

of you.

So now what you see is the.

Emphasis on global cooperation in the crisis in 2008, every

time an announcement was made.

This same announcement was made to all of the major

capitals, Ministry of Finance of the government in London and

in the various European capitals in Washington or Tokyo.

They would all make announcements at the same time because

they all coordinated.

And we learned that the big lesson is if you

have a global crisis to deal with, that you need

the global court needs global cooperation.

And now we can think about whether that will happen.

Parallels with today.

The consequence of all of this is we've got the

Bretton Woods institutions, the International Monetary Fund and the World

Bank.

The United States took on itself to maintain the global

order.

And the response to the crisis in 2008 was photographically.

Draw lessons from the Great Depression.

And you could also have the climate crisis, if you

will.

We've got Gotham and WTO, which are.

It's explicitly established to prevent a recurrence of trade wars.

And this is holding pretty well.

Or, I mean, people who criticise the WTO as ineffective.

I don't think the bad things were before.

I mean, they basically manage to do what they're supposed

to do.

And if you compare 2007 to 1929.

2007 could easily have become a Great Depression.

Mm hmm.

But what we have then is banks would bail out

massive injections of liquidity.

Trade restrictions averted, avoided cooperation was extensive, and all of

that prevented things.

From what is turned out to be a bad crisis

from turning into a Great Depression.

And then you can ask yourself the philosophical question outside

of the scope of this course.

But certainly attacks on the international order are increasing.

The United States is retrenching.

Chinese victims own bottled water.

So is the stability we have since the Great Depression.

Is that an anomaly?

So I would just go back to the status quo

and in the world as it used to be.

So we'll have what we do for the rest of

the course allows you to frame that question.

Questions people, before I move on to the next chapter.

I have a question about going back to causes and

tariffs.

One of the lines or the ball points is the

protests against.

Currency devaluations or affects evaluations.

What's the mechanism there?

How are those two connected?

It's just that every time someone proposes to do it,

a lot of people tell them you are idiot.

Okay, I'm exaggerating slightly, but yeah.

So, for example, Brazil is a case in point.

Anybody here from Brazil?

So the Brazilian foreign minister called the word Carlos, who

was around ten years ago, and he was widely criticised

for opening up a discussion.

So we don't.

It is just the memories of that are so ingrained

in those who do policy that it is it's become

a taboo.

Yes, sir.

So what is the formation of the WTO if a

country wants to introduce terrorism?

Mr. King.

I mean, I do not want to get too deep

into the issue of WTO for the World Trade Organisation.

What it does is if you're a member of the

WTO.

You will agree that terrorists cannot exceed a certain low

amount.

Like 15%.

I think it depends on the.

You promised you would not as a member, you promise

you would not increase tariffs beyond that and you will

not use non-tariff means like regulations to prevent trade.

Another question earlier when we're talking about.

The 1929 depression was that it was the first time

people had access to the market.

Okay.

So the stock markets have existed since the 1700s in

the United States and 18.

I mean, a famous crisis in this country was a

salt sea uplands.

In 1712, the Sultan of France had the crisis in

1720.

So there had been crisis.

The speculation, however, that those financial markets were only accessible

by the top elite of the countries.

So he had to be a member of the aristocracy

or top end of the commercial class.

So the difference in the United States in the 1920s

wasn't that I was a dentist, a dentist, a person

who makes a decent amount of money, 150, some euros,

a dentist in the before that could not have invested

the money anywhere except on the interstate and agriculture in

the United States In the 1920s, that same dentist could

buy stocks.

That's the difference.

I mean, the financial markets were essentially out of bounds

for anybody who wasn't super wealthy.

I'm simplifying for him to move, but that's roughly what

happened.

Okay.

Now we will jump and then we come back to

the jump a bit.

And I think the next, if I remember correctly, next

chapter is infrastructure.

So this is in the road map you have.

Now, the reason I am doing this chapter is I

assume a lot of you know this stuff.

But the thing is.

The thing is that this involves terminology.

A language and concepts have come up again and again

and again.

All of derivatives, mortgages, payment systems, securitisation as such things.

And this is what allows me to explain what happened

to this country on Wednesday last week, when the Bank

of England put up a 55 billion into the government

bond market and the crisis that made that.

So the two market participants generally refers to those who

are engaged in trading.

Because I buy stocks.

I'm a market participant, a small one.

Proprietary trading is when a financial institution trades on its

own account for speculative reasons.

And I said earlier this was a target of the

Volcker Rule and the kind of reporting in the EU

funds as an entity is an institution that invests money

on behalf of clients like Fidelity, BlackRock, Vanguard, the three

biggest in the world, not of Europe.

You non-Americans as well, of course.

And these are highly regulated, so they are restricted in

what they can do.

You have family offices that invests on behalf of a

single, super wealthy individual.

Multiple billions.

And sovereign wealth funds that invest on behalf of a

country.

These are the market participants.

Hedge funds.

Lightly regulated currency.

Sometimes everybody can buy investments, sometimes not.

I'm invested in a hedge fund.

Because there's no restrictions in this country.

But in some countries you have to be very large

to do it.

And this is what I invested.

I had to sign a document saying, I know what

I'm as the multiple documents saying.

I understand finance, I understand markets, I know what I'm

doing, etc..

So they're restricted to.

What they call sophisticated investors who understand the risk they're

taking.

So most people cannot investments from.

But they are, of course, they're still subject to securities

law.

They deal with the regulated part of the system, and

they're really difficult to classify except by a relative absence

of regulations.

They'll come back later on in other chapters.

Brokers and prime brokers.

I discussed broker dealers a few minutes ago.

A broker is a financial institution that helps with transactions.

It sits in the middle of transactions.

A prime broker is a type of a broker that

deals with hedge funds.

So I had funds.

If you're a small hedge fund, you outsource most of

your activities to a pro broker.

They deal with accounting, they deal with liquidity management.

They all might have a big hedge funds will do

them in house, but they still a hedge fund cannot

go and buy things directly from a stock exchange or

on an exchange.

They have to go through a broker.

So the prime brokers interface between a hedge fund and

the rest of the system.

I mention articles a little bit later on.

I think I like a slight or not.

Trading venue is a place where trading happens in the

language it used to be over the counter.

Over the counter.

Meaning if I go to his lately, he says, Will

you find my iPhone?

She said, Yes, in fact, iPods.

They say, yes, that's an over-the-counter transaction.

It's a bilateral fee between us to.

Alternatively, I could.

I could.

I could.

I could post my phone on an exchange.

She would bet on it on the exchange.

So you can add it to a formal venue, allow

for trading an exchange of a bilateral interaction.

You must be surprised that this is not always electronic,

but certainly it used to be done by people shouting

in a room.

Now it's usually done by electronics.

Do you know what the single biggest exception to that?

What else?

Yeah.

The metals market in London.

Commodities.

Commodities.

Metals in London are still traded by smelting people.

You can debate.

I mean, I have no view on that.

Some people say sufficient, others criticised.

I'm leaving that question to others.

Of course, the distinction between a trading venue and trading

over the counter is increasingly irrelevant because these entities have

sort of merged.

And however, basic as a general rule is that the

more complex, the more bespoke, the more illiquid something is,

the more likely it is to be traded over the

counter.

And that leave these systems next to this is I

was talking about tuition fees, a bank.

I need something complex.

A corner of the phone says can you please send

this to me.

This who quotes me on the phone, give you a

quote on the form.

That's still how you do it for complex securities.

There's a version of this which is controversial enough, depending

on who you talk to, which is a trading venue.

Not.

So imagine if I go to the London Stock Exchange

and I buy a stock.

It's the trade.

They're to everybody.

And they know that in the stock price, we go

up.

What happens if I want to sell a lot of

stocks in a company?

And all of you are big entities.

You want to fire some huge some arms.

We can make a deal.

This is other between us in this room.

If I.

Five $100 million worth of hits this B.S. I'm fighting

for at the current price.

That's a thoughtful, thoughtful is a group of investors who

buy and sell things between themselves at the current market

price.

This is criticised.

Certainly we can debate whether it's good or bad, but

that's a stark point.

So now we know what it means if I get

questions.

Is it?

Is it similar to bookshops of yours?

In 1950s we had.

Something on the shelves.

It's really hard to start making a comparison to someone

who happened a hundred years ago because the information transmission

was so poor basically 100 years ago because information couldn't

travel.

You had multiple local trains.

You see the same stuff with different prices.

And then there was some conflict.

But that's a very different it's a very different set.

So you shouldn't really draw the analogy to that.

It's just a question of what's the whether the regulations.

Or the regulation allows it.

Yeah, I mean, some parts of the EU complains bitterly

about them.

But there's also the cry is that, by the way,

the people who use them, you you have to sort

of be careful about who are the people doing this

stuff.

You tend to think of a wealthy, evil hedge fund,

but the biggest traders are pension, pension funds and insurance

companies.

So that's an entity.

I mean, it's a BlackRock, it is fidelity, it's a

pension fund, is an insurance company.

The other clients of.

Or if you're a supermarket person, your family offers.

But the regulators, by and large, they complain that has

so far been tolerated.

What's the rationale?

Too hot to accept it.

You should ask the question differently.

Why?

Look at panic.

You should know.

I mean, what regulation you shouldn't buy.

You shouldn't start from the point.

It's banned until you allow it.

You should allow it until you ban.

And then you have to tell me why would you

find it?

Because you affected the market overall.

For the cognitive function, we would assume that.

So the exactly exactly as I can call price discovery

that says on the market price is fair to the

target, one will report the traits to the market.

So it's not non-transparent.

Only the difference is more subtle from the differences.

If I go to market, then I want to buy

100 million.

Palms worth of HSBC.

Execution price.

I'm not going to get into Liverpool books here, but

if my execution price walk the limit order book, that

will pay a huge fee for that transaction.

Like that gentleman, he is happy to be on site

for the whole amount of the current market price.

Everybody's better off then you can tell everybody it happened.

So it actually benefits the big investors like pension funds.

So it is I mean, this is controversial, but it

is an unequivocal battle.

Good.

And what tends to be.

In a sample transaction versus.

$100 million worth of stock?

No.

So you got $100 million in stock.

Obviously, quite a large fluctuation in the price of the

dark pool.

Significantly reduced.

That is not the sort of transactions.

It is transactions of a security treaty on an exchange.

But.

A different type of exercise.

In large sums.

Michel Martin.

But I.

He would cut off markets.

A market?

No, it's not off market.

It's a market.

It's an exchange for a different type of exchange.

And by the way, if I want to buy a

stock today, I can go to ten different exchanges to

buy the stock stocks, not trade in a single place.

I mean, I can buy the same stocks in most

of the places in this stock market is certainly on.

Credit.

So if you read financial newspapers to get information or,

God forbid, watch TV.

I don't think anybody watches TV anymore.

We want to say you will get a completely misleading

information about what happens in the markets.

Newspapers report equity markets.

S&P tax rate for the fixed income markets are much,

much, much bigger and much, much more important.

Fixed income asset as a term is an asset that

provides payment on a fixed schedule.

Involving a creditor and the power of a sovereign debt.

And there's a huge number of categories of regular bond

or plain vanilla bond loans, credit derivatives, etc. By and

large, fixed income assets are traded over the counter because

they're so bespoke.

You look a formula particular pay, maturity and payment structure

and a different one another park bond from the same

company.

So they tend to be traded over the counter and

the volume is not much higher than for equities.

Credit risk as a concept.

You might think credit risk is the risk of default.

That's not really true.

Credit risk is the chance of losing money from a

credit instrument.

And you can lose money if nothing happens.

So keep in mind that everybody pays.

Everything goes smoothly.

You can lose money, but that's credit risk to you.

So a credit risk is specific to you as a

person in the market.

I love this.

Just means you lose some money based on your particular

position.

And key to all of this is a term called

Tony parcel, which is something you will see again and

again.

This is super important.

You are seen as in default immediately after you meet

missed a single payment.

So if I have $1,000,000,000 payment on something, I forget

to pay $800, I'm in default.

This approach hasn't been necessarily accepted will happen in real

life.

But you saw it with the Evergreen Company in the

Chinese music company Evergreen.

The issue is when they when they missed a payment,

they defaulted on all of their obligations.

So the company went into default if it missed a

single payment.

And that is a huge impact on how you deal

with resolution of crises.

And will discuss that, especially in the context of sovereign

debt, the sovereign debt crisis.

When I get to.

So the U.S. fixed income market is so far the

biggest in the world.

Let's just see some and below on this slide, I'm

going to look at bonds and not bank loans.

So you saw this plot early, but this is the

real return on U.S. bond markets.

If you had put if you had put $1 into

the US bond market in the year 1900 by 2016,

then my date as you would have made $10 in

real terms.

If you want to be a quality investor.

And then, of course, you must be good at reading

plots and you'll see something here.

There are four issues.

Until the great until World War One staple loose money

in the Great Depression.

In World War One, you make money until the end

of World War Two, you lose money.

Until 1982, you make money until now.

Like 30 year cycles.

These cycles correspond with this entire time period corresponds to

inflation going down, and this entire period corresponds to inflation

going up.

So this long run, inflationary spirals they dominate pointed towards

a lot of narrow minded, stupid people.

Have seen this big increase in bond prices as signalling

bonds are a particularly good investment for they're not.

If I compare it to the U.S. equity markets, if

you had put the same dollar into the stock market,

you would you would have had $11,000 today, not ten.

So the return of equity markets is 100 times because

only one markets over the 100 year period in the

S&P.

And.

So if you take the U.S. market particularly.

Out of.

So they told us that the markets are the bond

market and this is excluding loans.

It's about $45 trillion.

Twice.

The GDP of the United States is slightly on 19

trillion.

This is $45 trillion.

So is it more than double the size of GDP?

So this fits into the biggest category is Treasury.

Which is, of course, a government.

Mortgages.

Second biggest chunk, corporate bonds, asset backed securities agency.

The government buy, buy, buy another name, and then a

bunch of other small categories.

And out of the Treasury bonds, most are held by

the public.

80% and 20% by all the government agencies.

Out of all the government agencies is ready to at

the bottom.

The half is Social Security in the United States.

The Social Security fund is not funded off the books.

It is funded by borrowing, but with a lot of

European countries that follow it.

As a going entity, this is not a nice thing

to happen If you get into a recession, it's a

much better way to fund it properly.

So Social Security in the United States is funded out

of the by government bonds and then the retirement funds

of government employees.

The public.

Who owns it.

Put the government bonds.

So.

80% of government bonds are owned by the public.

Half of that is the central bank of the United

States Fed because of quantitative easing.

So they are still the single biggest open account and

bonds in the United States.

It's going down slowly.

Then we have foreigners and surely foreigners in a few

minutes maybe, and mutual funds and various other small categories.

So.

When you hear that the government that the United States

funds itself by selling bonds to, say, China and Japan,

that is simply not true.

You could see that the sell off by these statistics

is that the foreigners, foreign investors, only own about 15%

of government bonds in the United States.

Smaller and smaller people tend to think.

And if you see who owns that.

Japan is biggest is about 40.

It's about $1.4 trillion, China the next.

So why if you have seen the Chinese numbers.

You see higher numbers?

Do you know what accounts for the difference?

So this is a part of China.

I want to go through $2 trillion with the U.S.

government that if you read public discussion, you see much

higher numbers.

Do you know why we play?

Because the bulk of Chinese holdings is most agency bonds.

The issue by government owned companies.

Not by the government itself.

So that's a company, not a company.

Put the Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the biggest ones.

So this is a government agency fully owned by the

US government that is that borrows that borrows from China

directly.

What does it mean in practice?

They can't default without the government of the United States

defaulting.

Actually, they earn a little bit more interest.

So keep that in mind.

Keep that in mind when you think about some foreign

countries threatening the United States if it don't, because the

whole thing is an agency box.

It's it is They have left.

They have less.

They have more to lose, if you will, because of

how bankruptcy works.

Now, let's look at some of what on this list

here.

Look, some book.

Half a million people live in Luxembourg.

Why is Luxembourg number number five?

It was six.

Remember the quarter showed you last week the size of

the Luxembourg financial system.

Luxon put devices bonds to sell to all the people.

That's why.

Same as Ireland.

This is what Ireland is of.

Before these numbers Irish people buy a lot of Americans

wants.

They don't.

It is because I am expected these other Luxembourg entities

buy these bonds and sell them on to all the.

Or was he see the same walk up the list?

Switzerland is there.

That's also Hong Kong.

There's also Cayman Islands, of course.

Singapore also.

So these are the owners of U.S. central government bonds.

Any questions on the alert before I move on to

everybody's favourite company, a rating agency.

Intergovernmental means and.

The other US agencies don't know.

You have to be careful about the language.

Very careful.

Careful about the language.

The Federal Reserve is a government owned entity, but they

are not in that list.

But let's say some government accounting is complicated.

If most of your account is on a government account.

So this is from an accounting legal point of view.

It's a part of the central government, not an entity

owned by the central central government.

So, for example, if you have if you have a

household.

Often a husband and a wife.

It would be a money left by the husband to

provide for the wife to the husband because the same

joint entity.

So it's like the Department of Interior lending money to

the Department of Defence, that fantasy.

But to not.

I mean, I am not good at accounting and do

not get me on the government accounting.

Okay.

Rating agencies.

They are interesting.

The biggest one that all American.

The Standard Poor's and Moody's other speakers.

Fitch is French, but is is an American company owned

by French investors and some other ones.

And here is the key.

This is simply a mission statement, but this is super

important in understanding what they do, what they don't do.

And I read it out to you and point out

the key words.

A credit rating is S&P opinion.

That's the most important word.

On the general credit worthiness.

The second important word, often applicable was the credit worthiness

of applicable with respect to a particular type of security

or other obligations based on risk.

The key word is opinion and credit worthiness.

In the and classes today and next week.

I want to discuss why that is important.

If I don't do it, remind me if I do

want to spend time on those two words in a

more interactive way.

So ratings, it's a lack of great.

I mean, I'm missing some of the same pieces of

first column, triple A top single-A all the way down

to people.

Generally, highest ratings are known as investment grade.

Found the best investment grade if boundaries between the country

and.

So there's no single counter that.

So the ratings process is based on financial analysis, on

the I mean, if you try to see a typical

account in a in many accounting courses, you look at

the policy profit or loss quality of management industry you're

in and usually done unless otherwise indicated once a year.

Now, ratings have a huge amount of limitations.

They don't consider that business cycle missed.

The cycle means the economy is in recession or not

in recession.

They see the transition probabilities and chance of cover.

Tripoli to topple the single is constant all the time.

The only determinant of default risk is ratings.

It is not powered by any theory of the firm.

It is not based on any stochastic processes of a

firm.

And you can't really think about the correlation between people.

Firms alternatives exist, and I do want to spend some

time on these things in the question in a more

general discussion, but this is roughly how these things this

is roughly how these extend.

They are important because ratings are legally required.

For a lot of reasons.

If you want a report from the central bank.

You need ratings.

If you have a bank capital, we'll discuss bank capital

in a lot more detail.

It won't need ratings.

Pension funds.

Are required to buy only A-rated securities.

Insurance companies only rated.

So the potential ratings agencies are racist because so many

entities have to buy rated bonds.

Otherwise they will be lot less important.

And a lot of people don't take them seriously.

But they're still important and they are very sensitive politically.

So here's an example of a political sentiment by the

former justice commissioner of the EU, now a member of

European Parliament.

If you're reading Luxembourg, and I look forward to read

this quote out because it expresses the political sentiment, Europe

can't allow three private U.S. enterprises to destroy the euro.

Either the couple were smashed up or independent European and

Asian rating agencies would be separate.

We can't have a situation where a cartel of three

U.S. enterprises decides on the fates of entire national economies

and the citizens.

I want to discuss the quote.

You.

I want you to think about it.

What it believes to believe to be true or not.

Or stupid.

The problem.

Another problem is ratings are generally solicited by the issuer.

And the issue of debt only gets paid if you

issue the debt.

And you could see how that would create a conflict

of interest to inflate ratings.

You call it the S&P.

This gentleman is S&P, sir.

I have $1,000,000,000 issue.

Your fee, Roughly 10 million.

What was the rating?

Well, the reason is totally consultancy Tripoli.

What motivates him?

He knows that if he does reading, he gets 10

million people.

If it doesn't give it Tripoli, I won't issue.

So you can see the incentive problem in ratings, right?

And the ratings agencies are very, very profitable.

But here's my favourite case.

In Germany, there is a reinsurance company called Hanover Re

Re Means Reinsurance.

And Moody's, the credit rating agencies.

They decided to expand markets in Europe in the 1990s.

Moody's told the German reinsurance company Hannover Re in the

1990s 1995, that it had decided to rate them for

free.

But it was looking forward to the time when they

would pay for ratings.

Now the CEO of Hanover really was a parent of

a very stubborn Altman.

We thought this was like the Mafia shaking you down

and refused to pay.

Movies started reading them first it complained to the downgrading,

then to junk.

Hanover repaid the S&P safety rating totally minus for the

entire period.

You can draw from that any conclusion you want.

But this is this is a nice example.

If you're looking for a citation, it's in my book

somewhere.

So you can here is not a good reason to

criticise them, I think.

That is the an alien capability.

I did it previously.

Well, yes.

They are recommending their own credibility because Moody's is giving

gentle rating and then another guy is giving you a

bonus.

One could say that, but they still make boatloads of

money, so who cares?

I mean, I'm sure your point is right, but the

implication is not as strong as you seem to think

it is.

No.

The rating agencies have always been criticised to the quality

of ratings.

I am not concerned about that because you can download

all ratings ever made.

You can track what happened to the company afterwards.

And if you're quantitative, you can easily decide for yourself

whether you trust him or not.

So the transparency means that any analyst can decide for

themselves.

The biggest problem, the ratings is not on regular bonds,

but in structured credit instruments is probably why we might

get into this course.

But it's a ceiling of a chapter.

Dangerous instruments.

So if you're interested enough, you can take a look

at that chapter, even though probably not covered.

So what can you do?

The ratings are certainly necessary.

We don't want them to be provided by the government

because some private companies might be bad.

But I mean, if the government decides that politics will

be all dominated.

And the big problem is that Vivian Redding's point in

the quote I gave you earlier is that it's almost

like shooting the messenger.

It knocked people because they were downgraded.

Greece defaulted because it borrowed too much.

It couldn't pay back the loans.

The rating agencies to signal that.

So it's like shooting the messenger.

More competition would be beneficial as Singapore leads the way

in competition here, but is turning out to be really

hot because the system works.

The our pace is not viable.

So the only alternative is either the current system or

some sort of public set up like Singapore set that

we might discuss next week.

And then the question is, so do I want to

race with you again in the 7:00?

Should they be held accountable?

This is a huge issue.

So if a ratings is bad.

And to solve of be fed, should you be able

to sue them afterwards?

Yes, consideration is involved.

I want I want to delay the question.

I want to have a proper discussion.

A lot?

No, not yet.

Not now.

I just have to clarify.

Question.

Do ratings agencies have fiduciary duties?

Is it legally enshrined that they need to give their

best?

What we did in Orange did on a better than.

United Labour for the same reason because this all comes

back to work.

Opinion is a highlight is I want us to sit

down and talk about it.

So if I don't do it, the 7:00 next week

certainly asked me to do it yet.

We're just morning staff that in all of this.

With.

Morningstar they do.

Like no one is different.

Morningstar is a device I'm the most complicated see Morningstar

advisor for mutual funds so they don't rate corporate bonds.

So they are not a rating agency in the sense

that.

Then a related business, but not the same.

No terminology, and you probably know this, but I just

want to make sure we're speaking from the same book.

We had a concept of basic assets and derived assets,

an asset like like a stock Rafferty commodity, foreign exchange,

a basic assets activity is an asset whose properties, price

and risk and the like they derive from a basic

asset as a forward futures swap an option.

And in the UK on Wednesday last week, it's a

swap.

At the core of everything.

I do not want to get into any of the

detail, but a performance is an instrument that fixes the

price of an asset to be paid at some point

in the future.

A swap is an instrument where you swap a payment,

Plus I get the payment from one end point and

you from another.

I own a bond.

He owns a bond and we swap the payments into

bonds.

That's exactly what is at the core of the UK

crisis.

Last week.

Option is an instrument that gives you the right but

not the obligation to enter into a transaction in the

future.

And.

Margins.

This is what I wanted to cover before I stopped

marching, because this is a picture of what happened last

week.

If you enter into a derivative transaction.

One of the counterparties may owed money to the other

counterparty.

So if the futures contract, if the price of the

acid goes down or somebody is making money, the others

losing money.

And imagine if an insurance pool of people entering into

derivative contracts begins losing money.

If the counterparty people's.

Sure.

So if a big bank says a futures contract to

me, they will insist on a margin and the margin

is a fraction of the value of the contract.

So the initial margin is to if the contract is

worth $100, the initial margin might be $20.

And if the if a contract goes against me over

time.

I am required to maintain at least 50% of the

initial margin.

So if I lose more than $10 and I have

to provide money to the person entering into the contract

against me.

So.

He is an example.

But I do want to before I do the exam

now, no know can discuss what happened in the UK

last week.

And I do not see light.

I'm not going to use a blackboard, but I'm just

going to draw really briefly.

Pension funds.

They have to manage cash flow over long periods of

time.

So they so remember, when interest rates go up, a

pension fund loses money on the bond sale, but they

make money on the higher present value of liabilities.

So the pension funds are naturally hedged against interest chasers.

But to manage this risk in the short term, since

the bonds and the liabilities are not fully maturity matched,

they enter into swap contracts so that the payment flows

to the pensioners roughly match the inflows from people investing

in the pension funds and the bonds with biased insurance

against future pensions.

That's why they buy swaps.

That's what the UK funds, if nothing wrong with it.

The problem is there are two sides to this.

They're making money on the they are making money on

the pensions light of the liabilities, the liability side, because

they present this kind of value is going down because

interest is going up.

So they make money on the liability side.

They lose money on the assets side.

This match's problem is all the hedging or the swaps.

We're on the acid site.

And he was losing money on the swaps, and that

meant they got margin calls.

For that reason I just mentioned to you.

The only way a pension fund can meet the margin

really over a one time horizon is to sell assets

once.

I mean, if you get it two weeks, they can

do it, but not in one day.

So the pension funds start to sell bonds to meet

margin calls.

The problem is when the pension funds start selling these

bonds, the price of the bonds drops and yield goes.

That that makes more that is more margin calls and

they are selling into a market what the cost is.

So the price falls because the price falls, they get

margin calls.

This is the mechanics of the crisis on Wednesday.

So how does the Bank of England deal with this

correctly?

If Bank of England steps in to buying the bonds

the pension funds are selling?

And the Bank of England bought by 55 billion worth

of pension funds on Wednesday.

So that when the pension fund sold, sold, the price

of the bonds doesn't fall.

So this stop the feedback loop between between high margins

and falling bond prices.

That's nuts.

That's a mechanical description of what happened last week.

Questions.

How are they making money on the library?

Because liabilities of future pensions.

And the higher the interest rates, the lower the present

discounted value.

That's what.

So pension funds are naturally hedge against against pressed against

pension funds a naturally hedged.

Yeah.

Do you see an argument?

Go to be the future of a pension fund to

have access to emergency lending.

So it is at the central banks.

Instead of selling the bonds they produce to repay them

and get the to.

What he is.

What he is saying is that one way to stop

this would be if the central bank, if the pension

funds can keep borrowing money from the Bank of England

when they have an extreme liquidity.

It's a big step.

I mean, the system worked.

This system works by chance.

You can make the argument, but I look, I don't

see any convincing argument for going that far.

I mean, basically, to be completely fair to everybody.

The city.

While the crisis is hard for perhaps not optimal political

decisions.

What happened to the market?

The winced and the reaction of the Bank of England

was entirely correct.

The system worked.

I think there is a natural head and it worked

well that there wouldn't be any crisis.

No life, no.

Problem.

As opposed to leverage itself.

No, that's not it.

It's not.

Look, it's the issue.

The issue is pension fund assets enough mark to market.

Well, they're not well, they're not marketable.

Well, the assets are marketable.

That's issue.

So any time when you have an entity with the

liability side is non marketable and the asset side is

marketable and mark to market, that's what you have this

happening.

It's not leverage.

It's simply that in balance.

There's nothing.

There's no there's no other reason.

There's so there's nothing wrong.

I mean, nobody did anything wrong.

It's just.

Except perhaps you can't.

So about a year ago, year and a half ago,

we had this big crisis in Hong Kong when a

family office called cut to use its $10 billion and

it failed.

And what is interesting is what actually happened.

So Archos had several prime brokers.

If you are wondering if you have if you have

$10 Million and you have several brokers.

Here's a list.

Credit Suisse quotes Goldman Morgan Stanley, which it should receive.

No more ups on Wells Fargo.

And the prime brokers knew exactly what kind of trading.

And they have traded swaps worth $20 billion, double the

amount, and which meant that when the positions they traded

swap speculative and what like the pension funds in speculating

the swaps would be positions went against them they had

to pay matches to the prime broker.

And similarly, when the positions were in their favour, they

would take money out of the merchant account to inflate

it on profits.

This is what they did.

When they got into difficulty, they ignored pneumatic calls.

And now you start seeing the difference between the top

banks and not the top banks.

Some prime brokers reacted immediately when they saw the not

meeting margin calls and liquidated all positions with within.

So see the list.

Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs.

No loss on this delayed.

And that meant when they positions were eventually liquidated, $20

billion worth of assets with double the market at the

same time, like a $0.05 scenario.

So much money that it prices crass and that meant

Credit Suisse lost 5.5 billion and Nomura $2.9 billion.

You will see no more of been in the news

again a little bit later on in the course for

a similar mistake.

And Credit Suisse.

You might have seen this in the news now because

the credit default swaps on it are very, very high.

The market is increasingly pricing in the people of Credit

Suisse based on the CBA spreads.

Just in case you have a cup of tea if

you view.

Good to know.

So but this also tells you the difference between the

top end and the non top, non top ends of

the market.

Let's take a break now and remind me to stop

the haircuts next week.

I think you know.

The big difference.

Everything else.

It looks like the one.

His three month.

Old son is probably.

Too expensive.

How are you?

I have not.

Received.

141.

Since.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That was about 75.

75% of the time when I realised I was 35.

Plus I try to get the answer.

Or you want to take the.

Yes, because that.

Oh, yeah.

I'm wondering, I was thinking about what you said about

the barrio being about the central bank blending, having a

lending facility.

But I think that it is a very temporary, probably

in this situation.

He said.

So temporary problem, conversely, temporary solutions.

Well, that's what makes owning the bonds and keeping them

for the seven years of maturity.

No, I would think that you would think there.

Is a lot of sauce.

You know, whether or not.

This particular case, this microcosm of the similar things could

happen with the system, We know it's feasible.

Once of.

The problem is that this.

Is a multiple choice temporary solution that is for the

Senate to bypass in a setting up to the crisis.

I mean, it might be a wrong Kyrillos make believe

that crisis was happening, that stress was happening to the

banking sector.

If you would just go to a big operation in

the morning.

But I wonder regarding the funding for the unified funds,

even if things are moving.

The banks.

Have.

Access.

To credit.

She makes sense for them to access politically, but they

want to restrict access.

So you want the banks?

Banks are special thanks, especially because I mean everything to

simplify things.

They handed fingers everywhere in the economy with the problem

and they had an enormous amount of conditions.

That's why they have.

The pension funds and not just through the system, the

functioning of the pension for the families.

Personally, I want my money, but it's.

Not as it's not a crisis to crisis.

You need this facility to keep prices for other things.

You had this ad hoc solution.

And I think just that.

I mean, I guess it's the lender of last resort.

But is what you how far are you going to

be bank lending?

I mean.

Maybe it's just a bit more what maybe more prudent

fund could be included in that.

I know you.

I mean, some insurance companies.

You really want everybody.

Yeah.

This is another issue that comes as a profile for

this.

Mean it's used to.

Become something of a fantasy because you have a privileged

position.

It's a huge number of regulations imposed on them.

They want it to be regulated.

The pension function here, the quality of regulation package to

safety.

If you stop giving people the taxes, you also you

would have more control over what you do.

I mean, I guess it's a collateral.

And the only collateral you accept from legislation is be

one type of expert.

You know, but I mean.

But it does not work.

Well, that's not what this if it's a collateral that

you get at the bank.

I mean, there is no reason why you need to

go to your bank is called sit back, then swap

the contract if needed.

I mean, that's the purpose of banks is to sit

between the Commonwealth and the central bank.

And you don't want the central banks do anything because

everyone discussed this point.

I'm assuming they wouldn't be discussing digital currencies.

With really because no.

Phone coverage.

And.

That's a big argument.

Section one.

Almost a narrow into.

This one.

This was exactly what was supposed to happen.

There's nothing wrong.

And what is keeping this sort of going for the

particular is that the system what the system should.

Be talking to the.

Interesting case.

But the alternative is to mention history.

Yeah, you know, it is very interesting and it's one

of the reasons that's what I'm trying to do here.

So hopefully, hopefully not too many of them.

How come you never want to live in interesting times?

Then we could find something.

I don't.

Thank you so much.

9:30 a.m. on Thursday.

The Trump administration.

I think.

Okay good people that.

Yeah.

Okay.

So let's talk about let's talk about three possible crises.

So I came here to watch the end game shopping

list of stress events, and I know we got into

this last week, but I do want to add to

that.

So I wanted to it two or three things as

part of this, first of all, as quickly.

Well, do you?

So I you know, my view on this is opposed

to what do you think?

Will Ukraine Russia will lead to a systemic crisis.

Anybody want to take the point?

Yes.

Not directly, but it would have has the potential to

trigger other events that could lead to a systemic risk.

So that's kind of.

What events give you scenario.

Give me a scenario, Mike.

Yeah.

Okay.

So, I mean, this is a kind of tail end

scenario.

Let's suppose that there is a dramatic collapse of Russian

power that results in a power vacuum and creates increased

global competition.

Two United States and China.

And to fill that vacuum.

So.

And then you could potentially see flashpoints that could really

trigger the US-China competition.

So it's quite contrived.

Well, it is not it is not contrived for one

important reason.

You sat in the beginning to tell you that systemic

risk is a quality that's most highly likely.

But how do you tend to see that's what you

told us.

What you said highly is how it is plausible, which

is that as if the work goes against Russia.

And therefore Russia will collapse quite, quite like that would

have enormous political consequences.

To think it is destabilising, keep it, just keep it

low quality.

Stabilising enough to cause a system crisis wouldn't.

At the beginning of the war, the United States froze

foreign currency reserves of Russia that were outside of their

holdings.

And I'm sure China took notice of that.

And so they may take actions to minimise their exposure

to the dollar, which could put the dollar at risk

of no longer being the world's reserve currency, at which

point the United States would, you know, probably not act

super rationally, given the political disruption that's happening that could

cause a systemic crisis for the.

Not.

I am not buying.

Okay.

But however, however, I do want to delay that particular

discussion because what I will do in about four weeks

time, I'll talk about the reserve currency and the US

dollar and the Chinese renminbi together.

When I get to the sidelines to delay that until

I have a chance to to the context to that

question.

I was wondering if the Fed, if I think it

was in May that Russia initially was planning to pay

the interest.

J.P. Morgan I think Bush and Bill, in the last

hours, the central bank decision to pay the interest.

So it's but you know, and I was wondering if

that could be a scenario which leads.

The quick answer is no.

And let me explain by the.

Russia, especially after the Ukraine, after the Crimea, after taking

over Crimea has been quite isolated.

It was quite a small player globally.

So even if even if Russia defaulted on those applications,

it was so small.

Remember, it gave the number for the total volume of

the U.S. credit markets of 14 trillion.

Russia is a tiny fraction of that.

So that would not happen.

And.

Those U.S. government bonds Russia holds.

They could be confiscated to pay back the creditors anyway.

So the answer is basically, no, that's not that's not

a concern.

So why was it the.

Reason for concern at the time.

The one when I was reading the Financial Times back

then.

It was a real deal to them.

If not, what happened is that.

Not for a different reason.

What was happening is that.

Because of sanctions.

Russian wanted it to get paid than rubles.

So it is really a question of because their access

to the global financial system, swift and other parts of

it was restricted in what they were arguing as to

as to whether the movement could be, whether they could

be paid the loopholes.

And the reason they would do that is of would

force the importance in Europe to find loopholes to give

to the Russians.

This would then undermine sanctions.

So it was a political game on where the sanctions

work rather than anything else.

This is a slide.

It didn't threaten anything, but it threatened sort of this

sanctions, political consensus, perhaps, but not beyond that.

I think that the news flows out of this.

One of the worst news flows out of this one,

obviously behind us.

And they did not try to reinvent the wheel in

any way.

Because first, before that, anything happened and I should like

to change this system and then that will support nobody.

And then there were energy crisis across the European.

Then they learnt to cope with this.

So nobody is getting infected here?

No, no, that exactly is the point, except the gentleman

is doomsday scenario.

But if Russia loses the war, in which case all

bets are off.

Last week, last week, we ruled out the possibility of

using nukes.

Who said that?

You know, that nuclear had one thing.

You know, what would you keep on this issue?

So unless that happens, there won't be any systemic risk

to the world because these two economies are very small

and their global trade is very tiny.

No.

You know where they are.

But the rest of the world.

Economy, not in Russia, collapses.

On a given day?

No, but not.

Because.

It is the biggest country in the world with bordering

on a huge number of countries it affects include heaven.

It would have a great impact on China.

I know, but I do.

This is not a question on on global politics.

I am not an expert on global politics.

I love to move to a much more boring topic,

which is pro cyclicality.

And somebody who is not.

So the way I'm going to do this is I

want to give you a chance to practice answering questions

for an exam.

So.

So.

So this could be an exam question I want to

respond to.

You asked if this was an exam and I was

mocking your question.

So who's brave enough to tell me?

Give me an abstract.

I've given up.

This is five, six, eight.

Give me an abstract definition of culture dependency.

This could easily be an exam question.

So who wants to give an abstract definition of procedure

coloured?

The change in one variable will impact the ability of

any federal government.

You would get three out of ten, for that matter.

You said nothing wrong, but you think it's a.

Manageable variable to be.

Yeah.

So both variables impact all this.

So the way you say that is pro cyclicality where

you have two or more variables, all of which have

a direct impact on each other in a positive way.

That's pro-cyclical.

That's what you're missing.

So you would have got a sense seven out of

ten is countercyclical to balance out.

So two various groups say more like both impact upon

each other in a positive way.

That's kind of ten.

That's your answer?

No.

You said one variable infecting one another.

You did not do it by correction and you did

not do the probe.

Watch how you got those people have on foot.

And I'm being pedantic here, but I'm also doing this

so you understand what is expected when answering some questions

in my course and other LSC courses.

That's exactly how mocking looks.

One thing an important point here is.

If I ask for a abstract definition of cyclicality, I

am not looking for an example.

To say an example is, Well, this is how it

works in the real economy.

It wasn't asked though, and some more on this asked

if I had an abstract definition.

The gentleman says the cotton crop is all you have

to say.

For like three nights.

Okay.

So.

Another heartbeat.

Q One example that is one example of pro-cyclical behaviour

in the economy and not in the financial system.

Discretionary spiral.

As prices fall.

Creditors are happy.

Had.

But you're not wrong.

But you're making it hard for yourself.

Growth and consumption.

Not to accept that we are coming.

For the economy and growth and more money in general

and therefore increased consumption.

The same would be.

And then you have to say and increase consumption first.

What?

Increase consumption increases.

Yeah.

You know, complete the cycle and then it repeats.

So you could do what you did.

But this is a better example.

So a consumption and growth is a good example of

pro-cyclical behaviour in the real economy.

Can you give me an example of pro-cyclical behaviour in

the financial system?

Don't remember if I give you one last week.

Following in the footsteps of.

Well, that's a real economy, not financially.

So automatically ruled out.

But.

You actually haven't done You haven't you haven't done a

look at you have a closer look.

The psychology around momentum stocks, where the price of the

stock increases and therefore attracts more buyers.

The past.

Those are more important to the stock price.

That is that is a good example.

I can see how telling you this one I have

in my mind.

But what the gentleman said is is correct.

And I'll come back to this a bit later.

And of course, it's momentum trading work because people buy

stocks, the price of the stocks go up.

And because the prices go up, people want to buy

more.

So it's a process that could be crucial to equality

between investor sentiment and prices.

Another financial market example.

You didn't see anything of this side investment.

I think.

Okay, explain.

So when the economy is doing well, banks.

Tend to pay a lot of capital.

So.

Let's look.

The economy is not doing too well.

You are.

You are absolutely correct.

You would want to be more precise.

And I think so.

But what you said is exactly correct.

So let me ask you then to flesh out your

point.

But you basically have got a goal of 10%.

I can extend the way you said.

So.

When the banks when the economy's doing well, the banks

have a lot of money.

I'm reluctant to use the term capital because it has

an accounting term.

So it's an accounting term in banking.

So I would rather people more see that they have

a lot of money, a lot of funds, because the

banks have a lot of funds.

They lend money to companies that makes it so the

companies invest and people fight because people fight and companies

invest.

That makes the economy grow and that makes the banks

more profitable with few people those loans to lend.

So it's a virtuous, positive feedback in good times and

in bad times.

If banks stop lending, that makes the economy contract.

Because the economy contracts, the banks lose money a lot

less.

It feeds on itself.

I really want you to understand the concept of pro-cyclical.

I will use this term again and again and again.

So you have no no excuse for not knowing it

if I mentioned.

Okay.

Questions?

Fire sale externality.

What is it?

Define the term externalities is.

Most of the systems are.

No, no, that's extortion.

No, it's fine.

It should be.

I take it.

Externality is when you and the company make decisions that

affect not that not affect all the people who are

not involved in the decision.

So the canonical example of economics is pollution.

If I'm a company, I pollute.

I profit from pollution, but everybody else suffers.

Therefore, pollution is externality because it's a polluting company.

I don't pay the full costs of pollution.

Less economic defined by a former LSU professor called course

got the Nobel Prize for this concept.

By the way, and definition in an exam.

That's all you say.

Can you define the concept of certain externality?

People from the sites related to the trouble before anybody

else on the site.

Fire sentence technology.

You do again.

When?

Like you have to sell.

So my sense of the president.

Yes.

Have you been to the clubs in most recent examples

of bias and externality you know of?

Panic selling, panic selling inputs.

For example, lots of financial externality.

But you need that.

You need anything to feed back.

So what happened was, see, there's a pension funds in

the gift market in the UK.

That was an example of a fire.

And to prevent that feedback loop.

That's what the Bank of England did, was to cut

the feedback loop between margin calls and falling prices.

Sorry.

You have a question.

But so now we're in the finding fire scene.

But you will not be extradited to the states if

a margin call on.

The margin calls is not on.

The margin call is not an externality.

But these things are the actions of people in this

particular market segment.

They create damage that goes beyond the market segment.

That's what's with a term, a crisis.

So what happens in a crisis is.

Exactly.

Two gentlemen said the matches are very typical example of

this, because you can watch as prices fall, but it

can martins itself.

And so prices fall more and more march and you

spread the misery.

So one person can then start impacting on a whole

person on the marketplace.

Especially being somebody who most likely won't go and.

What could happen.

So that example could easily spread to other sectors if

they hadn't stopped in two.

Okay.

Finally.

What does it mean when I say systemic risk builds

up out of sight?

I think that happens when you are smiling.

So you will.

You want to try?

Sure, sure.

I think the way we talked about this last part

was the idea that.

We if if we can account for the risks that

it's not, it will most likely not lead to actual

failure.

So as you talked about the non as well us

with this before, if we knew that that was going

to fall to take precautions, we would probably have someone

come around and try to fix it.

Whereas if all the systemic risk was most likely things

which we did not have before.

So I presume that it's mostly things which we are

not fully aware of coming.

Very good.

No, you're exactly spot on in that SMU.

You would be more tight in how you write it

off.

But what he said is correct, and I'm going to

repeat what he said.

So what he said was that if you can see

your risk, you will likely protect yourself against the worst

outcome.

So therefore, to begin is almost axiomatic that systemic risk

must happen somewhat when nobody's paying attention.

So very quickly to summarise it summarises this.

So.

I'm going up.

I'm going to repeat the question I did last week.

Just because I'm not.

Anybody.

So do you anybody want to argue that you want

to live in a country where you would never have

a financial crisis?

I know most of you said raise your hands last

week, and then I discussed it.

But anybody want to maintain their position?

Who doesn't like.

Who doesn't like to stay and look in a stable

country without having a financial crisis.

So you would prefer so you would sacrifice growth.

Okay.

So you would sacrifice growth and stability.

So for take India, for example, the global financial crisis.

But the fact that in the most of at least

most of the world economy.

In India is exact in some form of an economy,

this applies.

India has never had a financial crisis.

And you know what?

Systemic risk in India is very low.

But also the problem of risk taking in India is

very low.

The Indian economy has not performed well in the long

run either.

So.

You know, so so they found almost that exemplar two

goals in favour of argument, not against India.

So I think the against like I said, it's a

trade off, but the cost of the financial crisis is

so huge.

You were mentioning you put a dollar in the stock

market in 1929.

You wouldn't have got it back for 35 years.

In terms of unemployment and political factions in.

In the thirties you have Trump Brexit.

These can be quite destructive events.

I guess you could argue that it's nice that he

does it instead of a very, very steep increase and

a very, very sharp fall.

Which cause a lot of misery and very, very costly.

Sorry.

So what you're saying.

What you're saying is a perfectly legitimate view.

What you're saying is that people are caused by allowing

these things to happen, which has extreme has damage outside

of just an immediate from an immediate.

So it is you're actually saying it's leave we missed

the big picture.

The only hope for long term economic growth in those

with the short term costs can be quite high.

Could be because of volatility.

And I think, you know, recessions can be good, you

know, productive disruption of capital and all of that theory.

But there's a difference between a normal recession and a

financial crisis.

So let me let me.

I'm not.

So let me just come back to this point gentlemen

made.

In an Excel.

Some questions I ask will have a yes and no

answer.

The answer is this.

That's it.

All the questions like the one.

Both answers are correct.

What matters is how you argued.

Right.

So if it's if the answer relates to your opinion

on something.

And I don't care what your opinion.

I care about how you support your opinion.

There's no it's completely irrelevant whether I agree with you

on it.

Just just keep that in mind.

That question falls into that category quickly.

What?

What is a competitive devaluation?

Great Depression.

What is a competitive devaluation?

I justified it by the paper.

What is a competitive devaluation?

Yeah, it's because of that.

Even marginally faster.

Than the visual innovation they managed to export.

So repeat the evolution of the currency aimed at boosting

exports.

Developing those districts.

Another country has to do with the country.

Yes, that is correct.

I want to pay a police.

I will have a problem with pension.

You said artificial.

You get to this point.

So what you said, you said in your book, you

said you could use not terms that have no meaning.

You start using points.

Just.

It's just.

It's just.

It's just all has to be careful.

Up to the US, to the Mexican government here is

correct.

So it is a system whereby one country devalues and

then another country immediately followed by devaluation.

So I want to work through a quick example.

I'm not going to ask you a question, but I'm

going to work through it.

This is question three here.

So imagine a country in the 1920s that exports beef.

I'm thinking Argentina, by the way.

The affects exchange rates is $5.

To a dollar.

The price of beef is one kilo.

One is $10.

Even the $2.

Imagine the country devalues the currency so that the exchange

rate is now $10 to a dollar.

How will the price of beef change?

And white and white.

Blue and white.

For people who are using dollars because people are not.

So what can happen to the price of beef?

And why?

And there are very few dollars.

One, you know, after the devolution, they are playing only

for one.

So.

Okay, so.

So one argument is that.

So that's one scenario.

The price of beef will go to down to $1.

Equal to $10.

So if I continue to lose out.

That's one extreme.

What's the other extreme?

But the other extremist, the price of beef stays at

$2 and now is equal to 20%.

So that's an area of continuous benefit.

In second scenario, the consum consuming countries benefit.

That's that's a lovely compilation to me.

What determines which outcome happens if Argentina.

Argentina's a very small.

Exporter.

Small country and the global beef market is big.

You can end up here.

Right.

If Argentina is big.

Then you're more likely to end up here.

And if what happened is because Argentina defaulted, so did

Uruguay, so did Brazil, All the big beef exporters, all

the exporters did the same.

And that meant in practice, all this benefit went to

the consumption countries, not to the exporting countries.

And that's why you couldn't be.

Commodities.

Exporters in competitive devaluations effectively gave free money to the

wealthy countries, imported this stuff.

And this is the constellation of risk which is now

recognised.

And to that extent, it illustrates why it's a stupid

Why is it why you do not want to do

competitive valuations?

It all depends on elasticity of demand.

To use an economic term.

So last so last question.

The last question.

Let's be slightly more existential here.

So the lessons from the Great Depression are.

In the crisis.

All of us put money into the financial system to

prevent defaults, don't have trade barriers, don't do competitive devaluations,

have global cooperation and global institutions that are meant to

protect us, like the IMF, the world from the WTO

and the rest.

Do you think that that Daft Woodward is now going

away?

So obviously it was slipping into this certainty you had

before the Great Depression, or is this world order created

by the Great Depression, which is the way you were

working itself since then has been the cause of the

Great Depression.

Do you think that this state would change?

What do you think?

Not related to her.

You.

You're not going to try.

Issue.

I'll come to you later.

Anybody.

I think that is that is one of the sort

of big change unless, you know, right wing politicians get

good increases because after 1939, we have seen different crises.

And then each time the quality was pumping through the

system and that support was provided, at least for the

time being, whether it was those crises or Draghi's famous

statement that Italy could equal sovereign debt.

They said that ECB will do everything.

What they look at, what it takes to make printing

money.

And we have seen that that's what is going to

be okay.

So let's confuse this.

Largely in March 2020, the United States provided massive liquidity

to other countries.

The act was super important globally.

So therefore, if a British company, British bank needed U.S.

dollar liquidity, they could go to the Bank of England

and the Bank of England could supply the liquidity on

demand provided with a swap agreement with Mrs. Countries super

important.

Do you think the United States would always continue to

do so?

Yeah.

Unfortunately, I think you have to go into political economy

after.

Yes.

It's such a tangible element of financial power and it

lets them have massive influence.

The spotlight continued to be reinforced in at least the

discourse and how a lot of people talk about the

fallout of.

The primacy of the United States as a financial actor.

And so I would imagine that a lot of things

would have to go wrong for the United States to

no longer want to.

See this happen.

So you so you argue that the united the influence

and power of the United States in global financial markets

increased as a consequence of the.

Yes, I would say an increase.

But I also think we've been talking a lot about

cooperation.

And I think that it might be worth mentioning a

bit more on the unilateral ability of these.

Finances of the United States in this situation.

So I'm not sure whether.

It's more like cooperation is a huge element.

But I also see financial conservatism as a massive element

of facilitating this kind of.

Okay, So with your political economy argument, where do you

see the top rutile heading?

Trade.

I would say that I am neutral on the.

So what is happening in trade, by the way, which

is and then we have to stop.

The WTO is becoming increasingly irrelevant.

What is happening is that countries created a fragmenting into

smaller group of loosely affiliated countries that have trade agreements

with each other, but not outside of the group.

So therefore, we end up in multiple.

So European Union is an extreme example.

We have the Asia Pacific set up another example.

Latin countries keep on trying to do this and successfully,

etc..

Loose confederation of countries and the top util is fragmented

into a looser group of smaller countries.

We end up in the European domain are in the

US domain are in the Chinese world.

And the fragmentation could certainly be suddenly we'll look away

from the lessons of the Great Depression in terms of

retaining a central control, whether or not it's good or

bad, it's a different matter.

Any last thoughts on the Great Depression before we stop?

We have to stop sharply because they have a huge

cost coming.

Three lessons.

So next week we'll continue on with the bond markets

and.

I think that tortuous risk is in itself.

It's up to the memory system.

I'll see you next week, people.

Lecture 3:

She's looking.

Got.

You know, I just you know, I just learned this

is not the case 31 years ago.

That's just.

So mysterious.

Who can tell me where I left off last week?

Well, margin margins, haircut and leverage.

So the dots should be somewhere here in closing.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay.

So do you people have any questions on what we

did last time or anything before I went into this?

No.

In that case, haircuts.

The term haircut is similar to the term initial margin,

and I'm really only cutting it out of this so

that you're aware.

So if it comes up because it's used all over

the place and you certainly should know the term, if

you haven't heard the term, you won't want to look

for you in this in this course haircut is like,

how can I get rid of that?

No, I don't want you to do anything for me.

Just get out of the way.

Fantastic.

So haircut is similar to in the shoe market, and

it works typically.

It can actually mean two things, by the way.

This is why everything is complicated.

So a haircut means if I pledge a security for

collateral, only a portion of the market value countless of

clients.

So let's say, hypothetically speaking, if I go to a

bank and let's say my phone is worth hundreds hundred

pounds.

I pledge this call to the bank.

The bank will not give me a loan of 400.

It will do a haircut on the value of the

phone.

Let's say it's 10%.

It says 10% is the haircut.

I'll lend you 90.

And it is because I lost my phone.

A security professional.

So if you borrow something without security or use a

security to guarantee something, they don't use its full value.

So here could.

Why would they do that?

Because.

If the market value of the phone goes down in

the future, phones will of course, drop in value.

Then it takes care of that.

And there's cost involved in selling this and things, things

of that nature.

The other term, and this is the different terminology, which

means if creditors are willing to give up a lot

of the value of a bond in restructuring.

Let's say, for example, if I have a bond as

opposed to 100, I won't be able to use the

creditors.

And you said, okay, John, I'll make a deal.

Let's make the bond 50 and you promise to pay.

That's a clear cut.

So here comes a reduction in the value of bond

in the resolution of a crisis.

The place where you're most likely to see this crop

up is in sovereign defaults.

So when Greece arrested for ten years ago, their bonds

with their country and what we are seeing throughout Africa

at the moment, we are seeing a wave of sovereign

defaults happening.

Their bonds are likely to be full equities as well.

All clear.

Just so you just so you're aware of the language

here.

And finally and I'm just really running through a shopping

list of terminology, and I would expect you to know

this quite well, since most of you are companies Mark

to market is the type of an accounting standard whereby

you quote the values of assets, plenty of books at

the current market value rather than the price at which

you bought it.

No, And just keep I want you to keep in

mind that this has a direct connection with the term

vis a vis margins.

So what happens if there is no market for an

asset?

What happens if the market for an asset is illiquid?

That is exactly what happened to the world in 2007

when the global crisis started.

There was a huge number of assets being held from

the books of banks and other institutions at the mark

to market.

But then, poof, the market was gone.

So how do you do mark to market when there

is no market for the asset?

And it also sort of said it would mark to

a model pricing model or if you will, a slightly

more dismissive you don't market to magic.

You just make up the numbers and that is what

half is quite.

That can certainly happen.

Just be aware of that.

I mean, this is not going to play a huge

role in this course.

However, one place where this is important is in financial

stability.

Marking and margins play a very useful role for investors.

Gives them protection.

But.

Like so many other tools, when used mechanically, mechanistically in

a crisis, they can become pro-cyclical.

I want to discuss this.

Senator, how can.

Mark to market become pro-cyclical.

And one reason, of course, is you might start trusting

the market values that might undermine trust in institutions.

So Mark to market is certainly one of the drivers

of financial crisis, like I say.

So the tools we have can be used for bad

or for good.

Well, look.

I'm sorry.

I just.

I couldn't resist, but I saw the.

I had to see if it works.

I need to find a use for this.

So what Can I use it?

What can you do with this in this course?

Now, another thing I need to discuss just running through

things is the payment system and.

This is just like a definition rather than anything else.

I'm just running out of things that we would talk

about.

Payment system is a way whereby we move money between

economic agents.

If I give her 10.

The payment system is my hand passing 10 to her.

If I use my iPhone to transfer money to her

IT payment system, it goes from Apple to my bank

to to the British shop system to her bank to

perform.

This payment system is a mechanism that moves money between

people or companies, and they can't do something really simple

or something really complicated.

No work.

Does this become important?

We're going to come back to this and what the

intent will be to cryptocurrencies.

But by and large, governments like to control the payment

system.

And the reason why we are seeing central bank digital

currencies of the type we discussed in a few weeks.

It is because of the payment system.

Again, the energy field in China.

This is certainly the reason why the Chinese government is

taking control of private payment mechanisms, because China is unusual

in the part of the payment system in increasingly large

parts.

We've done public private market and not by the government.

So the Chinese are going in the same direction as

everybody else.

The government wants to control it.

It can relate to a global system like Swift, and

it is something fundamentally important.

And this I'm just putting this out for now.

And one aspect of this relevant to what we are

increasingly seeing is something called the real time gross settlement

system, which means in this country, if I want to

use transfer money from my bank account to her bank

account, I can do that in a fraction of a

second.

So for those of you who don't live here, usually

I'll just give you one typical example.

On Friday, they had somebody fixing something in my house.

I had to give him 120 for that.

I just try to money directly to lowest cost.

And that's how we solve this.

And it's not that there's no fee and there's no

delay.

Eurosystem has something called Typekit, too, which is not quite

as efficient.

They're trying to make it faster.

What is holding it back in Europe is the banks,

in fact, like to make it slow so that they

can piece.

The United States is especially problematic since it's one of

the very few countries in which these checks.

Every time.

And that's a very slow, inefficient payment system.

So besides the United States, what other countries still use

checks?

Pay the checks.

I know some of you come from one of those

countries.

India uses India.

India induces checks.

And whereas in France, what France?

France is certainly France is a very unusual European country,

and this depends on checks.

I think the only one to India, France, the United

States, we are moving away from checks.

So, for example, I mean, but this is a real

pain.

But for someone that has seen checks, it's actually because

I'm.

The United States is actively trying to close the system

down.

Whether they succeed is a different matter.

Then we have only private payment systems.

We have Visa and MasterCard for private systems.

Apple Pay, which sort of piggybacks on top of this.

So MasterCard, Alipay in China, PayPal.

Then we have called the crypto blockchain and and also

certain other payment system.

And just to close that point, we come back to

it is the payment system is a nationally strategic thing

and given the current geopolitical environment.

A few years ago I participated in a Department of

Defence event.

One if you want to talk to the United Kingdom

as a hostile nation state, how would you do it?

Well, the payment system.

If you are thinking strategically, ask a hostile agent for

that is what you use.

And the only part of my life when I sat

next to a U.S. general with the nuclear weapons is

sitting next to me on a panel was in the

National National Security discussion where I discussed this and he

discussed nuclear weapons.

And the whole hype is soft to be next to

some personality, but I never thought that would happen in

my career.

But payment systems are a matter of national security.

As well as finance.

And for a lot of countries, if you attack the

payment system, it's a declaration of war.

So therefore they're closely guarded.

Just to give you one example of how this is

done is in all most countries in the world, I

know this country, Europe, they're not listening.

I took a look at the facility for payment systems.

The Bank of England runs it.

But if something happens, they can stop somewhere else in

almost immediately.

They have a fully staffed, fully operational, duplicated facility.

And I think that's common in a lot of countries.

Questions.

We'll come back to this when we do crypto lending

to digital currencies because that's what really becomes important.

I want to discuss briefly and very briefly the concept

of of a central bank clearing counterparty CCP.

Central clearing Counterparty CCP.

This is on another of these national security level institutions.

So let's say, for example, and see, just because he's

next to me under these sorts of continuities and give

us an example here.

I hope you're okay with that.

Yeah, fantastic.

I should go to him next.

This just seems so close to me.

If I buy a stock, let's buy one share of

Google from them.

What happened was a whole number of things have happened

and for that to work.

I have to gain control of the stock.

If she said to me.

I have to give her money.

She has to receive money.

And by the way, if you ever bought a stock,

you do not own the stock.

Almost all Starbucks in the world.

They are owned by a couple of very large American

banks that are owned on your behalf, by the way.

It's a very interesting lawsuit in Germany that came out

of that a few years ago.

Exactly that issue.

But ignoring that technical debate is a huge number of

issues that happen.

And.

Clearinghouses.

They are institutions that sit in the middle of people

buying and selling financial assets.

So I don't buy it from her.

The clearing house sits in the middle.

I buy my stuff from the chairman's house.

I pay to the clearing house.

And the clearing house buys it with her and gives

you the money.

And partly for efficiencies sake, but partly for safety, both

for efficiency and for risk management.

I am an I trust experienced system she trusts and

we don't have to trust each other, which is the

point of this.

So.

So the clue system is the most is the most

one of the most important parts of the financial system.

The Depository Trust and cooperation in the United States cleared

in the year 2009.

The thing it was, I should say, after this numbers,

but it shared $1.4 trillion worth of trade.

I just tend to post 16.

Operates.

So clearinghouses are fundamentally important.

And if any of you is from Hong Kong is

the only known case when a clearing house called bankrupt

was in Hong Kong about 35 years ago.

And that led to wholesale changes in Hong Kong financial

regulations because the government of Hong Kong failed to adopt

and it changed a large number of things afterwards.

So the assumption is that if external system fails, government

will bail it out.

And then, of course, we so I basically said everything

was on the slide.

And then the big question is the big question is,

should it be paid for by government?

Is one of those things no government will ever say.

We will bail out the payment system.

But the presumption is they will.

And if you follow Brexit UK debate, a lot of

that has to do with clearing.

Because trading of European securities was kept in London.

If a German for a bond from a German it

went We are London based challenges.

And that is still the case today.

But this is proven really hard to shift here to

Europe.

What's harder than people would have thought questions before over

what is.

What is giving holes in the broken.

She didn't cross is quite.

Broker is a person that would match buyers and sellers

that might take ownership and might not.

But that is usually a fairly small step here.

On one level, you could consider up a super broker.

The lack of confusion missed slippage in the clearance system

set to remove all transactions.

While the draw could only be light of the very

small number of people buying and selling and a broker

might deal with more bespoke offer over the counter type

operations, only few houses would buy things for the people,

for instance.

So it's the lot is similar, but the cost is

much, much, much bigger.

I think the houses guarantee this place.

Is probably feels a bit up.

Appropriate for speculative trades, but the broker might not take

position.

If I find out from the gentleman that you broke

about facilitated her section.

But it's a bilateral We've seen a lot, but it's

still exciting to say they get you take care of

the person.

The holiday chosen.

It turns out they just emerged spontaneously from the financial

markets.

So historically.

If you should do.

Stop.

Excuse me.

It's all clear and comfortable.

Years.

So the old bonds and equities and everything else was

traded on the stock markets.

And then over time, you've seen it fragment slightly.

But it's really I mean, I think they might have

gone one, but if you find lots of the product

companies are just invalids of the need for this to

happen.

I don't know.

I mean, I don't think any of it was government

owned.

But in one of.

Anything else?

Oh, what is so tough to get into Europe from

London?

Because.

Because if you have the infrastructure, you facilitate an enormous

amount of trade and to the tune of trillions and

trillions of euros a year, you had I.T. systems and

everything else set up.

We can't replace that immediately.

And there's another enormously big benefit to London compared to

the number of benefits London has over Europe.

The first is the legal system.

So we have.

So from India as common law?

Yes, common law turns out to be the best legal

system for securities trading.

So I guess that's why Singapore is a dominant commonwealth.

New York is common.

London is a Commonwealth legal system designed for EU journalists

to German entities write contract under British law today.

For that reason.

So that means and I've heard that the European Union

is talking about importing possibilities into Germany to deal with

that.

It requires capability.

Secondly, almost all European Union financial regulations was written in

order.

What in Europe?

The European Union does not have the expertise to do

this today.

Neither a governmental level nor the private system of.

And the private sector resists.

And it seems to me the private sector is happy

with the way it is.

The EU would like this to move, but they are

not getting this way so far.

So there's a possibility in the future that they would

strike.

So there's a possibility in the future that they would

change it.

In the future in the course of this far into

the future.

Everything changes as well.

But at the moment, the EU is not able to

get to.

There are no signs it is able to.

Yes.

But what is this common law?

Just say what?

Okay.

I am not a lawyer.

But let me discuss what I want to see.

Too much here.

And a little messed up, but basically a plea from

the Democrat.

The German parliament passed a law saying, you can't do

this.

You cannot do that.

Right.

And that's a dispute, the judge says.

Based on the German law.

You cannot do this and you cannot do that.

What happens if you contact the institution unexpectedly?

So that it's not in the law.

It's actually difficult.

It creates problems.

That is the next step in the lawsuit.

Call it almost all eventualities.

And what doesn't happen creates a crisis in Italy.

This is especially problematic because the Italian parliament has refused

to pass a necessary loss of the EU treaty.

So therefore you can't trade things simply because they can't

get into Parliament.

The laws in this country, the way it works is

a judge says, regardless of what happens, I'm gonna look

at what has happened in the past.

I'm going to make the law.

So the judge, the high court and of course, the

headquarters, Supreme Court, they say, based on my understanding of

what has happened, are going to rule in this way.

So the judge decides on the law.

But if something happens in a way, you can not

do it, You.

And that gives you flexibility to deal with things like

derivatives that you don't have in in other German legal

system or the French legal system to.

And by the way, now that's one of the limits

to my expertise here.

But you can find a lot of stuff on the.

Okay.

So I mentioned this couple of weeks ago and now

I'm repeating it.

I want to spend a little bit more time on

this again.

But remember, this is a repeat shuttle thing, is financial

intermediation that takes place fully or partially outside of the

regular financial system.

If you want to be slightly more flip, you say

it's something that is like a bank, but it's not

called the bank.

In other words, it's banking without being subject to bank

loss and banking licenses.

So I gave you I asked you a few weeks

ago if you have the relevant revenue does not have

a bank account in the is not a licence in

the UK.

Just like it's for a bank here.

Just shut up.

It doesn't.

Most of the things affect us, but not everything.

And this term's negative was created in 2007 because of

the global crisis and now sometimes called parallel thinking, because

shallow thinking is just negative and parallel banking is seen

as positive.

It was certainly historically a US based phenomenon and now

has become increasingly widespread.

So basically, just to give you three different models of

how integration can happen in the first line, I have

a traditional bank, according to bank, in one of one

textbook first week events.

Never were like that, but I'm just simplifying the looks.

Bank collects deposits and makes loans.

That's a bank by the textbook.

Another way is you make, you buy you you buy

rights in a collective investment schemes.

This lady says I'm going to collect 100 of all

of you and I'm one of them.

Out of that I might issue securities that you can

buy and then I will provide lending to people.

So you can so you can go to her and

I can say I can borrow from her and she

will lend on our behalf.

This is like a bank, but it's not a bank.

And then showing that this became very, very common and

very problematic.

And then you had a direct peer to peer lending,

which some of you may have tried this, that you

just go on to a website and you say, I

want to provide 100, and then she can go to

the website for 1,000 and they will say 1 from

me, 1 from everybody else, another that I'm lending to

her directly.

Of peer to peer lending, which is.

Has problems, but it's sort of in some places quite

popular.

All of this is banking without being called the bank.

That's the point I'm making.

And nowadays, what you see is if you're a corporation.

Almost all large corporation.

So 20 years ago, if a big company wanted to

borrow money, they would call up the bank, take bank

loans.

The $5 billion will lend me 5 billion.

5 billion.

5 billion?

What?

Three?

Whatever.

Today, if you need 5 billion, you call up.

You call somebody else, you say, issue five, I'm going

to issue $5 billion worth of bonds and I'm going

to sell it directly to the bond markets like BlackRock

and places like that.

So for large companies, this is a part of shadow

banking where I can buy BlackRock.

Bond fund, the BlackRock Bond Fund, five funds from large

companies.

But you see, the problem with that is it only

works for large companies That is big enough to issue

bonds.

And if you're not big enough to issue bonds, and

that means small and medium sized enterprises, they are a

little bit.

And if they don't have place.

And if you take every country in the world.

Who creates jobs?

Who makes the economy grow?

It's small and medium sized companies, not the big ones.

So a system that so a system that rewards what

you put company forward to, the bond markets make it

very costly for companies to borrow directly from banks.

Hurts economic growth quite a bit.

And a collective investment schemes Legal.

Collective will.

Have their version.

Of events.

Yes.

Are you sure?

Yes.

That is collective investment schemes are being organised and what

we see is this shadow banks, non-bank finance companies, nbfc

and they will debate the difference between Nbfc and Bank

is that the Nbfc can look to open deposits to

borrow from the public.

So they pool their own resources and then lending to

the people.

No, I mean this actually this question of India has

been on my desk because we are looking we have

a cooperation with India securities Regulator recently.

And what can you see?

So the CBI you have we haven't even met this

MP about half a year ago on YouTube, a consultant.

And now we are planning a big event in Mumbai

in December on exactly these topics.

Of collaboration with the LCR system.

But it's the Department of Finance, part of the part

of that.

I would have gone to Mumbai for some in this

course because of the father and mother course of teaching,

so I can't go to Mumbai.

Otherwise, I would have been part of a completely and

completely assignment.

So there is a particular type of fund called and

money market mutual funds, which is especially a Chinese and

a U.S. phenomenon, not really seen much outside of these

two countries.

It's a shop that essentially collects deposits from people.

I'll invite commercial paper from companies, commercial papers, a short

term, not a bond, because it's been less than one

year.

So a short term security issued by companies that want

to borrow.

And this has become very problematic because people treat them

as if they are safe as banks.

And one of the difficulties of undermining faith in the

entire financial system, showing that big plans is very hard

on them.

So they are suddenly going away quite rapidly in China.

The United States can't do it for political reasons, but

they've certainly long to get rid of those things.

Not a good idea to have a deposit taking institution

that lends to makes risky loans.

That's a bit tricky.

However, shadow banks can be quite beneficial.

Because the problem is for two.

If I put money into a bank and the bank

loans it to somebody, that's a very the spread between

them is very high, is enormous cost.

Then as soon as it's a very expensive I get

no interest and cushions borrowing pace a lot of money.

That's basically the cost.

And you can borrow perhaps for a wide variety of

reasons.

So the banking is holds back the economy.

Banking holds back the economy.

In Europe, this has been quite controversial because once you

own companies find quite easy to borrow.

Well, Italian or Spanish or Greek companies find really hard

to borrow money.

Money flows to Germany from from the rest of Europe

into, say, German assemblies helping the German economy grow.

But at the expense of cities elsewhere in Europe.

So therefore, the European Union, a huge project going back

over ten years ago, or the Capital Markets Union aiming

to create this type of system of Europe.

It failed.

Because the contracts just proved to be too powerful.

They don't want to change this.

It's very good for their bank.

And I'm not going to get into this slide here,

but this is a slide from the Financial Stability report

on the growth of non-financial assets in the world.

And if you're interested, you can just download the document.

But it shows how the growth of alternative ways of

doing finance has, how alternatives to finance have grown quite

rapidly in the recent is just just look at the

second quarter here.

Public financial institutions is going down and all of the

financial intermediaries is caught up.

I won't spend too much time on this in this

course, but if you're interested, it's a good survey of

the issues.

And why are amid concerns about Chauvin's?

One reason is.

Usually the reason is either abuse of clients.

Micra prudential in this country and other place.

But I know this country with very big scandals recently

where a shadow bank was.

Essentially steal people's money and it into reacted too late.

And same type of scandals have happened in every other

large country, right?

These are difficult to think of as difficult to find

thought of early enough to stop it.

In the Asian crisis.

And but 22 years ago, the one the Thailand, South

Korea and Indonesia violation, all the places like that, the

shadow faced with a vehicle for moving money from international

markets into the local credit markets by passing regulations.

Mexican crisis a few years earlier, exactly the same happened.

So they use that to bypass governmental controls.

And there's a lot of fears about what might or

might not happen.

However, on the other side, because more competition this is

good for customers.

More diverse financial system is a stabilising and very important

piece of financial inclusion, which is that if you come

from a developing country, especially banks do not serve people

who were not well-off.

Full stop.

So these new types of institutions have become a very

powerful vehicle for financial inclusion.

This is to help everybody get access to financial services,

and that is so therefore, there's a lot of benefits

and cost.

Everything is a trade off.

Questions.

Yes, sir.

Oh, shoot out, commercial banker.

Go back to that profit.

I the stock.

I'm going to go back.

There you go.

Yeah.

So is the idea you buy the short term?

Commercial paper.

To make a long term note.

On the idea is that a money market mutual fund

is A, b, B, they collect deposits.

And then they would buy commercial paper issued by companies.

So if your company wants to borrow, you say, I

have a six month commercial conversion, pay for a six

month bond, if you.

Will, If you want to put it off with a.

Six month loan, you call me back and say, Hey,

you left me $1,000,000.

Here's a simple, yeah, we'll fight this commercial paper off

me.

You're getting $1,000,000 now that you've been involved for something

for six months.

So what if I told you I was working in

the United States, in China and China was also part

of.

Yeah, I remember some of the some of the those

from some major parties.

So I'm just.

So lots of Chinese phenomena.

Yes.

So in China.

So in China, you have this rather peculiar situation where

five large banks, a thousand regulations will become an onerous,

difficult.

They stuck, created the shadow bank of collected deposits and

make loans and institutions owned by the bank that off

balance security.

So it's also it's a separate legal entity, but fully

under the control of a commercial bank that is just

trying to bypass the regulations and set protection.

But like I said, he's got a very big clampdown

on this in China, not for very good reasons, but

yeah.

I'm sorry.

Trading strategies I want to discuss briefly just so I

can use.

Basically, I don't want to use this language, so I

want to continue.

So I.

This is like trading strategy is a rule used by

people buying and selling risky assets.

They can be formal and automatic and automatic like a

high frequency trading fund or a computer price and sell

stuff completely automatically.

Or they can be very informative, vague.

I just prefer safe assets.

Very often, and thus in an unconscious you don't realise,

but you have a preference.

If you are the type of person who puts in

money into the bank.

You have exhibited a preference for assets plus very safe

assets.

And I want to discuss a few categories of these

things so I can and the reason I refer to

all of it later in the course and then then

I can do it systematically.

One of the most famous one is value investing, which

means that you buy companies that you think are trading

below the inherent worth.

Somehow the market is not valuing these companies appropriately.

You can buy the cheap and then you buy stocks

with strong fundamentals, good earnings, good dividends, good good value.

Strong cash flow.

This is the person most famously associated with is Warren

Buffett.

And you then say seeking yield is maximising risk.

That is, this is sort of seen as a fairly

low risk but fairly decent investment strategy.

I'm not going to get into whether it works on

my first not like topic.

That's not my interest in this course.

I'm simply what the terminology to be understood.

Almost on the opposite end of that.

If you have technical training.

Technical training is when you use computers to forecast prices,

trading decisions.

Based on these forecasts, you often find patterns mean stocks

are cheaper.

Monday saw stocks fall in January.

And that's a very silly old strategy.

This is how you see I mean if you if

you Google this, you see a lot of this would

like animal analogies and attacking us.

Yes a.

Technical trading and something history challenges it.

Yeah type issues and thing for that.

And you see a lot of this in the crypto

world.

So little of the Bitcoin wall of $20,000 or whatever,

that's what you see.

The language reflects, you know, language reflects world view.

It's a lot of studies that say this work, but

the problem is data mining meaning.

If you're forecasting something, you know in the data, you

will find evidence, but that doesn't mean you can make

money off it.

So of studies from technical training, that's a good pulse

because a lot of them are made by people selling

services.

However, if you are successful in technical trades, you don't

tell anyone.

You do it on quiet.

So we actually have no way of verifying whether technical

training works or not.

And the people who probably are most likely to be

successful are not the ones you hear about.

The people you see on Black Pages and media are

probably only what is known colloquially the snake oil salesman

selling junk.

But it doesn't mean it doesn't work.

By the way, I'm not going to make any statement

as to the momentum trading.

This is important in this course is when you follow

the trend.

Let's say this lady here, she decides to buy a

stock in a small company.

This is owned by Sainsbury's, a slightly struggling supermarket.

She puts 10 million in the centuries and as a

consequence, on the London Stock Exchange.

The prices rise slightly, but luckily this is how the

crisis was.

I want to go back to 10 minutes into it

and the sheep business an issue because that's momentum trading,

because you see the prices rise.

You buy if you should.

Prices fall, you sell.

And by the way, I think I told you two

weeks ago the reason why retail investors underperform professionals, so

they tend to buy at the end of this boom

and sell at the bottom.

So they buy the most expensive, sell the cheapest.

This is why we put investors tend to underperform.

However, you can make a lot of money out of

momentum trading, but you just want to be slightly aware

that you don't want to be the last person to

buy and the last to sell.

That's.

Keep in mind.

So one one area you really see this with the

retail investors is you only engage successful fund managers.

You put money with this superstar.

Parts.

Problem is, by the time a folks fund manager becomes

a superstar, they probably too.

You probably miss out on all the geniuses.

You're too late.

So by the time you get there, you're too late

to make serious money out of them.

You really want to find a superstar before they become

superstars?

It's not easy.

And finally, high frequency trading is trying to be the

fastest.

A very famous example of this is 200 years ago

when Napoleon lost on Watson in Belgium.

Bare bones, Roscoe, he said patients from Waterloo to London

with the news.

It took two days for the news to travel from

Belgium to London.

Pigeons could do that an hour.

And then he spread the rule.

The U.K. lost France one everybody stocks.

He bought a lot of stocks.

And then the true news came in.

The U.K. won.

So he sold them.

The book made them out for some.

What you see most examples, small example, the most famous

example of high frequency frequency trading is when he used

very fast computers, very fast data networks and algorithms to

trade.

This can create stuff.

So when I played the video for you two weeks

ago and my account director of the system recently talked

about the flash crash.

That's exactly what it was.

That's exactly what was behind that.

And this certainly leads to destabilising behaviour in financial markets

and is certainly very controversial.

But I'm not going to get into any of that

here.

I can discuss it if you're interested.

But.

But by and large, it's outside of the scope of

this course.

What is interesting is shooting.

Shorting is selling assets you don't own.

You might borrow a stock or an asset.

Today.

You sell it and then you going to fight fight

back in the future and repay the stock to the

person important to Trump and.

There is nothing wrong with this inherently a state.

It can't be a very legitimate hedging strategy.

To give you an example here.

Let's say let's say if I'm a small company, I'm

going to do business with a lady here.

She's a big corporation.

I have to make a substantial investment.

I can match my risk.

I think the stock.

So if she fails, I get some money back.

If it succeeds, our business is good.

So there's a perfectly legitimate hedging strategy.

Just keep that in mind.

But you can certainly use it for speculative bets and

it becomes very political and moral for those of you

in Europe.

It might not come as a surprise to the that

are often religious reason for banning short sighted.

No.

You know, I see some of you shaking your head.

No, but there are still there are still religious overtones

in legislation governing this throughout Europe and certainly very strong

moral reasons.

Morality says, oh, I'm profiting from the misfortune of others,

going to see how it feeds into a whole cultural

framework of ethics and religion and things like that is

really the one area of timeless where those things mix

in, in a funny way.

Naked short selling can mean one of two things.

Thus it must be reversed as soon as it was

either.

You are only speculating.

I think the company is going to fail.

I'm going to set it short.

And if she fails, I make money.

I hope she pays us to make it shorter.

Another is a derivative contract where I sell an asset

without borrowing it.

How does that work?

I call up my phone and I says, sent me

a contract whereby.

It's like almost become like a futures contract.

So it's a contract that you simply selling assets at

a predetermined price today without buying or selling anything.

You're just you just sending money over in two directions,

depending on what happens without the actual transaction taking place.

So naked short selling can be used to give a

free hand.

So when I buy a good option, it would be

an option that.

I don't even have access to with the 85.

I guess.

But I'm not calling production along production, so I know.

I know where you're going with this and I know

we can't actually a similar.

But if you just call it as an option, you'll

be fine.

This is your call.

If you think this is legal.

We are going to find out what option is holding

the rights and not the obligation to actually work a

futures contract.

If I go to Riverton like this, it's just not

an option.

But to say sorry.

As a normal person.

Access to track is really the first approach.

I can think of that I can buy online broker

offices, I can never stop and then sell, you know,

to others.

No, I mean, I can and I mean, I love

this approach, to be honest.

So.

Jim so.

So there's the almost completely aside, but I was looking

at what is it by a particular European security in

an obscure country and the whole thing is difficult.

So the only broker that would sell to you was

a German.

This control.

I've had it.

They were setting all sorts of things with this sort

of derivative instruments.

Check your broker.

They might have it, but they don't.

Maybe change your broker.

Or.

Maybe change your broker.

I mean, my UK faced the regular proper I use

in the U.K. they they do this.

I can do this.

It may be called something different, by the way.

It might be called contract difference.

Contract with the contract for different CFTC.

Check the check, not term if you search for a

reciprocal.

But what are you going to spot?

No.

No.

I want to know.

I see.

Oh, by the way, what do you think is the

most shorted stock in Europe today?

Probably a bit like guessing, but it's Credit Suisse, I

would guess.

I don't know.

That's true, but I'll just.

I would not be surprised.

And I'm about to go to a formula.

Okay.

I'll come back to Germany in two slides because there

are two short selling scandals involving Germany, by the way.

But the issues are you are seen as seen as

profiting from falling markets.

However, conceptually is certainly different from studying things of your

own.

You also profiting from falling markets and if you buy

foreign exchange.

You're all on the short selling and go long.

You always save one currency and buying another.

It's really hard to see an economic distinction between short

selling and just selling things yet you own.

However, there's a strong moral and political dimension to this

is often banned, but empirically there is no evidence indicating

that it's.

From this.

By the way, if you want a really interesting case,

I don't think that put it into the slides, but

you go to YouTube and Google, a French supermarket chain

called Casino and an American hedge fund converted.

What is you will find a fascinating YouTube video because

the Muddy waters is had a really big attack on

the on the on the French supermarket chain casino in

company is of course a fantastic video on YouTube focus.

Well worth watching.

So basically there are concerns about financial stability.

So how does a short work mechanically?

Let's share speculative for us a stock so she borrows.

If this is a stock, she for the stock and

who learns it is usually someone who's a long term

investor.

Pension funds are the biggest providers of stocks for short

selling.

A pension fund is investing for the long run, so

they have to lend it to speculators for a fee.

Insurance companies are not a very big source of mutual

funds.

Almost any mutual fund trust is complete.

So basically anybody with large asset holdings, then the speculator

promises to return the stock at some date in the

future.

And here is where it becomes particularly important, some margin,

because initial margin and maintenance margin keep that with things

can get iffy.

Wirecard.

It's a beautiful.

Wirecard the German financial institutions that very suddenly became very

large.

And then the Financial Times, by the way, not the

German press, but the British press ran articles about how

they were fraudulent.

And if you are from any country in Europe, you

know exactly how this works.

You can't write about your own problems.

You can write what other people's problems.

So what you see were constituencies that refused to ratify

the.

No, they did.

They did.

They did accept the accounts.

And so they accept them after things start to blow

up.

So they have to run an about how they might

be fraudulent and the German regulars to back and prosecuted

the Financial Times for the facility of writing articles up

on the big German financial institutions.

And people set up in the stock.

Then of course, a couple of years later, Wirecard was

revealed as having been confronted and the CFO is still

on the run and the CEO is is in German

custody.

And to use another German word, schadenfreude, the f t

has a lot of them.

By the way, Schadenfreude means pleasure of the misfortune of

others.

And eventually the Germany fired the head of Buffet, the

regulator, because he said it was actually quite remarkable in

a testimony to the German parliament a few months later.

We chose not to regulate.

Why cut?

Think about this.

You had a regulator whose job that is to regulate

financial institutions.

Then they could just pick and choose who's regulated.

It's an absurd statement and you could fight it.

And most incredibly, by the way, the staff of the

German regulator were allowed to buy stock in a company

that they regulated themselves.

But I cannot think of any country in the world

that would be seen as okay.

It is just it's remarkably bizarre.

And they planned it afterwards and they tried to get

a forum to vent off and post a different issue.

Short squeeze is a case where if you know somebody,

it's a short position, you can actually cause problems for

them.

How can you cause a problem for someone who's shorting?

Well, I really need you to stop.

Sorry.

I didn't want to come back to that.

I have certain things I picked to play for her,

but I'm going to pick on this gentleman here next.

Are you okay with her?

You're perfect.

He likes the.

So imagine that gentleman here has shorted the stock.

And imagine this stock is going up in price.

He desperately and he's going to march and calls from

his bank.

He desperately wants to price to fall.

But you keep on buying the stock you find by

filed by to try to collect so that to make

him get into difficulty.

That's a short list of short squeeze.

So you are deliberately moving to try and you can

do it with a lot of assets.

How do you pick enough?

Well, the assets, the small.

And that means if if is a hedge fund, if

he can't beat the markets, his positions are liquid, liquidate

on the spot you put out of business.

Why would they want to do that to him?

He might be a competitor with another hedge funds and

if he goes bust, I can take over his place.

And that's.

Just a typical aside from the GameStop story I'm going

to show you a little bit later.

That's a short squeeze.

Back to Germany.

I'm sorry for people in Germany, and I hope you

forgive me.

I'm sympathetic with both the right and wrong.

So what is right and wrong?

So what is Britain wrong with.

Those building blocks?

Look, look like.

And you're right.

These people, in that case, you had the obligation to

send an email with a correction.

But waited for this woman brother.

All the way to the new.

Office.

You see, if he was, you get his life ahead.

And by the way, I had four years of German.

I should know.

I used to speak German quite a bit, but I

forgot it all works like I do it correctly in

the second world though.

It's the other way around though.

Okay, I give up.

Some of us do.

The slight shift.

And so so this is a highly questionable thing, by

the way.

Porsche and Volkswagen have a on and off relationship as

companies.

Now, Porsche is also going to join together and no

Porsches can split up again from Volkswagen.

And they wanted to increase the voting power and push

it kindly, having only push it.

And therefore, instead of buying a spike in stocks, this

was at the height of the global crisis.

This has been for 15 years or more, just like

a stock increased from 30 to 150 when the crisis

started for no apparent reason.

This is where the world was heading into recession, and

carmakers do poorly in recessions.

So every carmaker was going down in price except Volkswagen.

And they appeared massively overvalued.

Now, of course, nobody buys new cars in a global

crisis, Right.

So therefore, Volkswagen was massively shorted.

And apparently at one point the short positions amounted to

12% of all of the market cap, which is enormous

for a big company like that.

Well, Porsche owns 43% of Volkswagen, and the German government

and the regional government owned another 20%, got men who

were definitely looks like a shares on the open market.

Which is why it has become speculative.

And then the speculators were being squeezed and that caused

the prices to go up and up and eventually the

price of works, 70,000 is really killed the speculators and

netted the Porsche family 30 billion.

Not bad.

So if you're big enough and he wants to go

for you, that's the place to put your stuff into

this because it's highly controversial.

Was it illegal under German law?

Things just to be debated.

Why was it allowed?

It basically pushes the boundaries of what should be allowed.

In any case, no normal human things, probably.

You know what, Jim?

And misspelling say the GameStop.

Back to the United States.

Couple of years ago, GameStop was a shoe store selling

computer games, hence the name GameStop, and they had been

seen by hedge funds as a company in difficulty.

And the hedge funds started shorting GameStop quite aggressively, believing

they were destined for difficulty.

Then something new happened that never happened before with this

very small investors who coordinated with this.

There's a discussion about Reddit called Wallstreetbets.

They said they caught the new combined GameStop stock on

a trading platform called Robinhood.

Now, Robinhood, you can buy and sell stocks without a

fee.

How can you?

Who knows?

I can make money.

I've been a broker.

Doesn't charge fees.

So in trading.

Yes.

Yes.

So the way Robinhood makes money is they sell the

valuable traits to a couple of the places, but then

use that to trade on.

So the order flow is is the commodity.

But you can buy a set of stocks on Robinhood

for a very or for no fee, and you can

buy them very small amounts.

So if you a typical person was a teenager or

a 15 year old person sitting in the basement.

And this all may come in like you stopped by

this evil hedge fund still in this let's buy.

So it's within $10.05.

And this is roughly how it happens.

Well, these are here you see the stock prices intraday

throughout this process.

I mean, they're basically trading the $20 and some point

is $500.

So that price pattern, if you look at it, tells

you you just see this particular movement here, Right.

You're start to see here this vertical jump up and

down.

Vertical jump up.

Another one, enormous jump of 500 all the way down

to 150 and up again.

I mean, this is if you look at this, it

tells you something funny is going on.

And for for a chain of stores that sell computer

games.

It's not like they're inventing shoes for cancer or new

iPhones or anything like this.

It's the stores.

Boring business doesn't.

And this sentiment, How often was capable?

What is driving this sentiment?

Sentiment is essentially a measurement of how the world.

Thinks about some sort.

So sentiment you can measure.

For example, how often is LSD mentioned in the press

as a central mission and you can get.

So on these Wall Street Beats discussion group on Reddit.

If you compare the SPI, which is S&P 500 ETF

in the US.

And GM is GameStop.

So before this.

Everybody's talking about the S&P 500, not many about GameStop.

But now I can see how the sentiment how all

of a sudden everybody's talking about GameStop, not nearly as

much about S&P 500.

So of course, if you're a trader, you can see

how you can see how sentiment starts driving prices.

And the outcome is a here's what becomes particularly interesting.

Interesting.

The hedge fund with the largest position lost $3 billion

because it's been forced to close out at the height

of the highest value.

They were forced overall to sell into to buy the

stock of the very people.

The last 3 billion.

And then she, the Robin Hood, could no longer trade.

This sense a conspiracy.

But what happened is Robin Hood was clearing trades.

We are being called DTC.

You saw it mentioned a few minutes ago.

And because if you buy a stock in the United

States, it takes about five days for the transaction to

be recorded.

Is this a long time lag in the accounting systems?

And that means DTC was going to concern about Robinhood's

solvency.

Having all these trains on the TTC.

So they demanded a collateral from Robinhood worth $3 billion.

Estelle Faust.

When that was happening, Robin Hood was forced to curtail

trading in GameStop, causing the prices to collapse.

Laura Conspiracy theories around that.

They eventually raised 3.2. 4 billion from shareholders to meet

the collateral, allowing them to continue trading.

This was an only good return money back to shareholders.

Questions.

I didn't quite.

Understand how we're going to make money out of the

Philippines.

So if you are a very large entity like Super

Bowl being the biggest in the world.

And you know what?

Everybody's buying in real time.

I don't want everybody to be wanted by the sun

in real.

That gives you the ability to forecast short term prices.

Yeah.

So my deal with prices will go up in the

next couple of minutes.

That's why he does want to walk around the floor,

want this from everybody, because then through a very high

frequency short term for customers, low prices, that's not that's

not.

Questions.

Okay.

We're late for a break for.

Then I'll do the securitisation after the break.

So I.

Kind of.

This week.

The of.

So maybe it's just like getting factional.

So didn't go.

I think it was good.

So it's good to know I trust you.

Cause I know.

I just think that you know yourself.

And there was that.

And that's because what's most useful now, which was when

this whole question of the economy was like, No, really?

And after that, it was over.

I don't want to know.

Well, I think I do.

So.

It?

Well, it was in The New York Times.

I thought it was a good one.

Yeah.

And I'm like.

No, I'm not like that.

I didn't think I was going to find out what

I was saying, but I just said, Oh, that's good,

because otherwise it's just like, Oh yeah, I know you

do that.

But then you go, okay, so you have to do

like people say, Oh my goodness.

Oh, yes, you think about it.

It's like.

It's like.

It's like.

All right, Think so.

I want to stress that I would just like to

say that I would like to thank you for the

summary.

Of psycho psychotherapy.

I still like you, and I don't want to wait

for you.

I just don't want this to be the case.

I mean, you said this, Goldman, moments ago.

You were like, oh, okay.

Oh, no.

I think I used for it.

I am just discussing terminology.

I'm just discussing concepts.

And I want to conclude this chapter by discussing the

concept of securitisation and should all of you know what

it is.

But I just want to make sure we are all

speaking with the same understanding since I will talk about

securitisation quite a bit later on.

They On one level, you could say securitisation is creating

asset backed securities, meaning you take a lot of assets,

credit assets and they are pulled together.

You take credit assets, you put them together in a

portfolio and you sell them in the various forms to

creditors.

If you were following the news last week, that is

a very old rock band called Pink Floyd.

They've got a $500 million offer to sell to Securitise

the catalogue, and they couldn't do it because they don't

like each other.

One of them likes Putin, another likes Ukraine.

His latest argument.

So they couldn't securitise.

But you can put anything into credit cards, car loans,

mortgages, anything with a credit or future income element into

it allows you to securitise and securitisation.

We put subprime that is high risk mortgages into them.

Although the heart of the global crisis 15 years ago.

Mechanically.

The way this works is a firm has some assets,

corporate loan mortgages, credit cards.

This company is known as the originator.

They put these assets into a special purpose vehicle.

There are other names for it.

The name for this change is with the jurisdiction could

be called a trust.

I'm going to use SPV, but in your country it

might be called something different.

This is a separate legal entity under the control of

the originator.

The SPV buys the assets from the originator and sells

the right to the payments pool to investors.

And to make this work, you can't because you own

collateralise.

Meaning?

Remember the haircut discussion we have earlier?

The value of the assets exceeds the value of the

rights, the payments, the difference in this equity.

It is owned by the originator.

I mean, here is one floor of this.

I really don't want to get into this.

But basically at one end, you have homeowners who get

mortgages from mortgage originators.

We know that the banks, we issue mortgages, we sell

them to an investment bank, they pay a fee to

rating agencies to rate them.

And if I premiums to insurance companies to give them

extra protection, all goes into the SPV and that is

sold to investors.

This was at the time of the global crisis in

2008, and I would discuss one particular example of this

in a couple of weeks.

Why would you Securitise.

Well, one reason is you could.

If you are.

Thank you.

Hold these assets, you can transfer the risk out of

your balance sheet.

So therefore, remember what I think is a bank light,

especially in retail banking.

They don't want to hold the risk of loans on

the books, but they are experts in selling loans to

customers.

So they can take loans.

They can focus on the export side of the business,

which is selling and then securitise the loans.

So what's to get rid of them and not keep

it on your policy?

Nothing wrong with that.

And it allows credit to become cheaper for borrowers and

also it allows investors more diversification opportunities because I can't

get access to credit card receipts or car loans, and

especially not credit card receipts.

And Japan, if I wanted to.

But this allows me to find rights to.

I would want to do that because I'm looking for

uncorrelated, high risk assets.

So if you are a big investor, you're always looking

for something with a high risk, high return, but uncorrelated

with what you have.

And that's exactly what this is.

So in principle, there's nothing wrong with this.

Well, it's a big problem, not the lemon problem.

The lemon problem is based on a very famous paper,

not in economics, and it's based on American term, a

level in American in American English means if you buy

from the used and it's not in it's it's a

very low quality.

So if you can't buy a used car, is it

a good or a bad car?

Well, it depends, but a lemon is a fat used

car in American is not in it.

You would not use this term of this country.

And that means there's a moral hazard.

So if you're the originator, you might only securitise the

worst loans that if you use securitisation to get rid

of junk assets.

The worst part was that often happens and increased liquidity

risk like we will discuss later on before will often

work.

I'm just putting this one on so that you know

this exists so I can refer to securitisation without any

lack of understanding.

Christians.

I love the players of the asset backed securities would

benefit from.

If you are a pension fund in India.

You are looking for a high risk payment problem and

you pay country citizenship.

You can expose yourself to high risk asset class that

is not in your own country for Coronation Street to

knock it low.

You should expect credit cards in Japan uncorrelated with India.

That's why they are selling institutions, not retail.

Sorry.

I mean, these are you and indeed in this country,

individuals.

But this tends to be done in the home segment.

You might see a firm find this, but I think

the typical bias would be institutions.

But you could certainly I mean, your broker might sell

it.

I don't know.

You've broken up your taxes to.

Anything else?

So now I want to change truck slightly and go

into theory, which I have not yet done.

Lots of.

And along the way you have a couple of videos

I will show you three videos actually shown in a

couple of minutes.

So what I'm asking here is in this chapter, what

is the risk?

No.

You might think that's a silly question of risk is

risk risk.

But the risk is the risk is not a monolithic

single entity.

Risk is a very different things.

Two very different people with risk.

Risk to me.

It's not a risk to him.

Everybody has a different view on risk and what matters

to them.

So therefore, there's no sink, There's no concept single concept

called risk.

But what I want to get into is.

The risk with this risk of rice from.

And you might have heard it never studied chaos theory.

The typical example of chaos theory is a butterfly in

Hong Kong boxes, wings and sets in motion of ten

events.

Of course, a hurricane in the Caribbean.

That's chaos theory.

A tiny amount blows up into something enormous.

Well, the least interesting thing is the butterfly.

And the second most important thing is the hurricane.

What's interesting is how do you get from the butterfly

tiny event into a huge outcome on the other end

mechanism?

The mechanism is what matters.

So.

The best economists.

I think this is perhaps the world's most famous economist,

John Maynard Keynes.

He wrote almost 100 years ago about just writing about.

The Great Depression lasted time.

British newspapers would have papers with photographs of people.

And you could vote on which face was the prettiest.

But.

Houston.

He is interesting.

That's not interesting.

What is interesting is you could a price a lottery

ticket if you hold the key maturity.

So if everybody thinks that person is the prettiest and

you vote along with everybody else, you all get the

lottery ticket.

Four.

So he wrote.

It's not the case of choosing those faces, which, to

the best of one's judgement, are really the prettiest.

But even those which the average opinion genuinely thinks the

fifties.

We have reached a third degree where we devote our

intelligence to anticipating what the average opinion expects the average

opinion to be.

And there are some, I believe, practised in fourth, fifth

and higher degrees.

If you are trading for by investing.

Are you thinking about the fundamental values of a company?

Why do you think?

What will other people pay for it?

Well.

Because of who you are, obviously.

I mean, a lot of people want to trade.

They are not doing fundamental analysis.

They do psychological analysis.

That's a symptom of this.

You are trying to see what do other people think?

And you get a profit from the way other people

think about some of the world's most famous investors go

about their business, not the boring, fundamental analysis of balance

sheets and matters with the cash for.

That's exactly the context to this.

So why the flooding?

This hundred year old code is, of course, because we

have classified risk into two categories.

Ex androgynous in the dictionary means comes from within.

It's a risk that is created and amplified by the

financial system.

Exhaustion is in the dictionary means from the outside it's

risk of rights to the financial system from the outside.

So imagine I wake up this morning and I read

on the BBC website that Liz Truss, our illustrious prime

minister of this country.

Has said something typical.

As a consequence, I go to an online broker and

I sell the British pound short.

Do one change, make it more likely the Pope will

fall if I do vote.

The answer is yes.

No, I am not a big person, right?

I don't own billions and billions of pounds.

But just the mere fact that I react to this

news by setting the tone, I haven't seen the impact

of the.

If I wake up this morning and I go to

the BBC website and I see this, a 30% chance

of rain today.

I used to be on the phone ignoring that if

I go to the BBC website for the sake of

the story and it says 30% chance of rain and

I have an umbrella in my pocket when I leave

my house, I am hedging against rain.

Thirsted for a hedge against rain.

Make it more likely it will rain.

There's no.

So the weather were hedging because the weather has exogenous

risk.

And while and torturous risk is what we interrupt when

you people start working next year or the financial system

is different because you exist.

Some of you might become the president of a big

country or you might become billionaire hedge fund managers.

Well, let me be a huge part of the system.

Or you might have a typical position in this market,

but nobody none of you will have seen the impact.

It's just a matter of degree.

Technically, situations are natural, but with ancient affects.

Outcomes was one where they don't.

So 65,000,000,000 million years ago, an asteroid hit the Gulf

of Mexico, killing the dinosaurs.

That's an exciting a shock because the dinosaurs did nothing

to make the asteroid come and keep them.

If the Astros had communicated to somebody from outer space,

that would have made it an intelligence event.

But I don't think that's happened.

So let's go to engineering and invent the this example

crystallises what happens within tortuous risk.

So just up the road here, a ten minute walk,

a ten minute walk from here you have the Millennium

Bridge, which crosses the River Thames goal from the St

Paul's Church to the Tate Modern, and it happens to

be the first pedestrian bridge in London in US in

a century.

Opened by the late Queen.

The year 22,010 is called the Millennium Bridge.

And here's what happened.

And now we're going to try to show you a

video of a sound.

If I can manage the technology, let's just see if

I can do it.

How can a sound?

I need some people.

I'm a mac user with none of the samples here.

Windows is making sounds.

Why I hate I hate windows.

No camera.

Let's do another.

Maybe this works here.

No.

Why is everything so complicated?

Okay.

Sent to audio.

And when I'm lucky, I am not a person who

gives up easily.

So let's just continue trying.

Because there is no sound to this part of the

video.

I should have remembered, by the way, all this, of

course, that basically this is a millennial preaching to see

how much super smooth Opus acquired this impossibly St Paul's

church.

The question is what actually happened, What caused it?

And then you can ask yourself, what does this have

to do with this course?

And now I want to sound.

For me, it was.

It wasn't so much in places.

People close to the site rails as if they were

at sea.

Others thought it was like walking down the middle of

a moving train.

That's all the way.

Back to me.

So this is the clients of banks and let's put

the regulator of the visa.

And by the way, you can tell by the way

he is dressed.

He is not he could not be above it.

You know what is wrong?

We have not looked at our calculation without overstating it.

Oh, God, You forgot to divide.

It by two or something.

Like there is nothing like that in this issue.

So this was engineer responsible?

I don't think you're real.

He'll be immortalised in LSD, by the way, the I

completely aside.

Completely aside, my co-author on this work, Sinn, was the

personal.

I did an event with him for a month and

he showed me the video.

So this is being shown by people.

This guy probably never thought he could become this famous.

This is the danger with being on TV, by the

way.

You never know how it ends up being used.

Avoid TV soap.

In my family, I had lawyers and engineers.

And you just know who makes all the money in

my family, by the way, most ingenious.

But I have similar genius in my family, so I

ask them to explain this to me.

And here's what happened.

When people walk, you generally to force back and forth

force and the cyclist was a stuntman left that pushed

a little bit to the left, a step more right,

a little bit to the right.

This is called Typical person makes two steps per second

to Hertz and every Prius.

Moves.

Because some indeed it is.

The nature is not state neutral winds and you had

water and with a bunch of things, a bridge can

move by death.

Otherwise they would collapse.

So.

If any of you has ever done military service, you

might have been told, or even the Boy Scouts were

good scouts, by the way.

I loved this, but before I was kicked out.

So if you apply for a military service, you are

told.

Soldiers marching across bridges.

Off much at all the stock market on the cross

bridges to work independently at.

And the reason is of this two thirds harmony when

can harmony can create harmony the people from the bridge

so it collapses a well-known problem.

So.

So let's say the people within the army, they tend

to know this.

If you if you go to the Prince Albert Bridge.

This is just so opposite to the Houses of Parliament.

And put forward a list.

The final requirement to look far beyond that is a

prison.

I think the prettiest prince in London, by the way,

is a still there's a sign that says soldiers marching

must stop.

There's a picture of that in my book somewhere.

So.

However.

The people walking on that bridge are not soldiers.

Everybody's doing their own thing.

Now comes the finance question.

This is the River Thames and always have been going

up and down.

If you cross it.

And some gusts of wind hit it persist a little

bit.

And it ought not to fall in a natural reaction

of human beings who lean against the movements of the

grids, moves this direction.

You need this way.

You push it back, and then risk of this starting

to really push it back.

So you have some active ethnic kind of movements.

And if you see the video, you see that's exactly

what happens.

The people on the bridge all start doing exactly the

same movement, all pushing the bridge more and more and

more.

That's what caused the sway.

The engineers had measured the number of homes that you

require.

173 people to march on the bridge.

Put it this way.

But the interesting thing is.

There are some mechanism that cost people who don't know

each other to act as if a soldier's on a

bridge.

That's interesting part.

So the bridge was a harmonising force to 200 people

from individuals into soldiers.

And in a crisis, that's exactly what happens in a

crisis.

Some harmonising force takes people away from being individuals to

their own things into anybody ends up doing exactly the

same thing, which makes a crisis much, much worse than

it would otherwise speak, which is why I'm talking about

it.

So this is not an acceptable harmonising force.

So questions before I move on.

Yes, sir.

QUESTION So this is indulgence with right?

In terms of the yes, people are, yes.

But then the win is.

Exhaustion, shock.

So what you end up seeing a lot in my

course is a diagram of the type.

Remember, let me them the first week you see, I

said it's nullity and absorption of shock comes in the

sex and change and endogenous events.

So and so.

This is how I think about crisis.

Okay.

So the global crisis in 2008 was purely and taught

to this to the financial markets, which is why it

was so bad.

Markets, the institutions of the market were all eating shocks

to each other, making it worse.

It was like cold.

It was not like that.

And the war in Ukraine is not like that.

So when I say the word Ukraine or cold, it

is not a serious crisis.

It's by using this analysis to be applying this analysis

to.

And therefore, if you're faced with a situation in the

future, this gives you a way, a theoretical framework for

how you can think of a major stress in the

markets.

If you want to ascertain whether you should be concerned

or not, and I wrote like this is why in

the middle of March 2020, I wrote a blog piece

saying exactly, We should not be too worried about COVID.

What exactly used to resort to this type of work.

Something like soap prices.

You have been taught, if you take any course in

investments, the prices are there to reflect the fundamentals of

the economy.

If you've taken a course of the economics of valuation,

this is the type of thing to learn.

And of course, like the market prices reflect.

Reflect what the market thinks about something based on analysis

of what's going on.

Like I say, you'll see in the lower income courses

a lot of accounting courses on the valuation, investment courses

type of thing, but.

Market prices can also be an imperative to action, meaning

market prices cause some behaviour.

And that is my focus today.

And I want to give an example of you.

So imagine a hedge fund that's operating under a leveraged

constraint.

No.

Before I move on, I want to you not to

be confused by the following.

I will use the term leverage constraint in two different

ways in this course.

So the term leverage constraint in this chapter is different.

A leverage constraint in financial regulations.

So do not get confused by that, please.

I'm just asking you to be aware that I will

use it totally.

Two different things.

In this particular case, a leverage constraint is the amount

value of assets to equity.

And I'm going to set that up.

Five.

So imagine, time starts on day zero four years, zero

times zero.

Prices are initially $10.

The Hudson owns ten units of assets.

Q Quantity ten We value assets 400 times times $10,000.

That is 800 equity assets.

Money that is 200 leverage must never be five.

Because thousand divided by 200 is five.

So this is a head fund before anything happens.

Like the people on the Millennium Bridge before.

A gust of wind comes along.

Then an exogenous shock happens.

So this is the common seat of the of the

of the of the absence.

Then of the shock comes the crisis falls to $9.

And now what you see what happens is the assets

go to 900, debt remains 830 to 100 because of

leverage.

Leverage is nine.

And that means this hedge fund had to sell assets.

Because the leverage is now nine instead of five.

And we can solve for that.

So what this shows here is you end up you

find out that if you just do the math, you

find out that you end up selling $400 worth of

assets.

So assets go to 500, you pay off half, you

dumped an equity stake of 100.

So you keep equity fixed and you sell until you

meet the leverage constraint.

Very typical for stress scenario behaviour.

But this is a small hedge fund.

Now, let's make the hedge fund big.

So when they sold prices for making a typical market.

So no.

And let us give credit to the price impact factor.

It's just simply if you sell something, how much do

prices change?

Typically, it's a very simple pricing model.

So.

So if you sell if you sell some amount, this

is a change in quantity.

How much you sell comes the price you sell it,

that this is how much the price is change.

So lamb five times the price times the amount to

sell is the change in price because you sold a

very typical trading model equation.

And you can solve for that and you can iterate.

You find out that.

You find out, you end up selling.

You end up selling quite a lot about you end

of selling about about nine eight more stocks.

How do you fit in the previous case?

It's just exogenous yourself.

You sell 50 shares.

If the shop is introduced, you sell in prices for

the end of selling a seven.

And now you get to a peculiarity.

If any of you has ever taken a course in

microeconomics.

You have been told that in every every single human

market.

If prices go up, you you buy less, your prices

go down, you buy more.

If prices go up, you sell more, your prices go

down.

You sell less.

This is the basis of supply and demand.

This is the fundamental relationship to economics.

And you might have been told, but the only exception

to that is something called a Giffen good, which doesn't

exist.

It's a theoretical construct.

There is no human good that does not obey the

law.

One zero?

No.

If you can think of one of tell you why

it's wrong.

Yes, ma'am.

It's like Louis Vuitton bags because your utility is by

you been only person in the room and can afford

them.

So if the price is go 4000 to 10000, you

are rich and you walk into the room that you

want and all the rest of us can only look

at it and we.

Not sure why luxury goods is not an accepted luxury.

It could allow rich people to show everybody the average.

But then if you say if you increase the price

of.

Milk, Right.

Yeah.

Because if you are really very wealthy, if the price

goes up, it allows you to signal your filthy rich.

Yeah.

So luxury goods have the property that if you increase

the price, you wait some more.

But that is because it allows rich people to signal

to the average.

So the value of good is not that bad.

The value of the good is Social Security because so.

Diamonds as well.

Were these with.

No diamonds to not have obtained with diamonds?

How did the town look at full of full of

supply and demand.

The two assets never responded well to assets who will

respond least to crisis.

I hope you never consume one of them, and I

hope you never consumed both of them.

But what I just got into is, on the other

hand, women and tobacco.

But almost all of you can make tobacco almost.

You could increase really shocked, increase the price of tobacco

and people still smoke with packet day.

This must put up a limit.

But I mean, basically, for almost every price range, tobacco

consumption does not respond to prices.

Here is the same thing.

But he still goes on.

But here.

If the price goes up.

You have to fight to meet the constraint.

If the price goes down, you have the strength to

meet the constraints.

So you have inverted the laws of supply and demand.

No.

Yeah well that housing in there is really designed.

You are not going to sell.

Okay.

You might end up in right neighbourhood.

You might enter the movie with Colin.

Sample, but.

But then he did a follow me from the beginning.

A soft camp observation.

You can't do that.

By the way, the most expensive land in London is

where we are now.

Do you know how much they value the land and

this building was?

No LLC paid for the land is still sitting in.

50 million.

Very expensive land.

But no, not even modern music.

It's no asset.

No.

Why are you so important?

So what have I done, by the way?

I know that I'm going to I'm going to flip

this into a crisis.

I have demonstrated how a small shock can trigger a

large outcome.

Because?

Because the market participants are following a constraint that they

cannot take a trading strategy that can then make the

people in the market behave like.

So it works in the same way.

Possibility of threats harmonise the behaviour of people on the

bridge.

That's exactly why I'm doing this.

Doing something.

And if you think this is okay, this is just

John coming up with abstract academic examples, I can find

lots of real world examples of this, but I want

to show you one.

It's not just use.

So, Chief, why do you.

Just buy cheap?

Buy expensive?

Buy cheap, Sell cheap.

Buy expensive.

I could have said.

This is the opposite of supply and demand, as you

would learn in a microcosm.

I was just curious to the viewer.

Is it a spelling mistake and its.

No, I didn't think so.

The problem with Spellcheck is that.

If a word is correct, the spelling bee can be

multiple different spellings and the slights, trust me.

I can never eliminate every mistake so much like that

once I can.

How does a three year course on a typical year

with five or six students and none of them has

told me that I'm still looks like seven?

You've said that even, by the way.

But I.

Promise.

But this is smoking.

Okay.

So here is why.

Here's an example of one of them using certain samples.

This here is the biggest stock market crash the world

has ever seen.

In the entire history of humanity, we have never seen

a bigger crash across the world.

Individual countries, by the way, my home country, Iceland, has

the European record for stock market crash.

And I hope your country will never, ever get to

that.

But it's a tiny country.

This is global.

So what happened in 1987?

The global stock markets crashed by 23%.

In every country in the world with the stock market,

meaning there was no stock market in the Soviet Union

and therefore no market crash.

But in a country, the stock markets have all crashed

by around 23%.

And this is certainly by far the biggest one day

shock we have ever seen.

So what happened?

Well, the reason is an automatic trading strategy called portfolio

insurance.

That was a harmonising device and made everybody sell into

a falling market.

Here's how the Dow Jones fell.

Typical pattern escalated down the elevator.

Little lift if you live in North America.

So the mechanism is a put option, gives the whole

for the right, but not application to sell an asset

at a pre-agreed strike price in the future.

Call that x del Toro put option is the rate

of change of the price with respect to the underlying

asset.

Meaning it's the first of gravity of the option price

with respect to the price of the underlying assets.

It's a slippery slope.

This plot shows the blue line shows the payoff.

5 to 1 as prices change speed of.

Overstock at expiration, you had a green line, but at

any point before that, you have a smooth concave line.

And I'm assuming all of your almost policy options before.

And if you haven't, well, this is not going to

be the determining factor for whether you pass this course.

We've already talked lot to a lot of the options.

The slope of this blue line is that.

No options.

Of course, they're quite a nice way to hedge risk.

And then the hedging in financial markets means.

But our portfolio that consists of one put option and

Delta's stocks must be riskless.

Why riskless?

Because if the stock price goes up, the option goes

down.

As its stock price goes down, the option goes up

because she has to watch it.

So therefore, we combine the option of stock in the

right amount and with a risk plus asset.

Okay.

So therefore, mathematically, one option Delta stocks is riskless and

must be the risk free rate.

I mean, if you take it, of course, option pricing,

this is fundamental to the.

Supposed trade options don't exist.

While you can use financial engineering, which is you synthetically

replicate an option, you can create an option by combining

cash and the underlying asset.

Because if option plus stock is cash or riskless, you

can take cash and stock.

You can option just basic mathematics.

So that is called replicating that option synthetically.

In the.

Or financial engineering, which is about choosing one asset into

another.

They often tell you this is of no cost.

But of course, those compute losses, you call this risk.

I'm about to talk about.

And that, however, this means if you want to maintain

the portfolio when the stock price fall, when the stock

price falls.

You need less and less stock.

So you sell the stock when the stock price falls

and you buy the stock and the stock rises.

If you want to maintain this appropriate combination of stock

and cash to get the option.

So here's a simulation I've done this year.

I wasn't sure what you.

You have.

And in this example, what I've done is I've said,

What if we sell?

Prices fall because you sold just as the hedge fund

in the previous example.

So I simulated a price path, the right one.

But what happens is when you get this shock here.

It's just triggering you, right?

Because the prices have fallen, you no longer need as

many stocks these are selling.

It will fall in market and that drives the prices

down, down, down, down and down exactly what the simulation

shows.

And in this particular market, what happened is that of

the time, $90 billion was following the same trading strategy.

Now, 90 billion is not a huge number, but of

reports of people in 1997.

But it's not a huge number, but it is 3%

of the market capitalisation.

And if you keep in mind, most stocks never trade.

So most of the market cap never trades.

So this is quite the large amount of trade that

stocks follow the same trading strategy.

The point here.

And then we end up with a big shock to

the shocks.

Markets declined by 10%.

People follow this strategy.

They should have sold that this month because of lagging

behind when the market closed.

Everybody run the numbers and said, Oh my God, I

have to sell the portfolio.

So when the market opened, $12 billion hit the market,

the seller, the open market, the $12 billion sell.

No, this is not.

But this is a very so that the portfolio ensures

in the people in market and made them behave like

one panicky person.

So the market dynamics are price falls, delta holds you

sell not makes prices fall more a lot makes Delta

Force more and you spend more aggressively.

But you have caused the crash in 1987 and many

others before and since.

And this is a typical example of these stabilising feedback.

That can cause in this case caused by trading groups.

In this case, it's a trading rule that says cell

phone loss.

And nobody knows this exists.

Nobody realised this danger was here until it was too

late because this is the type of dangerous risk factor

that is completely invisible until something happens that makes it

visible.

By this time it's too late to do anything about

it.

Well, they say crisis happens out of sight.

This is the canonical example of why how crisis happened.

And by the way, then you ask yourself, why did

the stock market in France fall because of this?

This is only being done with U.S. stocks, not French

stocks, but the stock markets of the United States drives

the attitude of investors.

Everybody will appoint the SEC before they will continue repeating.

So the French investors, when they see panic selling to

the United States, it panics.

And France and Germany and Japan and in the world.

So the United States strikes markets and especially in times

of extreme stress.

So next week we connect this to something called perceived

risk.

Absolutely.

And some person has to remember to start me off

here.

We take a quick break and then we have some

discussions.

The result is.

I asked her to identify yourself.

Is just.

They should be dealt with.

So just because we.

Yeah.

I mean, some very.

And they know that you played for long.

I'm glad because I got to say something.

There is no choice because this is just somebody who.

Let me talk.

About this.

No one will make it out.

Thank you for all of your service, for all the

farmers.

You have to be a part of it.

Yeah, that's what I'm doing.

Yeah, you have to.

You have to be the first.

So I think we have only three preconceived ideas, right?

I mean, you have.

You have some ideas because there's so little things you

might want to say.

I'll bet you have in a sense that it's just

for the idea that it is for the others within

the system, but it's also.

For a particular country.

Because it just seems.

Administratively.

And I think sometimes I use the language to think,

of course, the best for sure is that it's like

we have each other's friends, so we get our friends.

For example, I guess you just show us and we

have.

Oh, it's a golden opportunity.

Yeah, that was a little earlier.

So you get to really have a group in the

forefront of this right after.

Obviously, it's one of the genes I shouldn't have given

you.

But, you know, it's like secrets.

Just like someone's here, They just show up there.

It's like, Yeah, I guess you're supposed to do this.

Yeah.

Oh, yeah.

But then.

Yeah, yeah, yeah.

Oh, I wish I was pretty sure and I just

didn't feel the same way.

That's right.

Yeah.

So there's so much stuff.

I just saw that this week.

That first year we had like one socially.

That also was a video call, like.

So I was like, okay, you have two questions.

And you also have 3 hours with like other shows.

How can I.

Ask you a question?

You just.

Said, Hey, I don't know that you know anyone.

Yeah.

So these are you.

Yeah, I knew.

I knew I was going to get something that.

I had scheduled.

Yeah, that was something that was pretty similar.

So.

You know, anything new.

To me?

Just.

I think that's right.

It's much more practical like that.

If you want to work in financial the.

Same way necessarily.

I think it's actually.

Absolutely a lack of sympathy from San Diego.

But you know what?

Like I say, what would you like to say?

This is the last thing that we're going to be

able to identify.

Like a lot of people.

We thought we wanted.

To pay back lot of other because I want to

get to know of this stuff, like how do you

find me?

Like you doing something that's very.

Oh, yeah, that's the way.

So like this.

Be like this.

Know they say these things are.

So, you know Christian renaissance.

I was.

Just thinking, you know, I think about three or four

years ago, four years ago.

So it's a bit of a it's a beautiful thing.

And I, I was I was like, okay, sort of

faster than I thought I would have been making friends.

But yeah, it's okay.

So then I think especially I would love to have

somebody like I actually heard three times the class and

it's just it's one of the things.

I used to.

Do before, especially, especially children.

I felt like I was in.

But this.

Is amazing.

Right?

It was accepted.

I think that's why the law is actually studying English.

It's become a year story.

Yeah.

Oh, my goodness.

Anything like that?

Like his future wife.

You probably need an essay.

To make it.

They were really.

No.

Oh, okay, guys.

I was just wondering.

If, you know, you can stop talking.

There's nothing like this back then.

This is it.

So I had this question on my mobile phone, but

I was.

Oh, come on, Come on.

I do want to spend some time on rating agencies.

And I'm going to ask all of you to raise

your hands in response to the following question.

And if you don't answer, then you are in difficulty.

But I don't.

By the way, before I do that, I got a

question from someone here that I want to I want

answer.

I do not.

The questions in the centre section of this discovery, scientists

generate discussion of faulty material of cover in the in

the course.

I'm going to count.

So I have a huge number of possible discussion questions.

It's never been my intention to cover all of them,

or even most of them on probably one or two

or three, just depending on how my objective is made

to get an interactive discussion here.

I'd rather go through them one by one by one.

The answer to every single one is in the slides.

Someone, by the way.

And they're not they're not representative of the exam because

these questions are open ended by the excess precise.

So almost all of these would be really bad, expensive

questions because there was no way to do it properly.

So these are these are open ended questions designed to

get a discussion about ones.

I want one or two or three conference at most

and no more.

XM is.

If you take a look at the old examples to

see how I do them now.

A.

I haven't asked a question yet, by the way, but

it's the first one be.

How?

I am lost.

And before anybody starts panicking.

There is no correct answer.

Should the rating agencies be, in your view?

Should the rating agencies be held legally responsible for the

ratings?

So something if they do something wrong, they get punished.

How many people say yes to that?

Your hands.

How many people say no to that?

Oh, okay.

Okay.

I'm going to be nice.

And I didn't account, by the way, when I do

this.

I'm just guesstimating here and I want you so much.

You have no excuse anyways, but.

So why somebody who said yes, why?

And I never asked who said no further than the

four of you, Why do you hold them leak responsible?

That gets to transparency in their work.

If there is a transparency and accountability that will.

The victim was strangled.

Because we have seen that there would be some so

that they would agree to a company crazy.

And when they refuse to pay, then they are degraded.

So that is quite arbitrary.

And at the same time, you had another agency which

is giving them a very good debt.

Okay, so you so you.

So you think so?

So so okay, I'm not going to respond because I

want other people to give me their views.

So it's a very good view.

Anybody else?

Come on.

Yes, sir.

I think part of it is if you get it

wrong, I'm against what we mean by legally liable as

well.

So I didn't get it wrong.

Fine.

But the instances of negligence, whether it is established professional

practices around how you to right companies and procedures and

to follow the commission in breach.

That seems to me to fall under existing law around

professional negligence.

There's no reason why you shouldn't.

Hold on.

Okay.

So I'm going to take so I'm going to write

what you said because you said something quite important.

You.

I'm going to summarise it.

They.

Follow standards.

For a set of practices just too long commit to

right to the Blackwater.

Somebody else had a comment.

How would you avoid the conflict of interest issue?

They've been very responsible for their meaning.

I mean, if.

If they know that there will be no.

If they know that they are not receiving anything, they

are giving those raises.

It's an open door for a conflict of interest with

their clients.

Exactly as I said.

But so is conflict.

Conflict of interest if only made if a security is

issued.

The only the fee issue security.

So they might be fast armaments or what.

What anybody else someone the the.

What about you people that you remember saying?

This is the quiet part of the room.

If they're not held accountable, they can do whatever they

want.

So they can take money from someone.

So exactly what you said.

So they can just do anything.

They don't have too much power.

They're too much power.

I mean, actually, it's really they can do the their

businesses trust the fact that they are reliable.

And so by continuing to do that, they will lose

out of favour.

And in the long term, it will not be profitable

on and trust the ratings.

But I do agree that there is a certain level

of conflict of interest when your clients, as opposed to

someone you trust to, to rate you.

And then there's competition.

So there's different market players like how, how do you

ensure that they don't turn a blind eye to something

just because it means that they can say in the

long term, Oh, we didn't know we followed our internal

procedures, but and truly, like, they could have done more.

How could.

Trust.

I just.

Yeah.

Okay.

I think the conflict of interest is fine as long

as we think full disclosure, because after all, the rating

agencies only provide an opinion and the market can decide

whether they.

Are you and me, Yes or no, say.

Yes and no.

Okay.

To keep what you disagree, but it looks like you're

more than Mozart.

I want to delay the political parties so I will

exhaust.

Yes, first.

And then what you say is that if nobody says

anything, we just.

Take another one.

So I think another potential reason is that in some

instances, the index of negligent ratings extends beyond the parties

to the contract and can impact the parties in the

event of systemic collapses or things like that.

And in that sense, I think there's a public policy

reason to try to capture the impact on those non

contracting third parties that consider the risk attached to that

and impose that costs on on negligence.

Strong externalities to decent economics lenders, anybody who lost $1,000,000,000

before they got to the other side.

The investors.

Many investors will take the waiting super funds to question

and then then put their money.

But after that, some redecorating.

And then there are so many instances in the past

that credit rating agencies have given you a year and

then bought back investors.

I would more 20 companies went bankrupt.

Then they changed.

The rating was meant to be profitable yet.

Of course millennials just so.

On the other side?

I do not know.

I think you are more than no side there.

So now we are more next week and next week.

So now you can say what you just want to

say before.

So again, the credit agency only provided the opinion.

So if there is a conflict of interest, as long

as they make full disclosure, the market will know about

the context and the market and know, because I can

tell that you trust the credibility and know about the

quality of their people.

Okay, so what?

So what?

So what you're saying is that even if they are

wrong, the market can't just because there is something.

So I want to go back to the crucial element

in what you just said.

Right.

If you go to a consultant.

Says Consultant.

Evaluate this for me.

They are blue lights to follow professional standards.

Like one of the gentleman was setting the back.

If you call an accountant, an accountant is required legally

to follow certain practices and keep you comfortable.

Unintended.

If.

They've come to make a mistake.

And if they took a mistake, the rating is not

a professional.

Otherwise, it's an opinion.

And opinion is like something to put it to a

newspaper and you can't really produce.

It depends on where you're from.

But in the United States, where all of a sudden

the United States has stronger protection for free speech.

So in your country to the world, and certainly you

can say anything you want in a newspaper, the United

States.

Yeah.

Yes, you can.

Sorry.

You cannot tell anyone.

Yeah, you cannot.

So that's if you're sure you're an artist, for example,

and you give false information about the ability of a

politician, you can be sued if it's not.

In France, but not to the U.S..

Most of us in France who came to this country

years.

Anybody else.

So often the people who said, No one of you

wants to defend your views.

Yes.

I would just argue for like human nature.

Obviously, like their job is to.

Come up with the perfect greeting.

But what if they missed something?

It was not their intention.

So I obviously they were terrible at doing their job.

Or I would fire them.

But then, like, are we actually can we actually like,

can they make really legally.

Okay.

Hold on.

I have one question.

If it is just opinion, then why regulators are insisting

to have this credit rating for the companies whenever they

are playing protect issues.

They don't.

Of.

But the engagement with.

I want to come back to that.

I want to go back to what you said is

factually to factually look right.

Factually look right.

But it's almost right.

I want.

I want to go back to this point later on.

But I question.

So do banks double check their rate of like all

the financial records when it is under your triple-A rating?

Yes.

They do.

Oh, yes.

Oh, yes, I do.

To what extent are they?

Look, let me go back to the point that you

have.

You had a comment on the note and somebody else

on the site.

But I'm going to I want to answer his question

first before it goes less important.

He says to fact check the world.

Then I credit hedge funds.

Basically, he is roughly one half of nobody who is

in those credit trusts ratings.

Because I accept it.

But we are professionals who hold trust, and there are

people that are very large hedge funds out there that

make very good money out of predicting credit risk, better

than ratings and even trading against.

So basically, take it as your question.

If you the data is there, you can't run your

own models and do a better job with this.

So please, therefore, if you see a rating, there's nothing

preventing you from all the trust that the people do.

So yeah, I, I didn't like the points about this

on my first point by sending you can be accountable.

So it's just an opinion.

It doesn't force anybody to buy that software to solve

it.

Can you think of any influence on what everybody, anybody

else could do with that writing?

And if not, when, I can force anybody to do

anything with it.

So it's it would be strange for them to take

responsibility that somebody just wants to see their own stock

has lost a lot of money on that because then

you can blame credit agencies for everything.

And secondly, the ratings are and opinions are popularity final.

So you have a segment called Equity Research, which provides

views on various stocks about whether, you know and of

big banks have these divisions.

They recommend certain stocks to buy their comments to sell,

and they also never take as possibility products.

Okay.

And they also have a conflict of interest.

Okay.

So now we get to your question because.

It's not you.

You're both not really strictly correct.

And I got to tell you why.

Ratings are not required for a company to issue bonds

and sell them on the open market.

However, his work becomes important for a lot of investors

are legally obliged to only buy bonds that have been

rated.

That's what this is.

That's what happens.

And I like the example of pension funds.

And it pension funds and insurance companies and therefore far

the biggest buyer of bonds and the private sector those

and they have to look at ratings before they can

only buy some rating.

So it is strictly not only a market outcome like

like an analyst's opinion, it feeds into a legal process.

So what is what are the we've seen so much?

I knew.

I struggled to really come to a solid answer, but

ended up just I said no because of the There

seems to be a very difficult I mean, we haven't

talked talked about this yet, but I think the real

problem going on here is not so.

The negligence or whether or not the rating process is

good.

But the fact that.

There are, but you can buy a rating.

The rating can be by functionally.

And so there's a question of how much of delivery.

And I think that I kind of regret my saying

no.

But it seems hard to draw the line between when

you enter.

The area of advice and of looking at bad information

and then where things have been perhaps deliberately.

I think that that's the field that's the most not

the most salient, but most serious issue.

Okay.

So yeah.

I think the problem that comes up with this point

is that the clients of the rating agencies differentiate the

end user of the rating.

And so the person who pays the money is in

the.

And that creates all the problems.

And so it may even come down to a consumer

protection issue, which is why I guess you might want

to regulate not.

I think of it I think repellent is that if

that is going to cause a personal crisis on behalf

of consumers has good, you should.

To the.

Choo choo choo choo choo pension funds.

Defence buys it.

Then had to use.

But they had.

They placed.

So they have application to do the right thing, then

I.

Think you should do.

I think you're stretching, just poking.

Fun at not being there.

The the rating agency provides the rating.

Yeah, but that issue does not consume that service.

Someone else consumes it.

And yeah, often go to help someone.

That's who's Clint Eastwood.

So I'm going to put it to you that.

We as society have not accepted any of their arguments.

So I'm a man and I think we should not

hold them accountable.

And I think that's a common view.

That is that is the prevailing, strong prevailing view of.

So.

So I think most most credit ratings are a good

thing or useful.

Useful, Right.

And if you would.

Hold them.

Accountable, they would certainly, as you also mentioned earlier, put

us into the Coastal Commission and make the whole thing

more expensive.

And this is probably a lot more useful in the

end.

You make do these.

Okay, So.

Exactly.

So I'm not so you again.

So let me tell you why we are our society

in every country and reject what you are saying.

So most of your companies, not all.

And you might know that some 20 years ago we

used to have one more big a company for.

Arthur Andersen.

And they were essentially killed by the US authorities.

So now we have one fewer accounting firms and consulting

became part of team they like to say.

So we have an oligopoly of accounting firms.

I can audit accounts.

Not a good thing.

So if are sufficient.

So thus we should listen to what if a sufficiently

bad rating scandal happens.

These three rating firms that we have in the world

would become too.

Because that is not a good thing.

That's a reasonable one.

The second thing is, if you hold people accountable, the

cost of ratings will go up to compensate for expected

future equal liabilities, which will then sharply increase the cost

of ratings.

That's the second reason.

So every time this issue comes up, those who come

to Ike in that they dominate your concerns.

You might disagree with this thought, but that is where

we have ended up in every country.

Comments.

I think I think, of course, the sovereign debt crisis

of the European Union is very clinically meaningful.

And I want to show this rating agencies and they

also want to ban them and then start they want

rating agencies.

And you can't.

They can't.

We've been unable to.

So you get even after that.

What is it?

Nothing.

Nothing happens.

So it's after 2008 with all this stuff, trying to

create the biggest reading scandal in human history after the

2008.

Enormous amount of discussion about this, but nothing happened.

In India.

We're making some plans to bring some of that money

to the rating agencies, especially after the recent scandals which

have come to light.

And I think last week they banned one agency called

Bridgecorp.

Okay.

Yeah, they're very to.

I don't know, but I look, it's a very nice.

Thing she said a couple of weeks ago, or maybe

it was last week that they only consider androgynous risk

when assessing a rating.

It's actually I don't really know what to consider, but

let me let me know.

I don't want to go that far, but let me

give you another dimension to this one.

So if nobody was equally applied to buy rated instruments,

then I don't think would be any issue that it

would be like a stock analyst's advice on the stock

no more and no less.

And nobody takes equity out of the syllabus.

There might be some, but I think by and large,

these are just seen as cosmetic.

Research reports that differ from the people commenting the data

that they should.

Just because the data is there, is there more volatility

in face of it?

This is actually I see the ratings on phones and

should not be much of an effect of ratings.

Analysts opinions.

Bank analyst opinions on bonds have tended to be backed

off on analyst opinions of equities by.

But.

So the problem the focus of the problem is we

need them the way they have chosen to run the

economy.

You cannot do without rating agencies.

You need the for pension funds and you need them

for those companies.

And a lot of of the things of that sort

of seek the way into almost an enormous part of

decision making.

So therefore, reducing the number of one is one of

the measures that is dangerous.

Increasing the costs is dangerous.

So then ask yourself, what about reforming?

And the most obvious reform is.

Left them with quite a ratings pay enough issue.

And then you run into this, you know, they will

refuse to pay.

This won't issue that Folsom fires.

You can't force the fires to take.

So it has been discussed.

It is not worth forcing the buyers to pay for

rate.

It's just not work.

Then you ask yourself, should each country had its own

rating agency, which you can't trust the French American companies?

No, because that's.

Even less right.

Because actually they promised I won't mention Germany, but I'm

going to do a German example.

Actually, they can, because it's a very there's a very

famous case when the previous German chancellor was leaning very

heavily on rating agencies to treat certain Germany, German companies

differently.

And it did go back to 15 years.

You just cannot trust governments with this to stop it.

Not just one country in the world, but has found

actually a decent solution to this.

And that is single.

Anybody here from Chicago?

Fantastic.

So.

So you are the modern country in this discussion.

Which is the one of the universities in Singapore, has

a very last book to read issues in the Singapore

region.

Of the country, but also extending extend to whole the

whole region Singapore operates in.

So it's essentially become a public good.

So an independent university affiliated entity, rate securities, securities for

free.

This then gives investors advice for removing at least this

incentive problems.

My understanding is this works really well.

This was the best solution ever.

But basically, by and large, reforms have not been successful

to stop anything else for ratings before we move on.

So in these cases and in this case, how is

this rating agency or any other anything from the 1933

sorry, how would the rating agency be earning these exemplars

of Singapore?

Because they're just funded by both government contributions and similar

forced industry contributions.

Remember, Singapore is not a democracy.

You can do things you can't do.

So basically all credit rating agencies should have to be

financed by the government.

Now, in the north, I mean, this is something that

works as single.

Singapore working against.

These reforms actually applies, for example, in the US.

I'm not I don't think this.

Model would work in the US.

Where Europe.

I think it works because I was single for years,

but it would not work.

I don't think as long as you look outside of

that, to be honest.

There's a lot of issues that come up.

If you're the if you're a democratic country that you

don't have to deal with if you're not Democratic and

that that's that's one of them.

I don't think that would be work for the United

States.

Anything else?

So do you think that insurance companies or pension funds

should actually be obliged to to use ratings?

Actually, that's a very good question.

What else was basically, you know.

Yeah, I think so.

My preferred way out of this would be to use

the dependence on ratings just enough that that to take

that would take care of some of these problems because

the.

Ratings would basically basically become an opinion.

And you have other credit from the problem you run

into there is.

People investing on behalf of these entities are not the

most competent in the world.

So in the worst case by the the worst investors

are local governments.

I mean, I think every country must have a scandal

involving a local government person earning $100,000, investing $1,000,000,000 and

making a complete mess of it.

I mean, nothing that happens at all.

This is not the easy problems.

Anything else on this?

Before I move on quickly.

Well.

What if.

I mean, if a company's data is mostly static over

the period.

Doesn't that increase.

The risk of.

So I'm not getting a repeat.

If they start a company.

The criteria that the agencies use, if they started to

do it and.

The president does.

Mostly static doesn't show a lot of trends.

Then doesn't that increase the risk of creating?

Shoot.

Shoot.

How?

And what if they.

What if some companies don't disclose.

A lot of information that is needed?

That's right.

I mean, we're not discussing illegal behaviour here.

We are discussing I mean, I don't want to get

into some of the details of breaking the law.

Right.

Which is a.

We have.

I'm presuming the.

I would say manipulation.

Everybody manipulates anybody, breaks the law.

But I mean.

This is a place as difficult to go to.

Okay.

And the other.

I actually also know that I should question two, by

the way.

So let's do short selling.

So I would do a similar question.

I can actually keep the I can keep the the

the the yes and no pitch here.

Question.

One is how many people would want to ban naked

short selling?

And how many people you want to ban naked short

selling?

Yes.

No more help from Lost.

How many people want to ban naked short selling?

Raise your hands.

Come on.

I refuse to believe that Nobody.

No, No.

Who was the bandit?

Even a bandit.

Yes or no?

No, don't do that.

What is the need?

Okay.

You have until later.

The discussion.

Does nobody in the room want to bed naked?

Scorpion accepted.

But no.

All I'm asking for is a yes.

No.

I'm going to discuss it.

I'm just looking for the number of people.

Just everybody is okay.

The naked short selling.

No, I'm not okay.

One was already banned.

So none of the naked naked stories.

I don't care whether it is banned in India.

Still evolving.

Gender.

Lending and borrowing mechanism is really necessary.

Can I stop you?

I don't care whether it is banned in your country.

What do you think about it?

Do you think it should be banned?

No, I don't think so.

Okay.

One person and everybody else's.

Arrests and we can have a bit of.

Like, you know, finding it will instead be imposed on

regulations.

Okay, so you want to be in the field.

So let's do this because we only have four, 5

minutes left here.

So why do you why are you so strongly against.

I mean, like, um.

I mean, like, if we allow the next I'm sure

selling it will, like, we give to people or the

institutions to power to, like, you can just follow.

We don't need to pay your real money into it.

So actually, the risk is really high and you are

using the leverage.

So we cannot sometimes we cannot predict the risk.

So it's very likely that if we not if we

don't have very good regulations for anything.

Okay.

So this is very typical case.

What she's saying, I think, is that it just creates

risk with no benefits more or less.

So we must take a strong pro-market view here, by

the way.

Yeah.

What did you hear?

First of all, there's.

No way to implement this.

So how would you.

Be able to distinguish naked short selling from edgy or

be super like refusing to.

Kiss because it would.

This great plus woman who walks right into the European

banks.

The United States is introducing these super easy to parent

law, saying you can no longer sell stocks.

You have this hope since you.

Like you always pretend not to have children for.

I hope that you are.

That is true.

I mean, if you know.

No, you are correct.

It could be it could be difficult to prove, but

it's not.

Okay.

So let's change the question here.

What about banning short selling?

No eclipses in years.

So you're you're a cave, but you're a cave in

both your cave, both naked and regulatory concern.

Yes.

Just because I need to engineer and he don't think.

So what you so his argument is so his argument

is it doesn't matter what I think about naked short

selling short sellers, not naked, fully clothed is valuable and

it can't identify what is naked and therefore should not

be back.

That's your argument?

Yes.

I think if you want to have.

Nothing wrong with that.

Anybody else with a view on this?

Yeah.

I think the you know, it's very easy.

To see.

This book is not is actually not easy.

To pay.

It is specifically very I mean financial engineers are extremely

creative.

And so we have a system here that although we

think there's still a bit of.

And is definitely taking a lot of joy and suffering

of others and is naked short selling.

It's still something that we see and that we can

understand that if you created good enough legislation to ban

it, we could find people and very quickly find a

workaround that potentially create something a bit more dangerous.

Okay, we have to stop.

But there's a very important point that you just came

out with.

And then we do spark because there's another big fuss

coming in.

But is said is the fact that if you try

to ban something like like naked, short selling, short selling,

given time, the financial markets will create other instruments that

effectively mean short selling without actually it being short selling.

So you so you get the same eventual outcome through

different means.

This is really what you see.

I think that's that's entirely correct.

People with thought we do have to stop since there's

a huge class component and I will see you all

next week.

Where.

Is.

Lecture 4:

There's a.

All right.

So we get a check on something like this on

Thursday.

And I don't know whether it was deja vu.

She chose not to go back and go back again.

And that's what I would have to say to you

guys, I got to tell you.

I think she.

Yes.

You know, what I want to do is get that

support down.

Yeah.

Okay.

Oh, good.

Marvellous.

I hope you all had a good weekend.

You didn't study too hard.

Look up at the ministry to object to you and

any questions you people have for me before we move

on.

No question.

Okay, So I believe this is where I left off.

If not, let me know.

Okay.

We all agree.

So.

So just to give you a little bit of a

roadmap of how we got to where we are, the

last week I discussed an alternative risk, which is all

about how all about this classification system of risk into

two main categories.

I gave you one theoretic and one practical example, another

one to translate it into something slightly more practical.

These slides I'm about to show you what I'm going

to do to do this.

I'll give you one case study of the most famous

hedge fund collapse in history.

I'll do that last.

But before that, I want to give you the type

of slides I tend to give to policymakers.

So if I'm going to or somebody to see if

I'm if I'm talking to professionals, these are the slides

I tend to show to them.

I skipped all theory a bit, but I'm going to

I'm going to start by showing how we measure risk

in real life.

So this is like a fake risk model, if you

will.

And I know that some of you may have seen

this type of thing before.

I mean, my entire course has been for three or

four, four, seven is all about this one slide.

So I can do a whole masters course listing our

contents to the one slide statistic, matching the amount of

simplification that you see here.

Now, imagine prices are p returns is white.

Suppose I want to measure risk by volatility.

Volatility is just the standard deviation of returns.

I'm going to do something like be patient up there.

So what you're saying is measured risk is a function

of past prices, that's all.

And this in real life, I would think in practical,

real world applications, something like that.

But just technically more complex is what, 95% of applications

use even more.

Even more than that.

So this is how risk is measured in real life

is more complicated than that.

You have to.

So you just run statistics that all of a sudden

happens.

Now, remember the example I gave you of last week

of a risk of a ten first?

So remember the ten bursts.

But it floods.

And I said risk is highest one second before the

tempests and the lowest one second afterwards because it that

was twice.

But if you measure risk in this way, you do

the opposite.

You can see your risk obviously picks up as two

things go wrong.

And this is what happens in real life if you

are working in a financial institution, hedge fund, bank, government

agency, central bank, media, politics, you see everything is calm

until something bad happens.

But if you want to be really be on top

of things, you have to realise that of course, often.

But this is the lowest, not the highest.

And if you get the information, I think you'll have

a very good bit of knowledge to take with you.

You need a.

So.

The risk is created in my favourite quotes to policymakers

by the former head of the CIA.

Yes, I'll talk about this in a few in a

few weeks.

But if basically the Bank of International Settlements in Basel,

Switzerland.

And he broke 20 years ago.

Do we see this time different risk increases in recessions

and falls in pools?

In contrast, it may be more helpful to think of

risk as increasing upswings, as imbalances build up and materialising

in recessions.

This worldview is completely consistent with Minsky's financial instability hypothesis.

Stability creates instability.

Which is if you're ever in charge of a financial

system.

Do not try to make the system too stable.

If you make it to stable, you just make it.

You create instability.

You won't learn about until it's all too late.

So and talk to this risk is especially important when

people observe the world and react to the world.

And the financial system is not invariant under observation.

And sometimes when I talk to physicists, that's one issue

that distinguishes finance from physics and why I think physicists

might want to make the best risk analysis is because

we find that we it is because the physical world

doesn't care what you do.

If physics is all about measurement and statistics and computers

and technology.

Nate, you couldn't care less what you're trying to find.

Everybody's out to get you.

And your people out to get.

You can be very well resourced, very smart, very vicious.

So to understand that gives you basically what should be

completely cognisant of this is why I think finance the

financial system is the most complex of all human creations

because of this very complex human key and it's all

of a piece.

You can endlessly study numbers but and models and excel

spreadsheets.

But at the end of the day, it's people making

decisions affecting people.

And that's what you have.

That's what if you want to be successful, you need

to understand how people think.

So in practice, this means the cycle between virtuous ambitieux

feedbacks, virtuous things getting fatter and fatter and fatter and

fatter and vicious things get worse and worse and worse

and worse.

We call this perceived risk and actual risk.

Perceived risk is what you measure.

An actual risk is what really is important to you.

So this is an endogenous bubble created by me in

the computer.

You go up the escalator and down the lift, or

if you're from the North America, you go down the

elevator.

In this country.

We save lives rapidly.

This is a typical partnership, by the way.

I'm going to offer you a financial buckles or look

like this in some way, shape or form.

Now, in this shoot match, you use your risk go

inactive bubble.

Well, measured risk tends to fall as prices become higher

and higher and higher.

And the reason is purely mechanical.

If you look at the equation, I gave you two

slides back.

From from that decreasing economy because the incremental relative price

changes become smaller and smaller as you go up the

couple.

Now, many years ago, a British pop band had a

song called Money for Nothing.

This is the money for nothing situation.

Prices go up and up and up and risk goes

down and down and down.

What could possibly go wrong?

Well.

Arsenal of risk was boosted by pulling down the slip

up.

Therefore, the question is should we care?

It all depends on what you're trying to do.

If your objective is to think, let's say you were

the type of person that you get on your iPhone,

you buy ten Tesla stocks, you sell pizzas, theses short.

And you do that now.

And by close of business today, you close the position.

You have a date trigger if you buy a sell

within a very short time horizon.

All you care about is the secrets of all that's

important to.

If you care about long run risk.

So you you've people on average 21 to 22 year

old.

This means that when you start paying into a pension

fund, you'll be paying with a pension fund that will

have to pay out until the year 2019 because you

expect that death is 2090.

So that is a 17 year investment horizon.

You couldn't care less what happens in the short run,

and therefore the perceived risk is actually absolutely the wrong

way to measure risk for you.

But keep it in mind from from an investment point

of view.

Let's connect it to systemic risk.

As opposed to this slide, so useful policymakers.

And if I'm in a central bank, I will at

least let's.

So and parity for OSTP member country.

A systemic crisis happens one year out of 43.

Well, not always see the country.

The crisis frequency is lower.

So crisis, a systemic crisis that affects the most developed

financial markets most strongly.

By definition.

For most so.

In the early 2000.

Actual risk is building up.

Nobody knows it's out there.

Everybody is completely blind.

Until the risk of a hidden trigger, all hell breaks

loose.

Crisis.

Perceived risk goes up every indicate the shoots of, Oh

my God, there's a crisis.

We tried to figure out how to respond to it

really quickly.

We formalise how we respond to ongoing macroprudential regulations, which

I will discuss in much what the Fed in a

few weeks.

Meanwhile, actual risk builds up out of sight.

And this cycle repeats.

Perceived risk peaks after the crisis, Stocks actual risk peaks

before the crisis starts.

And that's the difference.

So especially if you're close to the end point.

So when the cycle shifts, that's when this becomes the

most important.

And therefore, how will it be affected?

We imagine two worlds, two worlds, one in which there

are no regulations.

There are no risk managers.

Everybody just does whatever they want to do.

And then in the other world we have regulations and

best practices and accommodations and all the paraphernalia of the

modern world.

Which world is more stable?

Well.

It depends.

For the following year for one important reason.

And by the way, before I show you this slight.

I'm going to show you an exam question I had

last year on this very question, on this very topic,

which was, quote, You can read this out that this

was an exam question last year.

So emerging market outcomes are shown on this diagram.

If you try to control risk, what tends to happen

is.

You really squeezed down the pack of risk you care

about with this inside the green box.

Because risk is like a balloon is the squeeze out

elsewhere.

So by trying to connect, trying to control the risk,

you can make the risk of bad, big events increase

easy.

That is a danger to the country, because remember, this

system responds to us trying to control it.

And remember, the people on the bridge, if everybody's controlling

risk in the same way, will not be if the

risk is really, really, fantastically well controlled.

It just emerges as questions.

Yes, sir.

If you think about.

Pieces of of that counterparty risk in that example, arguably.

Wouldn't you say that perceived risk was driving actual risk?

And they're rising together in the sense that if you're

not, it could be that most people are solvent in

the system.

And actually the risk is deriving from your ability to

tell the party is solvent and that drives the occurrence

of actual risk.

So you are you are right.

But there is a thought here.

You are not going to continue making this company unless

you pursue this law.

I mean, if you were a financial institution, you're not

going to lend to high risk counterparties or relatives and

friends of high risk to contract.

So therefore, for you to do that, you must be

perceived.

This is not typically.

So you're missing out on something.

That's the lesson of 2008.

Is really and I want to discuss on the topic

of the next chapter the croutons in this.

We really missed out.

So basically the answer is these things tend to be

negatively.

Anything else, people.

So.

LTC M.

No.

Any of you know the name Michael Lewis.

Some of you must most innovative books.

Michael Lewis wrote the fourth short that became a movie

called The Big Short.

If you want to study for this course.

And one way to do that is to either read

the book or watch the movie over and let people

get in, really see the movie.

He's also if you come to my office, I will

see most famous person supplement cuts.

So so and he is also has a master's degree

from LSU.

And in his first book, Liar's Poker.

When it starts out, the first person working for a

bank that's not for solving problems.

No publicity.

They would trade in fixed income bonds.

And his boss was called John Meriwether.

I lost one different speech.

And it was then and now.

The most celebrated people in the society was a successful

financier.

This was everybody's hero, not not the bad guy as

it is today, surely.

But they were heroes.

They were seen as the smartest, best people even around

that.

John Meriwether was just about the most famous traitor in

the world.

Rockstar in that terminology, it was very famous and quite

possibly be perceived to.

He started a hedge fund through two men who became

got the Nobel Prize for the Black Schultz equation, Rupert

Murdoch and Myron Scholes.

And.

Keep in mind, this is 30 years ago, minimum individual

investment was $10 million.

It shuts to a 25 meaning management.

The performance and management fees were 2% of your investment,

and performance fees were 25% of performance over a benchmark.

Your money was locked in for three years and they

raised $1 billion before they started.

Now, the dollar was much, much more valuable than it

is now, but these numbers are still staggeringly high.

You don't see anybody doing a hedge fund of this

magnitude today, and the performance was astonishing.

First two years after they started, they were investors, 43%

and then 41% after fees.

You did pretty well out of being invested in that

capital.

Well, story starts at 6.7 billion and the leverage that

19 times, $226 billion, meaning a single hedge fund had

a trading portfolio worth hundreds of $30 billion at the

time.

So in current money, this is a quarter of $1,000,000,000,000.

I gave you the example of obstacles Capital a few

weeks ago.

When failed last year, they had to pay you.

That was seen as really meaningless.

So one phone trading and current money, quarter of $1,000,000,000,000.

This is a magnitude we hadn't seen since before.

Except.

You should really call it short term capital management because

it failed spectacularly five years after they came into existence.

And the reason why they failed is what I'm discussing

now.

So if you are a North American, you'll recognise the

term nickel.

Nickel is a five cent U.S. coal.

An outcome, one of the principals said, and a quote

in the Wall Street Journal, would make money by being

the vacuum cleaner in this country, a Hoover vacuum cleaner

and the, quote, sucking of nickels nobody else could see.

And because they were so smart, all the counterparty hedge

funds, remember all the prime brokers.

This is why I introduced it to all credit brokers

getting really, really good deals.

Except Houston's is the smartest of of lockdown.

This speciality was what's known as convergence trait.

So if you know the value of an asset after

future time point.

You know, something will cost.

And the problem, you know that in one time this

iPhone will cost $100 if it trading at $50 or

$200.

Now, you can make money off it.

And how many assets have the property that they have

fixed price bonds, government bonds, you know what you're going

to get.

And it's a typical example.

And because of bonds, a lot of particular maturities are

more popular than other types of immensely bonds you can

make money off.

They were betting on the European and Japanese bond market.

That would be Europe.

And they have they have the Italian central bank great

in the North Pole with Italian banks on government bonds,

because the Italian banks would charge the Italian government 2%

to broker Italian government bonds.

This is basically a highway robbery almost.

And they came in and they act as another broker.

But Italian government also saved Italian state, not so fortunate.

If you know history, you can connect the dots.

But I'm not going to do that here.

So the bigger picture is the media.

I am not going to tell you what we think

is value at risk, but it's it's a common measure

of risk in finance.

We via indicated at the beginning of 1998 it would

take would take a ten sigma event for LTCM to

lose all its capital in a single year.

The probability, the probability of a ten sigma event is

ten to the power, minus ten to the -24 zero,

24 zeros and then one.

Now, if you go to Wikipedia, Wikipedia tells you the

earth is 4.5 times ten to the pole, nine years

old, and the universe is 10 to 10 years old.

They were expecting to go bankrupt, much less once every

unit was.

That's what the models told them.

This is what this means.

They got so confident.

Or Erica, depending on your language.

They returned $2.7 billion of capital to investors in December

1997 so they could focus on investing their own money.

By the way, I think Limelight, this is this is

the best counter argument against limiting bankers bonuses.

Because because even the smartest people in the world, they

can make very stupid decisions.

So the problem is.

The problem is they were so successful.

Everybody was watching them.

So a lot of copycats came.

Other proprietary desks in banks.

All the hedge funds went after this same profitable business.

Remember the 23% returns of the fees?

And they have to keep the momentum.

So they went into a new territory for making money.

So let me see if Syria complies enough.

Hey, Siri.

What is the price of the VIX index at the

moment?

I found this on the Web.

By the way, this is astonishing.

Before the chase, the the Iowa system, you could ask

Siri, what is the price of assets?

And now she gives me Web pages.

Anybody with a computer look up the links.

The I-X.

The tribesmen.

Hey, Siri.

What is the VIX index at the moment?

Volatility index was up 0.66% today, trading at 32.1 thousand

32.

Did I tell you what the big source, by the

way, for?

No.

I don't like to repeat my stories, by the way.

So the.

VIX is implied volatility of the US S&P 500 index.

If you want to prepare for this course in a

different way, it's a novel by a person called Robert

Harris called the Fear Index.

About how a rogue artificial intelligence trading bot almost destroys

the world by trading the VIX index.

And a sequel in a movie, I'm not sure, but

mixed is generally seen incorrectly as a measurement of global

uncertainty.

So what does it have to do with us?

They started to trade disease.

Technically, they supply weaker.

If weaker is a derivative of an option price with

respect to the bottom, the.

But that's not.

Pertinent to.

Asked if this means they are betting on the VIX

going down.

So this is the biggest index in.

This, if I'm lucky.

One of the lucky numbers for the way I want

to take a picture, I should known for something quite

explicit.

Oh, good.

I truly feel you don't need.

You don't need to know.

What matters is the long run meaning of this big

C-17.

I just checked.

It's 32.

The VIX is a mean reverting asset.

What it means is the price of the VIX.

Welcome compact with me.

It is below me.

If you go to the ball, to me, it will

come down.

And now here's a here's a question I want all

of you to think about.

I'm not going to answer it.

But what?

This really test your final knowledge.

If the fix is.

I mean, we're looking at.

And if you notice statistics, you can predict it if

come back to 72 days.

But to most condemn of some form here, you make

money by trading.

Yes.

I'm not both.

I know.

I know that's how you feel.

But that wasn't my question.

You can actually do that if you buy an ETF

on the VIX.

You're not the only one to have that information.

So, yeah.

You could.

So you can go.

You can go.

You can go to a broker and you can buy

the VIX.

And everybody knows it.

Everybody knows that it to come down at some point.

So I'll be 32 today.

Why couldn't you why couldn't you buy a put option

on the VIX?

Because I'm not the only one to all the information.

So that's not the reason.

That is not the reason.

There is a reason for that's it.

Because if you have a good option, right, then when

you're trying to sell, that person knows that they don't

need it.

They don't wanna know that.

This really, people this is this really a test to

find those not.

Kin make up and I have created the mix and

actually came out black.

By the way, I never again, by the way, a

lot of nerve racking.

So VIX is 32 today.

The average is 17 taking money out of it.

So you can buy that.

You can buy the things you don't need.

You don't need to you don't have to buy options

by the likes of your broker.

You might be expecting me to come home late.

But we know you said it should be considered short

so you can find the first weeks from today.

In my online broker, something you'll probably use probably also.

Applying for this.

So what's the problem, people?

What do you mean by it?

Well, goodbye.

I could go on now.

I can.

I know I can.

I can.

Right now.

I can buy an ETF.

Meaning?

It's traded on the market, an ETF on inverse VIX,

which is a back maybe a week old down.

I can buy time.

I want to sell at any time I want.

Yes, sir.

You know when it's going to go down?

You don't know when it.

We're about to buy it now.

Coming in the opposite direction.

No.

I promise you, we go down eventually.

It's a meme.

It's been promoted.

It's been it's been fluctuating around fluctuating, I hope, 17

for the past 30 years.

Why can't you make money?

I mean, what I'll never be, there'll be a premium

on the offence if you try to look.

But that's basically his point, basically.

The reason is what I told you last week, last

week, that the example from 1987, you have to found

new position.

If you are if the problem is, if you bet

on the VIX falling, you have to continue balance and

continually fund your position and the annual cost of a

fixed position of 40% cost of killing, your cost of

care, the cost is 40%.

So this because this is an enormously expensive asset to

form.

If it doesn't come down quickly, we just want.

And that's the problem.

I think way completely, completely aside.

But one of my favourite scandal stories.

Anybody from Japan?

Five years ago, the Nomura Bank in Japan had prepared

to launch a big fund from a very long time.

Finally, on a monday morning Japanese time, they sold $5

billion worth of books to Japanese investors.

On a monday morning Japanese time.

Then bad news for the United States.

And by the time the market close in the United

States.

Remember, Japan was ahead.

We lost 96%.

But people who put money into the fund on a

monday morning, they lost 96% of the money.

I just.

It's an interesting story.

But you can Google Google the event here.

So let's talk about the relevance to LTCM.

In 1988, the VIX or some of the longer I

mean, the name of that one, it's come down.

But then there's one country in the world tends to

cause mischief.

That is Russia.

And Russia did exactly that in 1998.

The Ukraine is for the first time, they disrupted markets.

Couple of stories about this.

I think this is one of the few thefts.

In financial district.

What the Russian government did was they encouraged Russian banks

to sell futures contracts on the ruble.

So that if you were a best Western in fact,

like European Bank.

Protecting yourself enough to get the book of volume use

by a futures contract from the Russian bank.

Then Russia devalues the ruble, and that means that Russian

banks should have paid out a fortune to the European

banks.

But then the Russian government made futures contracts.

It is basically said the hatch is the vehicle.

And that basically that one day, $10 billion was transferred

from European banks to the Russian mafia.

Credit Suisse, UBS were the biggest losers.

Electric bikes have lost a huge fortune.

That's what happened here.

So what happened?

Because one down.

Problem is LTC funded the position and they were running

out of cash.

So.

Returns was -6.79%, 10% in June.

And if you capital base is fixed.

But you lose money with the loss of capital immediately,

so your leverage goes up.

So leverage was going up and up and up.

And when Russian people sit in office, panic spreads like

shock and correlations.

All of us to one unthinkable event happened.

Remember the 10 to 12 -2610 sigma that happened after

Russia defaulted?

And don't choose collapse.

Martin Coles hit Aldi, show them the healthy leverage sell

into a falling market price is found because they sold

both distressed Walmarts and closed.

This is a typical endogenous risk feedback loop.

Now, Carlos, I'm going to ask you to think about

a name of a bank.

We're not going to tell you the name of it,

but I want you to think about.

So the Fed central Bank of the United States would

organise a rescue package.

This is politically very difficult because with.

It was worth $3.6 billion, and a years later they

put trillions into the market, even though this was a

scandal.

So one Wall Street back.

If you know New York, you know, the hedge funds

tend to be in Connecticut across the water in Greenwich,

Connecticut, like an hour drive from Manhattan.

So one had to be sent to class two elections

headquarters in Greenwich.

They look at the positions.

They came back to Manhattan.

One car went to the headquarters of the bank.

One car went to the Federal Reserve to negotiate that

very trade against LTCM.

Causing global uncertainty to worsen significantly and make half a

billion dollars in.

No care for the rest of humanity or financial stability.

I'm not going to say the name of the bank

of love, but you should think about.

And if you are curious as to the actual the

best book on this is by Our Guide to What

You Live Inside with Genius Fail.

I got the story from his book club.

Me What.

Stick.

I am not going to tell you the name of

the bank, but there's only one bank that would do.

This, by the way.

So.

Why does and torture risk having individual economic agents react

to the move?

The housing.

Individual actions affect the world.

To believe LTC was unlucky.

This is the same mistake as ensuing years of the

millennium groups.

They were unlucky.

They just made a mistake.

A collapse is certain given the right conditions.

So profits were made by those who paid LPC amount

because I thought in September the next month down.

The creditors are taking over PCM after a very high

price.

And this came down to they made the future.

The extras explanation is buy, buy, buy A quote or

observation often repeated the case incorrectly.

By the way.

And they really want you to think about if you

understand this sentence or just this quote, you will understand

the financial markets on a fairly good level.

If you don't understand that, you are in difficulty.

So here's a quote case was asked by a trader

How long can the markets stay irrational?

And Keynes replied in lock, You can stay a Russian

longer and you can stay solvent.

Think about this.

This is one of the most profound observations of financial

markets I've ever present.

And if you get it, you're in a good place.

So questions people.

Before we move on to the next topic.

No models and models.

That's chapter three.

Chapter four is another short chapter.

Liquidity.

So what we have to do is to of do

theoretic foundation.

So the endogenous risk chapter is the endogenous risk chapter

is about theory, this is a theory.

And then we start applying this stuff.

Liquidity is what makes the financial markets work.

It's what makes the economies work.

Liquidity is the ability to pay for things, to save,

to buy things.

It is what is needed for things to work.

Everybody knows what is important, but nobody can define it.

If you ask three professionals what is liquidity, quite possibly

you get three very different definitions.

It's little bit like the old Indian joke of the

three blind men who were asked to describe an elephant.

That one touches the trunk.

Another is another site.

And they come up with a very different picture of

what the elephant looks like.

It's like the way you start looking at it gives

you a very different picture of.

And liquidity is super important.

And liquidity is highest.

What that means is.

When liquidity is scarce.

Prices are affected by the prices go down.

If there is no liquidity.

Nobody can trade this small price.

And if this if there is an uncertainty about the

value of security, liquidity can evaporate at the worst possible

time.

So liquidity mean B price means the market accounts value

to liquidity.

So if you want to understand what happened in the

common bond markets in this country, give you the example

of the feedback loop to Mexico that is all about

liquidity.

So.

If you want to.

Why does everybody want to have that IPO in New

York?

I mean, if you are if you're if you're an

American, well, it might be blindingly obvious if the financial

centre of the United States.

But European companies, they have an IPOs in New York,

not in Europe.

Chinese companies have their IPO in New York, not in

China, will not revolt, by the way, of the pull

of political reasons.

So they've walked into new companies everywhere.

One IPO in New York.

Why?

There's no more liquidity.

All of this liquidity, the exclusivity.

So this means.

The same company sold in New York will suffer a

higher price on the same company sold in London, the

same company in London.

We got a higher price for the same company in

Paris.

Let's get this high price on same company in Leeds

and you can go down the list of increasingly small

countries.

You can have more for your company in a more

liquid market.

What is liquidity crisis?

So liquidity feeds liquidity and this will make liquidity, which

is our concern of this course, feeds disappearing liquidity.

Liquidity evaporates at the worst possible time.

Liquidity is idiosyncratic in good times, meaning it only affects

the individual in good times and bad times.

It affects everybody.

So the more the most liquid securities are the securities

most people want familiar, well-understood risk formal trading recommendations in

stock market as the definition of the stock market.

Almost innovative, sophisticated, bespoke, risky is illiquid.

Low price liquidity is systemic, therefore so one pump of

systemic risk.

So many, many crises have liquidity for.

I'd like to ask you to look at first.

Modern financial crisis happened in 1763.

Started in Amsterdam, but very quickly spread to Hamburg, London,

Bruce and.

And Berlin.

It's open to get some of the book, but as

I call it, the first modern financial crisis, same same

crisis than us today.

Almost every crisis has liquidity at the centre of a

central element.

So that that is why 2020 called it wasn't really

a crisis.

Most only the liquidity problems some minor.

So no definition.

So in in a basic legal, basic accounting sense, a

firm that is insolvent is bankrupt.

A third party split with his assets minus liabilities is

still he was shot with positive but you can not

pay off creditors so imagine the full.

I owned a house in London.

And imagine someone says to me, John, you have to

pay 200 by us to buy this afternoon.

And the only way I can pay, you know, 200

is by selling my house.

United Kingdom has the most efficient real estate market in

the world.

I can sell my house in two days, not more

that I think the fastest.

I can do this tomorrow.

Really?

Oh, you think it's low?

Is it Austin, India?

I think the very minimum six months.

It takes three months or six months.

You can sell them.

I mean, you can have the most efficient, the lowest

cost and fastest real estate market in the world.

And there are more people.

That I know that are basically okay to be technical.

If I'm desperate for money, then a company supply house

is a huge discount.

Same thing.

I can call upon call the company, say, here's my

address.

They've sent this robot to look at it and then

they can send money to you.

That's important for us to get paid.

This.

Year.

But it's not 1139.

I would have called on Monday afternoon, but it's no

longer 30.

It was a huge disconnect this last.

Year that you created this.

This is this is the price of liquidity.

This is the price of liquidity.

I mean, that's what it is.

But the point this is my point is I cannot

do this by this often.

If I have to come up with 100 those afternoon,

I make this a payment because of three possible losses.

I'm declared bankrupt even if my net worth is higher

than 100.

That's the point.

That is a liquidity.

You can be solvent, but illiquid, therefore bankrupt.

So therefore, I want you to keep in mind it

was almost in this course.

But you have to know the difference between illiquidity and

insolvency in real life.

You might not know.

But these are technically, technically different terms.

But please keep that in mind for this course.

So.

Definitions of liquidity by CPS stands for the Basel Committee

for Banking Supervision that will define the two in one

or two regulations in much more detail.

But they have come up with two form definitions of

liquidity.

A funding.

Liquidity.

Which is the ability to obtain the money you need

to operate.

To make paintings like that is like me.

Can I sell my house to pay off my loan?

What can I borrow to pay a home market?

Liquidity is how easy is it to buy and sell

securities?

So let's just give you an example here of market

liquidity.

What I thought the car a couple of years ago.

I had to.

I didn't realise I sold stocks.

They treat the S&P like a chequebook.

I just basically take all of that money into compliment.

And because the amount of a new quarterly still high,

the broker took four days to give me the money.

So you sold the stock.

I took up the current price, but it took four

days for it to clear the transaction to give you

the money so I could buy my car.

What did the settlement say?

It was one of.

Three or four based.

Orders.

It took me away from my friend case.

Little brokerage.

Essentially no broker.

But I think some of the same.

I'm going to give you a trade king.

You can I can buy stocks immediately.

So if the money is with the broker, I can

sell the stocks and buy another one immediately.

But if I wanted to take the cash off the

textbook in that case, sold.

So that's a lot of liquidity.

So.

Market Liquidity Fund and liquidity are related to different concepts.

Generally, it relates to switching between cash and assets and

cash now and cash late.

In a crisis, every party wants the most liquid money.

And the most lifted money is by.

This year.

This is the most liquid money.

Or if you want to thank the money on account

with the central bank.

So in a crisis, nobody wants a liquid.

So this is like demand for this stuff.

All the ships are in crisis.

I told you why the central banks have standby facilities

to supply this stuff.

But what is important to the central banks?

During crisis.

So liquidity switching between cash and assets and cash.

Today in cash in the future.

There is a another related definition sometimes used.

I don't use it with all the people who use

which is central bank liquidity.

This stuff here, printing this stuff is central bank liquidity.

We set it up in the next chapter.

So when things go wrong.

Why don't you take a break now and continue this

discussion after the break?

I'll turn off the record.

Well, you.

They should have up like this.

And I like this.

I like this idea here.

So questions people before we move on.

So issues of objectivity.

Margins and haircuts of the type we discussed previously.

They are very they play a very big role in

liquidity.

Their purpose is to protect those who are owed money.

And if you have a highly leveraged position, you could

lose money with liquidity, which is exactly what happened to

UK pension funds over the past couple of weeks.

Margins have to be met.

Everything.

So if you are losing money on margin, you have

to make a mark every day.

And that is one explanation for Keynes's comments in his

previous chapter.

And often times margins increase in times of crisis.

So margins approach safety.

They are lower in good times and in bad times.

This news is easier to borrow in good times and

difficult to borrow in bad times.

This was locked in a pro-cyclical effort by the financial

cycle.

And mark to market accounting is also positive because if

you're marketing to market, then the value of your asset

goes down.

You will see losses on your books, even if you

haven't realised them.

And that can cause problems.

So mark to market is also pro cyclical.

And what you can't get in extremis is what's known

as a mob conspiring, then show you this is a

complicated picture and therefore the sequencing of the cycle is

important.

We always start with some initial loss and it doesn't

matter what the initial loss is.

And that means some speculators or some investors are facing

losses or finding difficulty from their position, meaning we meet

margins at the like and they might have to sell.

To me, this much is exactly like the British pension

funds.

Over the past two weeks.

And of course, the Bank of England committed promises to

buy those off them.

That is what stabilised the market.

And that can make prices move away from fundamentals.

You might have been told in some in some pricing

course that prices are the crescent discounted value.

Uncertainty validated what future flows.

Well, uncertainty.

So this becomes philosophical very quickly.

If a crisis can move away from fundamental prices in

times of stress.

That can give you higher margins, which causes more difficulties

for speculators.

But.

You also because you're losing money on your existing positions.

That gives you more funding problems and an inspired stroke.

And finally, if you want to fund.

Clients want to take their money out of the fund,

and that means positions go down and prices go down.

So all of these things, this is called the the

market spiral is why margins can increase financial instability.

Now let's talk about final book pricing.

So imagine you are a successful thief and you steal

a diamond worth hundred million dollars and then you feed

your pursuers into the desert.

After three days, you are lost your lottery system.

And that gentleman comes to you and says, Hey, come

on, LSC student, I'm going to sell you a bottle

of water in exchange for retirement.

Will you give him $100 million for one year?

For what?

Probably, yes.

Right.

The price of liquidity.

So under some conditions, one bottle of water, one litre

more than can be worth $1,000,000,000.

So what is the value of an asset?

Depends on.

Pics.

And here is one module of this, and I'm not

going to show the former model, but I'm just going

to show the outlines, but I'm going to talk about

how prices can move in crisis in this particular model.

So, yes, a lot of initial shock.

Prices fall away from fundamentals.

That makes it difficult to hold illiquid assets.

Why be why does not happen?

Because illiquid assets are the least discernible.

So in a crisis, the most illiquid things fall the

most in price.

So illiquid assets, this was the most difficult of all

go to illiquid stuff.

And of course, everybody tries to sell you these things.

Everybody wants cash.

You sell more risk assets, prices fall more and you

get this vicious feedback.

This is just one example of how in a crisis,

too risky assets become liquid.

And I know of sounding like a broken record here.

But what you always see in a crisis is a

preference for liquidity.

And if you want to understand the United States power,

everybody wants us to.

Lastly, asked if you want the Holy Ghost if he

was homeless, I suppose you do as far as strengthens

and everything else goes down recently on.

And we will discuss that.

Nothing in couple of weeks.

Why don't we discuss the U.S. Central Bank and COVID

19?

Because that little bit of analysis is key to understanding

what happened that.

So.

Asset prices are lowest when you need liquidity the most.

Which is, of course, exactly the wrong time.

To do anything about security.

Questions.

Before I move on to something different.

How do you come close?

Almost impossible.

How can a blind man measure the size of an

elephant?

When?

It's it's it's difficult.

This is why there's a lot of definitions of liquidity

out there.

The problem is all these definitions tend to be fairly

inconsistent with each other.

Because watching this, you can be so highly dependent on

what you care about.

Yes.

Are there regulations that governments or current banks around cash

reserves in response to liquidity crisis?

So I'll give you I'll give you one specific example.

Before the crisis in 2008, banks would often borrow very,

very short term, like 24 hour overnight money to make

30 year loans.

And that is not promoted.

So a lot of regulations that is supposed to net

stable funding ratio.

And the observation was name I forget in 43 they

are to.

Awesome.

Thanks to you.

Basically, under current regulations affecting all G20 member countries, this

means everybody else.

In reality, banks have to be able to fund all

tests.

Here's what I found.

Why does she insist on commenting when I a Tom

Watson and when about the price of.

The fix gives me a as I see the books

and the latest OS.

Iowa system must practice Basel three.

Basel free money won't be discussed fossil fuel for three

or four weeks.

I'll show you specific.

So going back to what you're talking about with the

balloon balloon analogy, this is government's response to trying to

eliminate, you know, a big part of risk from the

financial system.

But if we use that analogy, that risk will have

just migrated elsewhere.

And we don't necessarily know where that's at right now.

That's my contention.

And I wrote what has to be a fairly controversial

blog post of two weeks ago when I argued systemic

risk has gone up since 2008.

And the reason I wrote that is I did a

podcast in a set without thinking that said systemic risks

increased.

The thought about it.

Yes, of course it is, because for exactly the reasons

you just outlined.

If you're curious, he's on the block.

This is outside the scope of this course and everything

else.

People.

No.

Fantastic.

I like that.

Every year I think do was cause for a long

time.

And every year, said John, finally, you can spend less

time on the Central Park.

So in 2000, 16, 2000, 17, 2000, 82,019, I made

less and less and less important to spend time on

things that are more interesting.

But of course, it then becomes very, very, very important.

So now with inflation, this is particularly important.

It's just more important now than it has been for

a decade and a half.

So I don't see you being able to reduce the

importance of the central bank.

And in my slides, if I have to call it

for a heartbeat, the reason is I can't put all

of the subheadings onto one page.

So I have to split it up to make it

manageable.

That's why I mean, that's my point, Abe, by the

way, for no other reason.

So in part, A, I tend to do the technical

things in Part B, next to done with are more

policy implications able to inflation and.

If you come from a developing country, U.S. monetary policy,

which is one of the most trickiest things for every

developing country in the world at the moment.

That's next week.

The central bank is the most important institution of the

financial system, and the reason is it has a monopoly

on making this.

In the United States.

This is called this is called legal tender, meaning legally,

this is money.

By the way, when we discussed Bitcoin a couple of

weeks.

If you like Bitcoin, we will certainly get into the

boundaries of that definition.

But you know, not to talk in this in this

lecture.

The functions of the central bank are price stability.

The function of one make this stable.

Then we have macroeconomic objectives.

The economy has to grow.

Unemployment has to be low.

Financial supervision is regulations.

Financial stability, stability of the financial system.

We have the informal objectives stimulating the economy, which is

if all of the United States has become a fairly

big ingredient in the election coming up.

Bailing out governments.

And very important objectives nowadays.

ESG and the environment just depends on where you're from.

But if you take the ECB in particular, ECB has

taken a very activist role from the environment, much more

so than in the all the central banks.

So they really are deep into such issues.

Not all the central banks, as far as I know,

and equality, which we discuss many of these topics all

speak of.

And the important thing is relative importance of these institutions.

So historically, it used to be a private bank.

Like a corporation.

And in some countries to this day it is Switzerland.

This is one example.

You can buy stock in the Swiss National Bank.

There's only one in the world you can do that.

But as Switzerland, you can't.

If you are a conspiracy theorist.

And I am not here because I think incompetence is

usually a much better explanation for conspiracies.

But if you are a conspiracy theorists, some people in

the United States argue that because the Federal Reserve is

technically a corporation owned by member banks, it is somewhat

beholden to those interests.

Which is complete and utter nonsense.

But.

It allows for, if you like, conspiracies, why not?

In some cases, private banks money.

If you go to Hong Kong, for example, HSBC and

all the banks, they print Hong Kong dollars, they are

full reserve.

So meaning 1 HKD printing, perhaps, as we see.

In order for the HPC to do that, you have

to have one all on account with the Hong Kong

Monetary Fund.

Now, there are other names for this.

In some countries we call monetary authority like a Singapore

Reserve Bank, like India, Federal Reserve System like the United

States, People's Bank of China, Bank of.

But in a country common, I would use the term

central bank to contest all of this.

Next week.

I'll ask you some of you about the name of

your central bank, but.

But that's a different matter.

The first inequality was Sweden.

Are they sweet for the first people to create a

central bank?

In 1968.

That's all part of the Swedish central bank is oldest

central bank in the world.

The second is the Bank of England's.

Bank of England is what's absolutely fascinating organisation at the

time.

If you want to understand why this country became a

global empire, it is thanks to the Bank of England.

It was established because of its biggest enemy.

I think what is the biggest enemy of this country?

In 1694.

France.

So it was designed for one important purpose.

When Britain has a next war with France, they can

fight it without going bankrupt.

So to fund the war sustainably without destroying the country.

Because the way the French forces, what they just tax

everybody to death and destroy the economy when they borrowed

their way into war and therefore they kept the economy

alive.

Fantastic.

Really changed geopolitics.

Just being able to fight a war sustainably, financially, sustainably.

And what it did, it was the only cooperation allowed

in the UK at the time.

And the reason is they wanted all the upper classes

to own a part of it.

So why would you do that?

Because if all the families of the country owned some

part of the Bank of England, the political opposition to

exploiting it would be so strong.

You can't do it.

It will never go bankrupt because all the powerful country

people in the country don't want it to go back

to back to sit by his side.

And none of them are successful.

Questions.

Well, I think that absolutely, if Napoleon did that in

France as well.

120, 100 years old, he's copy this copy.

But he tried it through the 1772, 1754 more.

The Scottish person who set the central bank in France.

He stole the money and then almost bankrupted the French

state and the whole and everybody else of the major

powers.

The last country to establish a central bank was the

United States.

It had to be called the Federal Reserve because of

political reasons.

It could not be called a central bank.

Anybody here from the United States?

Which state are you from?

Washington State.

Okay, that's the snow central Washington state.

There are two central banks in the US state of

Missouri.

It's not the biggest state in the U.S. isn't Missouri.

No, no.

Why isn't it true?

And why isn't this one California number one Texas way

to the summit?

Because Missouri had two important senators who insisted that they

would own the truth, approve the establishment of the Federal

Reserve if both Kansas City and St Louis got the

Senate.

That's why the two.

So some successful investors like Marc Faber, they directly stand

that group and they they will then be better off

without central bankers and they actually move a lot of

sovereign debt and their long policies.

But can we deliver the next week getting to that

point next week?

The promise.

And the ECB, of course, among the big countries was

established in 1998 for that for different reasons.

France.

So what?

This money?

Historically, we have used a huge number of things for

money, seashells, cigarettes, pearls.

Sweden used copper in total copper has very high transaction

costs.

It didn't look silver and gold.

We now have what's known as fiat money.

Fiat money is money.

This money has no value except we trust the previous

government.

That's money.

Will be moved to crypto and digital currencies.

I will delay that discussion one or two.

I'll do that in a few weeks time.

So I'm going to for this chapter.

There's no crypto, no digital, but I promise you I'll

do it properly in two weeks.

So before 1871, rather than buying, let's listen to two

types of money and the most stable financial arrangement in

the world of the gold standard.

It was operated for 50 years from 1871 to World

War One, where money was gold.

And if you are into his enter into crypto.

The promise of crypto is if you give you the

same stability.

It's a gold standard.

The Kraken was the gold standard.

Yes.

So the idea is not either you just use gold

to trade, but typically the way it works is this.

Here.

I could walk into the Bank of England and exchange

this gold.

I think it sets up a moment.

This is a culture on this.

I promise to pay the piper until the end is

somewhat funny because this is completely circular of England promises.

Even if I give the Bank of England ten points

and you walk into the office of the Bank of

England.

There's still a counter there that is used for exchanging

such things.

So basically what happened is you had paper money, what

could be exchanged for gold.

And that exchange was stayed with all the major currencies

in the world.

The same one, same type of money.

Problem is, and we've come back to this one, we

can crypto's supply of money.

That's mine.

Gold out of the ground.

And the one who controls the gold mining controls the

world, including here from Spain.

Okay.

Spain used to control the world's money for 300 years

and completely messed it up.

If only there was money for 300 years before they

spent it on religious wars and stupid things.

So when the United Kingdom invaded South Africa over 20

years ago.

It was because South Africa had the biggest gold mines

in the world, so the United Kingdom would control the

world's gold supply.

No.

Gold standard fiat money is money created by governments, so

it's nothing physical.

It's not converters anybody.

It has value because you trust the central government.

The first known historical example of fiat money come from

China 800 years ago.

And what happened is that the Chinese emperor printed too

much money and it led to inflation.

And this is quite often the case.

If you print too many, too many palm notes, the

value of it goes down and down and down and

down.

That is, keep the trust in central bank, as you

will see here.

I want to delay crypto until we get to it.

So.

But however to discuss what this money.

The central bank creates.

This is for base money.

Money created by central banks.

However, most money in circulation is created by banks.

And we can hear this from you can create money.

So I'm building the class next week.

But everybody the economic activity to create money.

So therefore the amount of money in the system is

very ill defined.

And that's also the reason why the central bank finds

it so difficult to control inflation because they don't control

money creation.

And this, of course, is a very big picture.

The Japanese Japanese economy is the one where this is

perhaps.

Most complex among the largest economies in the world.

So money.

This is MCO.

Yeah.

So many comments.

This is and one.

Up another.

What?

And then I have some money that people throw away.

And by the way, completely aside, I think there's a

fuss about three years ago and they left a lot

of money on the table.

Although the person you see us soon after was send

an e-mail saying, Don't you want your money?

Why we don't keep it.

And even laughing when I walked in to collect it.

This is a debit card that is.

And one.

I guess if I have this here, I put it

into the bank account and I can take the money

out of the bank.

Like a like, like, like a current account, that is.

And one.

This here is a credit card and to.

If I buy something with a credit card, I pay

it off later.

It's a loan.

And the loan is an.

We're a alone can be m three if it is

very large and very long term.

So different types.

So therefore, now I want to show you how money

is created in a very basic textbook sense.

I mean, I know this is more complicated than real

life.

But what is particularly important is.

And too, it's an indication of the amount of loans

made in the economy credits.

Therefore, it indicates economic activity.

So if M2 type money is growing rapidly, it means

a lot of money still is invested in the economy.

So the economy grows and one money is going down.

It means economic.

You are lending less and the economy contracts.

Four.

Keep it in mind, that becomes very important in what

follows what is shown to the Great Depression.

A couple of weeks ago and I went very quickly

over the clock with one and then zero two because

it needed this light before I could explain it.

But now we can't.

So in the United States and Seattle, it's worth about

less than $1,000,000,000,000.

And one takes it almost two and two takes it

to seven and then 3 to 10 trillion.

The eurozone is slightly bigger, but has the same type

of as the same type of the same type of

roughly the same magnitude.

And by the way, M0 is all this stuff here

and reserves with the central banks.

I would want to discuss a little bit later.

So how was money created?

So if you take the basic textbook version of this,

and so long as you recognise that this is a

main way of explaining company is created, but this is

just very simple.

So I'm going to use these people as an example,

if you will.

The gentleman is otherwise he puts the dollars into a

bank.

The bank keeps 90% of that by law.

Has to keep 10% of reserves.

Hence the name Reserve Bank investments $90 two per.

She deposited money in a bank account.

The bank keeps 10%, lends $81 to her.

And so on and so forth and so forth.

Unless you keep repeating this, his initial hundred dollars becomes

$2,000.

This is how money is created.

But now you see the danger of that because.

If you go this way, you create money.

But if you go the other way, you destroy money.

So it sold.

So therefore, he pays off the loans.

Right.

Money goes down.

Then he pays off his loan.

Money goes down.

But you keep him going.

Eventually go from thousand to 100.

So in an economic boom, the chain goes in this

direction, creating money to fund the economy in a recession

to change course the other way.

Destroying money and holding back economic growth.

This tells this is how a reserve requirement can be

used to control how much money is created.

And this just shows you how conflict can grow under

different scenarios.

Nothing too exciting here.

No, this system is inherently fragile.

The bank makes deposits after long maturities of bank making

mortgages for 30 years, or lending money to companies over

30 years to build the factory.

But it's funny to think that these on demand deposits.

So that gentleman puts $200 into the bank.

That led to the birth of 30 years.

But he can withdraw his money anytime he wants.

That is, if a lot of people do, let's call

that bankrupt.

And runs.

This is a fundamental to understanding fragility and building a

whole chuck from runs.

By the way, the two gentlemen who got the Nobel

Prize in economics last week, they had the multiple runs

and we discussed their models by chance in a couple

of weeks.

So if you were curious, if you're curious about who

got the Nobel Prize three weeks ago, the two of

us, then we'll discuss them all within two weeks, two

or three weeks or so.

So when things go wrong.

Deflation and inflation.

Deflation is when prices drop.

And I said this before, and now I'm repeating myself.

It is costly because if you have money, you delay

purchases.

And therefore the economy slows down.

It makes the prices fall even more in a vicious

cycle.

And deflation benefits those who own money.

It is costly for borrowers and businesses and is costly

for regular borrowers whose salaries have to be forced to

go down.

The only some countries have managed almost inflation quite successful.

And the best known example in Europe a little bit

countries in Germany almost 20 years ago.

It's just it was hard for me.

Parts for.

If you want to view a full.

That's awful.

I thought you wanted to pronounce it.

I had what I had.

What is this, by the way, by the way?

I have four kids.

A few of them.

I used to speak.

I used to speak to him quite closely.

And then he said to learn Spanish.

And I forgot all the German.

No, he speaks Spanish.

It's a good trait of.

I don't know.

At the end of the day, it's named after the

person who did, by the way, that was lowering salaries

in Germany.

And if you want to understand why Germany's been so

competitive since, that's a key element to German competitiveness, but

that's a slightly outside of the scope of this course.

So this is I think you saw this before.

So I'm not going to explain it, but this is

an inflationary spiral.

It's controversial.

I do not want to spend too much time on

this.

But basically, the it's been pretty hard to establish a

relationship and parity between deflation and bad economic outcomes.

So the deflationary spiral I just showed you a theoretical

and it's not necessarily proven whether that is a relevant

thing in real life.

No.

It used to be when I did this course, I

did like the yearbook, but that was deflation was a

danger and inflation was just an academic thing.

But now all of a sudden, the world has changed.

Nobody knows what deflation is anymore, and everybody's concerned about

inflation.

So a little bit like passion.

If you keep your pulse long enough, eventually get back

in passion.

So he must like some change to do some things

with the right inflation when things go wrong.

So ideally, inflation should be steady, say 2%, which is

a law in most countries.

The reason is a high Inflation is associated with uncertainty

and holds back the economy.

Very high inflation is costly, especially hyper inflation when inflation

is very high.

And maybe just because some wanted to quote Vladimir Lenin,

but he said some hundred years, just 100 years ago,

the best way to destroy the capitalist system is to

destroy the economy.

And you'll find that.

Okay.

Lights on this little black Christmas light.

These.

So basically.

So this is completely outside the scope of this course.

But every time a country has transitioned from being capitalist

to communist, the first thing the communist authorities do is

to destroy the currency.

Russia and China did, Eastern Europe didn't.

So these are always the case because this is how

you destroy the middle class, is to destroy the money.

So inflation has been fluctuating a bit.

This is the problem is the status manual, because it

comes from the World Bank.

So there's no data for 2022.

I have data for last year, but not this year

simply means you can monthly data for some countries, but

not most.

So this is average inflation across all countries in the

world, this data.

So used to be a very, very high sum 25

years ago and is still quite low.

If we take last year we concluded the price inflation

in Sudan, followed by Lebanon, Zimbabwe, Libya, Yemen, Argentina, Surinam,

etc. etc. Turkey, which I was discussing with Peter late

one.

Yes, sir.

I'm surprised it is not the Iranians.

They were not with Iran.

This Iraqi high official.

I think it's one of the highest currently.

And it was.

Supposedly pointed to the.

Would it be.

Would it?

So, okay, so this data comes from one of two

world development indicators of the World Bank.

And it just might be that Iran is just in

the report they to have.

But the prices are not.

No, but I have a problem.

It's not quite as simple as that.

They.

We want to do an international comparison.

You need to make sure that the measurements and it

is similar across multiple countries.

All of this becomes complicated.

So the best way to talk to the Wolfpack.

And.

I have to.

Look, I don't.

I don't know why you want to do something, to

be honest with me.

I'm.

I thought of what he's doing in England, and I

look it up.

And by the way, the data is that you scored

WTI what?

The World Bank development indicators.

They have a nice arc.

So you can look up a country and a lot

of data for the country.

It was quite nice for that I.

So if you look at Duran Duran, I have no

idea.

Hyperinflation is when prices go up and more than 50%

a month.

The most the biggest historically, the biggest hyperinflationary episodes is

more of the two world wars.

Latin America when they were transiting in the eighties and

nineties and the Soviet countries after they stopped and communist.

The world historical record for inflation was set in Hungary

1945 to 1946, when prices tripled in 24 hours.

Just think about it.

You buy a bottle of water for 1 in the

morning and it costs 5, but it's only work in

a place like that.

You could pay twice a day to go shopping, so

you could pay for one.

Go to the shop so you could pay to go

to the shops.

Not very efficient.

No, The worst day has been smaller.

So high.

One reason you have high inflation.

So when I scenery means you print money to finance

the government.

And that seems to be the primary cost in Venezuela

today.

So continuing on.

Here's the world.

Here's the here's the world record for hyperinflation.

Hungary is in part the Yugoslavia, Germany, Greece and China.

I think I have upstairs in my office Yugoslav dinars.

That is more support than it was in Serbia last

time.

This shows the the hyperinflationary, By the way, the only

reason why the hyperinflation stopped is in fact with.

Is because the country couldn't afford to buy paper.

So they continued until they had no dollars left.

So they couldn't because they couldn't print money.

And that stock, you have inflation.

In Venezuela.

Not a problem.

This is a race because all electronic is apparently really

hard to get hold of paper money in Venezuela, but

much easier to do transactions electronically.

My system isn't subject to the same strict.

So the best known example of this is the Vivo

Republic of Germany in 1921 to 1923.

This episode the first study.

And the cause of that initially was simply the treaty

oversight and reparations.

But as the U.S., the state being forced to pay

a lot of money to the witness, and one way

to bypass that is to create economic chaos like this.

There's some really nice.

He particularly written on how this ended?

By the way.

That is so silly.

The person who sparked the hyperinflation in Germany in 1934

is how much it must be lost due to lack

of strength in Germany.

And he just killed the speculators.

He did a short squeeze, but it didn't stop him.

He was using the cycles of borrowing money in Germany

so that almost every speculator in Germany went bankrupt simply

because right after they started the crisis should be stopped.

Money for a few things pushed and inflation slowed down

for a few days.

Not long enough to cause problems for the state, but

long enough to destroy the speculators.

And therefore they almost enticed speculative swaps.

It's a very nice recent paper to be written a

lot.

Zimbabwe chronic hyperinflation since independence.

Inflation hit 17.3%.

And eventually they did something a lot of other countries.

So they issued $100 trillion bill.

I had seen the symbol of war for Yugoslavia.

Now, if you're into economics, here is the way to

compare hyperinflation.

So in the hyperinflation, like inflation growth, a double exponential

rate e to the power, even the power of something.

If you see the y axis there is this.

These are log scale.

So I've done this.

I changed the scale on both sides.

And you can see both Germany and and both Germany

and Zimbabwe, they had very similar growth paths in inflation.

And the reason this is similar is because if you

get into hyperinflation, the only way the government can fund

itself is by printing money.

So the government has to print money.

The faster and faster, faster rate can keep going, and

that makes the hyperinflation to work its way out similarly

across countries.

Questions.

Finally, expectations.

And this becomes key to understand the world beat what

I think is the biggest threat to stability today, which

is.

Five years ago.

Price has been on the move.

Wages didn't move.

Funding costs very low.

Everybody expected low inflation and that creates a virtuous cycle.

If we expect prices not to change, nobody raises prices.

Wages don't go up and everything is okay.

And then poof is almost like you go to bed

one day, we wake up the next day and everybody

expects prices to go up.

That makes prices go up and itself.

So basically what matters is if companies and workers, they

think inflation is here, they behave in a way that

makes inflation it.

So therefore, if you want to understand why only central

banks and governments try so hard to hold back on

rates increases today is to say what they what they

don't want the second scenario to be fixed.

Because if we start getting a spiral repeating base increases

and and price increases built into the economy, then inflation

is very, very hard to eradicate.

And this also explains all the labour market uncertainty.

This also explains the labour shortage we are seeing at

the moment is all because it's all because really.

The governments do not want to end up in the

second scenario, so desperately trying to prevent some risk from

crisis.

And if it works, what doesn't work, I think, is

perhaps the biggest global uncertainty.

At the moment.

Questions.

Is your pleasure to be available.

Phenomenal.

I've just looked at the books.

Sorry.

Deflation.

Is deflation a real phenomenon?

Not.

I've just been really in the.

Middle of this, a real world phenomenon.

I mean, these people in this country, they had deflation

for about five years, 1924 to 1932.

That was a very serious issue.

And that's because of collective pressure.

No, no, it was not what it was, because it.

Come on.

It was because the pound was on the fixed exchange

rate after World War Two.

And if you look at the history of your country,

which was then a part of the British Empire that

those countries had into much more difficult Indian Britain British

relationship at the time and how to feel impact on

India subsequently that particular stupid decision to.

After the fall of the gold standard of equal penalty

in 19.

From 19.

In 1924.

And also because it used to be the backstop, the

interest to be a financial backstop to the constant in

this country until those things.

But this is completely aside from from this particular course.

But that's that's an interesting part of history.

So supervision.

This is technical for I this is technical, but I

want to make something clear.

Regulations refer to the law and.

How you interpret the law.

Supervision is enforcement of the law.

So just like if you're driving in this country, you

drive on the left side of the road.

That's the law.

If I drove on the right side of the road

and the police stops me, that's security.

The.

I broke my own cardinal rule never to have a

mobile phone on.

And the problem is.

So.

So what do I do?

I have a stencil for the first person whose phone

rings.

You have complete this uniform turned off to make the

joke upon myself.

Yeah, I will do that.

But you are welcome to take your best shot.

But I'd like you to see this.

I always have a standard joke for the first person

whose phone rings.

And you've shown remarkable discipline as a group.

So supervision is enforcement regulations is the law.

So therefore, if you want to.

Most human beings don't care.

But if you end the work, you surely most human

beings called both groups regulators.

But in the financial system, especially in the official sector,

you need to know that supervisors are enforcers, regulators.

They write the divisive rules.

And it's because this language is used all over the

place.

You look at this data, the 10%, if you get

it wrong.

But of course the boundaries between them is blurred.

The regulators, supervisors have to interpret the regulators, and sometimes

this is problematic if the regulators belong to a different

government agency, county supervisors.

And then one issue that comes up relevant to this

course is should supervision be part of the central bank?

And I want to do that quickly before we take

a break.

We have a whole lecture on regulations in a few

weeks.

So should you supervise banks inside the central bank or

outside with a separate government agency?

Well.

The pros and cons, right?

One is a conflict of interest.

Because supervision might call for something different in terms of

policy and monetary policy.

One might want higher interest rates to fight inflation.

One might want low interest rates to help banks in

difficult.

Now this is reputation risk.

And I want to discuss the case of PCC early

enough in a few weeks.

Bank of Commerce and Credit International.

But basically to this I have a couple of slices

but this was a Pakistani bank operated globally, was fraudulent

and the Bank of England failed in its supervision of

it and was sued.

And that was a key reason why supervision in the

UK moved from the Bank of England to a separate

agency.

And then, of course, is the issues that the central

bank has a lot of tasks.

How can it concentrate on any of them?

Government agencies, they often have the properties that they can

be really good at one thing.

But again, in two things one gets rejected.

This is usually better to have one government agency.

One job is a better model to ensure.

But then you had also you had the issue of

the central bank.

Who needs to know what is happening.

It has to know about credit, about companies, by banks,

about what's going on in the system.

They need to be able to for pull money, monetary

supply reasons and for macroeconomic reasons.

If the two lending of last resort this is a

bailout in a crisis, they have to know about exactly

who is in the system.

So that knowledge of being able that knowledge is so

important that the argument now has been made to the

central bank to supervision.

This is what we do in this country.

This is what we do in Europe.

This is what we do in the United States, increasingly

so.

And my prediction is there will be another scandal.

And we then decided this is wrong and we make

supervision.

We take it out of the central bank.

And by the way, the United Kingdom is only led

to this lucky Bank of England.

Everybody has copies.

And in the United States, this is super complicated.

But basically, technically speaking, if you are a very large

state, the U.S. supervision is done by the central bank.

But if you're not, a large bank is done by

different government agencies.

So generally speaking, but the central bank has the responsibility

for regulating everybody.

And they sort of set general rules for all the

government agencies follows.

And in Europe, this ends up being very, very messy

because.

We are increasingly moving supervision to European Central Bank.

And the reason this.

European authorities don't trust European countries to supervise the banks.

There's a strong belief that.

The Italians, the regulators are very nice to target, but

some tough on other banks.

German regulators are very nice to German banks, are very

tough on foreign banks, etc., repeated across the EU.

It might be wrong, but this is the perception.

So for that reason, they have decided to have the

ECP in front and be in charge of all European

banking regulations and therefore the National Bank.

Like the Bank of France or the Bundesbank or the

bank, the Spanish Bank of Italy, etc..

They had eight since I'm working on behalf of the

ECB.

So the ECB decides on what to do, and they

just follow the orders given by the ECB.

Which is why if you want to be slightly glib,

you can ask yourself what the point of a European

Central Bank and nation states.

But that's.

Political issue.

We've got to take a break and come back and

have some discussions.

In the background.

I want to go through the questions on important issues

in a way that you might see them in an

excerpt.

And what I want to do specifically the way I'm

going to do it, is the first question is define

the terms and conditions and the confidence with and then

give an example of it.

I want to do the first part and the personal

answers.

And when I tell you how much you get for

that and an example.

So one of one or more of you can try

it.

I mean, I know your subject.

That is some reputational risk for having my dynamic criticism.

Only respond if you don't mind that.

But if you do it, you're quite helpful to know

what you think.

Right.

And what you did wrong.

So you want to start defining one of the terms.

Okay.

So exogenous risk is the risk which comes up from

outside of the financial system, of the system of large

external shocks.

GROSS Endogenous.

You don't have to do it.

You just want to.

So it's external risk which comes outside.

How would you settle out?

You played well.

When it finally came, he said to the Trojans, Anybody

want to?

When I want to give me.

In the administration, there is this particular system because of

the direction of the.

He started to talk to this and I told him

I gave him some more time for that definition.

And I want to speak to that bit, only do

it sequentially.

You said everything right.

But it wasn't completely.

It wasn't complete.

It arises out of the financial system.

That's what he said.

The consequences.

No, that is not what you should not say.

If I ask you for the definition.

That's exactly what I want again.

If I say to you that definition.

Don't go outside of the question.

Stick to the question.

And what was missing is whether.

It's caused by the mechanisms of the internal mechanisms.

That if you have really got, you have to 8.59.

But it's all about how you phrase is.

I would say the definition of exogenous means it means

something arrives from the outside and in the context of

financial risk, it means risk that is created from the

outside of the financial system and the financial system and

affects the financial system.

But this risk is not created by the financial financial

system.

Are slightly more complete than what you said.

But so what?

What was missing was What was missing?

No, not solving.

It is created from.

So first was I gave a pretty cute definition of

exogenous means from the outside.

It always helps to be slightly abstract in the beginning.

So a dictionary definition is okay.

Assumption is from the outside.

It's a shock that is created outside the financial system

but has an impact on the financial system.

And you could add that you can't control it and

you can't.

You can't you can't respond to it.

But then you move into the important space.

And you can react.

Oh, your fault, you can be reactive.

You then react because of a shock happens.

You do something.

Right, but you can do anything.

But the well, you can't do anything about the shock.

Don't take it too far.

Don't take it too far to stick to the purpose

of entry.

That is some question.

If I say you find it so, there's to conscience.

This is the best way to keep it short is

first.

And then what would you do?

You walk into the doctor's office, which is next you.

So who wants to reform and talk to risk for

me?

No.

I will give you a grade on the spot.

Yes, sir.

Great question.

I'm just trying to look at it this way from

the inside.

This was created by the financial system and has an

impact on the finances.

Indeed.

It's basically spot on.

It's a risk if you want to be slightly more

complete, but I'll basically keep all the marks.

But it's basically the risk that is created by the

introduction of the economic agents that make up the financial

system to.

Use the words generator and amplifier.

And it is.

It is and it is and it's amplified by the

introduction of.

So therefore to take his point.

And exogenous shock can lead to an unfortunate reaction.

But this is why this and look, these are not

separate things.

It's not black and white.

I mean, it's part of the same thing.

But if I saw the usual consequence of an exciting

shock, it's an unfortunate reaction.

But take, for example, practical matter.

The COVID 19 was initially an exciting shock.

That had a small and tortuous reaction.

2008 global crisis was a crisis created from the outset,

from the economic agents that make up the system.

And that's why those of us looking to.

See what was the endogenous reaction to the COVID 19

crisis.

So then when we got worried about it, if it

didn't go cold, if nobody knew how it would play

out and everybody was super scared of lockdown before economic

activity was closed down, perhaps.

A lot of people.

Would die, etc. This was the initial period two years,

two and a half years ago, and that slowdown in

economic activity is the reaction to it.

And then you start to get worried about how the

financial institutions are affected by this, tell people default on

loans, etc., etc..

So.

So culturally.

So there's a reaction to cope with a comment afterwards

that's unconscious for how the human beings that make up

this system react to that same thought to response to

a shock.

That was a virus that was discovered in Wuhan, China,

and that was a purely exogenous event.

Yeah.

The twos and twos also mentioned.

What happens over a month at the very beginning when

there is a liquidity in a Treasury market, and so

the central bank or the Federal Reserve could come in

and act as if.

The market maker came until the next week to discuss

exactly that point.

But I just need a little bit more inclusive technicalities

to do that now.

So you can go say do it before.

Q This was an execution at the moment.

You could know that what were the energy was affected

and that you couldn't just say stock, stock market, the

dominant capability.

See, this is coming from the outside.

So you want to buy into the stocks now because

at the moment I don't know what energy has consequences.

Well, so if you look at the worst day of

coal, which is March 16.

That's when the prices went down.

That's because worst of the financial markets in 62, the

markets will collapse.

That is what we finally realised.

A dangerous virus and she national lockdowns for all.

Thus, McCallum came to a screeching halt of months.

And then soon afterwards we had a few small spat

as we thought.

And if you call.

Facing the market.

We are if you look at the market prices in

college like this year, from the beginning of the year,

you get into February 15.

That's when the market starts reacting.

Except China is the exception to this.

Market reacts to it.

You get into months, 15 markets, markets crash, a lot

of fluctuations, and then the market sort of the markets

react recovers like this year.

And by July, the market had fully recovered.

This is my colleague was not a serious shot.

Yeah.

And you couldn't know in advance.

That's, that's why that's why the prices fell on March

16.

So then you realise it wasn't as bad as we

saw.

What markets they go on sharply.

But.

But that's the economic activity.

But if you can look at you look at the

if you look at GDP, GDP has continued to contract.

And then plus and then one thing.

They said.

I don't have the I don't have the numbers in

my head.

I don't have the numbers in my head, but it's

not up to my head.

But basically, I think the most economists have been calling

for a minimum last year for a year to recover.

You got that.

But they didn't.

But but, you know, Congress in a series of crises,

you look at decades, many years or even decades of

recovery.

So this was not the serious you had?

I do not want to spend too much time on

this.

I love this.

I love the question.

Also an excellent question, which is the following.

How do you reconcile the fact that it beats VIX

Index can be very low at times of significant economic

and political uncertainty.

This is this is not done.

It's already happened, but of it.

It's like the don't know the situation.

The crisis is already happening.

So that's of those risks you.

No, I could find it the best.

This will be good if I.

But facing off U.S..

You sit down?

Yeah, but it's just tasty.

It's the same.

We've looked up at the split hairs here, by the

way.

I mean, and how can this be high?

Basically, here's the question.

But the reason I got to this question is this

is just quote, The VIX index is generally seen as

a global driver of risk appetite.

If you look at, for example, investment and investment activity

in India, it is strongly affected by the VIX in

the United States.

Same same out of China.

Same applies to France.

Germany.

Same applies to the United Kingdom.

Every country in the world, investments in every country was

affected by the mix impacts.

It's not a trivial economic variable.

So the question is about is it a reliable indicator

or not?

Yes, it is.

Why don't they want it impacted by.

But is it the same?

But what does it matter if it does this?

And why do we care about them?

Why should why should investment into European stock market volatility

in the United States?

Because all the economies are integrated.

But that's.

Not how quality.

Is set up for kids.

Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.

This week the.

US is predominantly the most advanced, but trying.

India has invested in the US market as well.

So he has invested in the US markets as well.

So hedge funds are long gone.

So it is still.

So this is this a little bit of a conceptual

problem with all of this flexible.

Which is the way you think about it.

Why would somebody making a ten year investment in an

Indian factory be concerned with short term stock market volatility

in the United States?

And what we have seen is it's a very reliable

indicator of political uncertainty because sometimes, you know, something bad

is happening and in this case, long.

And sometimes the VIX is high and there's no real

reason why it should be.

So I can guarantee you that is what is true,

is that investors react to it.

But why should they react to it when it's an

unreliable indicator?

It's a different matter.

There is the biggest impact, a common factor for something

else.

So could it be that investor activity in India and

the peaks is driven by the same parties?

I'll just say I'll just put it all out loud.

The way the speakers discuss in this business or in

the common economic discussion is too shallow.

And to underline that I lost a lot of issues

around this.

So.

High levels can also indicate lower liquidity problems.

Sure.

And that's often connected to it.

So now I want to ask the difficult question.

Before the break, I showed you Cain's statement when asked

by the restaurant how long the markets remain.

Irrational chaos set in markets can be made in Russia,

not in Russia no longer.

You can remain solvent.

I didn't explain it then.

This is a good exam question.

Who would like to tackle this?

Ten points in a final exam question.

That's exactly the same question I used before.

And those who get it tend to be those who

get a boost.

So some on an exam.

I mean, I know that students are trained to think

that's great, but basically exams are written so that I'm

not that good.

A very good student can still pass.

So I saw you put a bunch of easy questions

on this sentence, and the play to trace can at

least get the lowest mark.

And then we have some questions that are on the

opposite and really only really good ones.

So then thought risk definition is the first time.

But this one is on the other end.

This is what helps people get first.

So who wants to tackle this?

What gets me A little girl?

The big exhibit.

Love of film.

Less than exuberance.

But I wouldn't get carried away by looking at the

profits is liquidity.

The actual risk levels have been higher.

True.

True.

I am what?

I am not disagreeing with that.

But Cain's statement goes one step further.

It says markets can be made insolvent longer than you

care.

Mark is can make it in a rational market that

you can make remain solve.

So this is.

With reference to the health incident.

And holding some kind of a position with you on

foreign assets when you need to be making clean money

for your margin covering that and.

Here.

What he's referring to is situations where the fundamentals go

against what is the conditions of the market.

And for that reason, you are in loss, whether it

be respected or the fact that maybe in the very

long term you will be in a gain and your

leader position puts you in a situation where you may

actually become insolvent because of the fact that you need

to retain that position and follow through for your bet.

Three out of ten.

12 1021 spoke to what they said that it's so

very irrational that market participants tend to take very risky

bets.

Putting the at risk it is preventing.

Just note that this list eventually lead to resistance.

No, definitely not.

Not necessarily.

That's not an argument.

That's controversial.

Lots of different arguments.

Volatile.

Yeah.

This is related to some concepts in behavioural finance.

It's like because individual investors, they're like not very well

trained, greedy.

So sometimes, you know, like the market will finally return

to average value, but we can wait that moment.

So you want to sell at some like.

Like the process is not like, you know, like you

sell before the prices will go up.

So, like.

Yeah.

So you would get three out of ten just like

he did combined this before the ten.

And so if you want to bet on the correction

of the market, say, because you.

Analyse the fundamentals.

I'm not 100%.

And then you might be right.

But it doesn't mean you should bet on it right

now, because you still have all of these constraints and

regulations like the margins and the accounts.

And, you know, the time factor is always random, but

generally that's all the time.

Even if you're right with your fundamental analysis.

So, uh.

I would like to say a question, but the main

idea is that the markets are always going to return

back to the quote unquote, rational.

You may just not be around to actually realise the

preaching of white.

It's a bad idea to make a Russian aggression.

You know, it can't become fully rational to buy something.

So I'll give you people who are tempted because one

of you support of the obvious.

None of you responded.

But let me tell you about your specific points, because

I am not.

I think this column will end up with terminal value

to Ireland recklessly and also on record saying it can

make perfect sense to pay people.

So the thing is.

Okay.

So those are not mutually exclusive.

Ideas need to come back to me and we will

simply.

Hear why you have You are missing the central element.

That's.

Well.

I mean, I'll tell you, but I'm going to let

you off the hook yet.

I want to see if one of you can.

Wrap it.

Up.

Now we know you're reaching.

It can be very expensive to make this, but.

Not for that.

Oh, okay.

You could be getting warmer.

You can look like you said next.

Correct.

And the cost of funding could be very high both

times.

But also what we saw is that actually the market

did move.

The way they wanted it.

They were actually contributing to the price moving away from

where they wanted it to go.

I give up?

I do.

The reason is the.

The.

The irrationalities caused by the trade of being a life.

The reason the mix was so high was because LTC

existed and therefore LTC and COVID die before the VIX

could go down.

So if you are the type of person whose activities

create uncertainty.

The only way a certainty can go away or rationality

can go away is for you to die.

So you had you ask the question, is there a

way you should help us?

I actually think.

You should have said this, not some.

Okay.

Yeah, I know that.

But do I have to hold your hand through every

single document?

No, because we're living in the wrong direction.

No, no, no, no.

Well, I gave you a very famous quote.

It's something I can say.

I know.

This is why you said it's not what is attributed

to be corrected.

We don't know who made the call.

To go shooting.

Not necessarily that the US, doesn't it?

Nobody knows who made the call, but it's a case

to quote.

So I so I just took the call and said,

Can you explain the fullness?

And after this explanation.

I know I'm being tough on you, by the way,

but this is really so.

So let me return to the point, because this is

important if you want to understand why.

The point is.

And I'm going to repeat myself.

There are people who operate in the financial system whose

trading behaviour creates uncertainty and creates what appears to be

irrational, crazy price movements.

It is irrational that the biggest index is hitting 80

or 90, you know, for a compact to sell.

But it's the fact that you have this huge entity

called LTC with hundreds of billions of dollars invested in

it.

And because nobody knew their financial position, nobody knew what

it was doing that was completely non-transparent.

It was that uncertainty that drove the VIX and picks

up.

And therefore, when did everything comes up?

Okay.

I know I've put a legislative plan to the question,

but I just I just spoke to the court.

Anything else, people.

So if I put this on the finalists, you all

answered correctly.

You promised me.

But almost regardless, I would suggest you think about it,

because this is a very different.

You give an example of big spread, but rationality doesn't

necessarily mean risk taking.

So.

I didn't define irrationality.

To that be the correct answer for any eventuality in

the smart.

Ways.

Like, Hey, hang on a sec, we are talking financial

markets.

So in the context of financial markets, it has to

be something that appears to be irrational or appear to

be crazy or wrong.

And whether it is true or not is can be

a matter of debate.

But the fact that the VIX index is 80 to

90 in August, in 1998 has the appearance of a

hopefully a rational market outcome.

The example you.

Gave last week of the GameStop Short Squeeze and Melvin

Capital.

Where they had a short position.

And when they say that the market reacted irrationally, which

drove up the price, which squeezed them and forced them

to lose $3 billion because they had to liquidate to

cover.

Is that an example of the market behaving irrationally?

Okay.

First of all, but first of all, I do not

in this course.

Want to get into rationality.

I've been very clear on that because.

The concept of what is rational or even rational.

This is a very complicated, very controversial and does not

have a lot of emissions, of course, whatsoever.

Practically no practical events have been in support of this

happening in the world into a rational, rational, if you

like, debated philosophy.

It was interesting stuff to debate, but it's not real

world useful.

Got it.

However.

You can certainly attribute if you if you're willing to

use it to the rational in a loose sense without

being too philosophical.

The price of GameStop was clearly crazy.

Irrational.

If you would like to.

If you if you don't take a technician too far.

That was caused by hedge funds being squeezed.

So therefore, these hats was half a day before the

president GameStop could control.

So you're right.

I it.

It's awful, if that's what you meant.

Yeah.

No, you're right.

So in a system like this, who is it that

dies or the one who has exposed.

The funds of the three?

In the GameStop case, the $3 billion fund that was

shorting GameStop?

What did they do wrong in that sense?

They so they have they have made.

They have made a bet.

No, GameStop was too high.

In terms of irrationality.

I mean, the what they do.

This is why I don't like this.

I don't like to take the discussion too far into

irrationality because of the irrationality.

Becomes philosophical.

That's a loaded.

And I don't want to get into a loaded meaning.

I don't want.

I know, I know.

I think.

Are you taking this discussion that don't want to go

that because I don't want to get into the definition

of what is rational, what is irrational.

That's true.

Instead, speculators will be killed.

You can ask some very nicely to put it right.

So if you if you could ask the question differently,

like how long can how can you how long can

volatility be so high in the market?

How long can the price price of crisis be so

low or so high in the markets?

Until the speculators die.

So if I ask the question that way, we hold

this classic and I've wanted to discuss the quote, articles

supposedly made by Hughes.

Because it actually opens up in this sort of type.

Of course, it allows for, but it's a very good

discussion on fundamental issues.

Anything else on this, people?

Exam question.

What are the three notions of liquidity?

She would answer them in an exam.

And I'll tell you, if you want to give you

all that pencil.

I've just popped up for half an hour of this.

By the way, so.

I mean, I can list them.

The final cut in the listing then.

So if you listed that, you would get three of.

Them trying to find.

Out.

About the loss of.

This funding liquidity, its market liquidity.

And you also mentioned central bank liquidity stuff.

That's correct.

Okay.

So funding, liquidity.

Is the ability to.

Finance a project.

And in doing so, you will need to have access

to two cash cash equivalents.

And the lag in getting that cash available to fund

the project will will determine the liquidity you.

Need to make when you are too precise in the

wrong direction.

He said to fund the project.

We have a demand for cash.

It might be must be funding requirement, but it might

be a loan payment.

So you to be healthy?

Maybe I maybe rolled over.

Yeah, you have to.

You have to do that.

You have to be more general in that book.

We're not going to put it is a reference to

the that being buyers and sellers willing to engage in

activities.

And.

And the lack of it is is actually the case

where where the market stops and there is no counterparty

to to sell your.

Extreme case, but it's also extreme.

If you look less like one way.

Is it is the premium that you pay.

As a.

As a follower of an aspect of the assets.

They don't having enough.

Parties for you to eventually.

Offload and how?

No.

All correct.

How do you pay the premium?

What is the premium?

Alpecin premium money tested.

So it's a discount.

Or to keep the time.

But at one.

Time.

It might be the speed of trading.

Or it might be the price you get or the

price you pay.

So you need to time also, by the way.

Anything, anything else on the people before me.

So finally, 2 minutes left.

You have to leave on, Time said, because common liquidity

is priced.

What does that mean?

The definition of liquidity is priced.

You just said it is the price of fame.

No, no, no, that's not that's not what I said.

That's not my definition.

What is the price?

It's related, but it is the lowest of.

Is the difference in the value of an asset that

you paid for the of that.

One thing.

To another.

That's.

Not wrong, but it's not as correct as it could.

In marketing suck in life, likely to constant value to

liquid assets.

In all of us, the market is willing to pay

more for assets.

In market sees us liquid.

Here's what this is all about, he said, but not

quite yet.

Okay, people, I will see you next week.

Lecture 5:

You come back here today?

Well, as far as I could see you guys.

So because we're on the pigeons.

Yeah, I started step by step.

So I would start here.

Any questions you people have for me before I start?

Oh, what's central bank in Central Bank?

AK You.

Said that this week you will take it up with

the central bank's destabilising.

Policies.

I will do that today.

Yeah, I'll do the preliminary first and then I'll do

I'll.

I'll get into that.

So all of that relates to the main job of

the central bank, which is monetary policy.

Monetary policy is using the levers of money, interest rates

and amount of money in this system in order to

achieve some objectives.

The main objective is always price stability, keeping inflation at

2%.

That sounds like a joke when to say that.

I mean, inflation has not been a target since I

started teaching this course.

So either way below, your policy is not sufficient.

I sometimes wonder if central bankers bonuses, by the way,

for getting the target issue.

Monetary policy is used both to get price stability and

to meet more political objectives like the level of output

and employment inflation.

If you are thinking about environment or ESG issues, that

is not within the monetary policy part of the central

bank.

That is within the regulatory capital central bank.

So ECB talks about and the ECB is the only

central bank really discussing that.

Then there really is really on the regulatory side, not

on the monetary policy side.

So to be precise, they control the supply of money,

availability of money and the cost of money.

So we defined last week what money is.

And the two relevant political policy terms is expansionary monetary

policy.

When the central bank increases the amount of base money

and zero in the system.

The contractionary monetary policy is to fight inflation and an

overheating economy.

Now discussing this sounds quite bizarre today.

Because the central banks still seem to be running expansionary

monetary policy.

Even if the economies are overheating and inflation is peaking,

it's actually not going away.

Monetary policy today looks bizarre.

It is just and basically nobody seems to understand what

is do.

But I'll get to that when I do the policy.

It is a testament to the technical public, you know,

technically speaking, and this is a common misunderstanding, the central

bank only controls the short maturity interest rates overnight money.

And the reason it does that is it if interest

rates are fall, one wants them to be, they can

create money to lend in period amounts and it is

below what they want it to be.

They can borrow infinite amounts.

And because the market knows that if the central bank

says overnight rates are 2%, that's what they are.

The central bank does not control longer maturities.

They exercise control sometimes depending on the year and if

patience is one of the exercise control.

They can push them up and down by buying or

selling along the phones, but buying logs about half full.

So you sometimes talk about a piece of string, a

disconnect.

You think of the when you control one, then the

short, then the rest of it does what it wants

to.

No.

We are not going to spend much time on this

information.

I just want you to put it up here, because

you see, it is something called the paper rule.

Rule.

What it means is.

And it's an automatic feedback loop which says if inflation

goes up all the time, it's so.

So here you have the actual inflation rate pie.

This is the inflation target.

And then if you fall below the target, you raise

the lower interest rates.

Now, no central bank in the world would admit to

using this table, but they all do something like.

So it's always an automatic feedback mechanism.

And really, what if I keep this equation in mind

when it comes to.

Well, we start discussing policy and why inflation was so

high.

It's not this expansion or whatever the central banks use

is all secret.

Doesn't work the way they think it works.

This is why the inflation of inflation is high.

Interest rates are low.

They believe of the equation.

But the equation is not necessarily true.

No, this is what I just said earlier, so I

don't need to repeat that the way a central bank

does.

Monetary policy.

Traditionally.

Is either by interest rates or by open market operations.

Open market operations.

Is when the central bank buys and sells government bonds

on the market.

And what happens?

What happens is, technically speaking.

If they buy phones, they increase money supply.

If there's cell phones, they decrease money supply.

And I want to go through this in is so

hard to take one take on the comedy, how it

happens.

Because for those of you who are accountants, as most

of you are, the accounting treatment of this is rather

peculiar.

There is something quite peculiar about how this is done

in practice.

Some of you've discussed whether we can have the discussion

on this.

So expansionary contractionary monetary policy can either be done by

interest rates or by creating or bump them up, creating

new money.

So what historically is called printing money?

Of course, that is technically not really true anymore.

But if you make one of these.

That's creating money.

Now then, third, what you can do.

This is a change in the reserve requirements.

So central banks have a minimum.

And if I remember the example we went through last

last week, you put money in the bank, the banks

lend out 90% has to keep 10% of the serve.

That's why you had a term Reserve Bank of whatever

Federal Reserve system.

If you change the amount, you have to hold on

reserve.

You can control monetary creation.

Now, this is not done in the developed world.

I mean, I mean, the reserve requirements in Europe and

the United States.

I'm finding that don't people this is very common.

But it's what China does.

What India does, Brazil does.

And then we can continue on.

Basically, if you have a if you have a very

advanced, sophisticated financial markets, if they don't do this, if

you have a less sophisticated market, this is what you

tend to do.

So here, for example, is to give you I haven't

acted this plot because it's a pain to get Chinese

numbers.

And we said to start publishing them anyways.

But this is this is considered to change the subject

quite much.

You can tell exactly what policy they were achieving here.

Multiple crises in 2000 make research requirement for down went

up again and China had a mini crisis in 2007

and found again.

So you can map out exactly how to do things

based on this.

Now within interest rates, there is a concept called spiral

lower bound.

Which is a misnomer.

They can make interest rates as high as possible, can

then make them negative.

Well, they can, but only by a tiny, tiny amount.

So even when Europe and Japan were at the inflationary

stage, they only put interest rates down to the -75

basis points.

Problem is the reason is finding almost finding the.

We just refuse to pay somebody to keep the money

in the bank.

So Europe, until quite recently, if you put too much

money into a thing, you might have to pay the

bank to keep it on deposits.

And if some countries, if you've got a bank loan,

we can take it back.

But interest rates for mortgages in Denmark.

Most famously was negative for exactly this reason.

That's why we've had to come back to the central

low funding.

And we have what is known as quantitative easing.

Or if you're in Japan, you can't call it quantitative

easing or QE.

You have to call it Q QE, because QE is

a politically prohibited word.

But QE, QE is not.

So in Japan, they do exactly the same thing, but

they're called quantitative and qualitative ECB.

Well, that is that is used.

So in the process, when the danger of deflation is

high and interest rates are close to zero of the

monetary to still work well.

So what it means is you buy security, government bonds

or some other assets from the public.

Now, you might then say, how is this different from

open market operations that they find previously?

The differences on the scale, scope and motivation scale, how

big of this scope, what do you buy and motivation?

Why do you do it?

Now.

If you apply pure logic to it.

Helicopter drops are much more efficient.

So Milton Friedman wrote 55 years ago, let us let

us imagine that one day helicopter plays on this community

and drops thousands dollar bills from the sky.

And let's further suppose that everybody believes this will never

happen again.

If you want to, to increase the money supply efficiently,

the most efficient way to do it is to give

people money directly.

That's often called after this, quote, the helicopter money or

gift money.

But helicopter money is quite common.

So you've been the best known of recent.

I said it just about the only essential of this

is to find and check if I can call the

check from about a year and a half ago when

the US government said it's American citizens if we get

another 1500 dollars.

Financed by printing money.

And that now has turned out to be the main

driver of U.S. and local inflation.

And one of the big weaknesses in Joe Biden's campaign

for re-election.

It is quite strongly it harms the Democrats because that

is just the one thing everybody says has caused us

inflation.

True or not, we can debate it, but the consensus

maintains that is quite so.

However, the cost of this one import will come back

to this in a few weeks.

So why do we not do helicopter money?

Because it often sounds stupid.

It isn't stupid, but it sounds stupid to give people

money this way.

However, the one place where you might see this is

one of the two central bank digital currencies.

By the way, completely aside, if any of you is

interested in central bank digital currencies, we have a request

on Friday on it.

And if you're interested in Chinese geopolitics, it's a very

interesting Chinese geopolitical angle to that discussion.

It's not your cup of tea.

So they asked me to be myself for this book,

and I refused to be on the panel.

But but, but I don't do this if you're interested

in seeing it, because, frankly, it's a good day for

the.

So you could apply for everybody else to.

While the person organising the event.

This person is a talker would be.

Yeah.

What you really want them to call you along.

So here is Joe Biden's helicopter dropped 4000 dollars.

No.

One reason.

We have been doing QE for so long is printing

money has been used to bail out governments.

What does it mean?

You are printing money directly to fund government expenditures.

No.

That should, in theory, cause unexpected inflation.

It can't be expected because if it directly if you

know it's going to cost inflation, economic agents will increasingly

raise prices and raise salaries to counteract the impact of

the resultant stimulus stimulus.

The problem is, if you do too much of this

is you end up costing inflation.

And if you do a lot of it, the problem

is you create so much inflation.

A government can no longer collect money from all the

sources.

Because taxes are paid afterwards.

Right.

I did a real time off, but not exactly real

time.

So only part of those people.

Real time and a lot of taxes, Texans taxes are

pretty late.

And if you have a high inflation and it means

government revenues go down the real terms.

This can be problematic.

So the higher inflation, the less money the government makes

from other sources.

There will be more of this to print money to

fund itself.

And that is what causes hyperinflation, like in Venezuela today.

So this might be justified in exceptional circumstances.

Problem is, if you do it routinely, it ends up

creating expectations of inflation, which is a topic we'll discuss

towards the end of this section of discussion.

Questions.

Is this what they're talking about?

They say the Fed needs to fight inflation before it

gets locked in and become permanent.

Yeah, that's it.

So can I delay that discussion until I actually get

to it?

I'm doing the preliminary math for sure.

You'll see.

I think in 1969, inflation was pretty much in control.

So why did it was not in control then?

In what?

With their suggestion that we should have?

What is the reason behind that?

No, no.

I mean, he he was he was voicing the most

sophisticated economic argument of how you should do it.

It's actually really come into context not to just take

it, just look at I think quote by itself tells

you not very much about why he said it is.

However, the only reason I'm putting it off is that

this term helicopter money is no use all over the

place.

And that's what it quote came from.

However, to actually explain the context to this would take

me a long time.

I don't want to.

But I'm not going to point you if you really

care about the background to this.

Look at something called rational expectations.

And Robert Lucas.

That's the context to understand what he's saying.

If you kill.

European Central Bank is worse off to help you take

it out as a special case.

So let's talk about the Bank of England.

Well, this panel is also part of India.

But in the of the single nation state, such.

The strength of the firm belongs to our country and

serves the country.

The governor of the central bank, and Peter Mundy, a

noted people who run the country.

They probably went to the same school quite like belong

to the same families.

They may not like each other, but they know the

children for 30, 40 years.

I mean, I remember one central banker who told me

that when a crisis hit his country some years back,

he said, when we have the crisis meeting, like all

my classmates from university were sitting around the table deciding

on what to do.

With the ECB.

That is not the case.

They don't the people of London do not know each

other that well, and they do not know the politicians.

And you cannot stress how important that is because in

this country.

Andrew Bailey Well, he's a, he's everybody knows that everybody

who's run the country knows who he is.

Let them talk to their kids.

That is not the case.

In the case of the level of the communication channels.

And trust doesn't exist between the government, the political leadership

and the central police.

Now, secondly, if the central bank raises interest rates or

printing money, that is an effective tax.

What you're doing is you are shifting money.

But in talking to one person and putting it in

the pocket of a lot.

So that's a tax hike tax, which just shifting money

between people.

So monetary policy is shifting money from one person to

another or one American person and one Chinese person, one

Japanese person.

Problem is, ECB monetary policy shifts in money from the

pocket of a Dutch person and put it in the

hands of a Portuguese person.

Different countries.

And that's a political difficulty the ECB has, is that

if we take to give you an example here, Francis.

Each person in northern Island gets 5,500 from the rest

of the UK.

Scott, You get three and a half thousand pounds.

I thought Lucy in Spain gets 5,000 the same in

a country regardless of where you're from.

There are massive transfers from the wealthy part to the

quarter.

What's.

So we are sad because we all live in this

country, but the warmth and pace of London keeps the

rest of the country 75 billion.

So.

But the fact is that it's not politically supported.

If you have different countries.

So those two political difficulties is you can't operate kind

of as a central bank in the country.

Second problem is who's responsible for it.

Now, imagine you live by yourself as a student.

You decide, Will you clean your kitchen to the bathroom?

It's your personal decision.

Imagine you live in 2019.

Other students who like the size of these feet of

the Eurozone.

Well, who cleans the kitchen and who keeps the bottom

of a tricky issue?

Some a lot of the others can never do it

all this week.

Do it for everybody else.

So enforcement and all this control mechanism and all the

fights along the way, because collective property is not owned

by anybody.

So what it means of a political matter is that

the ECB.

It has a Q Some of the rules don't apply

to anybody.

Just like in your pocket, if you live in 90

students in a list who does like when you have

a check mark to see if it did the job

you might have done.

The ECB meets the same political equivalent.

So easy peasy, huge amount of rules that don't exist

anywhere else.

And every time ECB is concerned different is asking for

people's.

This wouldn't happen anywhere else.

It just could be central banks in this country and

every other country would have the discretionary power to do

things the ECB does not.

And that causes also political fights and difficulties.

I basically said exactly what I just said here.

So.

So that's the political problem.

Yes.

And if you want to understand the Europe European discussion

on this, that's in context to put that in.

Now, how does or how has the ECB sold quantitative

easing?

This is an important point.

Because the most aggressive the two countries in the world,

particularly aggressive in QE, Japan and ECB.

I don't read Japanese, so I can't read the Japanese

justification.

Even if I did work for the Bank of Japan.

And I probably could ask some old friends that.

But but ECB, I can read the letters and this

is how ECB justifies quantitative easing.

I want to come back to this in a seminar

of hardly Trump, but I want to run through their

argument for why they do quantitative easing.

They buy bonds from banks.

That increases the price of bonds and put in lowest

interest rates and therefore creates money in the banking system.

Loans become cheaper.

Businesses, and especially small businesses can borrow more cheaply.

People can borrow more cheaply.

It's easier due to service that you get more investment.

And higher consumption.

Higher investment makes the economy grow more.

Therefore, QE is a good thing.

And I just got this directly off the ECP website

just rephrased it for about 4%.

Right.

We can then argue whether this is sensible or not.

Those questions before everyone.

Yes, sir.

In all of these countries, banks depend on deposits, collect

and then make money.

But in most of the Western countries, among, we has

been almost equal to zero interest rates, and that nobody

will put their money without incentive from where they're getting

money.

But it's not true that a massive amount of deposits

in the banking system.

Following this.

Massive, massive amounts.

I mean, I don't have the numbers in my head,

but it seems a very lost interest.

I mean, if you take the entirety of the federal,

federal, state of Germany, Germans put the money into bank

account.

I mean, they're actually almost unique in liking both accounts.

They are not happy, but they prefer that to just

tell them to stop making money saving the U.S. by.

Big banks.

The U.S. had massive, massive deposits.

I mean, you can look at that, but I don't

I don't do the numbers in my head.

But notice that the banks are funded by deposits.

I keep on.

I don't keep up.

I have to keep a little bit of money in

the bank account.

I get paid at the beginning of the month and

I have expenses throughout the month, so I need to

keep.

The gender of the work and the people are putting

more money into financially.

Like there's some financial aspects.

No, they're withdrawing.

All they are putting money in.

This is what will become double triple no.

But the the the the, the it depends on the

country not in Germany to pick to to pick a

particular country.

Right.

And there's been a negative inflow into financial markets.

The global.

So.

Challenges.

First of all, there is conflict between financial stability and

monetary policy.

Often.

Problem is the problem is for Sony.

This used to be not the case.

So for like 30 years after World War Two until

the 1970s.

Financial markets were tightly regulated.

There was no financial crisis anywhere in the world.

Between 1945 and 1972, no country in the world.

And then we got deregulation and we had a lot

of crises since then.

So then the priority was for monetary policy.

And.

However, right then you may have a conflict because what

happens to financial stability calls for more and more money

and the monetary policy cost less.

So that could happen in a crisis, but thankfully, frankly,

crystallises the problem.

Police question is a really good example.

There's a crisis in the government bond market.

The Bank of England stopped buying bonds or promising to

buy bonds.

But that is inflationary.

The last was indicated ahead through the inflationary signs that

said don't buy bonds dominate on the financial stability side,

this is by more than confidence.

That's actually the best example I've seen in a long

time.

For the past 40 years, inflation had become a serious

issue.

Then the central bank solved inflation by the 1980s and

inflation started falling.

Everyone knew.

And.

Central banks came to believe that they were really, really

good at their jobs.

They tend to be.

But the only thing that mattered to them was inflation.

So no emphasis on financial stability, no discussion of regulations.

Purity.

In mission meeting, monetary policy was the focus of central

banks in all developed countries.

And by the way, to give you context for developing

countries never made this mistake because a mistake should be

made by the wealthiest countries in the world.

Because developing countries always understood.

The links between financial stability, monetary stability and I went

to.

I went to some conferences after 2008 with a mix

of policymakers from the developing countries and the BRICS countries,

and these words really contributed What was shocking.

For instance, I mentioned before even laughing about the investments,

the crisis this had been with the 2004 purely developed

countries across the developing world.

Pakistan's policies in place to protect itself.

That's lot explains why they fell into that.

Now since the crisis.

And so that meant when the crisis came in 2008,

the central banks in all of the developed world, certainly

UK, Europe and the United States, were unprepared for the

crisis of.

They just didn't know what to do.

But since then they've compensated and more.

And now they have re-emphasised the historical role they've provided

liquidity.

The financial stability and supervision and regulations are increasingly moving

into the central banks.

Like I saying, because of how badly they messed up

in 2008.

And as I said earlier, objectives can coincide or objectives

can conflict.

This is what I've just mentioned earlier.

No.

One interesting aspect of this is central bank independence.

If you see.

So I sometimes like this.

So if you take the United States.

The governor of the Federal Reserve System.

Jerome Powell.

I sometimes think he's the most powerful bureaucrat in the

world.

Because he has nobody he requested.

Now the head of the military has nuclear weapons, but

he reports to the president who decides whether to use

the nuclear weapons, but not the head of the central

bank.

And the same applies to almost to a lot of

countries.

Now, can you think of two recent exceptions?

Two countries that have accepted that do not follow the.

What Central Park Company was part of the witch hunts

in the last country.

The Chinese.

So concerned that this northern Turkey does not continue to

keep fighting the government every six months, which we will

talk about later, both in the United States.

Certainly the reason is credibility.

Because if the politicians decide on interest rates on monetary

policy, they would lower interest rates to get political support

like before elections, to stimulate the economy and then increase

them off to to solve the problem.

And because you don't trust the politicians, you would rather

have an unelected bureaucrat make decisions on our behalf.

That's why central banks have been made independent.

And by the way, to repeat, if you take the

entirety of society, government agencies, none of them are dependent.

Except.

Except the central bank.

What exactly does that mean?

Means all of you.

All and.

And then, of course, if however, of course, if you

and if you go to a lot of developing countries.

Who might have really bad institutions.

Quite often they have exactly this reason emphasise the importance

of the central bank being independent and competent.

So quite often has been the most competent organisation in

a lot of countries and most free of political pressures.

Now, one problem with letting central banks have a lot

of duty is reputational risks.

I will discuss one example in a couple of weeks

to the case of BCCI Pakistanis with this bank that

was fraudulent.

But if the problem is if you do regulation, take

it to honesty.

You will make mistakes.

And if the central bank will make the regulations, they

make mistakes all the time.

But just remember, the big problem is mistakes undermine the

credibility of the central bank.

So I think paradoxically, politically, the more powerful you make

a central bank do weaker, you make it.

Because they're more political and more depends on political support.

So therefore, I think we have got to meet.

My view is we got we made the central banks

given too many things to do.

This makes them less able to do what they should

be doing.

And if you and then if you can discuss this,

if you want this seminar in the in the context

of ESG and the European Central Bank, that's an increasingly

acrimonious debate.

No.

This is the previous slide.

What is V way is we lost track, but nothing

left of it.

But what?

We will get.

Back a little bit.

Back up in here.

And by the way.

And by the way and by the way, you know,

if you had to spend in this country, you spent

in case the.

So you shouldn't write in.

This is not a German.

I think people will know who you are in the

case of those.

But the poet has a special spelling bee.

So when I did my book, it's an American publisher,

a fusion of control.

I had the Bank of England set back and they

corrected them.

Where are you from?

Why would you do.

Such a thing?

Then.

How does this Central Perk communicate to people?

This is a very, very big problem for.

Now one person wants.

The only thing people pay attention to is central bank

interest rate decisions.

Nobody pays attention once.

Actually is quite possibly true.

But they have to communicate.

The problem is if the central bank says nothing.

Then the markets get surprised by what the central bank

does.

And that can cause a crisis like we had in

the U.K. a couple of weeks ago.

The central bank says too much in life is to

overreact to what is quite possibly fiction based on bad

information that might be changed in the future.

So the central banks have real policy problem when it

comes to communication.

So what do they say?

When do they say it?

And there are certain governors of central banks recently.

You have.

How can I put this delicately?

Been not as careful as they should have been.

And communicate people so they can cause panic.

When the central bank says something, we can quote real

damage.

It used to be in this country.

This is a very rich estate, of course, but Britain's

financial system was regulated by April.

If the governor of the central bank raised his eyebrow,

something was that in meetings and if he did not

raise an eyebrow, everything was affected.

The race's eyebrow.

Don't laugh with my fellow.

The word was perhaps you had to observe that nonverbal

signal.

Yes.

We talked a little bit about Mario.

Draghi and when he said, we'll do whatever it takes

in 2010.

So the best example of successful.

But I think the most damaging from the case and

this is a very good question.

I think you said ten years ago of the European

crisis.

The European Central Bank will do what it takes.

And believe me, it will be enough.

What he meant is that no matter what crisis happens

to Italy or Greece, Portugal, Spain or Ireland, we will

print enough funds.

We can make enough funds imprinted on money for lower

interest rates for a level that will prevent this from

becoming a crisis.

And because Marcus 15 crisis was almost immediately over.

Let me give you one example of this question a

few weeks, but let's just ask the question.

In 2008, the Irish government said something similar.

Markets did not believe it and Ireland was subject to

an attack and then had to request assistance from Europe.

So if you say something like that, you have to

be credible.

Problem, I think is with us is that it is

a statement that the lesson taken by the ECB and

the European political leadership was, no, the ECB will pay

this out of every single price that happens.

So while it might have been might be the right

announcement.

Ten years ago.

Then maybe even doing it has created very serious problems

for Europe is not an easy place to deal with

unemployment.

You can get into the to the current environment questions.

Know what is the credibility of the Royal Bank of

England?

Because in 15th October last year in his speech, he

said that inflation will come down to 2% in next

two years and 10.8% in the next three years.

No inflation in 15%.

The governor of the Bank of England has been unfortunate

in how his words have been perceived.

Frequently.

And finally.

When the central bank, a lot of assets like it

too.

It can cause balance sheet problems for them.

Remember, right when the Grand Central Bank is the think

of it like from a purely a company point of

view, the government owns the central bank.

It's it's off balance.

It's off balance sheet.

And I feel the government owns the central bank.

This is what the obligations of the central bank under

covenant obligations.

Legally is separate, but it's over.

Problem is, if they start taking on a lot of

buying a lot of bonds or assets, they can use

a lot of money based on all those assets.

And the ECB interest is particularly difficult.

Remember what I said earlier?

But the ECB holds unique name of central bank.

The ECB is not allowed to make losses on assets.

It's actually kind of bizarre that one of the rules

that come up is that one Greece bailout nine years

ago.

We only investor in Greek bonds but it did not

get a haircut was the ECB.

But now they put a huge sum on the corporate

bonds, so to speak.

You if you had a big sovereign default or a

major crisis in a large European country that then have

very serious balance sheets in part on the ECB, and

I'll show the Japanese numbers in a few minutes, same

issue there.

Swiss have acquired the most take on this because the

eight years ago and I'll show you that they're Swiss.

Seven years ago, the Swiss appreciated the Swiss franc by

18%.

Show the example of that.

But the point is they are running the U.S. trading

portfolio, intervening in the Swiss market to the tune of

a few tenths of the sentences for systemically.

So trying to keep the Swiss franc fixed up.

The reason was they lose an enormous amount of money

for doing so.

One reason why they came up with that.

However, they also within intelligence team, because they invest a

lot of money into U.S. tech firms some years ago

and Tesla and Google and Amazon, Apple, big chunk owned

by the Swiss government.

And they've done quite nicely, as you can imagine.

Question Before I move on to the next section.

So.

So really quickly, there's a little bit of a historical

background because I guess gives context to this.

Inflation has been falling all over the world over the

past 50 years.

Here is a list of countries that used to have

I mean, Germany, South Korea, US, Japan, Singapore all had

inflation, had very high inflation 35 years ago and all

have very low inflation today.

I mean, this fall is quite universal around the world.

By the.

And of course, right after World War Two, what happened

is that some governments and the United States, it was

an explicit policy in 1947 with all the hype that

the U.S. had after World War Two, they deliberately created

deflation for government bonds.

So they basically said if you were a patriotic person

who got government bonds to support the United States fighting

the war, well, you should hear what you're going to

hear about 20% by printing money.

It was a huge inflationary spiral in the U.S. between

1947.

And then they had on the debt down to a

level of okay with the stock inflation.

And now today, a lot of commentators have called for

high inflation to destroy government debt.

In some countries that is quite doable.

In other countries it is quite problematic because if you

try to do that, you have to think of two

things simultaneously.

Refinancing.

But isn't it the point of the policies implemented right

now to reduce the debt they amassed during the boom?

Problem is, there's a problem.

The problem.

The problem is you had refinancing costs.

Right.

So interest so government's taken the change of government that's

come along stated all the funds they have I think

Spain which is a particular problem.

So if government bonds have a seven year maturity means

you have to refinance 5% every year, even if the

value of bonds has gone down, your borrowing costs are

can outweigh the cost.

So it makes sense, if you will, if you're not

running the deficit.

That is, if you're if just you're paying tell you

that it's okay to refinance.

Not.

And that's really important to note.

So this is what stuck in the years decades after

World War Two unfold in the fifties and sixties and

then the 1970s was called the Lost Decade in most

countries in the world.

This was a time when you had high inflation, depression,

physical, up and up and up.

And economics and economies were contracting for just about the

entire decade.

That gave us the lovely words.

Stagflation means stagnation and inflation.

And a lot of commentators are worried that we are

now back into a stagflation type loads where we are

stuck with long term inflation and negative growth.

And the cost of solving this was enormous.

So difficult to solve this problem.

This is why to come back to what I would

say if inflation is not killed now.

It will become an absolute monster in five years time.

And these.

So we cannot overemphasise how to get information of the

control to the.

So of course.

Okay, we'll skip this one.

Fighting inflation is very costly.

The only time I have to.

U.S. president using the third derivative mathematical thriller from the

speech was when Richard Nixon said the rate of increase

of inflation is going down.

Remember, that's a third derivative argument.

We need to learn how to fight inflation.

And roughly speaking, the way that is done is by

creating a recession, creating a very sharp economic contraction.

Massive unemployment, massive foreign asset prices, and not very high

interest interest rates and the other countries is very, very

painful.

It is to get rid of inflation.

And if you want to understand all the arguments going

on today, that's exactly what should be that in the

year 2022.

Well, not.

And therefore, the most important economic question of the year

is, is inflation temporary or is it permanent?

You come back to the bedroom?

So the central banks after the crisis in 2003, they

said we don't want to repeat the mistakes from the

Great Depression.

I told this story before the first bullet point and

the response to the to the crisis in 2008 was

very low interest rates, a massive creation of money.

And I'll compare three countries here on this.

So if you take this is when the crisis comes.

Interest rates in the United States have peaked to 5%.

And quite quickly after the crisis started, the U.S. started

lowering interest rates.

Japan kept it low, but they've already very low.

So that's not interesting.

But see, Europe.

Europe was raising interest rates until the crisis was already

starting.

We kept a very high level for a year afterwards.

Out of curiosity, do you know what U.S. interest rates?

So I have a theory.

So.

The United States always have people working for the central

bank, and especially the New York Friends of the Fed

understood financial markets.

They knew something was happening.

Crisis hit.

They started really seriously in the pope in 2008, but

the crisis started in early 2007.

And I think the U.S. realised that things would become

iffy.

And this was not the right time to reduce liquidity

when markets would be stabilised.

Also, they reacted so quickly because they had competent people.

The ECB have no defensive England on the way, so

therefore, by cutting interest rates so quickly in the US

last month the US economy started recovering very, very quickly.

The European Commission kept sliding into recession.

Then that led to the European sovereign debt crisis.

That country contributed to the European sovereign debt crisis.

I think we have to go by this data on

most of 2000 participants of the central bank.

This includes the interest rates by a net person.

So on the top of them, yeah.

People 5%, that's a good job they did.

But I think let's still say the previous let's just

be how you started thinking of a central bank.

This was not prepared for the good those in a

crisis like.

They were they were raising then because it became because

of the financial markets were because the economy was growing

rapidly.

Yeah.

Is so the U.S. and Europe, European economies.

So this is right after the reform of Germany.

This ended in 2003 for the Germany was growing, but

the rest of Europe was growing rapidly and they were

worried about European inflation.

U.S. was the same.

So that so that was driving this.

But just people say the central bankers didn't work, jump

in the run up to the crisis, but financial regulators

failed.

No.

The the the the.

Well, the not different people, by the way.

But see, here in the run up possibly.

But see here how how behind from the European reactions.

That is.

That's a real problem.

It's a real problem in the ECB.

The actions we hold lately at.

And by the way, you assume that I am the

only you know that the crisis we know have.

But let's let's debate that discussion.

And they can take the central bank assets.

This is QE, basically.

So the Fed has almost had this is a percentage

to GDP for the Fed is keeping assets to GDP

steady until about.

You can't you can't get months here.

So this is this is the Central November, October, September

is four five between September and October.

That's a massive liquidity injection.

And you see how how small the ECB liquidity injection

is by comparison.

Again, what happened is and this is if you you

into geopolitics.

Now, some of you I took into geopolitics.

The U.S. is the liquidity provider to the world.

This is proof of that.

And both the title of this year also sharply increases

U.S. power globally.

If you would like not to like this.

No, it was very effective.

What is the role played by China in playing this

coordinated crisis?

Whether they will be able to monetise.

That.

Process but.

Not the people of China put in the roles.

So.

The effectiveness was this to prevent 2008 from becoming a

global crisis since the Great Depression?

So it worked.

The problem is, and this is what we did next,

is it created the expectation that the central banks are

now responsible for general economic well-being.

They did not have before.

And now we see the consequences of that.

So let's take a quick break and come back to

my slides of strength and told me I'm missing the

rest of the slides and I try to go out

and fix it.

It's a question what I have now.

So I will have to complete this chapter next week.

But the only way to deal with this, I will

have a slight slackened.

Slightly to say he would make a difference for those

in crisis to those that are put on TV.

You know, I have no slights beyond this.

I don't have the the the.

The.

That they want us to do that.

Yeah.

I can't go beyond this one and this missing.

So we had to is they have quite some distance

I concrete because I feel I can fix it but

I can't fix it in.

Give me more time.

I have no I'll move on to the next chapter

and finish this one next week.

So.

Oh, that takes us to that show.

So if it were the central bank banking crisis.

Oh, that's a fun chapter.

So it's an optimistic topic.

And then you can remind me next week where I

should continue on with the central bank.

So why do we have banks?

Well, banks, of course they are.

They are the necessary evil of the financial system they

seek between borrowers and lenders.

And why can't people directly lend to people?

Well, we have search costs.

You have to find some of the land to verify

that they can pay back.

You have to monitor them to make sure that they

are doing the right thing and you have to enforce

your claims.

If they don't pay and you give them food.

A very famous Peruvian economist called him.

Now, the De Soto, who wrote a marvellous book four

years ago called The Mystery of Capital, which is why

some countries control because they can lose productive resources and

investment into the real economy, which is why you have

at least three issue, why India's the biggest owner of

gold in the universe.

This is a completely non-productive asset.

It's amazing, right.

So the and and save a lot of developing countries

is money stacked in assets that have not hurt the

economy.

And this is a big part of that.

Another dishonest argument was that if you want to grow,

you have to be able to take the savings of

the country and use them within the country.

Instead, what happens in the developing world is all the

wealth goes to New York or London, where it helps

all the people, but not the country.

And a big part of that is you don't have

these mechanisms, and especially with enforcement, it's a fairly big

thing because the courts don't enforce these laws, then nobody

bothers living.

So food banks provide diversification.

They are allowed to pool assets.

They provide liquidity.

So that and maturity transformation, meaning I can put my

money as a deposit into a place, I think withdraw

the money in a time of want.

But.

Banks can then make a 30 year loan with.

So let's say benefit of bank and they laugh that

it is a money.

But the problem with banks is.

Runs and we'll discuss runs in Washington the next chapter.

But a bank run is a that's a term means

if a sufficient number of depositors want the money back,

World Bank, the Bank of Spain, simply because it can

meet all obligations.

It's a liquidity, but not a solvency.

Let's remember the distinction between liquidity and solvency from a

few weeks ago.

That's exactly where that comes from.

No.

The first thing I know of is the Medici Bank

in northern Italy.

Which held so basically in part created to bypass usury

laws most of the time in Europe that prohibited charging

interest on loans.

A little bit like Islamic banking is today.

And because it presumes that they four or 550 years

of the history that a 32% return on average on

assets.

And if you ever happen, go to Florence, Italy.

You see what happened to the money.

It is one of the most magnificent cities in the

world, not least thanks to those people.

A lot of other stories, by the way, but I'm

ignoring all of that.

So this is how they would do things, how they

would do things.

And by the way, in in 1400, the most powerful

financial centre in the universe was supposedly what they would

do is you were exporting, say, from UK to Italy.

Some person would agree.

They would give them.

They would give them.

They would give them money.

And then they would the things you would lend somebody

money.

And then it would be paid back with interest.

And then, of course, a little bit later on, it

would repay the money back.

No problem.

Expense is one problem, says moral hazard.

The so-called extreme moral hazard means that when those who

take risks don't have to face all the consequences of

failure, but get all the benefits like a say, if

you go on a holiday and you help all those

people and you throw off your iPhone and get run

over by a car you claim of insurance, that's moral

hazard, which can be because if you really want to,

you can make that happen deliberately.

I think that's been known to happen.

But with insurance.

They know about this.

So each of the banks managed more than assets.

Problem this moral hazard is, but it's not compensated, meaning

it's not priced in.

So if you moral hazard, sex is everywhere, but it's

not not a problem if you can deal with it.

But if you can't if you can't price it, then

it does create a problem.

The biggest problem there is government guarantees.

So the government promises to support somebody in the financial

system like deposit insurance or all of us to fail.

You know, the government cannot price these things in its

means.

So it's quite easy for the private sector to take

advantage of a government guarantee.

And that means, of course, in reality, if you are

called to a problem that creates it, you start providing

support to the private financial sector.

You can't just simply you have to do a huge

number of things because once you start providing support, you

start creating moral hazard.

Mediasite To regulate money, regulate its own problems, and they

keep on creating problems of governments.

Control of the financial system becomes ever more intrusive, ever

more powerful.

So, so long words and big reason for that is

moral hazard.

And we discussed this in chapter 14 of your time

on the bailout.

But basically, from a financial regulation point of view, the

bigger the more dangerous, the worse run and the more

interconnected a financial institution is, the more likely it is

to be bailed out.

Therefore, you have incentives to be badly run.

Very simply, every government does guarantee.

This product guarantees, then you might want to be at

different.

For that reason.

Now how costly a banking crisis.

Well, if you take the typical country and want your

data, go back to the 1800s.

The probability of a typical country in the world of

having a banking crisis has fluctuated from zero to about

seven or 8%.

And the 19 1950s and sixties.

This standout, the fifties.

This is the safest decade in human history.

And we have now come back to a time tunnel

that we had before.

So the typical country today has a policy of five

or 6% chance of a banking crisis in a given

year or one year out of 20.

Or if you look at it, they are slightly differently.

And the most dangerous year, there was 13 banking crisis

in the world.

And again, if you're interested in this data, you can

download this five version column, the balance to keep track

of all the banking crisis in the world along with

the costs of them.

This makes for a very nice material for theses use

of properties of things.

If you need this for anything.

But what that's like always ends up rotating in.

Because I wasn't ready for this lecture.

I didn't have time to rotate it.

But let me just.

So how do you rotate in?

And we want to know how you rotate PDFs in

Acrobat.

So many.

So the country with the highest number of banking crisis.

So this is all countries with data since 1800 and

the country with the highest number of banking crisis is

the U.K., followed by the United States and France.

With Switzerland and Turkey the safest.

You don't usually see those two last countries together when

it comes to financial stability.

So that's what the data shows us.

This Credit Suisse.

I didn't know where that's going to take us, because

that is you can look tired by the day.

So see?

Oh, see Now looked in all of my slides.

Oh, I hate I could put.

How did I do this?

You wrote it, and now it has to be played.

Hmm.

See, I am learning.

I'm learning.

So the cost of banking crisis, is that up to

the.

The first is the direct fiscal cost of dealing with

the crisis.

And that means how much government money can be used

to bail out.

Thanks to what the rector supports.

Somebody's difficulty is the money that goes from the government

to the private sector in response to a banking crisis.

The indirect costs of a banking crisis is how it

affects the economy.

So this is beyond the fiscal cost, which is how

much does the economy flat on growth fall if you

have a banking crisis?

And these two people in London and Venezuela, by the

way, listen to the head of research at the OECD,

be a very nice person is the head of research

at ECB.

So they estimate output losses by extrapolating economic growth before

a crisis and saying if there have been no crisis,

you will continue to grow at that rate.

And therefore the actual economic growth compared to the hypothetical

is the output cost of crisis.

Well, the problem is this argument is often used in

this country in 2008 because.

So if you take until 2007, the UK economy was

growing rapidly, it was hit by crisis.

It's almost like the growth has shifted downwards.

And if we had continued to grow.

Then the shortfall.

But those tools in a 15 was 205 billion.

This number is often cited as a cost of the

2008 crisis for the UK.

It prompted this argument this.

If perhaps the rapid growth before the crisis.

Was due to excessive risk taking.

And if the UK had been more conservative.

Growth might have been lower following the Green line.

So the UK actually gained by having an economic growth.

Firstly, would you want to live in a country without

a crisis that roughly speaking, I gave you a chance,

I didn't explain.

But that roughly gives the arguments because if you try

to regulate everything very heavily, you make the cost of

borrowing very high.

This means you pulled back economic growth and it could

easily end up on the green.

As if we benefit from the crisis, not the other

way around.

There is no way to verify this.

This is surely hypothetical.

Just keep this in mind.

But I'm not making a claim.

All I'm saying is that when you see somebody discussing

the cost of crisis by this argument, is all this

subject to my counter argument and these two things being

unverifiable in practice?

I think you should make the movie for there because

they know what you want to do, whether their growth

can be so bad.

I think you know what, you are talking from investment

point of view, but does that mean that it could

work in terms of crisis started it all that way?

The economic condition is difficult.

The chances of making money playing out money is higher.

So from an investment point of view, we need to

invest in countries which are either troublesome, which are having

trouble in some countries as well, but still living.

I think we need to solve it that way.

What is it?

I mean, that.

Are not saying anything?

I'm saying I am not overstating the point.

I did not.

I was careful how I treat the point.

I am not I am not making any.

And by the way, I but personally, I would like

to admit some country to this country and this country

is much poorer than the country as one.

So is opposite position.

So personally, I think leaving that aside, if you take

this studies, they take some crisis.

Argentina.

Which is a lot of crisis.

One of the crises cost 55% of GDP to which

was the government expenditure to fight the crisis.

Finland in its crisis found 13%.

Indonesia 56%.

Korea 31.

Mexico 19.

Sweden 3.6.

Turkey 3.2.

So in most cases, I mean, in some cases the

the the press dominates and in other cases the output

loss is slightly bigger.

So if you take, say, Indonesia's is particularly badly affected,

there's both enormous fiscal costs.

And however, the growth in Indonesia before was certainly caused

by excessive inflows of money going unsafe things.

So Indonesia is very much subject to my critique of

the previous slide.

But the only point is this tells you the banking

crisis are not cheap.

On this one part I looked at in India when

I looked at some banks, you have some banks that

are in trouble.

Then what the latest several times is that therefore, that

troubles some banks from what you've seen with this underwriting.

It's very common, very common practice.

Cost of a discussion of this are very common.

So the government.

No, but you can only do that if you have

a failed by not a banking crisis.

Because it all depends on the difficulty of combining two

things in difficulty the big bad, the difficult to do,

and not for the third place.

I think you have to happen in breaking crisis.

So the cost of resolution and the you read some

poems, quote in first person, by the way.

He became the governor of the Bank of Ireland after

the Irish bailout in 2009 when he was imposed on

us to rebuild Ireland after this crisis due to work

at the World Bank.

And he did Good LLC, by the way.

So it's a discussion.

So he says in a quote, A famous study from

20 years ago, If countries have not extended some of

unlimited deposit guarantees open to support repeated recapitalisation, Step two

Bailouts and regulatory forbearance.

The cost of resolving the crisis would have been ten

1% of GDP instead of ten 10% of GDP.

Probably what he's arguing is that the cost of banking

crisis is not the crisis itself.

It's the cost of government interventions to fight the crisis.

These tend to be badly done.

And therefore the stakes.

The corollary to that is.

If the government needs a crisis for which it is

not prepared for it to spend a lot more money

dealing with it otherwise.

So it would take Europe and the UK in 2008

because the ECB it because the Bank of England were

ill prepared.

Both spent a lot more money fighting the crisis.

The only question would have.

So why do banking crisis happen like this?

This is a comedy.

Some Christian.

Fundamental cost is a banking crisis.

So we have to separate out the fundamentals and the

specifics.

The fundamentals of the things you surely press in all

banking crisis.

Regardless of the country.

The specific causes are specific to your country.

And so.

Banks make too many bad loans, which is fantastic in

good times, but because they make so many bad loans,

they could have lost too long.

Banks couldn't find anything to invest in before they exhausted

all of the value for investment.

They end up invested in risky things.

It quite often a real estate.

I got to tell you a story.

So one of the most famous students of the crisis

is Robert Alexander, professor of Chicago.

He came to Iceland in 2008 and said on TV,

you were about to have a crisis.

Everybody freaked out.

How did you make that judgement when it drove from

the airport to the teams to get counted?

The number of building crates you're building everywhere.

That means you're building too much.

If you build too much, you will have a financial

crisis.

That's a very good indicator of crisis.

Spain in 2007 used more concrete and the rest of

Europe combined.

Think about it, space has 40 million people.

Europe has 500 million people.

Spain, less than 10% of Europe is more concrete.

But everybody.

The whole building everywhere, of course, ended up in the

same apartment at a lower prices and say it's quite

possible to happen in China at the moment.

So that's the point.

And you end up investing in the wrong things.

And that means it takes an increasingly small patch of

everything to turn Trump down.

So basically what things are so so you're quite the

silly aftershocks.

But I should keep on going up to your front

yard.

Too bad news.

So I think he can expand.

It takes a very small thing for anything to come

crashing down quite a bit.

And it's an old crisis.

Minsky is due.

The crisis was said.

Who said stability is destabilising?

He said, You should think about this in terms of

financing.

So he said companies can have three types of financing.

First, go ahead, financing.

That is when firms borrow little and when they borrow,

they can be paid loans out of cash for.

The second type is speculative because firms rely on cash

flow to repay interest rates, so they keep on rolling

that principle over.

The third type is called Ponzi financing, or the cash

flow is not sufficient to repay either the principal or

interest rates.

So firms affecting the asset will increase in value to

replace the last.

Which sector of the financial system has to fall into

category three predominantly?

Real estate.

Yes, but people pay the price.

I know.

I know.

It's hard.

It's this type of company in the financial system will

predominantly rely on three.

We them know.

Private equity.

Private equity is really cowboys.

And if you take the one of the biggest dangers

with interest rates at the moment, which is that if

you belong to category one.

You got it.

You too.

Interest rates and interest rates for what you use in

supply.

But corporate borrowings have been sharply increasing over the past

15 years with low interest rates.

Doesn't help if you can borrow at almost zero.

Then that becomes health and then you can always pay

dividends or buy stock.

This is increasingly common cooperation left what corporations can leverage

just sharply increasing, but that is eventually become so depth

that a corporation and seven to an incredibly sweet meaning

if there's any disruption.

Well cooperation is facing very serious difficulties.

So the systemic consequence of interest rates going up and

now is the number of companies in category two and

especially three that are now much more common than they

used to be.

A massive corporate team is going to be looking up

and this is why he said stability is destabilising and

this has become quite a common turn of phrase.

And I'm just quoting one governor.

The previous governor of the Bank of the People's Bank

of China, he said.

Is it excessive optimism in the boom period?

It will lead to an accumulation of conflicts which may

end up in a so-called loose involvement which has become

the collective terms of the previous.

So specific.

Anything on the general general causes of panic of banking

crisis?

Let's go to specific ones.

In the developing world, especially commodity price booms are a

big part of a big contributor to banking crisis.

What know a real economy shocks like a savers could

be.

Russia and Ukraine fall into that category and liberalisation which

really discussed the financial liberalisation.

So we'll discuss a little bit later.

Bad regulation and corruption and crime but all known drivers

specific drivers of banking crisis.

But basically, by and large, the fundamentals are well understood.

But the triggers of crisis are many.

And I'm not going to go through this list.

But here is one shocking burst of crisis and the

cause is often.

Financial liberalisation is an interesting one.

I know If I asked you, would you want more

liberal deregulation, more liberalisation?

I would guess a priority.

Go to the club next week.

74.

75% say no and 25% say yes.

So why would.

You.

Want to liberalise the financial sector?

Well, what are the rules?

What is the richest country in Europe?

Jamie Dimon, the capital markets overseas.

And why of Luxembourg's business.

Finance Minister.

When I say the richest country in Asia, the capital

of Singapore.

What is Singapore's business?

Banking and all the things right?

Crystal Palace's financial sector is a huge contributor to economic

growth.

It's a huge country with this country, but drives the

British economy.

The city of London, which is just a sheer.

Which of course is the reason why the lack of

the disability cost LFC 15 million.

By.

Because it's certainly expensive real estate because she still to

being next door.

So therefore, if you have a small financial system, maybe

you want to liberalise to become a big financial.

You might be Cyprus or you might be Iceland, or

you might Ireland, you might be Moscow, or you might

be Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia or Panama, etc. etc. etc. etc..

Want to lose this a right way and a wrong

way to liberalise.

A common mistake countries make is to deregulate, but continue

to provide government guarantees.

So you end this war more moral hazard.

What was at the heart of the savings and loan

crisis in the U.S.?

So we discussed the later and the Scandinavian crisis also

discussed later.

And the issue of crisis was not discussed, but a

long chapter in my book.

So this is one real crisis.

And then we have the basic political economy fighting for

purpose.

And one of the persons with a visual expertise is,

yes, she was professor of political science and a good

friend of mine.

Let's see, was written, quote, The lower body is actually

the shark prince, the former head of Citigroup.

He said.

15 years ago.

As long as the music was playing, you've got to

get up and dance.

Meaning, as long as the financial system is expanding rapidly,

you cannot stop participating in the expansion of the financial

system.

You have to continue even though you know it would

take you to do.

The public sees the benefits, the economy is growing and

you've got this, which means this is fantastic.

So the public, I feel the economy is getting weaker.

Everybody's buying because in fact, the houses and fancy phones,

politicians take the lead from the public.

The bank might know better, but.

They probably enjoyed the right to the technocrats.

You know, if they tried to warn against this risk

being denounced, losing their incomes, being prosecuted or assassinated.

And if you think that is something only happens in

dictatorships, both South Korea and Greece have prosecuted somebody who

won a group who essentially told the truth.

And Greece persists to the state until exactly that's what

Greece is to South Korea sort of gave up.

So it's very hard for someone if you are in

a country in a bubble state, it's very hard for

anybody to say, hang on, people.

Maybe you should take a slow breath and slow things

down.

It is practically impossible.

And the former head of the Federal Reserve in the

United States, he said the job of the central bank

is to take over the principal just as the party

gets going.

It's very difficult politically to do that.

So the political argument for even though, you know, everything

is going to end up in a bad way, you

cannot stop doing it.

No corruption.

It is a strange form.

Corruption fuels a lot of bank failures around the world.

I only know three banking crisis caused by corruption.

If you know of one, please let me know.

I mean, I would love to hear more.

But I ask people like so in the Venezuela and

the Dominican Republic, both of them.

Thanks.

Well, I think banks are sensitive to this with the

taking deposits, but they didn't record the deposits as liabilities

on the books.

Instead, they paid the lowest profits to the owner, so

they just falsified the books.

Because these are big banks.

Eventually the fact that the banks failed, the government had

to pay them out and that caused the crisis in

the Dominican Republic, by the way.

It's the most beautiful example of corruption.

I have heard of the ruling families of Dominican Republic

all the.

They stole the money and they got the government to

pay them all afterwards to pay twice.

So it's like a thief says, I'm going to steal

hundred pounds.

Go give me another hundred pounds.

So let's see what is the best case in the

Moldovan?

What they usually have is an overnight.

Some people open the Baltic banks and Moldova, and some

some deny it transferred all of assets to Hong Kong

and disappeared.

It basically collapsed the banking system like that.

And nobody knows to the for these people.

So this is the only known case to me of

corruption, cost of banking for me.

If you know, for example, please let me know.

I think you've been there.

I learned that even though they.

I cannot.

Because.

Corruption.

That is that is that is corruption must not be

caused by accepting a small share.

We will not break the law.

You take time to Asia and South Korea and Malaysia

if you want to extend it.

The banks would take advantage of the rules, but they

would not break the rules.

That's a difference.

So if you put it in opening the case, let

me know.

By the way.

I would love to add to my shopping list.

So in the world, there's a huge number of banking

failures.

I will.

I am only discussing a handful and only discussing these

because we need to change the way you think about

finance.

So these are not discussed.

I'm not choosing this because it is spectacular.

I am using them because they have an impact.

So we the start of Germany in 1974.

First off, used to be a large relative in the

fifties.

Lot to.

Germany is a country with a huge number of banks.

It's actually using a large number of banks.

So you have a few large ones, but a huge

number of medium sized banks.

First, that you send to the 15th largest bank to

Germany.

The U.S. makes a fairly sizeable.

And the family hosted the Internet banking business in Germany

for 200 years.

Almost continues.

It's a long family history of you for.

No.

Here's why this is important.

There is speculating on the Deutschmark dollar.

Like a lot of people, they lost money.

It's a lot of people did.

But here's what happens, why it's important.

The German authorities closed them down at the close of

business German time.

They did that in Germany, but they continue to operate

in New York.

So the bank was simultaneously closed on one country and

is bankrupt in one country and not people in another.

So what happened is they look back.

So they were receiving false marks and promises that they

never thought that was a trade.

It was quite smuggled in Germany, Germany time.

And they're supposed to deliver dollars, I think close of

business, New York time.

And they they allow in Germany to receive replacements.

But they could not deliver the dollars in New York.

Of settlement.

This.

And the consequence of the two consequences of that, by

the way.

So we start off important.

First is we allow for foreign exchange.

We have now moved to continue settlements.

So you have some money calls back and forth immediately.

And we have no mechanisms in the settlement process to

prevent this from happening.

Secondly is what happens, what the government authorities can not

refuse to cooperate internationally.

What happened is that the German regulator refused to talk

to foreign regulators.

They said, we are German.

We will talk before Sarkozy.

AM I'm not making this up.

And that meant they refused to give information to regulators

or the authorities in New York or London as well.

So the consequence of that was if I if they

closed down, the German regulator created a new one, complete

German reform afterwards.

Equally importantly, local regulations.

This is the Basel Accords to discuss if they allow

regulators are required to cooperate internationally.

So banking regulators, they might work in a single country,

but they are required to have extensive cooperation and information

sharing.

The regulators problem will be cost of documents.

Questions.

So we've got Italy.

No, that's much more of a more colourful example.

That corporation used to be the biggest private party in

Italy.

The chairman of the bank, well, practically belonged to what

was an illegal nation with lots propaganda to it.

It was also called God's Bank because he had such

close relationship to the Vatican.

For those of you know, your Catholic history, you find

that these two institutions, it may seem like lots of

the Catholic Church and not necessarily historical friends.

So it's a critical anomaly and also close connection to

another famous Italian enterprise called the South.

Now, the Italian regulator and the Bank of Italy are

competent.

To bypass Italian regulations operating via Luxembourg.

And Luxemburg said, We don't care what you do outside

of Luxembourg.

So they could break the Italian law in Luxembourg without

the Italian authorities knowing they were doing so.

Whatever the reason, they collapsed because they were borrowing dollars

of foreign money to buy.

Their own stock.

So they've got quite a euro denominated assets.

So the problem, of course, is if you know Italian

history, Italy was running high inflation and frequent devaluations.

Then Italy had one of its frequent evaluations.

The euro collapsed in value.

So therefore the value in Italian value of the liability

swept off because the dollar got stronger their own, that

the asset values were constant and therefore they could not

meet their obligations and event fails.

So this was what they did was illegal for Italia

boss.

So he fled.

Support.

So he was arrested.

He was sentenced to jail.

Was able to see, went to London.

He was found hanging onto Blackfriars Bridge, basically up here.

No.

I take the Blackfriars Bridge to work every day so

I can sort of see exactly.

I sort of think of all the things under the

bridge.

To this day, we don't know.

He was killed.

We killed himself.

But basically this led to a potential change to some

regulations because Biloxi authorities who claimed that they could not

did not have to speak about Italian law were no

longer able to do so.

So therefore, this goes beyond the first case.

This is important information.

This says you can not break free.

Break the law abroad if make later has to cooperate

with the domestic regulation.

You remember first after in the break in, the ball

is finally at BCCI.

BCCI was a Luxembourg is recce registered bank had offices

in Karachi, Pakistan and London.

Basically think of Qatar and Pakistan.

And what they were doing is they were recording.

They made only books.

Timothy Deposits.

So they said so.

So they laid the acid site.

By basically flying.

Not at first and not the last to do so.

And then they said they made a lot of loans

with a lot of profits.

So they're quoted profits on the books.

That's not true.

And then when they started losing money, they repaid deposits.

They used depositors money to repay trading losses.

This means they were just bound to collapse.

So the accountants.

P wc used to call Price Waterhouse Coopers, but then

called P w price now called P WC.

But before this Price Waterhouse attended works for Coopers, they

were increasingly convinced that the fraud was an authentic, that

the financial statements were inaccurate.

They formed the regulator, the Bank of England.

The liquidators p p filed a lawsuit against auditors p

w security.

And they had to pay out $175 million because they

did not detect the fraud.

Now, this becomes important.

The creditors tried to sue the Bank of England because

the Bank of England was a regulator of the CCI

that mostly was eventually thrown out and went through the

court system.

So the issue is as well.

So this one is super important because it's the you

can sue the auditor.

Obviously it's the case with the authority regulating.

Well.

It depends on the country.

Depends on the country.

And in Europe, it turns out, is surprisingly easy for

the United States to come.

But in Europe, you can't.

So it creates reputation risk because it's an institution responsible

for monetary policy.

Committee is also regulating.

They messed up regulations then that can undermine the reputation

of the central bank.

And that is why the United Kingdom in 1997 moved

regulations from the Bank of England to a new regulator

called FSA.

This was headed by a former deputy governor of the

Bank of England who then became the director of policy

a few years later.

But then the global crisis in 2007 came and they

realised this was not sensible and they merged all the

regulations back to the bank.

India and.

By the way, because the Bank of England is seen

as wolf eating in regulations, it is often in water.

Until recently.

A lot of all the countries do the same thing.

Question.

So you said that PricewaterhouseCoopers was there for something that

would be okay, but they won't agree with you.

And then here within Pricewaterhouse, it was eventually setting the

case for $174 billion, go the other way and eventually

became collapse.

We called it the peak peak because the it happened

on his watch.

It should have noticed earlier.

And you see the difference.

Remember the credit rating discussion we have last week?

This is the thing, because in order to say they

have a fiduciary duty to do the job properly.

So people, we now have a fairly strange setup because

I have to finish I have to start the system

with figures out to us and Sweden.

And then we discuss best practices and regulations and then

figure out what went wrong with my central banking slides.

Let's take a quick break and come to you after

the.

Able to figure out how to do this, actually, you

know.

So we have.

To talk about.

So I.

And by the way, you can see the results and

who you.

If it's just, you know, just a few things like

that.

There's some.

It's just.

Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.

That's why you're not having a good time.

You just.

This was just going to.

I thought my shoes.

Also joining us as we have recently, was just a

couple of ways that this was able to give us

an idea of what it takes to.

Oh, I know.

How did you know that anyone could help him out

and talk about, you know, even I have no idea

what it's like to be on this planet.

So I think that some of these people I just

think that somebody with an outsider that connects with them.

And so I said, Oh, I think I love this.

I know that, you know, I, I was looking for

something like this, but I mean, this is an opportunity

for us to talk about this stuff because you have

to get out of this building right away, that this

is what I said about this a little bit about

like about how to to my.

I want to take you.

Guys.

This.

Okay, do that.

I have a little bit about partly because I have

no I have not started to talk things, so it's

actually a bit difficult to discuss localised.

Usually given 5 to 12 bursts.

So.

So I will probably try to spend most of my

time in Central Park and I might do a little

bit on the banking crisis, but that's neither here nor

there.

But because this, well, I always wanted to know is

asking people to outline the main functions of a central

bank.

And I'm asking for a volunteer to give me one

of them.

What is the function of the central bank?

And give me a little bit of discussion of it.

We want to talk.

Controlling inflation rate by market.

Who won't?

Why?

Why would you do this?

What do you want to do.

To economic growth?

And.

And.

Financial stability.

Okay.

Anybody else want to post?

What is missing is the price stability to keep inflation

steady.

I a central bank function.

People.

Printing money.

That's not the central tension that falls under the hood

of insurance.

You're probably not even up to scratch from another central

part of the law.

Acting as lender of the last step in times of

crisis.

What is that?

So explain a little bit, because it's a this is

a tricky point.

In terms of systemic crisis.

The Select Group of eight, the central bankers have been

placed what money and then why they want.

Whether financial assets to provide support, support for the economy.

The oppression kind of situation.

I can tell you, these shoes ripped off the floor

like a luxury resort.

A lot focus on last resort.

But what it is, is actually seeing correctly is the

central bank provides liquidity support to financial institutions in difficulty.

And it's not it's not technically it is not supposed

to be a bailout because you're only supposed to do

this for institutions that are technically solvent.

Even though this, however, the only issue with this really

falls under the general heading of financial stability.

So therefore, it's a subject of not debate and not

one of the five linguists is sympathetic for financial stability.

Another one more use of a lot.

Quantitative easing forced monetary policy.

Managing foreign.

Exchange reserves.

If that's a.

Separate.

Yep.

Okay.

That you might that might not necessarily be true of

some countries.

And that's what makes you think you might think you

know, you might do.

That, but it's.

Certainly not a way to function.

I wouldn't call it.

No, you're probably technically correct.

I would not put it to someone in peculiar supervision.

What is the position?

Regulations.

Supervision and supervision always with the central bank.

Why would you want supervision to be with the Central

Park?

Well.

But why would you want it?

What's a good idea?

So let's take the point.

But you were you are exactly correct.

You would have gotten pretty much, by the way, that

extent.

And look, I want to take this point one step

further.

So she says supervision, which is correct, and thus enforcement

of regulations.

Correct.

One reason why it's a good idea for the central

bank to do supervision of one reason.

It's a bad idea.

Of the.

One reason it's a good idea is because.

Bureaucratic bodies.

The cycle for one reason is a good idea is,

as it was says, and there are more than one

more reason.

One reason is that because they are independent of their

independent, they are less they are less subject to political

pressures that might force them to pay somebody out that

is politically favoured.

Another reason?

Think you can make a joke by raising their frustrations.

No, I'm not done this mission yet.

No, no, you first ever.

For if they're the regulator as well as the one

establishing policy, they have a fuller picture of what's happened

in the global financial system and are able to.

Yeah.

Yes.

Indeed.

Information.

Yeah.

I was going to say.

Oh, good.

Two ways.

A wife might that might be a bad idea for

the central bank.

Because it can contradict the other one.

They.

We're so excited for the PCI example.

This is an example that this is the if Mike

I the conflict that might need to do something for

supervision of conflict in monetary policy or it could undermine

the reputation.

Another objective now.

You know, I think you have one right to keep

the.

Economy in shape.

Trust me, it's I.

So.

Okay, now I'm going to challenge you a little bit.

That is correct.

But what if you wanted to be more formal?

Keep the economy in check.

Of.

Yeah, it's a big deal.

I can be more formal.

Macroeconomic objectives.

So as you said.

But you're you've recalled a few months ago.

So what is what are they trying to do with

this?

I mean, they're controlling inflation.

They are trying to do.

But they're unable to do it.

Like, for example.

No, no, no, no, no.

He's still as you.

So sorry.

Continue.

Yeah.

I was going to say, like.

For example, if they find global inflation, but it floods

up and then you get they're not able to cut

their bank.

What are my objectives?

People price stability and employment.

No.

Price stability is monetary policy that's not related to this

macro macro at the moment is is really something slightly

different.

Somebody said the right words economic growth and unemployment.

This is more or less the same thing.

No.

One, low unemployment for high growth, usually for political reasons

it is stated as low a high employment or low

unemployment rather than high growth.

Because growth is, if purely political, because they move and

they move together.

But growth is often seen as either being more abstract

or even negative.

Well, unemployed employment is you should have seen as positive.

Another objection, more central focus.

You object to non-financial means protecting investment.

That is increasingly increasing the role of central banks.

So people, do you think.

What you sense limits to the environment because it's increasingly

complicated.

How can the central bank.

How is environmental policy?

Not having people having.

Paid with money is one of the parties that does

not.

Depend on their purchasing.

I get so grateful.

And then you have things like pelicans.

Age.

So exactly how, she said was one way the central

bank could use monetary policy is.

So if you still want to keep executing monetary policy

and one is buying bonds on the open market, they

could explicitly target green bonds like quotas for green companies

from brown companies.

So they could buy they would buy bonds of windmill

companies for foreign companies.

So that is one way they can do that.

What's another way.

Just to reduce the size of their mandates is to

legalise the.

Target is.

Sure.

Sure.

Actually, I don't know.

I mean.

That's the of it.

But you know something, by.

The way, I think in the treaty, it is it

is illegal that the way they put it is because

they believe that they will find this economy.

They know it's going to be load of whatever.

Okay.

So let me explain what the gentleman just said.

Right.

So this is the Federal Reserve, the U.S. or the

Bank of England or the Bank of China or the

Bank of Japan chose to buy bonds from increased competition

from companies.

I don't think that would be an issue in any

of these countries.

But what he's saying is, because the the underlying treaty

to keep its bank from discriminating.

Exactly.

Therefore, the ECB cannot.

This isn't a set of rules that applies to the

ECB, but this does not apply to all the countries.

And then he saying and I used it, I didn't

know this.

And therefore the ECB is bypassing that by someone interpreting

enough financial stability which is stretching the galaxy.

Which is pushing musicality a bit.

I love the way the central bank can do with

environmental policy at the same time.

One of the problems.

Discouraging lending discouraging, letting go, companies attracting.

Let me hear about how the U.S. economy can help

you do the.

Payment policies to give preference.

To general.

You have something.

Maybe they could provide lower interest rates to banks.

Um.

To learn more, to know what you cannot do, what

you cannot do.

You can not you can not have two types of

central bank policy made for finance depending on the asset

mix of the banks.

And not.

Always just say no.

I don't think I don't think I would open technically,

you would think on this much more, obviously.

So when you listen to what.

Goldman can do, some kind of incentives.

The government can't give you five percentage points.

So how could the central bank.

So one way.

So there is two ways they can do this.

One way is to find the balance between companies cheating

on the spending.

But in other countries, it's not true.

Or another way, the consumer, which is exactly what you

should be discussing, but.

So Houston, ECP, by the way, computer science.

And I was not thinking about in terms of this

cool.

I wrote a blog post on this over the weekend

on this very topic because I was curious.

The way this is done in Europe is by banking

regulations.

So this is the ultimate close.

Because a rogue company is likely to go bankrupt in

the future.

The causes of the problems industry green companies related to

prosper lending to growth companies are riskier than lending to

Greek companies and therefore the capital charge.

So I would define profitable yet but it's affected cost

of lending.

Cost of lending to green companies is lower the cost

of lending to drug companies.

So that's the primary way you would have confidence.

And that person to think that argument is wrong.

I was under the.

Influence of.

The Sputnik because I think the quality was in the

EU, which is a different matter that I can't speak

to.

But.

So I had to kind of do that in about

two or three weeks, but thankfully so is essentially it?

If I make a bank loan to say, luckily that

she's high risk and I make a bank loan, luckily

she's low risk.

I have to keep research, I guess loan to her,

but not to go.

If I look both of them, 1,000,000.

She is high risk.

She's low risk.

I have to have reserves of 50 million for her

bank loan and 200 million for conventional.

Do it.

Assess the facts before.

You hang on a second.

Just discusses the accounting mechanism for how you do this.

The effects have you to say you need more reserves

for loans too high too soon.

I could borrow.

So this is done.

This is just part of banking regulations and then they

can classify brown borrowers.

High risk, higher risk on all of us would be

to increase the ability to serve.

We have to hold against this loss, making loans more

costly.

So they're doing the same thing I was suggesting before

that these different way.

Yeah, but this is the mechanism.

Yeah, this is the mechanism.

No, you're right.

But this is how.

Come here.

Well, that's what's.

Sorry, this is what's being proposed.

Now, I personally think this argument is.

Really?

Really tricky because and I think the groups should be

equal challenges to this point.

The problem with the argument is that any environmental standards

for free data from companies.

Comes decades into the future.

It's not coming within the lifetime of a loan.

So even if a loan to a coal mining company.

Are they going to continue to mining coal, oil or

coal producing electricity company?

They're going to continue to operate for the life of

the long.

They might even have government contracts to do that, and

therefore they are low risk for the life of the

law.

So they were saying because of the type of company

country, we might go bust in 50 years, this is

quite possible.

This not new.

This company is going to help us me this in

the next two years, which is sort of like.

So therefore, Elizabeth, use of the system?

Well, I think it should be part of government policies

other than upset over that.

That is exactly is the correct point.

Right.

The the this is what I think we might call

it.

This is trying to.

Achieve a policy goal.

That belongs to one part of government and using the

inappropriate tool to have accomplices.

That makes more.

Sense.

That's my take.

However, by the way, this is highly controversial.

So have you covered all of the central bank's functions

in this?

Yeah.

And the quiet one, the one they don't like to

talk about, which is the one about them being able

to bail out governments and finance directly that.

Which has happened in various.

In the past.

But still a country.

To not have that constitution.

Exactly.

So the this is you.

If you look at the legal mandates.

So this is what legality versus reality.

It's not the same.

I don't know of any Central Coast which has within

Los.

You have to bailout governments and the IMF, which is

why it involved the central bank, lost everyone.

So they sort of the way central bank law should

be with the most countries in the world come from

the IMF, directly or indirectly IMF, to certain more stressed

stresses.

But this always has been that big part.

And we met with the Bank of England, was created

for that purpose.

The reason they were created.

So therefore it must have been in full force at

the time.

So failing of governments in difficulty for finance of governments

is always been a part of the central bank's job.

We've got.

But why is that not just part of a sub

category of financial stability or maintaining.

On monetary policy?

Because.

It's it's different financial stability.

It's about whether the financial system is excessively risky.

Monetary policy and price stability is about inflation, which I

think it's cumulative saying to the government of your country,

spend more money than it otherwise would do by increasing

the money supply.

Just difference.

So how do you handle a spontaneous memory loss?

I mean, I might be wrong.

I mean, I don't know.

All of them, but I think some useful.

Yeah, but in the developed countries, do they explicitly forbid

it happened in this case, for example?

I If memory serves, I am not an expert in

ECP rules.

The reason ECP is intervening is use of the financial

stability mandate within the relevant treaty.

To do this.

So the United Kingdom or the United States, the central

bank can do without this note, nothing prohibiting it.

There's no loss of to this in Europe.

There is law.

So I would think this is totally a foundation security

part of the treaty.

But I am not going to claim to be an

expert on ECP law nor a lawyer for.

Anything else on the.

So why do you make a central bank independent?

So why is this central bank unique among government institutions?

Who never says anything.

Yes.

You know why they should be independent?

Just so they're not subject to political pressure.

Are going to be like.

Before the election.

Things tend to kind of interest rates, but.

You know, I'm sure.

They would they would want it to look better for

them.

Well.

Some of the contracts.

So do you think it's a good idea for central

banks to be independent?

How independent would you make the central?

Independent.

Like a school of.

What do you mean?

Like you said.

There.

That's a bit of trust between the two governments of

the EU, and they don't know which one.

I don't know that that that that is true.

So if the so what she is saying is if

the central bank is too removed from the political process,

especially within and especially within the EU, then that can

create some difficulties in how these two organisations cooperate.

How does the EU exercise control over the ECB?

But basically.

If the president.

Wins.

And one day I got it.

And she had sent it back.

Experience.

No.

She has economic experience thus.

She has helped the IMF and finance minister.

Susan.

Christine Lagarde is a lawyer who was the finance minister

of France.

Meaning very different experience from running a central bank to

be a finance minister.

And at the ECB.

At the IMF.

She was remote.

She kept a of grief from important decision making, delegating

not to leave below what is so.

What is the problem?

Back in a race is the governor of the central

bank is not a true expert in monetary policy.

So what problems could look like of Phoenix and what

problems could arise if the governor of the central part

is not a true expert on one person?

She could be influenced by people that that claim.

They are experts and so on.

And.

Canada's smart contract says.

That's exactly what's happening at the moment.

So if you are in charge of an important.

Function.

And you rely on the layer below you to give

you advice, and I always just give you different advice

how you can choose between different advice.

You see, if you don't know this, you have no

way of about it, right?

He knew what he was told in moment.

I was going to talk about this next week, but

I mentioned the house as it came up.

This is fairly big fight with 300 lead and something.

It's a first novel.

So Iris is chief economist in between monetary policy, direction

of the ECB, etc..

Snapple is concerned about high inflation.

She would like a more aggressive reaction to blame is

more a forward economist who trust is what he prefers

to do it slowly.

And these are very important.

One level below, Christine, like our people, she has to

pick and choose how they you choose between those two.

That's a bit of a tricky issue for a governor

of the central bank for monetary policy.

If they want, they can conclude that their agenda.

Central banking is a political agenda because they didn't have

an expert.

So she was appointed by the government and so on.

So the more likely that she will get blamed on

the government that later on was that events because at

the end of the day, growth of interest and then

government workers getting a little bit less tax from the

lower levels.

Because we are so this is always the case, of

course.

I mean, this is always the case.

So the basically the point.

So what is the.

So why know, let's look at let's look at the

pure abstract issue.

Why among all government policy permits.

Why is monetary policy at its price stability unique in

that you can give it to a government agency?

What is unique about monetary policy is not all the

other policies.

It's a way to make monetary policy with other products,

including independent government agency.

But it can't with anything else, including independent government agencies.

What is unique about monetary policy or price stability?

So this is a point that in not pulling the

slides we have wanted to discuss.

So here's the point.

Inflation is measured in almost three year time.

The central bank gives us mostly inflation numbers that they

expected to serve the United States, at least if you

measure efficiency.

I mean, that's all the big central banks measure.

So basically no inflation, basically anything.

And you can you could argue CPI is not correct,

but it's it's it's a standard.

You can.

There should be some well, and there are two instruments

to control it.

The price of money and the quantity of money.

So this time you have one measurable object and to

this support instruments.

These are highly transparent.

You can verify whether you do your job properly.

I think that is what allows a lot of the

governments to make this type of independent.

The problem is, as you move away from that transparency

into other domains.

So and it becomes harder for, for example, to take.

This environmental issue we discussed earlier.

If this if the Bank of England raises interest rates.

It affects everybody in the United Kingdom for good or

for bad.

It's a big, huge impact.

Some people lose more and some people benefits like, but

it's sort of diffused.

If you start to say this company is bad, this

company is good, I'm gonna use my policy to benefit

the good company and punish the bad company.

How can you make that decision if you don't have

that political support?

That's not a political decision done by entity that does

not have a political accountability.

So by taking on such and weakening macroprudential regulations in

a few weeks, it's all about it.

So the point is, if the policy objective have individual

persons identifiable business allowances or individual firms past winners and

losers, it's much harder to justify removing political oversight from

the.

So I think, therefore we get to these comments.

The central banks threatened to undermine the most cherished.

Comments.

So.

It is the court is the Reserve Bank of India

independence yet?

To a large extent, yes.

To a large extent.

So you can say what happened to the previous government.

That's why I'm reviewing the date of the 2012.

I can say that confidently.

And even with the limited crisis programme, none of the

impact was affected by that.

And you met the Nobel laureates, but also praised the

banking system in India.

So what?

So what?

Let me repeat what happened to write the Rajan?

There'd be more.

Than.

70 tomorrow.

It was.

No, no, no.

Thought that was the government doesn't cover the rock too

much.

And look, it was accompanied by.

A narrative like this.

You are unifiers.

Yeah.

You are fighting something that needs to be used.

He the was about.

What I mean is for, you know, this was a

crisis more complicated than that, by the way, because it's

okay.

I want to get this is a technicality so that

China is not the independent second largest is among the

big countries is quite unique in that and.

The Chinese government is tired of the weekend effectively replaced

by.

And it makes in a way, it's perfect sense.

But so if a lot of people are not democratic,

then the term independent central banks has no sensible me.

Right?

We need a particular political context to be able to

say that.

So given the Chinese political setup, it makes more sense

to have an independent central bank.

Among the committees.

So we.

Any questions or questions on any of this before the

10 minutes?

Well, I think even even in the U.S., the Federal

Reserve telling us there are so many locations that in

1978 the government was putting pressure on them not to

foot in like this way when slowly get inflation splatter.

And then in 1980, ultimately, before we can agree, there's

a lot of work to increase the risk by 20%,

10%, 15%.

Let me let me take that point into one important

caveat on all of this is something important.

When the United States killed inflation in 1981.

It was known this would be highly controversial.

And the president, Ronald Reagan, said to Paul Volcker, the

governor of the central bank, who could see by then,

you have my full political support.

When somebody criticises you, I will protect you.

And that is very important because even if you are

fully independent, you still need political protection against collusion.

And we'll come back to all of these issues next

week.

People, I will try to post the slides properly when

I.

Lecture 6:

It's a good thing that Americans are you.

Yes.

Think that's true.

This is John and she has sorry to hear about

this, but this is what they do.

So this is I can imagine, actually doing something like

this.

Although she was also said, yes, she did that, but

we don't know the reason.

You know, she has no secret that this is a

way that we were able to learn about it.

Yes.

That's really the message, which is still so true.

And I thought about it like, well, I think it's

a little bit more interesting than that so much.

I think, you know, it's great that I read that.

I was so excited.

For what we might have done before.

You know.

That's perfect.

So.

We ask you remember last time I was missing some

of some of my slides?

Unless I messed it up again, Those flights should not

be uploaded.

You should help on mobile.

Everything should be okay just to keep the sequencing not

too screwed up.

I am going to start.

I'm going to finish the from three areas.

Then I'll finish the central bank chapter and then possibly

towards the end of today I'll get into Bank Plus.

So why am I picking these particular bank failures?

Oh, well, I think there's this one in the.

The thing is, I ended here last.

It's not correct.

I finished the 20 use.

Yes.

No.

Okay.

I'm assuming I finished the previous section last week.

Those.

I did this one.

Get that thing finished.

I did not do this one, I think.

Yes.

Okay.

So again, I could have an infinite number of crises

I could have picked.

I'm picking a particular set of crises that are proving

to be especially important.

And let me start with the savings and loan crisis

in the United States, because that will turned out to

be quite influential.

So savings and loans is one type of bank that

exists or used to exist in most countries.

It's sort of fairly sleepy, is supposed to be quite

safe.

What happened is that this particular banking sector got into

trouble because inflation was high and then the government decided

to regulate the industry to help it grow its way

out of trouble.

That included, allow it to be true to new things

and new accounting rules, which is the relevant bits to

this thing.

No such policies.

Once you start allowing somebody to do something they couldn't

didn't do before, which is questionable, whether they should be

allowed to do it.

It's called forbearance.

Regulatory forbearance basically means you're not enforcing the rules you

would normally do.

However, the government continued to provide deposit insurance.

Decreased oversight, but continued deposit insurance classical problem in deregulation

and this cost the US over $160 billion.

And this is going back 30 years.

So today this would be at least twice, if not

a small amount of money.

The lessons for this and this is one, do this,

the lessons are you if you can't read regularly in

tiny bits.

If you choose to regulate, you have to do it

the whole way.

So you need strong and effective financial supervision.

The industry should not be allowed to control the regulation,

politically or otherwise, with lobbying or corruption.

The supervisors of regulating need to have proper financial resources

to do the job.

When banks fail, there needs to be need to be

closed down quickly.

And finally, deposit insurance needs to be funded with the

real money, not government guarantees.

Leonard discussed the last bit in particular, if there is

any hope, whatever country you are from, if the system

is such that the government guarantees deposits.

But if a bank fails, you have to go to

the government can request the money available to pay out

enough money, it becomes political.

So it's important that you have a special funds available

to pay off deposits when needed, because otherwise, I promise

you, regardless of where you are, the world, it becomes

highly political at exactly the wrong time.

So you need to have all of these things.

And by the way, if you're thinking about some of

these issues, all of these are problems in most countries

in the world, regardless of where you're from, I promise

you.

All of these are relevant.

In Europe.

We have a particular problem before at the moment, especially

Italy, which has a real issues with this.

But this is a this is a difficult problem.

The other crisis I want to discuss is the Scandinavian

crisis and.

The reason why it happened wasn't all that important.

It was the old sad story.

Government deregulate, didn't provide oversight.

After deregulation, encouraging lending, boom, economies grew rapidly.

Banks made too many bad loans.

This is happening again and again and again.

What happened afterwards?

Which is important.

And this is what I just said.

The Swedish resolution is a particularly important.

And when it comes to how to deal with crisis.

Sweden is the gold standard for what they think is

the gold standard or how to do things to governments

in the face of the crisis.

They include both monetary and fiscal easing.

That is the way they sort of treated money at

the beginning.

They increased capital expenditures.

They invested significant amounts of money into the banking system.

And I'm going to discuss that under the best practices

for the next section.

And the cost of the crisis turned out to be

very small compared to what was envisioned.

The person in charge of this is the current head

of the Swedish Riksbank.

By the way, if you go to YouTube, you will

find a video when he visited us a few years

ago.

The Caleb talks.

It's someone on YouTube in my research centre.

So best practices.

And this is really what this tweet did.

When a bank is failing, you want to deal with

the crisis without the taxpayer having to pay for it.

You don't want banking services to be disrupted.

You want shareholders to lose all of the money.

And if that money is gone, you want creditors to

lose money in the priority order.

Oftentimes you want the famed institution to be taken over

by a stronger one.

And unless you get a systemically important institution, then that

should be manageable now.

The model to do this is called the bad bank

model.

Technically speaking.

You have a feeling that this is what you should

always try to do?

I mean, if you can't resolve it by swapping a

failing bank into another one, you actually have to deal

with it directly with the failure of a failing back.

This is the way you should do it.

You take over the government, nationalises it fairly.

But remember, the shareholders lost everything.

You take over the failing bank.

It becomes a government owned entity.

The government split the assets into two categories.

Good assets and bad assets.

But assets are like bad loans.

Good assets are good loans and operations, I.T. systems, branches,

buildings and things of that nature.

Your government should sell the good bank as quickly as

possible.

The government should never sell the past bad assets hold

on to until expiration, because if it fails, sell it.

If we get bad prices for it.

So therefore, hopefully that's why you minimise the losses and

minimise disruption to the real economy.

Now, is it possible to do this?

What gets in the way is politics.

What gets in the way is this bank is important.

Its service is an important community.

It will be so embarrassing for the government that its

losses are released.

There are some quality issues of importance, some important donors

like that who worked in the millions of excuses given

by the government.

And if I have a chance to discuss Italy, that's

exactly how the Italians messed up the repeated bank failures

in recent years.

They did not do this.

So in the 2008 crisis, Europe did not do this.

That is why.

The reason why Europe did not do this is a

fairly big contributor to the European banks being so weak

to the state.

This is why 15 years ago, Europe has some of

the strongest banks in the world.

And now Europe does not.

Have strong banks.

They try to keep them alive.

They couldn't deal with the problem properly.

China, by all accounts, is not doing this because for

different reasons.

But China is not doing this.

The EU is trying to do this.

When the bank Pompidou, popular in Spain, failed in 2017.

It was sold to Santander for 1 at no cost

to the taxpayer.

The correct way of doing things.

Italy spent 17 billion.

It could not afford to rescue two banks.

And that is just the wrong way of doing things.

And if you don't deal with feeling to take your

case, you end up with place.

Place of those lumpy.

A zombie bank is a bank that is insolvent but

operate operating with the of government policies.

Japan is the best known case of this happening.

It took the 15 years to deliver this of it.

Until it definitely status is stuck couldn't grow a one

term because evergreen so from a county point of view

since most of your accountants what is says as follows

you change the rules governing bankruptcy.

By allowing banks to treat firms that have failed as

not having failed.

You just basically you basically manipulate the chemicals so that

the bank keeps a company that has failed us by

not having failed.

So how do you deal with them?

Well, you keep on lending in money so you can

repay the loans back to you.

Could evergreen cemetery some of never lose their lease.

The problem is.

If somebody walks into the bank and says, I have

a great business idea, give me a loan.

The bank can't keep the company alone.

All the money is going to fail companies.

And this is a real problem in a lot of

countries.

Japan has had this.

It took the 15 years to unwind this.

Suddenly, Europe has this problem of alliance against Spain.

To this day, Italy, Greece, all the countries from which

to a large extent.

So the problem is and remember, you will know from

your own countries, regardless of where you are from, I

can this.

Oh, my God, look at this important company that employs

million people is producing strategically important things.

Remember in France, they make the producer of your goods

strategically important, which shows you how ridiculous you can get

with that sort of line of argument.

I think there's a serious case I know of, but

this happens everywhere.

In the United States.

General Motors was strategically important basically this way.

So, I mean, I promise you, regardless of where you're

from, this would have happened in your home country.

So this means stagnation and this is not good for

the economy.

So and ultimately, the problem is if you try to

solve it by merging banks into bigger banks, you can

end up with too few banks, but then become systemically

important, meaning you can't eat properly with the.

And that is certainly been a European problem because Europe

now has increased has the problem was see pieces become

bigger and bigger and bigger.

And this is compounded by an official policy, ECB policy

of what the few events.

This means that the ECB will not give you back

licences if you try to start a new bank in

Europe.

Then just say no.

They don't want more banks and they want fewer banks.

But this means of course you end up with the

big C few uncompetitive questions.

Before I move on.

Yes, sir.

Do you think feel people have a problem with India?

That is.

Yes.

But yes, back then I think it's largely for government

and the government, of course, the existing vendors to subscribe

to this.

Yes.

But at that time, my question is usually when they

want if there are any company goes back up, then

investors should lose their money.

But in this case, what happened is that there's something

that 81 bondholders that did this, 81 by one, nobody

was great enough, whereas all the shareholders retained those shares.

And the reason they are given is that this we

are going in line with the same policies designed for

the financial crisis.

There's another word for this called corruption.

Somebody somewhere, somebody and someone's somebody pays.

If you if you let the bondholders protect the bondholders

before the shareholders.

That means somebody paid some money to me.

That hopefully means.

Work that pertains to this one group over the financial

crisis.

They are saying that it is in accordance with.

Something that is completely, utterly stupid.

Just follow the money.

Who paid whom in India?

Who owned the bank?

What important politician was on the board?

That's how you answer the question.

I promise you, this is not.

This is nothing.

But I know the case, by the way.

Corruption.

Questions.

All the questions.

So I think when I think the central bank.

This is roughly.

This is where I ended up here, right?

I think this is where I ended up with the

central bank before the slides ran out.

Okay.

People are nodding their hats and I will take their

word as gospel.

Since you're supposed to say yes.

So I want to discuss the in this.

I have discussed monetary policy and central bank policy for

quite a long time now.

I want to get into the post global crisis pre-code.

Because that is at the root of so many things

today.

As I showed you earlier, the Bank of Japan did

not react.

ECB reacted slowly.

And the Fed was the quickest bank to react.

No, he wasn't.

Exactly.

After the crisis of 2008 crisis.

We didn't get to look one last time.

Oh.

Okay.

So let me let me quickly run through the form

here, too.

So this one to the reaction.

So this they would have a this led.

So I must certainly discuss.

This idea of this one.

This is not cleared by this one.

That this cause, this one.

And then this.

But this one.

I did because the problem the reason why the this

is cost but because being that this we discussed.

Yeah.

So this was the first figure I couldn't do because

the figure was but so see how central bank interest

rates had changed speech in this time period.

So the US kept the very low until 2016 and

then started raising them when things were.

Looking good.

The ECB.

Kept a much higher.

Stover, 2%.

Throughout and throughout the height of the European crisis.

What you see here is this is what Draghi says

will do what it takes.

But they still they still had interest rates above the

above the US rate and as slowly decrease and we

kept them low.

You really see the difference in how the two central

banks do policy.

And if you look at the assets, you see exactly

the same pattern emerging.

So the ECB, even at the time when it rises,

we do what it takes.

They still continue to increase asset holdings afterwards.

So therefore.

And it decreased.

And it wasn't a 15 when they realised, Oh my

God, this is not working.

Let's continue to do quantitative easing effect because this is

this a maturity issue.

The Fed stops by doing QE around 2012.

So so the U.S. is reacting much, much faster to

its problems than the Europe is reacting.

No.

We can ask ourselves why.

I mean, I think there's a huge amount of politics

because remember last time I said central bank belong to

one country.

You could quickly deal with the problem.

In Europe, we had this endless consensus building runs.

And just by looking at these plots, delaying them by

two years and policymaking, which just nuts.

I mean, I'm not being a little bit unfair to

the ECB here, but this is certainly not the way

we want to do things now.

So but here's where it becomes important post 2008.

Immediate reaction to that doesn't make was lower interest rates

print money.

The difference between the U.S. and Europe is the ECB

has continued to print money, but the U.S. hasn't.

And what are the dangers from doing so?

So here's how they the roughly speaking, how these two

arguments line up.

Depending on which side of the fence you sit, you

if you don't do QE, you get depression.

And though they say bouts of depression, what happens?

You have to help the banks.

Otherwise they collapse.

Then the banks misbehave.

You have if you don't do QE, economic activity collapses.

Well, the crisis was caused by the issue of debt

and you make it worse.

Well, you are creating jobs for the poor.

You are making the wealthy richer.

Risk of deflation.

Well, inflation will eventually happen.

Structural reforms is too hard.

We have to print money.

But if you do QE, you remove the impetus for

reforms.

It is really bad for savers, but it's really good

for borrowers.

This is this is roughly crystallising the debate.

To my mind, if we have accepted this to you

three years ago.

Most people would have said that.

I'm convinced on the left hand side a more powerful.

In the 2022, the Oculus on the right hand side

have become much more powerful.

I eat the people who state the meat in the

right red block.

They are more likely to have improved, right, with benefit

of hindsight.

Of those on the left hand side.

So the consequences to this are let's discuss them in

turn.

How do we get growth?

Actually, there's an interesting footnote to this.

The thing it was Economist I forget what it was

the.

UK.

He was a columnist for the Times of the to

have an article saying why the Netherlands is anti-growth.

I like.

And I think this is a common problem in most

countries by now.

We do not want economic growth.

We save it too, but we act in a way

that makes it impossible.

Which is a slightly different issue to a lot of

discussion here.

But if you're interested enough, that article about the Netherlands

was quite interesting.

So let's discuss the growth argument.

The main driver of economic activity is small and medium

sized enterprises.

They make money.

They credit the banks and lending to them.

And because we live in a bank dominated economy, we

have to print money.

So the assignees get money.

I promise you, wherever you are from, except the United

States, this is the policy I commit.

You countries have.

I don't know of a single country that is not

having this particular debate except the United States.

Well, the problem with it is that if you print

money, it can only help growth in the short run.

And if the fundamental problem is it undermines the support

for the necessary economic reforms you need if you want

the economy to grow.

And if you take Europe as a special case, you've

roughly speaking, of three.

Why not go out back in?

This is called magic.

I have no idea what happened.

Let's just say that.

Six Keep.

I could pretend to be a magician.

So in Europe, there are three categories of countries those

who reform continually.

Scandinavia, where I'm from.

Every time you come to come to this country, you

think seriously, you go to Scandinavia, to London.

And the argument is you come to a developing country

and everything doesn't work properly.

This is the prevailing views among my countrymen and others

from that part of the world.

Then you get to the Middle East, UK, Netherlands, France.

Germany.

Some reforms, but not the law.

But basically the same level of.

In terms of quality of everything.

And then you go to some of Europe, what is

impossible to reform Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece.

So if you refuse to reform your economy, the only

thing that can help you grow is is quantitative easing.

So the impetus for economic growth.

The input is for economic growth.

What is driven economic growth in Europe in particular?

In this time period has been quantitative easing.

And therefore, if you follow the European narrative, every time

there's a problem, they say, well, the ECB will come

in and print money to help us out of the

problem.

And that, of course, then takes us to the inflation

we discussed a little bit later.

So financial markets.

The liquidity injections we had in 2008 were essential to

prevent.

Financial markets from collapsing.

Otherwise we would have gone from the Great Depression.

I mean, absolutely convinced it did the right thing.

Did the right thing.

But.

Problem is when the markets stop reacting to liquidity and

not to the real economy.

So now we have come to the states in financial

markets with bad economic news makes prices go up because

it induces fat in the central bank is more likely

to print money to help out.

This is exactly the wrong thing for financial markets to

do.

They're supposed to react, of course, to a lousy.

And by the way, if you see the shock in

the past month in this country, I think what's happened

in the U.K. in the past month, I think a

lot of you see in home countries in the next

months, I think we had this the first with the

financial markets are now responding in a way that they

haven't done for 20 years.

So it's complete shock that we're the imposing discipline.

We haven't imposed discipline for a generation.

So in financial markets they like bad news because it

means more QE.

So where does money flow when we do quantitative easing?

Well.

Asset classes, fixed income.

Real estate equities have performed really well in this time

period.

Of course, it's completely logical if you can borrow almost

0%.

You can really get nice returns.

There's nothing, nothing magical about it.

So therefore.

And money flows into this, especially because if you keep

your money in the bank account, you get nothing.

So therefore, you either you just buy risky assets and

those who have done something really, really well.

This is what it just said.

Bad news left markets.

Now let's discuss something relevant to this inequality.

So inequality is both wealth and income and give you

let us give you a statistic.

When you people graduate from this depart from one, what

would be important you are in make you get a

job in either a company or consulting firm.

You will learn a lot more now and you will

in 2007.

If you work in MacDonalds.

You earn less.

No money earned in 2007.

That applies to all of Europe.

If you want to think of a labour shortages, I

mean, this really goes very far probably to explain the

labour shortage we have now.

So this is inequality.

So the reason we did QE is to help.

Yes, it means help the workers.

Problem is the impact on acid markets has been particularly

strong.

And especially those on fixed income have really seen their

assets drop in value.

So let me start.

These stats are really hard to come by.

And I, I got the UK numbers a few years

ago and I just have not been inclined to to,

to, to.

We do this again?

By the way, if you if you look at assets

inequality in Europe.

The new case feels typical.

You would guess it's like it is similar to France,

Germany, Netherlands.

Germany is one of the fastest increase in inequality in

Europe.

Switzerland has the highest inequality in Europe, by the way.

But ignoring that.

So what you're seeing is that.

So how to read this is that someone who's in

the top 30% has no assets.

Someone who's a typical person.

Their total assets, including property and financial assets, is about

200,000.

So then you get you get to the top.

And if you don't top 10%, then you then your

total assets exceeds 2 million.

So asset inequality is what it is.

And this sort of distribution is what you find everywhere.

Now, while the QE has changed the composition of who

wins and who loses.

Because even if low income workers are a little bit

more.

The wealthy earn a lot more, and that means inequality

is increasing.

And the biggest losers of.

Cheap money has been poor savers, unsophisticated savers, retirees and

pension funds and low income workers.

So how does how does this work?

Technically not.

First is the income composition.

Sharma Where do you get your income from?

The households can earn money either from work or from

investment returns.

When you're a pensioner that you get all of your

income from the last year.

So because the accommodative monetary policy has helped company's profits

more than they would have increased asset prices, those who

own financial assets and also own companies have therefore become

wealthier and otherwise.

So the benefits are primarily gone to those whose income.

You're right.

Some things not work, i.e. assets.

Channel one.

Secondly.

The segmentation channel.

The financial sector has been a threat to the fishery

because of the support given to the markets, and this

means people employed through the financial sector who already have

very little the highest earners in any country, they are

earning a lot more.

So therefore, because the accommodating monetary policy benefits.

Companies have paid the highest salaries.

Salaries for those who've worked in those sectors increase even

more.

This also widens the income distribution.

And then, of course, finally, wealthier households have those assets.

And while the poor households are nothing or even that.

And therefore, the wealth gap is increased by accommodating monetary

policy.

So this roughly has been less so.

So the the this roughly has been the consequence in

societal societal consequence of keeping interest rates low and printing

money.

Question Before I move on.

Let me then do.

Comment.

And then today, the COVID crisis was different from all

the crises I have studied, and the reason is at

its core.

It did not originate.

From excessive amount of risk taken by the financial sector.

How you should help crisis play on the two most

borrowing too much real estate investment, too much speculation.

COVID was not like it wasn't.

It wasn't as quick demand shock, less demand for certain

services like restaurants, arts, sports and therefore its impact if

hit to lowest income workers, were least skilled workers first,

because that's where they work.

And this means that there is practically nothing the government

could do about it.

From an economic point of view, public help those worst

affected.

So almost also with the financial policies and most economic

policies were basically useless, except that it was quite important.

And recovery is k-shaped that is some winners and losers

from cold.

No impact on countries is very asymmetric.

We know that some countries have done really well.

Others will continue to suffer from it.

And we don't really know.

But this is not really my topic.

I want to go to the central bank because that's

the topic here.

So if you do the economics summary, GDP fell.

It started falling in first quarter 2020.

Had a really shock in second quarter.

And then by and large, has recovered.

So here is GDP normalised to 100.

And basically I made my slides this summer.

GDP numbers lag behind so I could not get anything

more up to date than now.

You can one quarter.

So you get Q1 this year.

The if you were interested in this data side sells

for a month, three weeks ago essentially to inflation data.

But and my favourite website for economic data, which I

believe is based in France of all places, is the

best website.

When you compare it, you go to the one you

find is that.

That's where I this from as well.

So you see the United Kingdom, I mean, we actually

still don't understand why suffered by far the biggest drop

in GDP of all major economies.

But then it recovered really, really quickly.

I mean, to my mind it means somewhat this is

just bad measurement.

I mean, it looks so out of place, but you

would expect the U.K. to be basically like Germany or

France in this case, but it isn't.

So to my mind, there's something wrong with the data,

but I don't know.

But you see, everybody has.

So United States has recovered.

Korea has recovered.

Brazil has recovered.

The United Kingdom has basically recovered.

Germany has not in this particular sample.

And by the way, this is Ukraine.

And this is also why.

Germany is looking really bad in global economic growth leaks

because it both it can find are coldly for some

reasons and then got the double hit.

But that's not our topic in this course.

So if you if you do slightly bigger list of

winners and losers throughout the cloud, just across the code

here, Ireland has the best.

Some countries actually came out of Kobe with very nice

big economic growth.

I still don't know why Ireland did so well, but

that's a different issue.

Now I want to focus on the central bank's interventions,

and one in particular, because it's the most important.

Almost every country in the world reacted to it.

Lower interest rates.

QE relaxed bank lending standards are discussed in the event

in a few weeks.

Lot of grand schemes.

The important one is the effect swaps.

By far.

So besides supporting work, by far this is the most

important interventions and geopolitically was hugely controversial.

What happened is it began in February, March 2020.

A lot of firms in the financial sector and non-financial

sectors throughout the world.

Have a huge amount of the US dollar liquidity in

then and when the world was heading for a crisis,

they needed liquidity.

But then you have a peculiar situation.

You are a Brazilian company.

But you're not.

You don't need for serious liquidity.

You need the US dollars as liquidity.

German company.

You need to establish liquidity, not euro liquidity.

And then what happened next is really, really important geopolitically.

The United States had two programs.

Available.

One was open to everybody.

So if you take China, for example, China.

Chinese companies demanded huge amounts of U.S. liquidity and the

forms of the help by the Chinese government.

That is Chinese companies.

Bond holdings of U.S. dollars were pledged as collateral for

China to get short term liquidity.

It could then provide to its own companies.

Same applies everywhere.

Same of the same same happens in most other countries.

And then those countries, United States, have particularly friendly relationships

with.

That means I don't have the full list in my

head, but it's the UK, the ECB, Switzerland, Japan, South

Korea meet with one of one or two others.

They could establish a US dollar swap lines.

What that means, technically, if you are a UK based

entity, you need U.S. dollars.

You could go to the Bank of England.

The Bank of England could give you unlimited US dollars

funded by the Bank of England.

Happen to affect swap agreement with the Fed in Washington.

So therefore all the liquidity demands of British entities or

Japanese entities of European assistance was directly met by this.

And politically, if you're into geopolitics and some of you

are.

This happened when Trump was president.

This meant the United States was willing and able to

have everybody who needed this without questions being asked effectively.

And this really strengthened the US style of Rome as

the centre of the world's financial system quite significantly.

If you ask yourself, would all the countries, if they

had the reserve currency, which we will discuss in a

couple of weeks like China, have done the same thing

in the same situation?

That's the question everybody asked themselves and everybody came to

the answer no.

For a change.

The power balance between China and the United States globally

as a consequence.

So.

A.

Because you talked about this one.

You listed the.

What makes.

Does the 1978 congressional be, on the contrary, selected, or

is it purely Joe?

So you need.

We need to be.

So I'm going to rephrase the question and I'm going

to answer it.

He asked why he was going to do this.

Was it geopolitical or something else?

The reason is that she grew up watching what happened

on.

So if you I'll show you in a few in

two weeks, the biggest foreign exchange traded currency.

So these countries currencies are most used for an street.

And the U.S. is the one you remember to begin.

The British pound Swiss franc and then Korean one is

quite high up then side.

So it was targeted to most of those countries.

So that that is not is most likely to be

somewhat of.

Just for a few.

Came across from her.

But.

But.

Threats, corruption?

No.

So he's asking what is weaponized?

And the answer is unequivocally no.

Other conditions.

That's what that was a super important thing effect in

the expectation of the whole post-war circumstance of discussing refugees.

And you're supposed to do this without taking favoured countries

and unfair.

This is why it really strengthens the power of the

US, I think is a super influential effect in the

world's financial history.

And completely aside, by the way, and completely aside, you

know, I can connect it to something else.

You.

The if you if you are making investments.

But corporate investment in Japan, in France, in Germany.

In the United Kingdom.

In India.

In Brazil.

Risk.

The risk appetite of the United States has a much

bigger impact with this issue, and you still miss the

economic conditions.

So investments almost everywhere you go from economy is much

driven by US risk appetite, not by risk appetite in

your home country.

Which should give you a positive force.

But if you're into geopolitics for some mix, it's quite

interesting.

If you're interested in this particular debate.

I actually had a paper that just came out on

the topic.

But of course, the nexus between.

Sort of and I think you point to second Interesting.

So questions before everyone.

So moving on.

Nothing exciting on central bank interest rates at all.

Basically zero uncovered.

At the same time.

I miss him.

But what?

Okay this the plot.

But it's I'll tell you what the cloth says.

It's nothing too exciting.

All it says is massive QE, some massive increase in

the balance sheet of central banks.

You can destroy.

I mean, I can destroy from memory if I get

the 2020 big increase and then slowly then staple, then

stabilising for mid 2020.

So I saw the products question before I move on.

That the sets to see them.

So once they.

Know this is the what this is the balance sheet

size of the central banks.

I all assets held by the central banks.

Which is basically proxies for QE.

So what about today?

So his inflation had a global peak in the early

1980s.

And has informed that basically if you were to pick

a year, you pick 1982 for the United States in

1982 might be different than your home country, but basically,

regardless of where you're from, it sort of started falling

from the sky.

Many reasons why inflation is falling.

Central banks understand the job factor.

China became a global exporter of deflation.

What this means technically is the China become the dominant

low cost manufacturing country as it continues exporting cheaper and

cheaper things.

They drive prices of goods down globally.

This is what I mean when I say China exports

deflation.

And.

Now, keep in mind, yes, I.

Do believe that you are using the tariffs on China

would reduce the inflation.

What?

Reducing the tariffs on China?

So he's asking if reducing tariffs on China will reduce

inflation.

I think that would have been an important discussion to

have five years ago.

But not anymore.

Basically, China is no longer exporting deflation.

So check with China's cost base.

Has sharply increased.

So China's no longer in this role.

So therefore.

And then you have an increasing number of alternative nations.

I think that question would have been more relevant five

years ago.

Effective.

I think if they did anything, that would just the

beginning of reforms in China.

I saw how to what extent we can say that

the only six force contributing to the decline of existence.

I mean, and I'm not discussing any of it was

saying we have China entered the global market and started

driving down cost of goods, that prices could go down.

All I'm saying no more.

I know this.

I'm not I'm not going to get into I'm not

going to get into and there's no causality here.

But this is if you want, because it's all Chinese

domestic politics behind it, not anything Feedback from abroad.

So relationship between money and output.

This is by the way, this is the oldest economic

model in the world.

By a chuckle.

David HUME.

Who is more famous as a philosopher.

But he wrote it 300 years ago.

But this is a company that it says the amount

of money in the system and how often money is

used is equal to crisis and the amount of seats

Cook used to.

So therefore.

How if you want to control, if you want to

stimulate the economy, this is why you print money.

You can hopefully.

Q Cause this is growth.

If you want to decrease inflation, you reduce and hopefully

people.

This is sort of how you're thinking about it.

But of course, what really matters is expectations.

So if inflation is steady.

0%.

2%.

5%.

Thousand percent.

It causes no real problems because hiding information that is

constant is built into the system and we can deal

with it without problems.

But it's always going up and down because that starts

changing things.

And there are some technical issues to get into.

The technical issue is that when inflation increases, impressive value

of future cash flows falls.

So therefore, bond holders are seeing inflation going up.

Why they would want the pressing value to exceed the

market value for funds.

And therefore, if you issue a new fund, you have

to pay interest in excess of expected inflation.

So when inflation goes up, interest rates sharply increase and

refinancing costs sharply increase.

And if you want to come to a bond inflation

index, this is particularly problematic.

So this means, roughly speaking, when inflation goes up, depending

on where you are with maturity of refinancing, you either

benefit or you lose out.

But keep in mind, keep in mind the interests of

this common value and how higher interest rates may describe

the higher rate.

So a couple of years ago I got curious if

I'm is for five years ago I said bond returns

in various countries and different inflation scenarios.

And this is what, a ten year bond if you

just take Germany as one case.

If you in Germany look, then this is five years

ago had everything got 8% inflation regime and stayed there

for ten years.

German bondholders would have lost 90% of the value of

the bonds in eight years.

This was this was using the proof that the bond

rates at the time in Germany, similar things in the

United States, in the United Kingdom.

So what you're seeing is that if inflation starts to

locked in, those people who own these bonds, they are

in for very, very sizeable losses.

And who owns Fox?

Pension funds and insurance companies.

So we tend to think.

And by the way, this this was the ten.

So the U.K. is the only U.K. This is was

quite interesting to see how the press reacted to rising

interest rates last year, pleasantly, by the way.

Do they sort of you tend to think of evil

capitalists, but it's not your own people.

Pensions and insurance companies.

Inflation goes up.

These entities are liable for fairly can be liable for

very substantial losses now.

Some parts of the economy when inflation goes up are

most strongly affected.

Low income households, those with high debt.

This is really what is driving the housing market possible

for the moment.

And what we do know is that every time you

have high inflation, there is a lot more labour market

disruption.

So the if inflation is steady, you don't see many

strikes and inflation is going.

You see this ratcheting effect from unions, corner strikes and

inflation going up, real salaries going down that demand a

correction.

And throughout Europe at the moment, certainly you're seeing much

more labour market unrest than you see in a very

long time.

For me to teach this course on Monday, next week,

I have to have a Lizzie pay for me to

be in the hotel for two days.

Because I can't go to work on Monday because there's

a train strike.

And the same thing happened three weeks ago.

So I had to stay in a hotel for three

weeks.

If it was, I couldn't go to work.

But that's never happened.

But people.

Just a typical example of what's going on.

So you start seeing labour market disruptions.

You start seeing political unrest.

You also see we see a lot of companies finances

come under strain.

Because see, certain individual countries are increasing difficulty.

Others who tend to see the highly indebted countries increasingly

facing increasing difficulties.

I could see France, I could see Greece, Spain, Portugal,

the United States.

All are facing challenges.

So if I take a million, I haven't picked the

numbers out in the middle of the summer, but these

numbers, they haven't come down.

So this is inflation.

Germany, United States and this country over the past five

years.

Until October, they were fluctuating around the target of 2%.

Inflation keeps sharply down and COVID because of less demand.

That's where we got all the QE again.

Then it's of a started going up sharply towards the

end of 2020 and now hitting 89% in.

All of these countries.

The central bank interest rates in the same time period.

It's been quite revealing.

This country started raising rates and has continued to do

so in our hands up as well.

For the past few months.

The US has continued to do so.

The ECB finally did it last week, so this is

also lacking here in responding to inflation.

And if you follow the ECP politics, you certainly can

see the political fight going on there.

So the recent monetary policies have slowed the.

Monetary policy says college since 2008 has made both private

and public sector borrowers dependent on low interest rates.

That meant there's a lot of some big companies that

only survive because interest rates are low.

But the problem is if interest rates go up, then

they can be in difficulty.

And this is roughly how we see things.

Expectation, bias and a given is what you want to

show you.

Again, if you expect low inflation, prices don't go up.

Wages don't go up.

Funding costs would be low.

In a nice virtuous circle.

You go to bed one day and poof, you come

to other issues.

Expect inflation.

Funding costs increase because of the prices go up.

And wages.

Wages go up.

So the question is.

The key word that everybody in this business is talking

about.

Is this here?

Do people expect high inflation to last?

Or do did not expect it to last?

And it's one of the most basic truths that is

the most important economic question of the year.

Is it transitory?

So the argument the central banks have made is that.

It was a one stop shop.

The price is because of postcode demand and therefore if

it is transitory.

It was it works its way out of this system.

Inflation will go down again.

That's been the BBC peace message, Fed message.

I mean, I.

I just I've just been incredibly dissatisfied by this transitory

argument.

I mean, last summer I was working at a company

doing business.

I was doing contracts, and whether or not we thought

inflation was transitory didn't even factor in.

Increase in the yearly value of the contract that you

build into your price.

You were just looking to gain from the short term

effects that's already built in it.

And so the next year you're making that same.

And so I, I don't know, this is more of

an emotional point, but I'm just tired of hearing this

from central bankers because no one is thinking like that.

And because of those personalities and the way that people

think inflation is entrenched, that we're here.

Fair enough.

I, I fully agree with you.

I fully agree with you.

But I'm to give you the part.

I'm trying to give a balanced view in this course.

Right.

And this, too, to repeat your point, the central banks

have continually maintained that inflation is transitory.

And the ECB continues to maintain that view.

I don't think anybody outside of central banking believes that.

I think your view is basically what the mainstream one.

So the permanent view is workers in difficulty.

They've seen the salaries go down by 10% in real

terms.

And by the way, what is happening is this is

actually harder to see but take.

So the in this country, you pay no taxes for

the first 12,000 you earn.

This is quite good.

You could 20% until you hit 45,000.

You paid 40% until you hit 150,455.

Problem is, some salaries go up.

More and more people see the marginal tax taxes going

up.

So it's hitting people both in lower real income and

in higher taxes simply because of how we get hit

by more and more marginal taxes.

And I'll bet the same applies to your country as

well.

So.

Companies, workers see salaries go down.

They demand raises, companies see input costs rise, and by

large amounts, both demand increases.

It's feeds on itself.

Ultimately we expect inflation before it happens.

And I think most indicators now that inflation is here

to stay.

This means technically unprofitable borrowers.

They might get into difficulty when interest rates increase.

Banks are very profitable at the moment because when interest

rates go up.

But they might.

But because it's easy not to put a company into

default if funding costs are so.

If funding costs are far from zero, it's much more

expensive to keep a company away from default.

So banks become more likely to push for defaults in

a high inflation environment.

So that is something we could start seeing much more

of in the years to come.

Sovereign borrowers, Most governments are highly indebted.

Of course, most borrowers in old currency.

Most have long maturities.

So.

It just depends on maturity.

Is the form impressive discoloured while you attempt?

It's a big risk more than increased funding costs because

of higher inflation, depending on where you see plastic face

in your backdrop or worse, of course, of government.

For your own country.

You can work this out.

I would think Italy's on the wrong side of this

and Germany on the right side of this.

Just to do just 2 to 2 extremes here.

Some bias upon, some naturally had some a tone to

this before.

Pension funds, both liabilities and assets fall, so they naturally

naturally hatched.

Savours what is you might not appreciate, but most entities

that buy bonds are legally required to do so.

So they are forced by us.

And when their rates go up, the demand changes unpredictable

ways.

So therefore, the question is are we starting to see

a bond crash?

30 years ago, President Clinton's advice in the United States

Senate when it was asked.

When you die, if you can get before, what do

you want to do?

Report us?

He responded.

The bond market is the most powerful force in the

universe.

30 years ago.

What kept every government on its toes.

What's the bond market?

Because we think that the governments of whenever you from

paranoid about how they would react to news the following

information that went the way.

And this is the point I said earlier but you

saw the U.K., the bond market, reacting so strongly to

mistrust this mini-Budget.

I think you start seeing the same phenomenon happening wherever

you are from.

Online is a complex of yet again the most powerful

force in the universe.

Be interesting.

So the problem is the textbook way to fight inflation

is to raise central bank interest rates.

Therefore, the idea is inflation is caused by an overheated

economy.

Growth is too high.

Rising interest rates cool the economy down and hopefully get

a recession so that you shift inflation expectations.

In 1982, when Paul Walker enlisted graduate hits for President

Reagan in the United States, Reagan said to Walker.

Do what you need to do.

I'll give you political cover.

So the president protected Walker from the consequences of killing

inflation.

This was a major recession in the U.S..

Do you politically see that possible anywhere in the world

today?

It's really hard to see that as a possibility.

So there is no political will, I think, regardless of

where we go from parliament.

There's no political will to tackle price and inflation.

And I think markets know what that means.

That means the market expectations.

So therefore, interest rate increases remain controversial.

And of course, a lot of governments like seeing the

bonds burned away in inflation.

If you lump in front I mean, this is not

a bad thing.

We started seeing more labour markets disruptions.

Recession over this happened was about to happen.

I think the developing countries are most likely to be

particularly badly hit.

So the question is, I'll get back to this doomsday

scenario of the 1970s.

If you're interested in this sort of chain of events.

Larry Summers, who does like this doomsday scenario, by the

way.

He came to my department a few months ago, gave

a talk in the old theatre on YouTube.

Let's see if it fit into this.

It's a nice questions before everyone.

I want to go to the United States next.

Before we take a break.

Then.

So this chain of events puts the U.S. into a

particularly interesting situation because it is the world's largest economy.

The dollar is the world's reserve currency, and other countries

have no choice but to follow what the United States

is doing.

So they have monetary policies that dictated behaviour throughout the

world.

We saw one example of this ten years ago, the

taper tantrum, and that is when the Fed announced it

would stop doing QE and just said, we're going to

start doing it.

What happened is that almost immediately a crisis hit a

huge number of developing emerging markets, countries, Brazil and the

like.

And the reason is that they saw money flowing back

to the United States.

So the bonds of those countries were badly affected.

Bond yields increased, financing costs increased.

So it costs countries a lot of all the countries

that are in a weak economic situation.

And the United States can be particularly strong, like the

yen countries.

Basically.

So therefore they have increasing amount of USD exposure.

But investors are not convinced of the fundamentals.

Fed interest rates might trigger money to be repatriated to

the United States.

The EU countries might have to raise interest rates, increasing

the debt to put an place pushing them into further

difficulty.

And I think we are already seeing this happening.

It's just the same.

The same thing.

And finally, what we're seeing at the moment is the

importance of safe havens.

Why is the US dollar so strong?

I mean, if you take Europe and the United States

and there's no reason I mean, I was in New

York.

I mean, I'm in New York a month ago, and

that like a savings account almost, you know, parity with

the dollar.

This is the most expensive trip for the US since

I was born.

And you show everybody seeing you as well.

It's a safe haven document.

We look at almost every country in the world.

You compare your country to the US and you see

the US as being better than your country.

Therefore, that's where you put your money.

And if you if the ECB is lagging behind on

raising interest rates.

Then that would just push the euro down more and

more and more and more.

Problem is, what do you push for?

We put the euro down as inflationary pressures.

Before we take a break.

Okay, We come back to this in the seminar portion.

Let's take a quick break.

Thank you.

Now it's equality.

For those of you who missed out, I said I

didn't see anything for this.

You never joke about such things.

So.

Trust is very important.

And therefore, if you see how government policy towards finance

is, it is really all about trust.

You have to trust the banks.

For them not to say so.

The second channel is cross held assets because banks don't

operate by themselves.

They are exposed to each other.

They're exposed to the same asset classes.

And therefore, one bank is in difficulty.

That might mean all the banks are also in difficulty

for a very simple reason.

Now, the best known case in world history is the

United States in the 1950s, when you can see on

this chart that these are bank failures in the U.S.

from 1920 until 1939, before the Great Depression, the yellow

block, about 4% of banks failed.

At the height of the Great Depression, the United States

lost 30% of its banks in one year.

Images of old banks failing.

And then with different government policy, some are showing what

they are like from the, you know, below 50 and

tire states in the United States like Illinois.

But no facts.

No.

So, by the way, in the 1930, that was possibly.

A little well known cases were politicians from Illinois.

Chicago is returning to Washington to talk to the federal

government.

And they couldn't go back home because their banks failed.

So they had no way of paying it because the

United States did not allow banks to operate across state

lines.

If you lived in Illinois, you could not have a

bank account in a bank in New York.

So therefore you would absolutely expect.

So there has to be common European.

I had to borrow from French to go back home.

Well, one case.

So the solution to that to a lot be deposit

insurance, which we're going to analyse in a few minutes.

So I'm going to show you a video of this.

If I, if the video works.

And if not, if not.

I do not have that video with me.

Double check to ensure.

No.

A video so completely gratuitous anyways.

Oh, shut up.

So here's a case I want to discuss.

It's a bank that is known as Northern Rock because

it actually allows us to discuss the really centrally key

bank facilities.

So in this country, a bank or Northern Rock failed

in in in October 2007 at the beginning of the

global crisis, and people lined up in front of the

bank to get their money.

This is a bank, the first bank run of this

country in 50 years.

Certainly a big embarrassment to the government.

So.

There's a really cute footnote to this, which is the

bank loan was caused when the Bank of England said,

People, everything is fine.

If you're ever in charge of government policy, if a

senior government official goes on TV, assess people.

Don't worry, we've got everything under control.

Everybody would panic.

That's just a given.

So the there's something known as this is a steady

communication, but it's not what you do.

If you have government officials that tells people everything's fine

because I'm always taken by the population just being over

copy wealth is anything.

That's it.

That's how you interpret those words.

And when the Bank of England told people in this

country, don't worry, Northern Rock wasn't difficult because we are

dealing with the problem of your competence.

Everybody has got a country, Northern Rock.

What we need is for the French to get the

money out.

But the underlying story is actually much more interesting because

most of the authors of two states.

Penguin So let me let's discuss this two states issue.

And this is really nice if this is when discussing

this is because his business plan.

You always rock.

One third of the drift is mortgage market.

I actually got very close to the working system, by

the way, at one point.

It sort of would be interesting to have that to

work as instead of the back left with both consciences.

True.

So in the old school and never correct view of

banking, people put in money to make deposits in banks

and banks made mortgages.

Wolf interrupted.

What's to make of this whole say something.

This is where it becomes important.

So I'm going to show you by bow.

Okay.

I'm going to show you by slice you.

So.

So this summarises what comes to slide.

But I'm going to give you context to this before

I get to it.

The TED spread is the difference between the interbank loan

rate, what a bank will lend to other banks and

the Treasury bill rate to the United States.

Save and the same have the same measurement existing Europe.

So in 2005, banks are borrowing, as you can see,

30 basis points more on the US government response.

At the height of the crisis in 2000, the banks

were borrowing at 450 basis points more than the US

government was partly.

PESCA This is the context and our story.

2005.

Six and seven and eight.

Our story begins here.

When this starts going up, because this would be relevant

business.

And if you saw me, the two of them is

seven plus.

Exactly.

So the Northern Rock got into difficulty here with this

race.

That's what killed it.

So here's the business model, and this is simplified.

This is a simplified business model, but it also has

the advantage.

This will allow us to to discuss liquidity risk.

So Northern Rock would borrow 100 million from the money

markets for three months.

They will use those to make thousand bookcases.

It's worth 20,000 for 30 years.

They would then securitise the mortgages, meaning the package them

into a special purpose vehicle, sell that to wholesale investors.

We can find more kids from Northern Rock and Northern

Rock would use that to repay the loan.

Now, why would you do that as a bank?

Well.

Remember, this is what the financial system does.

Northern Rock is a specialist in mortgages, not a risk

taker.

So what they want is for those who can't take

a risk.

I even people who buy the securitised stuff, they do

that and they specialise in making work.

Is this common?

On principle.

There's nothing wrong with this.

The problem is.

If you can't sell the securitised mortgages for up to

three months, you can't repay the three month loan you

got in the beginning.

And you hope that.

And that is called liquidity risk.

That is so.

It is not that they are necessarily bankrupt as such,

but because they can't raise funds.

Therefore they couldn't meet the obligations.

And that's why an awful lot of debt.

Now.

This sort of funding structure was prevalent at the time.

I mean, the this is this is this one measure

that is of be so simple, but we could discuss

it on one slide.

But this sort of thing was at the heart of

the global crisis.

So therefore and this happened when this happened.

Exactly.

When the rates at the end of July went from

the TED spread, went for 50 basis points to 250

basis points.

So what technically, what happened is that it was set

in summer of 2008, but an investor investor who went

on strike, meaning what does that mean technically?

Who buys securitised cards?

This is important.

You.

A lot of them are bought by risk averse short

term investors like municipalities.

If you are local government, you huge amounts of money

come to matters that you're dealing with.

But the money comes asynchronously.

Your taxes.

You get a fee of euros coming in and 1.2

taxes.

But you had expenses nine months later, eight months later,

you continually do an asset liability management to minimise costs

and anything that pays you a little bit more is

beneficial.

So like pension funds or municipalities and things like that.

But using this as an input into liquidity management, but

if you are local government investment being in euros.

If you get worried, you just might go home.

Treasury This week you gave up 50 basis points, but

you were risk averse.

She had very, very quickly switched from buying risky private

market instruments into safe government instruments.

That's what that's what I mean by investor spectrum strike

the price of securitised products.

They just stopped buying.

Globally.

Everywhere in the world.

And that is what ultimately cost the global crisis a

year later and worse than what was the first victim

of.

So there were two big waves of bank runs.

There's also this interesting picture.

You professionals just up the street from here.

They knew the Northern Rock was in difficulty.

They stopped doing business in North Korea in July 2007.

The regulator had no idea.

The Bank of England had no idea.

So not what was effectively what it did.

A month before the government realised it was walking that.

Why do they find that the person, child of the

person at the FSA whose job was monitored, what he

got fired because he didn't do his job properly?

So then months later, the regulators started doing something about

this because they became quite concerned.

And the people, the British population realised that the Bank

of England was not a competent place.

So when they went on TV and said, Everything's fine,

don't worry, because everything's under control.

Everybody sort of screamed and went to the back to

take the money out.

So.

Finally and I like this thought this this story is

useful for a slightly different purpose.

I would not expect anybody in this course to fall

into extreme end state.

Globalism as a political economy wouldn't be the finest cause

if that's we've been want politically.

You could be.

I don't know what the problem unless you come from.

So there is a political undertone.

And this was quite common a few years ago when

people of the Occupy Wall Street occupied the city Ombudsman's

office, that the Street was imposing the same thing on

the countries where the left wing activists were trying to

get people to go and create the bank.

So they would say, if you all go and take

your money out of banks, you will cause a collapse

of the capitalist banking system.

Which is true.

If 80 if people have gone and taken money out

of banks, the capitalist banking system would have collapsed.

Except it didn't happen.

The only case I know of in history with actually

books was in this country 200 years ago.

When.

At the time, the context to it was that in

Britain.

The parliaments.

Constitutions have not changed for 500 years.

Some some constituencies.

You had seven voters or a member of parliament.

Some.

And in other constituencies like entire city, Manchester and Virgin

and Liverpool have no MPs.

And of course, all the existing members of parliament, they

want to change the system.

They liked it.

And the Prime Minister at the time was Duke of

Wellington.

The chaplain defeated Napoleon some ten, ten years earlier.

And they resisted.

So therefore, the population in the industrial cities in the

north, Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham and places like that, they said

the only way to force London to change its mind

is if everybody takes goes to the Bank of England

and says.

I have a 20 banknote in gold.

Because this the time we have the gold standard.

And what happened with this huge number of wealthy people

went through the Bank of England and started demanding gold.

But the problem is the Bank of England, for every

pound of banknotes with a $0.40 with of gold.

The Bank of England was about to go back.

And that's when Duke of Wellington changed his mind.

And you've got the Parliamentary Reform Act.

So this is the only case I know of politically

threatening bank run.

And there are posters all of you pay close to

stop the Duke.

It's only case I know from history.

With the subsidy question.

Which the cross.

9783 to to.

Just when they got rid of the rotten parts, in

the end, they landed something.

Questions otherwise.

Now, the next part, before I get to it, I

want to give you a warning.

No, not a trigger warning, but it's a trigger point

of sorts.

But.

There is some mathematics in it.

Now if you do not like some of you, of

course, have studied economics and microeconomics and all those have

almost no mathematics.

I also do know that on the final exam you

can elect to the out away from mathematics.

So what I'm about to show you.

I must I would prefer it on a level where

I assume you have had a course in my economics

at university.

If you had a course in microeconomics at university, you

should have no problems following what I'm doing.

If you haven't, you probably will not understand.

I don't want to explain it in more detail because

I don't just take a very long time.

So if you're not mathematically minded to take a nap

for 10 minutes on a Tuesday morning, I'm going to

do the one on a technical level, not on a

not on used.

The two names that diamond that week is named after

the people who came after his mom.

Douglas Diamond is a professional Chicago.

Nice chap.

Philip Wick was his Ph.D. student at Chicago.

He's a professor at the University of Washington, Saint Louis.

And I was sent to his house and I learned

that he used to play in a rock band in

the evenings, and he had a drum set in the

basement.

So he gives a drum solo and it came in

the palace acoustically, completely outside, but also very nice house.

So they got the Nobel Prize in Economics two weeks

ago for the Museum of Art to show you.

This changed the way we think about financial markets.

So in the model.

And by the way, I mean, this was in the

slides before they got the Nobel Prize.

They always do this.

It's not like I put it in specifically for that

reason.

So.

This is explains technically.

So in the basic version of the model, there are

three time periods of time, one time to attempt to

you put $1 into a thing and period times two.

If you withdraw your money at time one, you get

$1 back.

If you withdraw your money in period two, you get

far bigger than what?

So therefore you want we might want to keep your

money on hand to accept for the following reason.

In this world there are two types of people.

They are called early and late early people.

They like to consume in periods one and late.

People like to consume the period too.

So if you consume the period consumed period one, you

can see one.

If you tend to system, if you're late, you consumed

period.

To get to the peak of see us to appear

because the utility of see two.

Problem is you don't know if you're early or late.

You only load it afterwards.

So first you put your money into the bank.

After you do that, you are told you are early.

You are late.

It's just what drives the model.

So here's what happens.

Suppose there's no financial system, no way to shift consumption.

Well, you're utility ex ante before anything happens.

Must be your probability lumped up in early times.

Utility of consumption period one plus one minus lambda times

utility or consumption of period two.

By definition, nothing basic microeconomics by nothing specific here.

And if you look at this choice as if you

have one course in microeconomics, you will see diagrams like

this.

We have two choices.

You're picking between two choices, and we could pick the

way that is different between the two choices for the

difference.

Quote So along the blue line, you don't mind.

You don't care where you consume where you live so

long as you're on the blue indifference curve.

And we of course know you have one in period

one and period two that gives you a specific thought

where the solution is.

Suppose, however.

You can make a deal.

And to keep it simple, for this example, there are

only two people.

One of them is early, others late and have a

5050 chance of being early and late.

And before anything starts, they make the following deal.

In period one the lay person would pay the early

person some amount of money by.

That means the early person will get his $1 plus

pay and the lay person will get a little bit

less odd times, one minus pi.

And if he chooses prai correctly, if both better off.

Excellent.

This is one part of it.

And if you solve for it, you'll maximising utility for

both agents.

You had the budget constraints.

You end up with.

The standard solution in microeconomics is you just finding the

slope of the difference curve that must be equal to

off.

If faith, I think you have seen this type of

solution before.

In this case.

You understand that we haven't, and I will not explain

it.

That's roughly the deal I am giving you.

So utility and optimal social ensure this is what you

have if you want to keep.

But if you can make a deal, your end of

the green line is shifting business curve to the right,

meaning they are both better off.

So the so asked the so the way you slide

slightly down means this pie you are given not the

the the pie you get in period one you've given

up and period to.

Now suppose you look back that offers services to you.

One contribution of the paper is that the same solution

is obtained if the bank pays this optimal solution of

pay.

Now, this is before I get nothing so far as

relevant to this course.

But here is this is one reason they got the

Nobel Prize for this shows in the particular simple case

that the existence of a bank increases social benefit.

If you don't have a plan, you are worse off

than if you held back simply because it provides this

particular service.

And you might.

This is absolutely beautiful, he said.

And this insight changed the way both in economics and

all the fields, how we have thought about the economy

ever since.

But here's where it becomes irrelevant.

Penguins.

So well, if you put the money into a bank

that promises to give you one plus paying one and

of course one comes by interview 2 million.

Then under the deal, if you are on if you're

awake, you still might not be able to.

Because they might not have money to pay.

Everybody here is one.

And now we get into the runs and this is

where things become relevant.

Suppose there are empty possibilities to make it all simple.

The amount of money the bank has is and dollars.

But the total value of deposits here is one is

end times one plus five.

So the obligations of the bank exceeds the amount of

money the bank has.

Now suppose you get worried about the fact.

Well, of course you'll queue up and take your money

out.

That's just natural human reaction.

The first person who goes in goes to the bank

to get the full amount back one plus time.

Second person would get one plus five so that eventually

the bank runs out and the rest gets nothing.

So mathematically, one only one plus type gets paid.

The last pi comes one plus pi get nothing.

This is why mathematical representations of that part in the

bank when you would have been first in the queue.

That's one sort of intuitively.

So economically there are two equilibria.

One is the bank run and the other with no

bank run.

And you're better off having no bank run.

And here is where deposit insurance comes in.

This is the second beautiful insight.

And I think the key reason why.

The coffee Nobel Prize.

So the government does the following.

So the government puts a person for the time some

big heavy guy might have a gun in his hand

and he says, Give me pipe.

So anybody walks out of the.

It's enhanced.

By part.

And they can't put the money back into the bank.

So everybody that works out gets his or her dollar.

But because that money goes back into the bank, not

everybody gets paid.

Because the bank has and and dollars on deposits and

depositors the ownership.

And so the bank is solvent.

Now, what is your beauty?

What is the true beauty of this?

The government never has to do this.

So long as you know the government will do this,

nobody will run the bank.

So the policy, what is what is nice, what is

really nice about this is and this is something in

the policy world was understanding.

Is with the government can announce a policy, but if

the policy is credible.

Will never be needed to be implemented.

And that is a really cute insight.

That's a that's a that's a really cute thing.

So if you had deposit insurance in the simple world

of the month, deposit insurance will never be needed.

And that it that that applies.

If you can take this inside and apply to a

huge number of other activities in policy to that level

inside has really changed the way we have thought about

government policy in economics, finance and a lot of other

things as well.

Questions before we do some analysis on.

So.

This is a theoretical.

Let's take this to the real world.

Now, in the real world, things are never as clean

as the theoretical model, of course.

So what issues come up in real life?

Well, the advantages, perceptual advantages is it protects sophisticated investors.

It also levels the playing field.

Meaning if you're a new financial institution that has is

not trusted, you are still willing to put your money

into an institution because you know you are protected if

they fail.

So therefore, if you want financial innovation, which I think

is a good thing, the ECB thinks is a bad

thing, but that's the problem.

The the if you like, financial innovation and deposit insurance

makes it more likely that a new bank will take

off.

A good thing.

And it also prevents bank runs, which is good.

The problem is, of course, it creates more cash.

I gave the example last week of the banks in

Venezuela and Dominican Republic.

If it's very destructive, they can use it to steal

the money.

I see a lot of examples like that in the

world and I gave it to like there are dozens

in front of hundreds.

And as happens in the Senate case I showed you

earlier.

It gives the banks incentives to misbehave if you can

borrow, because I can put the money into the bank.

I don't care what the government does with the money.

The bank can just make high risk gambles with the

money.

And me as a creditor, I don't care.

So this is the government has to step in and

monitor this.

This is why you can't liberalise without thinking about it.

So by guaranteeing deposits, you stop creating all the things.

And then, of course, ultimately you get the question who

should pay for it?

If you needed.

Well, the way they tend to do it in most

countries, lifting Europe off the table, let's say the United

States weight for this country.

Its use of the banks so that banks operate.

They have to pay a fee into a deposit insurance

fund.

So if one of the banks fails, then depositors are

protected.

But if I'm a well-run thank.

And he's a bachelor.

Why should I pay for him?

I mean, I am healthy as a survivor and think

I earned the right to do this, taking up a

badly run back.

That's problematic and makes people unhappy.

Then should the government do it?

Well, with the arsenal, the U.S. government did.

But then when he came to Congress and Congress says,

hang on a sec, what went wrong?

And then they play politics for six months and did

nothing.

Politicians always do.

So it's not good for the taxpayers to do this

either.

And in Europe you have a particular problem because a

bank in Italy failed and somebody in Germany says, Why

should I pay for this?

Idiots in Italy.

The the the the the.

I always had this.

Fantastic, I repeated to you.

The front page of the field in Germany ten years

ago.

So.

So the two of you gentlemen, right?

So, so.

So I apologise for the really bad judgement, but the

trumpets would have been said before it came in the

15th year.

They created units of that category.

I'm sorry, I just promised my friend, but it has

to put a what's the right.

The postmarks are called Heisman of all subjects.

Plus Jim.

Questions you probably want to.

Translation of difference.

Of opinion for the Greek.

Greek.

That's what happens, right?

That's exactly what happens in Europe, is you get the

you get these political difficulties.

And this is causing real issues in this.

Just continue to create issues in Europe.

We know that there are misguided views on people's attention.

This is not a few more.

The incentive to monitor things or go down.

Nigel.

No, no, no, no, no, no.

That you can't do.

You have to be a positive.

Is it a fund manager?

Of course it might be.

But if I'm Joe Danielson right, I could walk into

him just to see an informal event.

I could become 2,000 into HSBC, and they can lose

my money for all I care.

The government of Great Britain.

Protection.

That's.

Well, the bond market is a big positive.

So.

Before the 2008 crisis.

A lot of people criticised.

They said.

And his excuse for the incident involving in Portland.

The criticism said, because you never use it, you don't

need it.

But remember, the inside of the mall is the beauty

is if you have it, you don't need it.

And therefore, if you if you are, you physically use

it, you don't need it.

That's an idiotic argument.

But what is happening throughout the world.

Deposit insurance was printing, was becoming weekly, weekly, weekly, weekly

like this was.

This is almost a universal thing.

Except to the United States where they did things more

correctly.

So that's not that's a stupid argument.

Of course, things are more complicated, especially when banks rely

on wholesale markets, as we saw in Northern Rock.

And therefore, deposit insurance doesn't quite protect us.

One might think Argentina gives us a nice case study

of how to think about this.

So before 1991, Argentina had deposit insurance.

1991, they decided, no, let's not.

Let's trust them.

Let's be have a be credible.

And if these banks misbehave and fail, we'd just let

it bloody banks fail and all these depositors lose their

money.

I became government policy of Argentina of three years in

Mexico in 2005.

What was the Tequila crisis?

This is relevant for this story.

But it's Latin American country.

For those of you who are geographically challenged in the

opposite end to Latin America.

But that's a different issue.

But because if you see one big left in country,

difficult difficulty.

You start seeing.

Maybe the others are also in difficulty.

So Mexico had a crisis.

And that led to uncertainty across the rest of the

Latin countries.

The eventually Argentina had one of his.

If one of the most crises from countries in the

world, they had a financial crisis the banks that failed

and because the people riots in the streets.

The government of Argentina was forced to provide deposit insurance,

even if it never would do so.

Right.

So that's that's a salutary lesson because even if the

government says we will never, ever provide deposit insurance, you

would never bail out the banks.

When a crisis happens and it really unhappy people are

lost in money, pick up the pitchforks.

What can you do nowadays?

The government will give it.

If you want to see this sort of thing on

a on an interesting level, look at China today, because

I think you've seen this play out there in various

different ways.

I think it's not credible to say you don't have

deposit insurance.

And I think this is also the argument why you

cannot have laissez faire free market views on financial regulations.

And ultimately after a discussion next week.

I think that's one reason why cryptocurrencies don't look.

But it cripple next week.

So in the UK, one issue that came up was

why we had different frontiers in the UK.

The system was after the first 2,000.

You only have 90% protected to 33,000.

I didn't take six months to get the money back.

So therefore enough comes up.

An interesting consequence of this, which is that when the

bank run happened, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Alistair Darling.

He worked hard to announce a deposit insurance scheme that

get 100% protection to all depositors.

So the U.K. went from a system that was too

weak.

What tactic do you like?

Protection, which is very small to one of these.

Too strong, protecting everybody.

And that's because that folk reaction, followed by overreaction, needed

to restore confidence.

And that decision led to a big crisis a year

later.

You've got banks that are taking advantage of this.

Including some parts of my home country, Iceland, which if

you can post a case for that, if you Google

it.

A lot of that was redirected caused by the.

Finally, Cyprus.

I am not going to spend a lot of time

a lot of issues on that I might do later

if I had time.

But the interesting thing about Cyprus in this context is

that when the Cypriot crisis was under way ten years

ago, the Europe the European authorities made an announcement of

8:00 in the morning on the indeed, this is we

are going to let Cypriot depositors in Cypriot banks.

You can have not even a haircut.

Depositors in Cypriot banks.

The effects of same.

They did not want events in Cyprus the day they

saw the fashion fail and they wanted the haircut and

the European legislation guarantee of the first hundred thousand euros

the protected.

European authorities said you are no longer going to follow

the law.

We're going to make depositors in Cypriot banks take a

haircut.

The promotion of this is one of the stupidest announcements

made by an economic authority, because immediately when you said

that, everybody said, Oh, we can't trust the European authorities

to protect us.

It is a crisis.

You just know.

And they 1990 minutes later, they came back to we

made a mistake.

I'm going to spend most of.

Time for two reasons.

The meeting was held up to 4:00 in the morning.

And people look very, very tired in the room when

you're making policy until 4:00 in the morning.

It was just a funny feeling.

And secondly, the president of Greece and the prime minister

of Greece, they both have families of old law firms.

So financial services to Russians of also depositors.

And they would have lost money.

And therefore, it was a matter of shifting losses from

the wealthy Russians onto the Greek depositors to protect the

business interests of the president.

Not the first time, but the last part of the

first is before we.

So people just direction here.

According to the motion from next week, we will discuss

technology.

Which means.

Cryptocurrencies.

Blockchain.

Central bank.

Digital currencies.

And the like.

So then, of course, I know that some of you

strongly disagree with me a lot.

You can come back with appropriate abuse and then you

start doing more boring things like, for instance, afterwards.

Let's take a break now and then continue to have

a discussion on policies to be.

I was like, This is important music, you know?

See what I want to say?

Careful.

So.

Here is.

So the question is.

So the question is three, five, three, four, five, six,

four, basically.

Last week I didn't present one, two or three.

Now I want to it just spread this little bit

between the two topics.

We had two things because this annoying thing like most

of my slides.

So here's an actual Excel.

Less than 5 minutes to spend a little more time

with that question.

Your government asks you for your opinion on whether your

sample transactions between 2008 and 2021 have increased both wealth

and income inequality.

Yes.

If you did not only accept the.

Fact that.

This is just typified, by the way, the European custom

and your government asks you for your opinion on whether

your central bank's actions in 2008 and 2001 have increased

global wealth and income inequality.

How would you respond?

And by the way.

This question is a little bit tricky.

It is not as obvious as it sounds.

I'm going to give you a hint.

You can see.

They increased both and it is still correct.

And this is a good exam question, by the way,

because there's no correct answer.

I don't really care what your opinion is.

You care about how you allocate.

So therefore, it gives you people a chance to do

the exact, you know, biblical type of environment and nobody

cares what you say.

And to respond to a hypothetical question, I would tell

you what I think the real time I told him

so he came in as a.

I can do some other stuff.

Such as minded.

Come on.

You're opinionated.

I know you love.

All of you.

Want to give you a comment, please?

I could.

Okay.

You're going to use the basis of maple syrup.

Okay.

No, go ahead.

Yeah I do worry.

Income inequality so got up much higher but to some

extent wealth increased and mostly wealth of those people who,

you know, who are part of the financial services industry.

There was increased more when compared to the wealth in

the real economy.

Okay.

So you say, okay, so you say.

You said?

Yes.

Both worlds.

Income inequality increased.

On an exam that would give you three out of

ten.

Because there's a second part to this question, which is,

is it still okay?

By the way, you can't deny that inequality increased.

That's a fact, not opinion.

Yeah, Yeah, that's a fact.

Also thesis.

So I would say yes, wealth inequality and income inequality

increase.

And yes, he was still justifying.

I would say that wealth inequality was increased.

I was just like with my example country, which would

be Canada.

Wealth increased primarily due to speculation in the housing sector

and in the financial sector where people are already entrenched.

Gained massively, while others were long term gains from that

area.

I would say that income inequality.

Also increased because high skilled firms like technology firms and

banks were able to.

People on higher salaries.

Well, incomes stagnated for those in unskilled work.

However, I will say it was justified because it was

needed in order to.

Creates the employment and growth needed to recover from the

financial crisis.

And.

International competition in.

Companies investment in innovation.

You can read.

The description is spot on, Correct?

Your response because you started out contradicting this idea.

But it's not just.

For all these reasons, it's a bad thing.

You have a long, detailed, correct discussion with the president

and he responds to ask why you still like it.

And.

I may not be so competitive, but so be what

you need to do for this sort of question is.

If you want to just sit here and the facts.

This just what you.

The facts.

Are you muted?

A massive liquidity.

Injection industry is.

Fuck inequality increased.

If you then say it's a good thing.

You have to tell me mechanically, what was it before

the policy, I think.

And you can do that, by the way.

But you have to you have to be you have

to be logical in how you do it.

So what was it?

So let's continue along this tension.

We know the facts.

Why was it a good thing?

If you get lots of coffee and you want you

want to try again what you look like instead of

something else.

I could try again.

I would say that it was a good thing because

despite the growing inequality, it still increased overall wealth in

the economy, which allowed.

Jobs at the bottom two.

Continue to be supportive of you.

Do you know the problem with that guy?

Do you actually argue that you actually lose him?

Because this is a this is a Triple Crown like

you just gave in.

So, no, you can you could do better than that.

No, but.

But that's how I came across.

That's something else.

I'm confused.

Or slightly negative, but.

The McConnachie.

So let's step backwards.

But I gave this a slight off and I gave

to the European Central Bank.

Slight on why they think it's justified.

So why?

So let's stop the thought we have.

Let's say we have agreed.

For the purpose of this discussion.

It's a good thing to to do a policy that

increased inequality mechanically.

Why is it logically, why is it good?

Because the policy lowered interest rates said that this increase

in business to invest more.

Yeah.

You need a little, little bit more opposition on those

on those argumentative bombs.

So.

Luke So so let's start with the basic.

What do you want to tell?

What do you want to have?

Not sure you want to help the workers with the

lowest salaries and most precarious jobs, but you don't want

to have university professors to tell you like myself.

That's not.

Lustily lustily.

You ask if you want to have someone who's who's

also precarious, concussed and on on a low salary earning

in this country.

I think the minimum rates in London's 11 will take

you another 9.89.8.

But you want to hold onto persons earning 9.8.

So how do you help?

So who do keep making 9.8 possible to do work

for?

Small and medium sized companies, most likely.

So you want to make it easier for small and

medium sized companies comparable.

So you want you want to have a policy that

has this policy objective to lower the funding costs for

small companies, because those are the companies who create most

jobs and therefore are most likely to help those who

lost mostly income and wealth escape.

Now, if you do that, you would always.

So then you get into the other side.

But of course, you can't target this policy.

It's not targeted take it doesn't become targeted.

So the implicit consequence of that will be that everybody

else benefits.

So you maintain that they go to the bottom.

They benefit more.

Of those who talk.

So therefore, if you want to if you want to

justify the policy, you have to say you have to

roughly justify two things.

You have to say this is a better policy and

alternatives.

Because you can have those people different if you want

to have them differently.

This is back to some of these people and the

cost of health care costs paid.

This is for the wealthy to get richer is acceptable.

By the way.

In this country.

We actually do not.

Everything we do in this country is good, but in

this country you pay no taxes for the first 10,000.

You're.

So therefore what Europe could do, so they could launch

a deal with the Europeans or the U.S., you could

sit below the threshold at which you have to start

paying taxes.

It.

You could also lower the tax burden on small companies

that employ these people.

Or you could theoretically.

So they don't have to spend as much time in

paperwork.

That might be a more efficient way to accomplish something.

But that corruption for all the political obstacles.

But this is what I don't want to get into

those people, see.

But I don't think this is the most it might

take.

Is it?

Certainly, Kim is justifiable, but it's not the most efficient

way of doing it all.

Look, if you want to do this, you can find

plenty of ways to help such work.

It's fun.

Fun to do this way.

Politically they to.

Questions before we move on.

So question number two.

You have been put in charge of your country's monetary

policy.

You can decide on interest rates and quantitative easing in

your home country.

You know exactly what's going on.

You know, the economic and political environment.

What are you going to do?

This is also great if I'm president, but.

So you've been put in charge of your home country.

What would you do?

Who was to volunteer opinion on that?

Tell me a country and tell me what it.

People.

You are meant to be opinionated.

This could happen.

This could be a just like a protest movement.

If I was, by the way, if I was interviewed

for global markets or Goldman Sachs, I would ask you

a question.

And then way you answer with access to the effects

of material impact on employment prospects.

And now you have a chance to practice a question.

This would be good across the street.

But yes, sir.

Can you repeat the question?

Oh.

Okay.

I would love to know.

Within the American you have been put in charge.

So you are friends, right?

You know you are from your own.

I grew up in France.

Okay.

The U.S. put in charge of monetary Iran is a

tricky case because they have other issues.

Of just different.

Differences.

Easy to do.

But unless to give you a sense.

Right.

You have been put in charge that ECB monetary policy.

What would you do?

So what would you do?

So I told you earlier, the biggest threats to financial

stability and economic prosperity is inflation.

The way you deal with inflation is by raising interest

rates.

What do you do?

And by the way, I promise you one thing.

One of you would get this question in a job

interview soon.

If not you more than one person get this person.

It's not a bad person to practice it.

So who was tried?

I will pick an echo.

Okay.

So you are you are speaking from in from Indian

perspective, then?

Yeah.

I will hear the UK perspective because you needed the

quantitative easing and then inflation is also more direct.

It's something like 6 to 7%.

In their mostly negative vision for the investments that are

happening in the outside world.

So I like to.

Look at your perspective.

So you can perspective.

I think raising interest rates looks inevitable at this scenario

because unless you control the inflation level today, we're just

so far, you know.

They mention this of people that unless and unless inflation

is brought to control, the cost of living, problems can

continue to remain.

And it imposes cuts.

Okay.

So.

So so, so.

So let's let's make this simple here.

The Bank of England will announce monetary policy this week

on Thursday.

What interest rates do you want on Thursday?

To give you a.

5050 basis point play on the car.

You want to go up 50 basis points.

That's making a.

Lot of people 70%.

Inflation rate, 10% that you won't see.

That's because we can go for a hike in the

second shot where we cut rates to 1% down to

1.5% as they destabilise the financial markets.

And so.

So okay.

So we need to accommodate because things may get more

complicated if there is a disaster in the financial markets,

in political system or kind of.

Corporate price in the UK.

Anybody else?

Mullins People here, what do you think you are the

ECB crowd in the back of that?

Were you?

Easy, Because there's nothing that I want to tell you.

If you want to show off, you can tell me

that you're happy.

I am very, very much in favour of that.

There you see.

Demonstrates moderately.

Almost.

The exact amount is to be determined.

Well, you look normal, Charles.

You can't.

Say.

It is like that dynamic.

I mean, you can.

You can.

Okay.

What will be the end point.

Of this is so this is a cockroach.

You are safe this now.

So you see before they say kind of you.

What should interested be involvement by the people whose job

it is to make those decisions.

So I'm challenging.

You wasn't in favour of the current policy.

So the the of the of the delay of both

the pace as well as the level of the rate.

Um, because there are countries that are still recovering from

the effects of both COVID and.

And the energy crisis that we're.

Um, principally it's, it's actually Germany that's that as you

showed in that situation pool that's that's suffering and.

You will need some support for a period.

Obviously, all central banks would have to be normal in

their in their policy rates, normal by historical standards by

the end of the decade then.

And this should happen with a moderate pace.

Okay.

The gentleman says ECB should keep rates as they are.

Anybody else who wants to say ECB should do something

different?

I think the ECB is lagging behind the curve because

they maintain zero interest rates.

But the AC rights issue.

Right.

That's what I'm saying.

The ECB left people what it is they right in

zero interest rates.

And so they are supposed to aggressively raise their rates

when compared to all of the central bankers.

Okay.

So maybe a little bit, you know, 75 basis points,

seven basis points continuously for another one year.

You think you should raise.

What about the rest of you, the ECB?

Follow the gentleman's advice.

Keep them unchanged while you increase them.

Increase the number.

Of useful islands in the rest of the of the

rest of the opinion.

Come on, you.

By the way, seriously, when challenged this way.

The worst thing is not to have an answer.

Actually in fact quite seriously if you us.

No.

Yes, sir, I do.

So I know your opinion.

I don't.

Yeah, I.

I think it would be lovely if you were the

ECB and would, like, not raise interest rates as quickly

as you might otherwise.

Thinking that drivers of inflation are probably not based in

European economies fed as aggressively raising rates that will have

an effect on global inflationary drivers.

And you might actually be able to you need to

be catering for a wide range of European economies is

probably shouldn't rise as aggressively.

Effectively, this is the inflationary price.

What about Australia?

Australia, I think partly because happened housing market, housing debt

and consumer credit are quite high.

I suspect again, the inflation in the Australian economy is

not being driven by what's happening in the Australian economy.

It would be mostly global trade related.

And you risk working the bottom out of pocket by

moving to the other.

There's an interesting contradiction coming.

Up here in your appearance.

Regarding the UK.

Basically setting out to develop the main driver for inflation

by the monetary.

It might be from the energy crisis, which is the

supply side.

So perhaps it's not the problem that the financing policy.

Financial policy isn't all about economic policies.

I made it a know where I wanted to see.

The problem with raising interest rates is that it's.

Diminishes the trust and fools and the recession.

So it's not such a bad idea to raise them.

If you want to keep trust, you have to to

maintain the rates.

Even if the market thinks that you're doing it wrongly,

then you have to.

Yeah.

To maintain that stability that.

Before.

I'm half Turkish and I think Turkey should raise interest

rates, though.

Turkey shoots by the record debate the rest of the

rest of it.

I have a case study of Turkey, by the way,

and it is time that Turkey's just said we'll do

this one case with an unequivocal you have to make

two years.

You can debate the rest of the world, but not

to totally do the thing is a bit strange to

walk from country to country and say inflation is not

caused by my country, but by local factors.

Like the biggest economy in the world is lost You.

I'm going to How can this logical inconsistency.

The saying when you put it off, when you are

given a point of view, the world's biggest economy.

Inflation is caused by external factors.

That is not quite so.

That is not quite logical.

But let's walk through this.

So I'm going to take up.

I'm going to take it all the way to the

opposite point.

So if you had said raise aggressiveness, I said don't

raise.

So I'm one of those opposite for that commission problem.

If the United States continues to raise interest rates, which

it's likely to continue to do that.

If the U.S. dollar continues to strengthen, it's likely to

do then and then the rest.

So what can you as a country, if you choose

not to raise interest rates along.

With the United States?

Then it means your currency would continue to weaken.

Therefore imports to the extent that price of oil is

important commodities.

And they go up and they go up in price.

If your credit is weak and it's inflationary.

Inflation in the Netherlands this month is hitting 15.5%.

In some European countries, you look at a 50 and

inflation, you have almost 20%.

And what would you say to the friend who's working

on this idea?

Sorry, I'm not going to give you 9 because you

have to sacrifice to keep inflation down in the French

republic.

How could you look the person in the face and

say, I'm going to make you sacrifice to keep inflation

down?

How would you respond to respond to that person?

I think the British people did.

It is the.

But do you think what you and your other friends

people did something not crazy?

This is why I'm telling you all of this.

You have to work on.

Nationalism and patriotism and hopefully that we work not.

Oh, my God.

I think it's up to me to promise you nothing.

I'm keeping against taking this stance.

The ECB stance.

The ECB stance is the base assumption that this is

all transitory.

And the reason why it's presenting is transitory is because

of external factors, not not necessarily caused by the the

nature of the European economy being a wage inflation spiral.

Something to do with an overheating in specific asset markets

that is flowing into the products markets.

It isn't what you would argue that happening through the

energy flow or.

Or how you guys doing a weighted for the price

of gas in Europe.

By the way last week which had negative.

Oh, surprises.

Of course.

I'm negative.

Everything like there's a lag between between.

Okay.

But it wasn't the the the, the the oil prices

have gone down.

Energy prices have gone down for the past three, four

months.

Inflation is going up.

Energy prices have gone down over the past four months.

You could argue that this was a short term adjustment

of prices by specific producers.

So you have to go really deep into the data,

understand where where exactly where those places made sector by

sector, see where there's any uniformity.

I mean, this is really what's happening in these in

these central banks, I believe, especially ECB.

They're trying to understand whether this is what you call

inflation by having across all.

Products across all of the economies of all of the

basis.

Otherwise you can't actually call inflation a CPI uptick.

So we have we have a one minute, one minute

left collective sound.

And you have said to raise an interesting shot that

would give the other side.

But one of the two important things on the other

side of the argument we need to think about.

First is not.

The very big differences in inflation across eurozone members.

Means Europe is becoming more fragile.

Some entity because of this, because that adjustment will be

really difficult to deal with.

If Netherlands is hitting 16%.

And all the countries are for that presents a lot

of different problems.

And it's the second and the second problem.

And the second problem is the.

At the moment, this is quasi increasing labour markets.

High inflation is being felt in the labour market.

So the salaries on the low on the on the

low incomes are getting ten, 15% increases.

The shortage although the shortage in the labour market that

reflecting that.

So that's an indication that increasingly that this information is

not transitory but has started because of.

Now, I'd like to say a lot of people, although

I can give you a full set up for people

that stop here.

But however, I'm going to conclude this is one thing.

The place we have at the moment and the policy

response to it is the most important economical and financial

question of this year.

There's nothing more important anywhere in the world from that.

And.

And just repeat myself.

If you are looking for a job anywhere, this sort

of sector.

Formulate a good answer.

It will benefit you if the question comes up.

What do you think?

Lecture 7:

I'm just don't really think that that's true in the

first place.

I feel like this.

Is what I am.

Going to be able to contribute.

I would have to seconds.

I think, okay, I started off that I didn't I

didn't show up across the state of fucking.

So thank you.

Okay, people, just to give you a roadmap.

Well, we are heading through this project.

What we have done so far is discussed.

We have discussed the theory, and now we are about

to go through several applications.

Tuesday, we have technology.

Next week we have form exchange.

Then we have regulations.

And finally we have bailouts and sovereign debt.

And I'm hoping I've managed to manage to get through

all of this in time.

So today's technology and before I do this.

I want to stress one thing.

I am not trying to go through how technology works

except where absolutely necessary.

It's is really about how technology is used in the

real world and how it affects the financial system.

However, that means I will have to discuss blockchains so

fine that the financial system has always been one of

the earliest adopters of technology.

Really?

Famously, when Napoleon was defeated in Waterloo, the Empire Rothschild

had investigators on the scene, sent pictures to London, and

he liked said he would talk first.

Who won the war and what he said we lost.

So therefore, U.K. stocks dropped in price.

But then came the one and only then sold before

stock.

So you make them up.

So you thought you by lying to people about the

outcome of them buying up the 70,000 cost and buying

the support, if you could use of technology.

So and nowadays and for the first time we transmitted

signals telegraph wire across the Atlantic in 1843.

Stock prices for the first application.

This is why the pound sterling exchange, which is called

Eagle Cable, because it's the first globally traded for exchange

in multiple markets simultaneously.

So technology is a force for good and for bad,

like everything else in life.

But this speed creates issues.

No.

One issue of concern relates to the concept of financial

innovation, which is the creation of new services, new instruments,

new activities.

Historically, it used to be seen as a good thing.

Checking accounts, credit cards, ATM machines, things we now take

for granted used to be quite innovative over time, but

they're also equally associated with best structured credit cards and

funds of other financial instruments.

So financial innovation is a force of good.

And for that.

And Paul Volcker, the eminence Greece of the US financial

system, who died a couple of years ago and wasn't

unless he graduated, of course.

And perhaps the most famous central bank of the United

States ever.

He wrote 15 years ago, The most important financial innovations

I have seen in the past 20 years is the

automatic teller machine.

Financial innovation moves around events in the financial system, benefiting

the inventor, not the clients.

There is much to be said about this.

And once you never buy things, one does not understand

if you are invested.

But.

This takes us to a sick area of things called

fintech or financial technology.

Now, Joseph Schumpeter, professor at Harvard 100 years ago, he

said the game of creative destruction is the process of

mutation, incessantly revolutionising the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying

the old, incessantly creating the new.

If I was teaching a course in why Europe is

declining, I would make that the theme of that course.

Because.

If you follow me.

It seems European with no new European cooperation that is

top 100 of the world created in the past 40

years.

Every single New York company that's either been Chinese or

American.

Every single one of all of us from Asia to

Europe, is the story behind all of these things.

And this is, of course, like I say, it epitomises

the problem when France it's a joke, strategic assets.

It just tells you exactly how backward things are.

So financial innovation is applying this to finance.

And what happens is the incumbents resist change.

So we had the technology and everybody who is in

power says, no way.

And that's exactly the fight we are seeing at the

moment is between incumbent interests and the new interests.

Digital disruption is a subset of that is where a

small company.

With really good ideas, really good technology, but not many

resources challenges the incumbents.

And just to give you a handful of names here,

Netflix, if need be, Facebook, Alibaba, etc., etc., are all

examples of this.

And to come back to my European point, none of

these companies are European.

Big tech is the use of technology and innovation to

make better financial products, mobile payments, money transfers, peer to

peer lending and things of that nature.

I'll briefly discuss a matter I don't really want to

go to Web3 with Defi because that's sort of slightly

side esoteric at the moment, but I might get to

that if I have time.

So the.

We have in this business.

We have the incumbents, existing banks, we have other companies.

They have start-ups.

A few years ago, which Alex Webber, still chairman of

the UPS bank, he gave a talk to.

So we invited them myself to invite them to give

a talk to the students in the old theatre.

And still YouTube if you want.

And he was asked by the students, What should I

study in LHC for a successful career?

He said.

Technology.

Technology.

Technology.

I asked, you know, the Fed chairman was a friend

of mine about this, and he said, Alex, Lithium might

be selling too short.

But when I give advice to our undergraduate students, I

said I teach more quant stuff.

I always tell everybody, graduate university in the year 2022

should be able to talk machine learning and artificial intelligence,

everybody.

You don't want to be an expert in machine learning

or A.I., but however, when your boss goes to two

people in three years time, he says you person and

you LSC graduate.

How would you approach this problem?

And you say, And as you graduate, if you use

A.I. in this way, you could achieve our objective.

You will get the promotion.

And so therefore, my advice to you speak to I

don't become an expert.

Leave that to the computer scientists, but know how to

talk.

A very useful skill to do.

And the job market.

This is not my subject today, but I'm going to

give you one quick observation on this.

APRA is easing its way to skill levels.

A few years ago.

I just did last seminar before college.

I gave a talk at the DCP on air and

the only thing that really upset them was what I

said in a few years time.

A lot of the jobs now funded by the economists

will be done by artificial intelligence.

What do you see on that level of jobs?

Routine jobs would be done by computers.

So testing, of course, for you've got to be above

or below.

But that's not my talk, to be honest with you,

interested in these things.

Now, of course, the official attitude is China's is heavily

regulated.

And what we really trying to here is a really

good, interesting case, because China used to have the most

deregulated financial system in the world and all the major

countries.

It allowed countries like.

Highly qualified if allowed Jack Ma to create and cockpits

and all the attendant issues that came up.

Right.

Alternative payment systems.

Nobody else in the world has allowed that.

And now what's happened is China has come back to

the way the rest of them want us to stay

control over the payment system.

I think what has happened, what happened with China is

eminently logical given how the world is operating.

So some countries in the world are enthusiastic supporters of

financial technology.

I would need to stamp out the Singapore and Sweden

countries that pretend to be 24.

I'm not Germany and the U.K. and countries that are

hostile to technology.

United States, France, Italy, Japan, etc. etc., etc., etc. And

you might be surprised by the US, but it all

shows in how they do regulations because all of all

everybody operates in finance is has a license and therefore

the licensing regime tells you.

Exactly how the attitude of your country is.

And you can think about how your country fits into

this.

If you're not one of the lists of places and

it's a concept within this I do not want to

get into.

What a lot of people call the sandbox.

But the sandbox means.

A tightly controlled regulatory environment.

So you are, as a financial institution, subject to only

some regulations so long as you stay within certain activities.

The sandbox doesn't work.

It's a beautiful concept, but what it won't be put

into practice runs into a lot of opposition.

Basically, roughly speaking, who is opposed to fintech?

All the existing financial institutions that don't want competition.

And all the supervisors of regulators who don't want to

make the who don't want to do anything different because

then they have to work more.

So the bureaucrats going to be compensated hundreds.

Now, here are the issues.

So.

When you start creating new fintech.

You start to think tech is generally good for lack

of potential reasons.

It creates diversity.

But the problem is, and I think this is the

key issue where you end up with a technological duopoly.

So I'm going to discuss part in the next section

with us from whom the technology is.

It's an increasingly returns to scale business model.

It fails and launches.

While why you do that first.

But the American people, the Chinese and Europe just can't

compete because it's too late in the game.

This is exactly what was exactly what's happened.

It's an increasingly shaky.

So.

From a micro prudential point of view, it's beneficial because

it creates more competition is better for consumers.

And here is the main argument, by the way, completely

aside from my book, Illusion of Control is all about

this.

And this is basically what politicians discussed in one minute.

You know, checks you all always get is what I

want to use.

So the argument used to hold back ethanol is all

this plant that used to the they completely, completely aside,

I was about to send you out to do my

lunch on Thursday and I was about to send an

invitation to the if you want to come to it

because it's relevant to the cause.

But then the unions decided to have a strike.

And of course, with this strike, the thing Wednesday, they

cancelled today and cancel Wednesday for them.

It's a strike of socialism on the ground.

Special Counsel It's going to moved two weeks.

Well, I will.

I will.

I will sent an invitation to think of this if

you want.

It's completely, completely outside of this course.

So questions before I move on.

Yes, sir.

Am I supposed to say Germany pretends to be hostile

because there are a lot of statistical differences which we

would most like to interview.

This is why I did not put Germany into the

hostile Soviet phase.

I am trying to work as a citizen of something

more from Sweden.

This much more.

Important.

They must also they must be willing to grant you

licence to corporate boffin finds a whole host of uses

to help you keep your licenses.

And describe what is different this time is different than

the journey to the thriving fintechs.

And London has thrived in fintechs, but these companies have

problems getting operating licences.

This is what drew me, was just not going to

go for it.

I just like, okay, I'll tell you what happens technically

and both in the UK and Germany, partly because the

government agencies come home from stuff.

And partly because what they are talking partnership with the

regulators generally is following.

You have to have a board, you have to constantly

have to have IP systems, you have to do this

stuff the others place before granting an operating license.

This is not a tech stock that operates.

So you need a lot of things before you can

get the license properly.

What's left is getting in the way.

Also, the official ECB view is that nobody gets a

new banking license.

That actually is just the official policy.

Position view of the government.

So therefore you can't be affected.

The ECB actively gets in the way.

So successful.

No, I.

Mean.

I mean, I know you had of sex life.

Yeah, I think so.

You have.

You have you?

I have.

I opened a brokerage account with a German company a

few months ago.

If the name of the player.

I know, but, you know, I.

I needed to be to close the market.

I need to buy stocks and.

Go to the next place I had to come.

But ignoring the noise, you are right.

I'm not saying it's the boats.

I'm simply saying they feel hostile.

I want to be on the queue.

France and Italy is hot and Japan for of the

fintechs.

So, listen, there's a lot of difference between the two

sweetness saw.

And this is for all of us.

So don't suppose I'll just win the general classification.

And by the way, I wish everyone was normal for

the holidays.

By the way, completely aside, I have a friend who

is an entrepreneur and this business has quite a few

fintech start-ups.

He said one of the most valuable commodity markets is

a company with a license.

So there's a secondary market for the cost of service.

You have a really valuable property in the secondary market,

which tends to be used in novel.

So coming back to anything else on this one.

So coming into this is the cloud and I do

not want to get to spend too much time on

the 12th.

But basically traditionally companies would run their own computer infrastructure,

have their own data centres.

And the problem is economically, if you want to make

your company.

The resilience of a system, scale culture.

You go up and down, how do you get security?

How do you innovate?

It's outside of the scope of expertise.

So new companies like Amazon, they talk.

We ask awkward.

Part of Microsoft's have basically become the mentors for.

For cloud businesses.

The promises of a cloud is not a specialised firm.

Is all the computer infrastructure allowing you to have flexible

operations outside of it?

If you take my online banking and your online banking,

so if you are doing a business with Revolut to

add 26 or 1 to 3 month or whatever or

one of these sort of things, they are basically almost

entirely in the cloud.

If you are doing a business with a traditional event,

like I have a Citibank.

The fact is on premises and the app is in

the cloud and then the app talks to the clerk

and this is how it usually works for traditional banks.

The problem is that the clouds is roughly speaking, first

of all, and that's a lot of these shoes.

I wrote an article about this.

I do not wanna spend a lot of time on

this in of course, but the single point of failure,

if you have everything that Allison one or two Allison

reach is fail, then your vision.

Then you start operating.

There's an increasing.

Returns to scale.

I mean, the bigger you are, the cheaper it is

to provide services.

And then you had the three largest cloud providers in

the world, Alibaba, Amazon, Google, Microsoft Corp, biggest rival, Chinese-Americans.

And if you're not American and if you're not Chinese,

do you want companies from those countries to fund your

critical infrastructure?

Not a trivial question.

And then something I had a discussion with a very

senior rector later about the last point.

Which is.

Critical infrastructure in the UK runs on the cloud water

system.

Electricity.

Financial systems.

Defence.

So if there's a disruption, who gets priority?

This is a trivial issue that basically avoid discussing the

caucus among trivial issue.

And then you get into the issue is, is Amazon

the biggest is America.

What happens if a US court or a US president

says in a crisis we need you to prioritise American

interests?

Non-trivial thing.

This is the least important issues we end up having

in the first place.

So the EU has tried to set up a European

club provision for decent work, and I am a shareholder

of the biggest European health provider and it is performing

absolutely horribly.

It is a Europe does not have any hope for

its own Europe.

Europe, by the way, has achieved this.

My main focus is with Germany because it is the

cheapest.

France has a mixture of age, but the top End

is all American.

The Chinese aren't supposed to operate much in Europe, so

they don't.

Questions are pops up before.

Yes.

Why does it work?

Because the problem is.

You are ten companies.

Here's an existing infrastructure that works on Amazon.

If a European alternative is this way to define the

political sector, it's also sort pieces of Europe.

Move your infrastructure from Amazon to the.

Obviously this site is a company of maintenance.

And no.

That's.

You think you can enforce it?

They are trying really, really hard.

Because of these systemic events.

I mean, the reason it makes perfect sense for any

large country.

Had its own club.

For its part, companies and Europe should have European cultural

values.

India should have Indian chocolate, some European old Indian, all

Japan should have Japanese on both sides.

For us, it's about the big countries like.

But the problem is they've just been completely unable to

block the train because.

I've been using Alison for the past 15 years.

I mean, personally, I run servers.

I used to have a server in my office upstairs

in my office, but used to not have everything so

convenient on Mormonism.

Alison works itself.

So how do you replace something that works is something

that doesn't work, that might work in the future.

Okay.

I guess, in closing for their training they have.

But if you look at the share prices of European

providers.

This tells you everything you need to know about her

success in life.

The biggest one in New York can all be peace.

French company.

I bought them off the IPO last year and it's

not been a happy purchase.

Of course, the biggest one is snap, Snap.

I also use them just completely and.

There is no party competing with Anderson Cooper or Michael.

So there's nobody else I could interest if I could

talk to you online about this, because this is becoming

a bit too esoteric.

Watching.

I'm going to.

Do a survey here.

I don't normally do that, but I'm not too sure

how many.

I guess everybody has heard the term blockchain.

But I want you to raise your hand if you

know what it is.

If you think you what it is beyond.

I mean, I'm not saying you've heard the term and

you've read one official newspaper.

How many people in this room claim to know what

it is?

I don't understand it properly.

Okay.

I don't want to talk about it.

I did, of course.

That's why I feel like I should raise my hand.

I don't think it's that.

Of course, you should know that.

This should not.

I mean.

I'm in any place in the course of what you

should know what to do for anybody else who knows

what it is.

And if you have questions that, of course, universally, of

course, and probably.

I mean, not of course, but physically into.

Yeah.

Okay.

So you studied them closely to two people or three

people have studied blockchain on some level.

Both online courses.

And I'm just saying, do you think you understand.

What I'm saying?

Because that's what I want to know.

If you had a university course, you should know what

blockchains.

Okay, people, I want to promise you one thing.

In 15 minutes, you will know everything there is to

know about watching you become world experts in clock, if

you will.

But now, I promise you, in 15 minutes, you will

become world experts in watching you look sceptical.

So you hit a home course on it.

And I'm going to tell you I could do the

same in 15 minutes.

Ten.

But let me tell you the difference.

I could never tell you the difference between.

I had no idea what he started, but I'm going

to I'm but I've seen this.

I've seen courses like this.

I have a friend, one of my friends created one

of the most popular online courses in blockchain.

So.

I am monitoring the mathematics of it and I'm not

doing a computer science angle to it.

That's probably what you spend most of the time on,

right?

Yes, it would be on some public keys.

Private.

Yeah, exactly.

You take a lot of technical stuff.

I'm not going to do any of the technical stuff.

That's the difference.

But that's that's so basic that these two gentlemen should

be able to implement blockchain.

I'm not going to teach you that.

I'm going to teach you what blockchain is.

This is a difference.

That's the difference between a 15 minute lecture, kind of

one you hold so.

Most of your accountants, you do not know what might

count.

And that trust is key to accounting.

You professional accountancy came into existence in the 15th century

Italy, because when Italians invented the concept of double entry

accounting.

Allows you to corporate things twice and allows you to

check but trust what's been required as the benefit of

total impact on.

So in the language of accounting, we can find these

at some larger database.

Lectures are Put your stuff in historical data, places a

computer system in the blockchain discussion world.

They tend to use the accounting lecture and not the

computer science, some data books.

But I want you to know the real names for

the same thing that you balance.

So the key term here is called mutable.

All of you who are locked in can be changed.

So, Kenneth, they can take a chance.

If you write something by a pen and a book

can go back to race what you wrote.

But pen to write something else that's mutable.

And that's what documentary is meant to prevent.

One thing that's changed is in databases, institutions.

We have a legal system police, courts, banks, government.

These are institutions society has created.

So we trust these databases.

We have an onslaught.

And if you want a real libertarian view on this,

the reason they do is they could profit from cheating.

Is smaller than net present value for future profits.

That's one of our basic economic arguments that if you

don't trust the institutions, then you don't trust the data

in the database.

That's roughly what it is now in the blockchain.

And what was the way I wanted to describe it

is.

Blockchain can either be what I call classical cryptocurrency blockchain,

like Bitcoin is the one I would discuss or something

else.

So keep in mind blockchain is either crypto or non-crypto,

including crypto first.

That's a classical piece.

So blockchain in the crypto sense is a new type

of database.

By design it is created.

Some data for information cannot be changed, Data is immutable.

Everybody can see every transaction database is publicly visible.

Consensus building.

How do we operate?

How do you change data?

The data base is by making visibility and verifiability.

Decentralised, so nobody has civil control over it.

This means there are multiple copies of that database.

So even if he's able to trust the manipulated, she

has a copy.

The seizure of my car, if you try to do

it, is a criminal.

Do something that is visible because every point is a

copy.

And key to this and this is how you political

integrity, your trust.

This comes from technology, not from institutions.

That really is.

And by the way, this is highly political.

So this is the political theme first.

So.

The way this is done.

And I have to show you what I mean by

the term hashing power, and I'll show up to a

few minutes.

The controllers are the ones who create new cryptocurrencies.

We'll show you how it works.

They can be.

They have an incentive not to falsify the data and

the data.

I want to show you what it means in a

few seconds.

So you, you, you even the people who came in

in a Bitcoin sense, would you make a new Bitcoin?

What it means in practice is you're adding a new

racket to the Bitcoin blockchain and that bitcoin you get

is your reward for doing so.

I'll show you what it means in a few minutes.

So key to this all is something called the digital

fingerprint.

If you are colloquial on the hash, if you are

a key.

So let me show you.

We have seen pictures of secret police, all evidence, a

QR code.

You see digital fingerprints on multiple continents.

They realise it's a string of looks like this.

So in my computer here.

I used a first principle digest.

I just a j gives me this string.

But just a cake is something completely different.

London School of Economics.

If I choose one letter after t the whole string

changes.

What a digital single printer crash does.

It takes a lot of information.

And makes a small representation of it, which is unique.

And you know, therefore if you change something enough, you

know, the fingerprint changes.

It allows you to verify integrity.

And every time you communicate over the Internet, there's always

a digital fingerprint.

Sometimes back on a QR code is exactly something.

A map's a QR code can be if you take

a picture with a picture with my phone, my iPhone

maps the QR code onto a website.

This is exactly what we.

It contains information.

And if you do not see it, hacking.

Hacking is all about reversing this.

If I know the past, find the information that created

this.

A non-trivial but technically doable thing.

So this is the key to if you have if

you know the technical term, digital fingerprint recognition, then you

could say.

So second, technical components.

It's a unique, arbitrary number that is used once.

And.

I am not going to tell you what it is

in our to it to the next section.

But keep in mind, it's important to my support to

have them.

It's a number.

So what's a block on a blockchain?

BLOCK On a blockchain contains the following things.

Very important.

It is a hash of the previous.

This means I've changed that previous block in some way,

which has changed all future books.

Therefore, has the hash fingerprint.

Moment.

Embeds in all previous information?

If a changed anything before the current digital fingerprint changes.

That's the technological.

We have.

Nonsense.

I haven't told you and some information I'm going to

show you by example in a few minutes.

So blockchain is blocks, link and sequence.

So it contains the previous block as the hash of

what it was after months of transactions.

And let's say hypothetically, it's a homeownership database.

You take information to jump buy a house from Mary

$100 and 2000 and the 2000 and and buy the

house and kill for 500 last year.

It's that sort of information contained in it.

It's a useful and good option for scientists.

So the way this blockchain is is simple and it's

updated is you create a new approximate.

Because in the House, as opposed to the next block,

incorporates previous blocks.

And that means you cannot maliciously change historical blocks without

the support in the current one, because you know the

current hash.

That is what gives you immutability.

That's the promise of blockchain.

Now we get into the political issue.

Who can add information to the drudge?

Newport.

In the traditional way.

It was a cryptocurrency miner.

The next section.

This is quite permissionless because nobody gives the cryptocurrency by

the permission he or she can mines a scripts of

mines, lots of mines, a bitcoin and nothing is You

add something, you change permissions permission means some entity, some

human being, some institution has the permission to add data

to the blockchain.

So therefore, we had two types of blockchains out there

to be general.

To be general.

Blockchains are open to the public.

Everybody can see it.

Everybody can add a new block to it.

Everybody has a copy.

And this is how cryptocurrencies work.

I'm tentatively.

Private permissioned blockchain.

Private means blockchain is not currently visible like your bank

account.

You would not want your bank account to be publicly

visible, so therefore that could not be affected.

Permission means somebody can decide somehow what to add to

the bank.

Consortia Government Firm.

Joe Danielson Somebody.

And that means a block chain.

Just trying it.

And commission is just like a regular database.

There's no conceptual difference between that and an Excel spreadsheet.

And now we get into the controversy.

Five years ago, the whole world was super excited about

blockchains.

It was the future.

Now, most people have changed their minds a lot since

I'm no longer super excited.

Basically what happened this.

For a blockchain that is commissioned and private, it is

less efficient and the a database.

Existing technology is better if you have a private permissioned

blockchain.

And that is why I want some very special applications.

Blockchains are not being used.

Let me give you a special application, which is actually

my floating practice.

Take shipping containers.

So the biggest shipping companies today, this company, Paris, they

have a blockchain containers.

So somebody loads of cocaine in China, this stuff.

It moves through the oceans.

It's unknown and invited them.

And then she went on to.

How do you verify?

Nobody steals from it.

Well, you have a block, Tim So there's a block

on the blockchain and it's this simple selling point.

So you can look at what's in the container and

see what was put into a container, why that was

in, in Rotterdam, what was then inadequately.

Announces public procurement in Europe.

So we have up so you have safe.

Local government is a highly corrupt in every country in

the world.

As you know.

By the way, local government has a bid for a

new school.

Of course, the local building mafia is going to try

to do a terrible price, but they keep it and

they like to keep all the high up information so

nobody can go back and find this and find out

what happens.

So I put every step to the public procurement process

on a blockchain.

You can verify the steps at any point in the

future.

Also, in these cases, the buying laws.

Blockchains have proven to be worrying that never boring but

not super useful for everyone.

Yes, sir.

Yes.

I hear about you all the time.

I have never poppy less.

Let's discuss a little bit later.

Ask me a question after that section.

Other questions.

What what weakness was found in the black chamber through

black.

Weakness and the weaknesses in blockchain is either by the

trusted institution that puts data in or it is by

the computer code used to update the market, basically practically

to smoke.

This is less than regular data is.

Faster than really what.

Happens in real life.

Outside of cryptos.

You said it's immutable, but I think there is some

issues in terms of if someone was to have over

51% of the hash.

Mean get to that in the next section.

So I know what you're saying.

I'll get to that.

So people are, you know, happy with being blockchain experts.

By the way, there is nothing.

What?

This is all there is to know.

But watch it.

Seriously, I mean, I'm not only this.

Everything else is technical.

It's not see.

In one slide.

Respect that blockchains cannot be able be.

Data cannot be made up to live here.

And then it is said that some people can obtain

the permission to change it.

Okay.

No, I know so.

So this is a trust issue.

And in the cryptocurrency blockchain.

Theoretically, you cannot change.

In a permissioned blockchain, you can't because the entity that

controls information especially is private.

They can do what they want.

But when they can't change it, then I think we're

exposing it to misuse.

Of course, this is an interesting issue.

This exactly is the trust issue.

And therefore if you are locked in crypto to shift,

you don't trust anybody.

Christians before a movement.

So you're all blockchain experts.

I have a question.

If I understand the law, you say blockchain, a new

database system that is more reliable and decentralised but less

efficient than the existing database technology.

So it can still be useful for some companies like

in some government projects where some hospitals for the surgeries

there, you know, those kind of companies can still be

useful for them.

Certainly.

So if you was useful in practice.

Is, will you trust one company to control blockchain like

minus two shipping containers?

But a lot of untrustworthy people on the way.

So trust with the company on one hand and criminals

people can trust in the other.

That's what it's useful.

So shipping containers, public procurements and things of that type

is what it's found.

And it's.

Okay.

Well, I have historically found that this part of my

course is the most controversial part.

Of this course.

Basically, students objected to some things I say, but this

is where I find things, the strongest opinions.

Before I do this, I want to make a disclaimer.

So I put a few million views on cryptocurrencies.

I wrote an article about a year ago when I

got hate on social media in 30 languages.

Chances are somebody you're linked with later, like before the

OP, if we're talking about what a horrible situation that

was for writing that article.

You know, when I wrote the slides, just it was

supposed to be neutral.

I asked a friend of mine, a very good friend

who runs a fintech on crypto with such strong crypto

to share, to read all the slides from show neutral.

So I frame my slides as neutral on crypto as

the possibly be.

So I'm going to try to do my best to

keep it that way.

But I want to be perfectly upfront.

I had views on this which.

So.

Let's start with the gold standard wasn't mentioned before.

So the world used to operate on the gold standard

for 50 years.

This meant printed money could be converted into gold.

The high price of gold and the difficulty of mining

meant the amount of supply of gold was controlled.

The benefit to this is stability.

The disadvantage is the supply of gold did not keep

up with the economic growth, which meant persistent deflation, and

this ultimately in line with creating money for themselves.

The alternative to this is fiat money.

Fiat money is money created by the government.

Without any connection to anything real.

The first documented example of fiat money comes from the

chain known as 13th century, where the chain is unprotected.

What to expect.

He predicted.

Two months and you've got hyperinflation.

Second example in history is Sweden.

In 1623, they did exactly the same as the Chinese

emperor.

They printed too much and got hydro inflation.

You reason that temptation for printing money is why you

make central banks independent?

Cryptocurrencies are the ideological core is trying to replicate the

gold standard, the technology.

And the idea is instead of mining or taking gold

out of the ground.

You replace it with a technological problem that's also difficult

mining.

And I'll tell you exactly how it works in that

few slides.

And the key thing is money is not created, but

governments.

This untrustworthy business model Trust is ensured by technology.

Nazi ideology Crypto.

Now the origin of cryptocurrencies Bitcoin, which was proposed, it

came into existence 30 years ago.

It remains the most valuable.

It remains the most technologically pure.

This is not something I want to get into.

A lot of have.

The problem with Bitcoin.

These are basically two problems with Bitcoin from in the

crypto space.

First is it takes a long time to add new

transactions to the Bitcoin blockchain and minutes.

And the price of that is the price of Bitcoin.

This is high.

So I think that close to a peak could go

up to this costly and slow.

Secondly, Bitcoin is not anonymous, but I had a bitcoin

conference.

We have an investment theatre a few years ago and

can content on YouTube.

It was one of the cryptos.

A friend of mine, one person we invited to the

dinner afterwards was the representative of the Metropolitan Police in

London.

I learned something valuable from this show.

Unless you call the country, the police of your country

has a group of people to monitor the big blockchain

for transactions.

They would talk to all the police forces, everyone They

will.

So if you tried to do something illegal, the blockchain

the government will want.

So therefore, if you don't care because it has to

be small so they will not bother.

I promise you, the government monitors and know who owns

almost all of bitcoin's.

So not alternatives that improve efficiency and privacy.

I'm not going to get into that.

But the only one on the discourse is Ethereum smart

contract to that letter.

So Bitcoin is quite valuable.

Hey, Siri.

What is the price of Bitcoin in US dollars at

the moment?

One.

Bitcoin is 20,746 U.S. dollars and $0.30.

So.

Basically what I wrote was quite to some.

So Bitcoin hit 70,000.

Earlier this year that is now basically same place as.

When I wrote my slides.

So Bitcoin used to be worth four US cents and

it's now worth $20,000.

It is that price increase that makes Bitcoin so visible

in the public domain.

Now anybody can add new blocks to a bit to

the back of blockchain mining or creating a bitcoin.

Problem is they have to meet a computational challenge combining

must use a mathematical problem.

You have to find the value x so that the

hash of the current law is smaller of the hash

of the previous block.

Remember, the house is a string of letters and numbers.

The next block is small, and this time the harder

you call, the fewer people.

Number six people searching for that hash that this mine

is to solve that problem.

And once you solve this problem, you create one.

You look if you the first to do it.

Because if she does it also, she is one second

before you, she gets it.

The first person to do it.

But every time you serve the instrument, they see the

problem.

You think you can create just one.

You own a bit of.

And it's something economically that if if a ten people

do it at the same time and the price of

Bitcoin is 2000, $20,000, your cost is 2000.

Assuming you even.

Yeah.

I don't understand how it escalates because.

Because.

Because the solution, let's say hypothetically, is a string of

numbers.

Just and I'm going to simplify slightly here, but let's

say the hashes is a string of numbers and I

don't know, but it would be state to state with

me.

Right.

And I think you've been to let's see this numbers

3 to 4, five, five.

The next one has to be smaller than that.

Right.

But however, if you if you're leftist, these are the

lefties are A, B, C, D, and e.

F.

So you have ten numbers.

I'd set up a nine.

A ten, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 is a

16 bit number.

So the notion of inequality for a 16 bit number

exists.

You never see that display on.

If you look at this, if you look at these

anchor points, you never see let it be.

These are 16 bit.

So therefore, the notion of inequality exists.

Anything else?

So the first person to find this ex gets her.

Well accepted meaning she owns in next bitcoin.

Now this is how you protect against manipulation.

Suppose the chain has a hundred books.

I suppose.

What 50?

Does something valuable to you?

If you want to manipulate BLOCK 50, you have to

change all the hashes for all the blocks between 50

and 100, and you had to do it really quickly

before anybody minds.

BLOCK one on one.

And you cannot do that economically unless you are.

And this is a very complicated document.

Unless you control more than 50% of all mining in

the world.

If you have more than 50% of all mining capacity

within your control.

This music was you on average you all this get

it Bitcoin.

Then you can manipulate the train story.

This is called 51% attack.

If you control more than 50% by now, there is

a very small exception to this.

This piece presupposes the clock's continued ownership of Bitcoin.

What if BLOCK 50 contains ownership of the Mona Lisa

equals the valuable painting in the world with $1,000,000,000?

So if he puts out a super value on the

blockchain, then it could be worthwhile to change all the

clocks.

Also, just keep that in mind.

But we are discussing bitcoin only here.

Falcon first.

The fifth coin is an issue by computational difficulties.

The problem, of course, technically speaking, is it takes 10

minutes to get the chain all transactions going to happen

within the ten minute intervals of half of the next

block.

And because of discipline, everybody knows if you try to

manipulate.

So this is the amount of bitcoins in existence.

The total theoretic total number of bitcoins in the world

is about 21 million.

And you can see, because this is this kind of

slow build up.

As you can see, we have already mined about 90%

of the world's bitcoins, about 10% left.

Now, this, of course, means the cost of mining the

bitcoins higher and higher and higher and higher.

So what are we used to?

What today?

Either.

Smart contracts are discussed later, but bitcoin and the rest

is meant to be a replacement for fiat money to

be used crypto instead of fiat eurostar's renminbi to do

our things by house insurance companies.

But two, three.

The primary use of crypto this time the speculation This

is by far the biggest what criminal activity similar to.

I do know that crypto is huge, just plain stupid.

I was in the Netherlands, in Rotterdam, by the way,

this summer I went to a restaurant and they said

big concept was.

My truck.

Okay.

So I tried it because, by the way, you might

not believe it, but if you are of foreigner, you

can not really use credit cards in the Netherlands.

If you start stop.

By the way, there would be like four cuts because

of high fees.

So I get cash from this Bitcoin machine.

Some work.

So I couldn't pay for my lunch.

It would come.

But so by and large, by and large, you can

not use bitcoins.

You only do it for one of these two things.

So why has the price of Bitcoin gone from $0.07

to $20000?

Well, the critics say it's an irrational bubble.

Advocates say crypto is used for valuable things and therefore

the price represents the bond of Bitcoin to society.

And by the way, keep in mind something fundamental to

this.

It just shows the price of Bitcoin is $20,000.

The value must be because it represents something.

So bitcoin each bitcoin must give society $20,000 worth of

services either today or in the future for it to

be worth paying $20,000 for.

Unless you're a speculator, I think that's really behind it

because people see the price of bitcoin go up if

by focusing primarily piece of capital increasing the value.

She had to take a quick break and come back

afterwards.

That is.

Yes, yes, yes, yes.

It's so nice for you now that you single, you

have a sense of.

It's just one of those.

Speaking of a new sense of superpowers.

Yeah, but that's not true of Serbia.

That's absurd.

And it's not much.

You have to wait and see.

If you start working at work like this.

February.

If we put a site where literally the train was

just over.

Oh, yeah, Yeah.

You're gonna have to change the way I look at

it.

But it's.

And I feel I have to say that, you know,

you look at it this way.

It's exactly the same.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah, I did.

I was like, Oh, you know, Do you want to

go for something That's not my friends?

But still, a was one of them.

Yeah, that's.

That's like the.

I look like every night.

I think that's I going to.

Yeah.

You know, I think when you go there you are,

you know.

She's doing all these things, but I just hope it

doesn't, you know, I hope that life is like that.

I guess.

I don't know.

Well, you know, I learned a lot.

And it's just nice to see that girl.

Yes, I know that I it's a good practice for

what they say is really going on because it doesn't

know what's in the water or the waters, especially when

it was on the news that something is that.

But know, because I think everybody should be like we

there for the whole thing.

I think that the nightmare for a lot of people.

Oh, okay.

Okay, cool.

Well, I don't know.

We had our headlines and you all stopped talking and

started paying attention.

On the other hand, you thought that you said you

like to talk.

There's nothing preventing you from going outside.

If you want the same thing for the course anyway,

so I'm not gonna miss you.

So that is pretty, by the way.

Everybody's so intimidated, they won't take you up on that.

So.

Here is a comparison with Bitcoin and other cryptos.

Trust in Bitcoin is issued by two things the computational

difficulties and the public visibility of the blockchain.

If you want to speed up the transactions which did

cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin cash and a few others, or if

you want to get privacy like Monero, you have to

give up trusts.

So all other cryptos.

But like I say, they aim to solve one of

the two problems they usually give up in some way

or another is there's no other way you could do

it.

Otherwise, I'm not really going to get into that.

So here the issues surrounding cryptos and now we get

into controversy.

Everything I've told you so far has been facts.

Now we get into opinions and I'm going to try

to give you four sides to.

So the main promise or promise of cryptos is that

governments can't create them.

A lot of crypto to see us to mention quantitative

easing, little trust, the ECB, the Bank of England.

They would mention hyperinflation things often Venezuela and quite often

linked to the Austrian economics.

This, by the way.

I think this business, we think of this, but it's

really focussed on an article, a three foot high break

in 1974.

And part of it completely aside, I learned a couple

of years ago that the only thing students in this

course of impressive that I've done in my life was

that loves to the hate 18.

I did a bunch of them.

Like two years before he died when I was 18.

But.

A very impressive person.

Used to be a professor, but his.

About the framework in Germany.

So.

So the idea is governments cannot create their own nuclear

force.

Is that a good idea or bad idea?

Well, it depends.

But if you trust technology, then.

But if you if you disagree with this, you might

say if you trust the government, if you trust the

central bank, it may be better for it.

For that for them to be able to adjust the

amount of money in the system.

And I have told you before, I think it's a

good idea to repeat this in 2008, because otherwise you

might end up with a Great Depression.

But it might be a bad idea to have done

it in coded because alternative route of the high inflation

today.

But I think fundamentally, I if I buy this person,

I think because while the likes of Bitcoin on the

blockchain is trustworthy.

No.

Ratcliffe On paper, careful of this.

I look at crypto like commodities.

Somebody has to program it.

The human beings operate computerised computer code.

That's the lack of trust.

And certainly for regular persons, investing in having a choice

between putting money into euros and build code, you are

much less likely to have your money stolen in a

bank from a crypto exchange.

That is an empirical observation so far.

So the trust issue is not life nearly as powerful

as claims.

Now, then me get into the core of the issue,

which is the value of crypto.

So how much money is in the world if we

take and one money also defined for the earlier for

the major economies and one is about $25 trillion if

we take for these if we take.

A general definition of money for the whole world.

And two, you might get a number like 6 to

$7 trillion.

So let's say you give a round number.

That's the amount of money in the system.

Crypto is still quite.

Quite small compared to that.

I mean, these numbers are from 22,021, but they are

similar today.

Crypto is slightly less than $1,000,000,000,000 worth a trillion.

I think it's not a lot.

Biggest is bitcoin seconds aether of this tether.

So for this ripple.

In this game people because.

Look India the length of the value proposition.

So if cryptocurrencies by taking my numbers.

If you buy a Bitcoin today that Bitcoin becomes money,

Bitcoin investors will get a return of 5,000% return because

if Bitcoin becomes the world's money.

And you're replacing less than trillion dollars with perhaps $15

trillion.

That means a 5,000% return.

And because we do know that it talked to thousands

of investors in Bitcoin, they controlled most of it and

the top 10,000 controls, almost all of it.

This would I think this would be the biggest transfer

of wealth.

From the public to a handful of speculators we won't

ever see.

This one really make enough?

This will make Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk poor by

comparison.

Basically, they haven't done nothing.

I don't think this would be politically acceptable.

I do not think there's any country in the world

that would allow that to happen.

Politics.

So I think that political argument alone means Bitcoin and

cryptos cannot succeed.

Of course.

Then if I say that then the the the the

the critical officials here say in a free market capitalist

society, those who take risks to get the rewards has

a connection to libertarian views.

And if you're a critic, you are just jealous of

them being comrades or you're anti-capitalist.

So this is roughly how the arguments go.

Then you have the third argument is involvement.

Mining is based on solving a computationally complex problem.

One thus becoming more complex.

At the moment, crypto mining uses about 1% of the

world's electricity.

Which in some places you see dirty coal to create

electricity to mine bitcoin.

This is certainly very far from being environmentally sustainable.

So there is a very this is a signal that

Bitcoin mining and crypto mining is fairly environmentally disastrous.

The Eastern came out with a solution to what?

To somebody called proof of stake.

But what that means, if you own Ethereum, you get

the next Ethereum.

That is just making the rich richer, by the way,

but by another name.

So I don't think that solves anything except the wealth

problem.

For the Bitcoin, for the aether holders.

Then we get into the control of somebody who controls

mining, cryptos mined by alternative pools called syndicates.

So this is a sort of loosely connected group of

individuals and companies we can join and be when we

want.

These pools often make money go quickly, which means the

specialist computers for solving cases, technically speaking.

You solve crypto mining using graphic cards?

It's most of our data and video feeds to help

make the most profits out of this.

If you're a gamer and you would admit to me

like a good gaming card, some computers have become very

expensive.

We all use for bitcoin mining.

We then there are companies who find those and buy

processes, put them together and make the specialist computers useful.

Make.

So the the these companies are entirely Hong Kong based

Chinese space in all the mining equipment that is American

and the assembly is is Hong Kong Chinese so.

Roughly speaking, it's really hard to find information on this.

I keep on adding people who live in this part

of Cornwall and they they cannot give me consistent numbers.

My best information I have looked at this last time

is the biggest minus is an entity called and pulling

the 25% BTC top 11% it btc com 11% all

Chinese.

So 65% of my control of mining in this world

is China.

But the situation in China for the coming midterms own

interests.

U.S. followed by Russia, Kazakhstan.

Malaysia and Iran.

So China has clamped down on the use of Bitcoin

internally for obvious reasons, but not ownership.

When we had the big court debate at the old

theatre five years ago.

I think the best counter argument I had with a

libertarian advocate was pre-code is controlled by the Communist Party

of China.

Is not how you want the money to be controlled.

That sort of I think that is the best argument

I can speak on this.

Is just to get some information to.

To the statistics in Iran, 3.8% is mainly done by

the Chinese community.

With no exact use of the the you are you

what you want rights is very hard to disentangle.

So the Israeli title is entangled this.

They can basically for the cheap electricity.

And that's all Chinese companies.

No.

No, no.

You are.

You are.

You are you are probably all right that I don't

know for a fact, but I do believe you.

Basically this is by far the biggest minus in the

world are some Chinese entities.

In the US.

We haven't seen any such transfers and who the main

owners of blockchains are them.

For the yes and no.

So you can find them in blockchain, in Bitcoin?

Yeah, you can.

So basically you can certainly find.

You can find out.

Very large owners of Bitcoin.

Yes, they are somewhat in a fairly pocket model.

Because you have to be inside the blockchain to see

the other transactions or if.

Everybody you can download it, you can just on your

on your Mac laptop, you can download Bitcoin blockchain.

Because what I'm interested in is I know the international

criminal organisations are mainly laundering money through blockchain right now.

So if everything is so transparent and as you said

before, before this is actively looking at the transactions, how

come, for example, in Latin American countries the drug dealers

are basically injecting so much of their community into Bitcoin

and nobody is really.

The invention.

Let's just say don't say no party.

Problem is, if you want phased in, say the if

if you are based in Colombia, Peru, and you're a

powerful drug dealer.

Right.

And you are.

You depend on the legal system of that country to

enforce the clean.

It's complicated.

It's actually very complicated.

So the however, it is very clear that all the

police acted and monitored a lot of the people.

You can look if someone wanted to caught watching.

And they know somebody.

Sizeable school.

Yeah, because for any other transaction, the fiscal authority would

come in and check like how you were able to

make such a big purchase.

But let me let me let me let me change

let me ask you a different question.

But where are you from?

I'm very thin.

But even.

So, five years ago, you wasn't Italian citizen.

You could transfer money to a crypto exchange in the

Cayman Islands.

At which time the Italian government had no idea what

happened to the money.

If you're entirely criminal, you've got to trust the money

into the flock to smoke under your own name.

You could have an account with a crypto exchange in

the in the in the Cayman Islands or under your

control, regardless of whether your source of your money was

legal.

Also year and a half ago, and we've made two

crypto exchanges and world reports, all such transactions, two of

the most prolific principalities.

And what is the latest?

Is there any authority that the.

Noble Italian company will know?

So if you trust the money.

Because the problem is he official.

I'm against the legalities here, but I think the technicalities,

when you open a bank account in the moment that

you have to prove who you are, know your customer.

You cannot operate an account with a crypto exchange until

you prove who you are.

That means if a copy of a passport.

They will report anything you do to the Italian government.

Every criticism to the.

Customers are, if they think.

They know this will not do them problems.

But their problem is if they allow you as one

person to do this.

Yes.

But if a lot of Italians do the same, then

they will be punished.

I mean, I guess maybe.

And even though I know for a fact the mafia

was using pirated things from Pakistan before the cryptocurrencies came

out, and those are in transition to free stuff to

basically conduct all of their transactions.

And then I just don't think it was has always

been used for that use.

They might difficult for transactions.

Often of course you are right I mean the things

are criminal all of a sudden of late and I

do not spend too much time on this one saying

this to be absolutely clear on this.

Every major crypto exchange in the world that complies with

know your customer and then money laundering regulations, this means

it is no hop it's it's asked difficult easy to

open an account for crypto in such UniCredit in your

hometown.

It's the same.

The same process.

This is what I'm.

So therefore, the only way to find out if you

go to some subterranean crypto exchange and somehow you wanted

to.

And if you want to help the financial authorities in,

look at how we can discuss that if you want.

Well, and by the way, and completely aside.

A lot of people have claimed Russians are using crypto

to bypass sanctions.

That is not true.

Because every single crypto exchange has to follow the sanctions

imposed by by the U.S. and Europe on Russians.

So therefore they impose sanctions like anybody else.

Christians otherwise.

And this has become too technical.

No.

Then the banks would go.

To the question.

Yeah, I'm a professional, so I you talk about one

of the major public support principles for criminal use.

I'm just saying.

But at the same time, claim that this part is

kind of like how they want to fight.

I just.

Want to.

No, no, because something is wrong.

He's asking a perfectly, perfectly very good question, which is,

if the police is monitoring Bitcoin, why are criminals still

using it?

So.

First of all, a lot of criminals are outside of

legal jurisdictions.

So if you take, for example, the type of criminal

types of computers and and encrypt your hard drive.

I like the one, the cry one.

What is hacking the very criminal method?

They are predominantly based in Russia, and the Russian government

will not do anything.

So you find if you operate in a country that

does not prosecute you, it doesn't matter whether the FBI

knows who you are.

A cup of coffee.

So your own government protects you.

That's all you need.

And if you a small drug dealer in South London,

if you go and buy, if you go to if

you go to East London and buy your drugs for

20 with Bitcoin, that is too small to be of

interest to the US, to the UK police authorities.

So as long as you do small transactions in crypto,

the police authorities in the UK are not monitoring you.

And if you are based in jurisdictions where the police

does enforce the law, then yes.

Is it mainly Russia?

Russia is a very big component to this.

Everyone is speaking.

North Korea is another.

North Korea is a state is actively doing this as

well.

So this militaristic Iran is very active.

So basically states that Venezuela is trying to unsuccessfully.

So if you're based in a state postcode and find

the best and what you're more likely to find protection,

if you will, from the from the statistics.

But let's not get into this into looking for that

observation.

I think mainly there is no financial instability here.

Convicted Bevans.

That's why I've left.

This door is shut.

There's no there's no there's no truth.

Because I swear to you, not true.

Because if I can't transfer Bitcoin to you, I like

you on the Bitcoin blockchain.

For that, I need to take these two gentlemen.

This must disclose in five on the course of to

be able to understand the mathematics and the computer system

technology for doing so highly specialists.

So to instead he's a crypto wallet.

This is a company that for you and those are

susceptible to one monitor.

Like that those two part of the.

System.

I know those $0.02, P and B and the true

experts if they could create an underground crypto exchange.

But if it had become relatively sizeable, that promise should

be noticed by the wants.

Let's look into this issue and we get sidetracked here.

We can get into this in the discussion prompt if

you have time.

So the banks would say the banking technology works really

well.

Fiat money works well.

Fiat money you can pay almost anything for no cost.

Fiat money promises they can store.

It used to be 2%.

Of course, not exactly the good.

For cryptos to take over, they have to somehow demonstrate

they are better than what they have got.

For me is the weakness of conceptual pieces.

Which can you say if you live in London in

the year 2022, you are better off using crypto hundreds

plus three.

If you can't make that case persuasively, then it is

hard to see a crypto future.

Then, of course, however, if you go to places like

Venezuela, you're certainly much better equipped when you are home

to the Venezuelan bolivar.

Say what's important.

However, although some music has been virtual, you would rather

prefer to have you as follows Fun.

And if you live in the same pop, you'd rather

be as follows.

So the they the the advocates say because you can't

trust the government.

Government is monitoring how you use money.

You know, your customer anti-money laundering AML because it becomes

more widespread.

You can buy a lot of things with this model

very you can transfer money cheaper within.

That means it's the value will increase.

That's roughly how the pro crypto argument goes.

Now we get into the key issue.

What can the government do?

So most governments, if you will, crypto.

So you're basically the United States in your script.

Why does Europe ignore crypto?

Because it's an imbalance.

Bitcoin in Europe is not important, But is it others?

Let me rephrase the slightly.

Crypto does not threaten anybody in Europe.

So who cares about Crypt?

It is either authoritarian states or and or states that

depend on the financial system for taxes.

China is, of course, the primary example, right, because China

allow private payment system to emerge and now is exercising

the same control as everybody else.

India is exactly the same place.

Russia is the same place.

Turkey is the same place.

The reason why you see all countries like the.

And preventing the use of crypto is so that you

can to to monitor the citizens.

So they don't like the doctrines.

I think the issue is.

British pounds are legal tender.

The government can say.

The London School of Economics is required to pay John

Daniels and Britain's funds.

They can say economic peace, taxes on British pounds, etc.,

etc. So if you can fake, you can force you

to miss a legal requirement.

You have to have a company come in with response.

So that power prevents crypto adoption in most countries.

No.

We are seeing at least two countries that have used

Bitcoin as legal tender money.

Central African Republic and Guatemala, most famously.

So.

Yeah.

100%, isn't it, Salvador?

I know, said somewhat.

I meant to change something.

You're right.

I know.

I know.

I know.

I know.

I know.

Yeah, I actually when you look in are almost lights.

And I meant to change it.

It's one thing for officers to.

And I've been to both countries, by the way.

So Central African African Republic and El Salvador have both

adopted Bitcoin as legal tender.

Problem is the asylum ceremony has been running for about

a year, has basically picked.

And I think part of that is the price of

Bitcoin was $47,000 when they started this and it's now

20,000.

So the people of some of us also want to

slow the price of Bitcoin fall by more than 50%.

And by now my understanding is that nobody will accept

it in transactions anymore.

So basically Bitcoin, the Southern Cross has failed.

Please correct me if you know better.

No.

What we have seen in the crypto markets as the

price of Bitcoin.

Other cryptos fell from the peak of 68000 to 20000.

It has created or exposed the weaknesses in the business

models of cryptocurrencies.

Celsius is a really good example of this.

Celsius was a borrowing and lending firm, so they are

basically taking crypto deposits.

And then think of cryptos with crypto loans.

Well, if your value of money falls by over by

70%, that makes it business model of a bank doing

that unviable.

And I suspect what we will be about to see

politically and I think this is given rapidly heading in

this direction is.

Cryptocurrencies Celsius or all the infrastructures operated in the crypto

space, which is regulated by banking financial institutions.

So the likes of Celsius would be classified as banks

gold forward with all the attendant issues.

So in other words, the technology is looking at the

stop building this body.

And then finally, we have this concept of the instability

of state and code base and what's a stable code

for those of you who are not following this.

So Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies fluctuates quite a bit.

68 to $29000.

A staple coin is a cryptocurrency that retains a fixed

value.

The fiat money.

I.e. usually US dollars.

The advantage to a crypto speculator is that if you

sell bitcoin you can get a statement column which is

easier, and if you cover a big country, you will

solve this directly.

So you just you just hold on to the things

in stablecoins or in crypto systems, etc..

So the problem is.

There are two ways you can do this, either by

a clever trading algorithm that maintains parity.

Terry us the most famous of the lot.

The trading algorithm didn't work because they fell by 60%

early this year.

Whatever Tesla says.

For every single telecom they have won, you have stolen

the reserves, but they refused to a quality.

So then you therefore need to put your money into

a company.

And they said, Trust us, we have $1.

I guess we have $1 against 1000, but we're not

going to let you see.

That's what creates issues.

So questions before we move on to something less controversial.

Yes.

We go back to what is the point of a

stablecoin if the point of crypto is to not be

tied to fiat currency?

The point of stating the coin is if you are

trading in cryptocurrencies.

And you might say, Ah, the music of today I

want to play Bitcoin tomorrow night.

No, we use those.

Problem for you as a trader is it's costly to

go from Bitcoin to U.S. dollars.

Therefore you want to hold views as.

So you have a cryptocurrency that operates like a U.S.

dollar, but easy to get in and out.

Got it.

So you get the exposure to the U.S. dollar without

the fees or the cost that would be associated with

the direct switch.

Yes.

So the excited because it's because if you want to

take Bitcoin you as Thomas, you have to have the

money go into your bank account.

Right.

Which can be costly or slow.

Instead, I send my fifth call and I get my

state right now if that happens like that.

If one of you is taller than me, that might

take some time.

You might pay a fee, and then you go back.

You pay the fee back, and it takes time to

get.

Do you know who promoted people?

Sorry.

$300 billion.

Oh.

Let's put it on the for a look at this

table.

Indeed, indeed.

This is what this is really what I'm suggesting.

Anything else?

No.

So I am not going to ask you whether you

like crypto or not, but I am willing to make

a bet that if I did a service is I've

done it in the past, it's course.

But half of you would say you like crypto and

half of you don't.

And I also know that after my election to talk,

you did not change your mind and say, I am

done, is done the Senate before and after.

So I know that for a fact that is not

an issue.

Free speech, however you like, and you're free to put

your mind at ease on the final exam.

Your opinion is irrelevant.

How you argue your opinion is what matters.

So I only care from an extreme point of view.

If crypto comes up whether you like it or not,

I care for how you defend your position for and

against.

That's all that matters to me.

Any other questions on this?

I want to quickly.

I want to spend some time on CPAC.

But to do that I digital currencies.

A digital console.

Basically a cryptocurrency in its typical form is based on

my money being a token of blockchain.

But blockchain is public and mining gives you trust.

If you remove either public or mining the tokens, you

are left with what is known as digital currency.

But digital currency is a little bit like a game

token.

If you go to the casino, it is something that

represents some amount of fiat money on a blockchain.

And there are certainly very good benefits from this year.

So here is the true benefit of Tokenised money.

So I'm going.

I've got to use these people in my experiments.

Suppose.

I want to transfer 1 to this government.

I go to my iPhone and that size of one

part of it.

What happens?

Apple Pay connects to my credit card provider, which connects

to my bank account, which connects to the payments and

shops.

This connects to his bank account is connects to his.

But we can assume he's.

Let me go from one account to another, account to

another account for another comfortable another account.

It's a lot of risk in that transaction.

So when you try to move money from one account

and other come from another account, it's a risky chain

of transactions.

Suppose instead.

This catalyst.

Right represented in my account.

I will just give you the kind of sprite or

typically I will keep the token fine beaming the token

over phone.

The media has ownership.

So instead of money going from one come to another

to another, the ownership was immediately transferred from one entity

to another.

That is very, very efficient.

So where you're seeing a huge amount of action in

this space is in tokenising assets and tokenising money so

that when you find things.

And when you in money.

All you're doing is swapping tokens instead of transferring the

account systems.

It's a very slow, expensive.

There's a high chance of failure.

So if you really want to see the state of

the art in this business, that's where the action is.

And only film takes place in laughter.

And let me show you how you can watch in

a few minutes.

And Jp morgan, a Facebook colleague provided by the Computer

Science Unit.

Before COVID 2019.

Therefore, I.

I was invited to watch the crypto poly in Switzerland.

If you follow the crypto space is the main crypto

super Switzerland.

If you don't know what Switzerland is, it's the richest

part of Switzerland with the lowest taxes, basically the wealthiest

cotton wool around one pretty lake.

And that's all.

That's what most of Europe is.

European crypto is located for no other reason.

So I was a token.

Sceptic inquired to the occupants.

I was in the single time talking to all the

big crypto guys to me, and they were really, really

sceptical.

Until then, I said one thing.

Would you really trust your money to Facebook?

That's one of the clubs.

So the one thing we all agree to disagree on,

whatever happens, we do not want Facebook to own our

money.

It disagreed with the analysis sent by the result, leaving

that aside.

What was the interesting thing is it's a type of

digital currency called central bank, digital currency.

That is the interesting.

We are seeing this everywhere in the world.

What this means is the central bank introduces a digital

currency along with the currency of money, with current money

supply.

Why would the ECB do this?

If you find a very senior person from a central

bank and can have a quiet conversation with them about

why he didn't tell you the following.

The motivation is they do not want the payment system

to be owned by foreign private companies.

They do not want the payment system even to be

under the control of domestic private companies.

They want the government to control the payment system.

That is the motivation behind showing that what China can

do in the space and this is the motivation almost

everywhere else.

So they know this is coming to know the otherwise

otherwise private payment system.

Eastern to this.

They want to be the first before they get stop

this.

So this is this is a drive and this is

the main driving point behind central bank digital currencies.

So let's do the obvious implementation.

This is not how we discussed it five years ago.

The central bank creates a blockchain tokenise its own fiat

money, the CB controls the blockchain.

There's no mining trust comes from the central bank.

You then swap your money for the token, you use

those for your transactions and lots it.

What's the problem with that?

Well, the first problem is every transaction is visible to

the central bank.

And depending on where you go from that is a

book or a feature.

If you're in Europe or the United States, it is

politically impossible for the central bank to know what consensus

is.

It's not going to happen politically.

If you China or Russia or Turkey India Person Okay,

so it depends on the country.

This is E so, so this issue, this ability to

distribute the blockchain is a key issue.

You can see what your own country's stance on what

people use tend to quite the multiple different countries.

Yes.

But the citizens of Dubai cannot deliver.

Let me finish this and then you can come back

to this because there's more to it.

Besides you.

Second problem from obvious implementation is.

What in point of effect.

The central bank controlled for the money.

So why do you need back?

Actually, it's not obvious.

It's almost like everything you do goes via the central.

But then you get a good eye.

Good thing is, the central bank can control the money

supply.

Meaning if it wants to do quantitative easing, it just

took tokens worth 1 and 5 cents instead of one

year.

If they have inflation, they can reduce the amount of

money in the system by saying you used to have

100.

Now you own 95.

You can increase or decrease in money supply on demand.

Problem finding problem is swapping financial technology to this type

of infrastructure.

Is an extremely expensive and extremely risky.

So therefore, this obvious implementation is not likely to happen

anywhere.

So human issues are just mentioned.

So.

If you are in Russia today and you use a

card to pay for coffee, the minister, the minister of

Interior will know within a second.

But John Anderson paid one group for coffee in this

coffee house, in this home.

Government monitors everything you can do Consular.

Obviously that is acceptable, but that's the key issue.

So does the government.

Do you want the government to have a power and

do you have a say in that?

So there are two hybrid implementations.

Now we get to your question.

One version of this is that private banks face claims

you continue to do business with the central bank and

the bank uses tokenised central bank money.

What she says is not your relationship with the financial

system.

What changed is relationship of your bank with the central

bank.

Again, this is increasingly seen as unlikely incompatible with the

existing infrastructure.

So what we are converting to is this This becomes

effectively a new, more efficient payment system.

So remember the example of the gentleman when it comes

to the money, To the gentleman.

You keep that feature of the system.

But you keep all the all of the rest of

the system as it is.

And that is what a central bank digital currency looks

like in Europe and in China and the UK and

everywhere else.

So it is basically when we started seeing it adopted,

it's become less and less and less interesting.

Questions.

Can be said that this symbolises a threat to the

existing fit in the companies.

Well, the the exist solely.

If you are.

So what I'm not discussing here should have put it

into the slight shift is that if you want to

find space for it's a decentralised finance space and fintechs,

quite a lot of it is on talk.

Bank money wants to be tokenised with tokenised money.

That opens up a whole new technological base to an

implementation.

And I think that's what the interesting thing is.

To the you have to keep the existing infrastructure more

or less.

So if you then stop some money and you allow

new types of technology to emerge is if government doesn't

step on.

So.

About 200 countries of the world are evaluating them.

As far as I know, they've been launched in the

Bahamas materially CCU.

Sweden, China, Jamaica, Ukraine.

All testing them in is likely to happen next year.

Eurozone.

But it lost in India.

The homework.

Oh.

Well, let's be realistic because.

I think that if you know of Singapore monetary, I

think that's tough.

I know that Social Sweden has started its studies pilot

program.

Yeah the Europe is looking at 2025.

The United States is a bit unclear, but it looks

like it's important farther into the future.

So the movie.

Comes to be tokenised.

So if you.

Well, the.

It's unclear what form to take.

It's unclear what form to take in Europe.

Because after talking the system.

I don't know.

Is that all you do?

No, I don't think they know.

I'll.

But, but, but, but, but.

But then you come back to the point of a,

c, c, d countries.

You listed Nigeria because European countries, Jamaica, Ukraine, India, basically

cost wise and benefits wise.

If you already have a very sophisticated payment system, you

don't need this.

It can have an infrastructure.

Or inefficient system.

And your system is small.

There's a lot of benefits to the return on investment

for a country like Nigeria.

It's much higher.

And the return on investment for a country like the

UK.

This is why you see this.

The exit party explains the logic.

And if you like geopolitics, I am not going to

say any more than I'm about to say.

But if you like geopolitics, you can see the central

bank.

Digital currencies are a key part of China's Belt and

Road Initiative.

Very very controversial.

Activities by the.

If you're into that sort of discussion, I'm not going

to get into questions.

So smart contracts.

So somebody asked me earlier if I had ordered Bitcoin

and never had I have on Ethereum, which is at

the top of my conference.

And the reason I owned Ethereum is a friend of

mine started a fintech too, and exactly what I'm doing

here.

And I was.

I was testing the system out with Sam when he

was setting it up, so.

A smart contract is in the market in a sense

executing digital contracts that facilitates the exchange of anything.

It is primarily or almost only on the Ethereum blockchain,

which is a type of cryptocurrency that allows for smart

contracts.

I'm sure what it means, for example, it's easier to

explain that way.

So imagine I have personally I have definitely been tokenised

on the blockchain, he assures.

Dollars Tokenised on the blockchain.

Well, let's see if we agree.

And he's happy since Japan is based in the U.S..

If I transfer money to him, I have to go

to my account.

My bank, my bank sensitivity cost me.

It's a fee associated with it.

And then I could use Why?

It's a transformation, of course.

But even then, there's often a problem to us.

And we pay a little money for this.

Instead, we make a few.

I.

He gives me $1,000.

I gave him the market value of Japanese yen for

those thousand dollars at the current stock exchange rate.

And this smart contract doesn't follow me.

Hey, it looks up the stock exchange rate for you,

and B, it verifies your social values.

See, it verifies.

I have the Japanese yen version of the.

The it's what our focus.

And if any of these steps fails, this does not

happen.

Now you can see why this is fantastic, because instead

of me having to finance for money, the bank takes

a fee and it takes time.

This is almost costless.

You pay in cash, which is, in my view, cosmism

almost costless and happens to something.

And you guys can tell me why India hates this.

And what we are thinking is why does India hate

this?

The feeling is once India is.

But this tax system, the bulk of money, they are

collecting surplus.

And that's exactly what it does.

Exactly is this you take the primary use case of

this.

This is remittances.

So let's say you are a person.

Well, very poor country.

You are working in London and you want to send

money to your family and support the war effort to

Somalia.

Very poor place for me.

For somebody in London to send 100 to subsaharan Africa

costs 9% and takes a week.

For for emissions slightly more than 9% pixel the same

for the same for a lot of other countries.

Conceptually, you could do this.

Why does it take a week?

Because the governments of these countries taxes and they do

anything they can to prevent alternatives.

But again, no, you know, you also start seeing the

political opposition to this.

Do you need this in Europe?

But I can transfer money anywhere in Europe costless.

And I can go to Iceland.

I had to pay my student loans either to use

a fintech to transfer 5,000 worth of money in Icelandic

for up to half an hour cost me almost nothing.

I don't need the blockchain for that either.

But if you have going outside of the comfort of

space, this becomes an increasingly attractive way of transferring money.

And if you ask yourself, Why do we have CPPCC?

It is this sort of technology that is keeping them

very, very scared.

They do not want people to do this in central

banks.

They don't want it to come from the property business.

Is somebody call for you on these super simple contracts,

sending money from me to him.

It no longer works.

The problem is.

You can't write general contracts, smart contracts for very simple

legal reasons.

I'm not a lawyer, but I'm going to give you

a legal argument.

One of the world's experts on this is a chapter

devoted from a German competence.

She must choose Evans Schuster as one of the most

experts in this topics in sport so that she can

look up what is written on this.

But his argument is that.

You can then write a contract that spans every possible

outcomes.

You always in every conflict dispute.

And the dispute, the reason the judges is to rule

on this case.

So you can never buy the contract except from the

very simple all the ways the human beings being human

beings, they are to start i.q.

So you need to just.

And secondly, the law changes all the time.

So a contract written today might be illegal tomorrow.

So the the smart contract, as some have even put

the legal system into it.

Very complicated, difficult proposition.

So buy a lot of smart contracts.

Contract workers shouldn't simply chase such cue.

But beyond that, as a practical matter, they just don't

work.

Questions.

Yes, sir.

That would be fine.

But the.

Let's say, for example.

Right.

So he's asking us for a contract dramatically.

Let's say, for example, if I say I'm going to

sell my car to you in three weeks time.

That's smokeless, right?

You could not run a smart contract with that because

you might like you must say, put John.

Your life's fantasy car only had 29,000 miles An important

for some tends to provide you this you could almost.

I just.

I just made that up on Twitter.

Anything that creates a potential for that is outside the

scope of a smart contract.

It has to be very, very simple.

Actually.

Actually, there is a way of linking international arbitration to

smartphone terms.

Of course, you can't.

I mean, I'm not saying I'm not saying you can't

link international arbitration to smart contracts.

But if I'm selling my car to this gentleman.

I'm not in the most of the British legal system,

not international arbitration.

And by the way, some countries do not allow arbitration

in Brazil.

So therefore, you view China as you exclude yourself from

of the parts of the world.

It's not simple.

Okay, let's move on.

Well, this is most interesting at the moment is in

a concept called decentralised finance.

Let's define.

Nobody really knows what this is, because I know there

are firms that exist in the space, but this is

by and large hypothetical.

But you are doing peer to peer financial services on

blockchains.

The idea is that it promises we can get most

banking services like borrowing, lending, trading assets and everything you

do for the bank.

But you do that with somebody that executes everything as

a smart contract on a blockchain.

And of course, this does not involve regulated banks with

all the costs.

This is much cheaper.

And you get full transparency.

You could call on anonymity if need be.

You still comply with a family KYC and sanctions.

You just create the kind of more efficient version of

the financial system we have today.

At the moment, this only exists as a concept, not

as reality.

I mean, I know there are some minor exceptions to

this, but by and large it is still conceptual.

I don't want to really get into something that might

change tomorrow.

Christians before we.

Go to person.

So finally.

Yeah.

It is in part of what's wrong with Celsius.

Basically they were lending that water.

And so because a lot of times they just went

bankrupt within.

So what he is what he is what he's asking

is he's basically giving a very common counter argument to

the fight, by the way, politicians often said.

But he said that said, this is opponent Celsius operated

as a crypto bank.

They felt the same thing happen in this space.

And the type of argument, by the way, is the

most commonly used counter argument against.

Let me give you my take on this.

I think the banking system is enormously expensive, enormously inefficient,

and provides really bad service.

An alternative to the banking system we have would be

a benefit to almost everybody except people, by the way.

Okay.

I invested, by the way, I had bank slots in

my portfolio of other.

So I still think you could do this a lot

better.

So?

I hope so.

I think that is the ultimate escape.

Anyone.

And if you watch Homer Simpson.

Homer Simpson.

There is a person who says, Please support the sake

of the children.

Every time somebody proposes something new.

You can always find something wrong with every idea you

come up with.

You always find something wrong with everything.

And if you only focus on what might go wrong,

you'll never do anything.

I think what this promises is, is very, very positive

and we will all benefit from it.

But let's just at the moment, it is simply purely

speculative.

Questions all of us do for a long.

I want to go to Brazil.

There are certain alternatives to digital tokens, money that work

in the traditional financial system.

M-Pesa in Kenya is a very good example.

And it's no surprise that a lot of these have

been proposed in developing countries that have a bad infrastructure.

The technology can quickly solve important problems.

So I'm sure this gentleman here could tell me all

about UPI in India.

But I'm not allowed to discuss.

I'm going to Brazil because Brazil has the best technology

for finance for a new type of finance.

Anyone who wants.

Hope he picks.

So ten years ago, finance in Brazil was very expensive.

It was cash based.

Only the wealthiest people in Brazil could have bank accounts

and credit cards.

If you hadn't been online payments, you would have to

go to a store and buy some tokens.

So this would be painful unless you were quite wealthy.

Banks are enormously profitable, but extremely conservative.

And then ten years ago, Brazil started seeing private firms

with fintech space committed to promising to revolutionise the system.

The Banco do Brasil didn't want to merge.

They used its power and determination to stop not the

turn of the conflicts of the started two years ago.

The benefits of Pyxis.

It's extremely easy to use individuals in person and private

individuals can only use it for free.

I mean, I haven't been to Brazil for many years,

but I'm currently back in Brazil now.

Well, that's the money, people.

That's the money.

They.

Here's a QR code.

Please translate to me.

So you give back this one.

One pence.

By transferring from your mobile phones to the QR code.

The central bank, compelled or forced banks and other institutions

to set it up and impulsive.

If I want to send money to this gentleman in

Brazil, he can just show me his QR code on

his phone.

I press a button and the money is instantaneous in

this account.

It's proven much more popular than debit and credit cards

and by now, one in five of all transactions.

Every transaction, including tiny ones involving cash, are not made

on the up.

So, I mean, you can see why this has become

such a global model.

Everybody's looking at this as a fantastic system.

Now, you can imagine the downsides to this.

Now they have pigskin, kidnappings, so people walk on.

This person is not exactly lacking in crime.

So now you had people being kidnapped on the streets.

Somebody put a gun to their heads and say, find

some money to me.

So I'm told by Palestinians that a lot of people

now have two phones, one to keep a home for

buying and one outside of the home that does not

have picks on it.

And to prevent this sort of criminality.

They have limited Night-Time transactions.

Is a lot of this this type of transactions happen

on Night-Time and then the central bank went on strike,

which disrupted the operation of the police system.

But basically.

It's become extremely popular there now.

They're not stopping the payments on installations they can buy.

So if you you know, if you're buying things and

you're paying farmer.

This is a Swedish company that offers have payments.

Now, they decided to do that with pigs, started to

use it abroad in the neighbouring countries.

It's a fairly big step to a Brazilian version of

secret receipts.

And key to it was the very firm determination of

the Brazilian central bank to force banks to use it.

And I think a lot of other countries are looking

at this very, very closely questions.

So I think Sweden is the 100%.

Yes, this is the place for this blade of the

blade.

We're not discussing what technology there.

That is not 100% cashless.

I mean, you can pay.

You can pay, by the way.

I'll give you a movie.

Any time, any political process to make society cashless, you

get enormously strong political backlash against it.

If everybody complies.

I mean, I remember when the former prime finance minister

of Iceland proposed to three years ago and he said

everybody from the far right to the far left to

the centre of politics, basically Russia's political spectrum was attacked

for making proposals.

But cash is very popular, so I'm told no cash

is used in most countries is.

Well, this is really this is the biggest use of

caste in this country and in.

And and in a lot of other European countries when

it comes to the rest of the world.

So Germans, of course, and Swiss are very big users

of cars and a lot of people in those countries.

Some of us carry lots and lots of cars and

expect to be paid.

But what happens if you for deductions.

I look at the money they.

You could paint some parts.

And.

Remember the following 40% of the population just want to

understand numbers is innumerate.

You saw the numbers on a computer screen.

Don't know what the numbers be mean.

It can't be percentages.

It can't do accounting.

But you can count.

30, 40, 68, 90, 105.

So do the family budget by looking at how many

parents they have in the wallet.

This is the single biggest use case for kids.

In developing countries.

Sweden, which.

Whatever it is that you said fully.

It's not.

It's not.

It's not.

And the.

Certainly in my country, Iceland is very, very cashless.

I haven't.

But I mean, I haven't used cash in Iceland roughly

six years.

You buy something, you buy something for $0.05, you buy

one piece of candy.

You a cup.

But it's not castles, Christians otherwise of people that you

could.

Use in the alternatives.

You didn't mention the telecommunications company having a bigger share

for mobile money in Africa.

In some countries, like in Cameroon, you see that mobile

money is definitely the more we use them.

I know my friends.

And I mentioned them.

Yes, this is this, this and this.

And this was positive thing.

And basically every African country has this Nigerian civil exception

because Nigeria has had regulations that prevent such companies from

operating.

But every other African country has access to this thing

extremely quick.

It's just I can't talk about anything.

It's been.

How do you see the role of telecommunications company coming

into that?

Proposing those alternative.

I mean, if you are looking at you are looking

for I don't know, they have a system specifically to

really keep the system a bit better.

These are not operating outside of the banking system.

That is the telecoms company.

It's not a thank you money.

So there's an intersection with the banking system on on

the ends of the transaction.

It is not for example they use arrangement and arranges

in our banking that's open.

I don't know, to be honest.

I don't know what kind of system could be put

it on.

It's just to take an example, when they become banks,

when they do something, become banks.

I mean, what what's the problem?

No, I think he's very conservative.

Expect some telecom companies as but guess.

I need this movie.

You start seeing why this is difficult, by the way.

So if you take telecoms and if you take banks.

Banks are regulated everywhere for particular reasons.

There's a set of regulatory philosophy.

Telecoms are regulated everywhere with different regulatory systems, with different

methodologies.

If a firm is both telecoms and the bank.

It's a strange entity in this.

What we have.

But I don't know, to be honest.

I mean, I don't like to speculate about things.

I don't know.

I don't know the.

Families a little more.

It's sort of.

The supported one.

But he said they become a band, he said.

He said the telecom operator SoftBank, which is a one

step beyond.

I think you take and parcel.

For example, they set up a bank on the side

of it.

Plus plus credit indices used to work these services.

Now, I think that they would have been happy.

And it's it's it's it's proper arrangement.

I mean, you convert it to France.

It is a currency.

That's what it was.

I think it's just I mean, I'm not I don't

want to talk about this, but what can you say?

But but please send us some information.

For example, take a look.

This sounds curious if you haven't seen.

Are any of the global like multilateral institutions like the

IMF or the digital currency is.

The World Bank has been very active in trying to

find solutions for remittances.

So the Soviet Union is this number 9% for transmitting

money to sub-Saharan Africa is a World Bank number.

And they are actively trying to find they are we

invested in a way to improve financial services.

And it's not something that investors do.

They do different things.

But the World Bank certainly.

I think financial inclusion is part of the original.

Excuse for financial inclusion, but it's not a.

Golden.

Opportunity.

For this to be transferred into the US and China.

Sorry, but as we have experienced this in China, it's

also been a process.

So which is it really means to me?

What's the name of the payments was going to be

cheques.

Which I picked up so we could.

We try not to.

Private sector payment systems.

Which is really, really unusual because other countries don't have

that.

So then so five years ago.

So the debate was the following.

Would the world go to China?

Will China go to the world?

What I mean is that having two private health insurance

payment systems is not the model we will adopt in

other countries.

War with China, a separate lawsuit of all the countries.

And that's exactly what happened, because the problem what's happened

in China is.

Even the payment system of sides of the control of

the government.

It's not acceptable in any country, certainly not China.

So we have seen increasing government control over it.

And part of the digital renminbi has now been in

testing for a couple of years, is expected to get

an alternative to the.

You want to know how serious this is?

We planned this whole thing because the existing services.

It depends on who you are.

Depends on the country is asking, how does this kid

in the swift.

If you want China.

It's an alternative.

That's exactly the challenge.

But with the China special growth initiatives, the bulk of

global Chinese infrastructure under Chinese control.

So.

So that he's at the right place in the Swift's.

But when it comes to the rest of the world,

there's no threat.

They want the system.

Or the SWIFT is the swift, easy only system for

sending large amounts of money across borders.

But however, the writers keep in mind, the people who

vote swift are not stupid.

They can see this threat coming.

So.

I'm going to one question.

If you don't know what we don't know what will

happen.

But I would not be surprised if Smith becomes much

more efficient and safe going forward.

I mean, is this the funnel that this was have

this?

Ten years ago, North Korea hacked the final tests of

the SWIFT system in the form of the central banks,

stole $90 million from Bangladesh, and that led to wholesale.

Change this in the system by matching shifts on a

weighted pension.

Guys, let's take a break and have a quick discussion

on crypto so you can tell me what you think

about crypto.

And.

Oh, yeah.

I.

But.

I thought, you know, I did that today in the

morning, I guess, when I was doing this work as

well.

Well, like, that was something that, you know, just fucking

with me.

I'm not talking to you.

I was just talking about.

It's just this guy, I think one of the first.

Yes, yes.

Know, yes.

I feel like yeah, I feel like I'm talking.

About this stuff.

It's certainly true.

Feels like something else.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.

I think that's part of what was, you know, I

think it's always going to be like.

Using words like in the words of the game.

Guys like.

You know, I really.

Want to try something.

That you have to do something like this.

I actually think about the next one was like 15

seconds, but I that they were like, oh, you know,

we went to this and that's when you will.

I just.

I'm sure that you're looking for a way to hold

onto the value of this moment.

Yeah.

Oh, you're so good.

So how did it happen?

Oh, I didn't know.

Like myself.

I was on this job for all those things.

I have a long way to go.

Okay, people, take your seats and let's sit down while

talking.

Stop talking.

And I'm going to do a survey here.

Now, we have a lot we have some discussion on

cryptos.

I don't think you have any opinions on somebody, so

it might be a quick discussion, but let's try anyways.

I'm going to ask every one of you to raise

your hands in response to the following question, actually, to

you to give me an answer to one of these.

APC MP The answer to A is yes.

Not important.

I do not know any finance.

The question is if your government came to you.

Also distinguished alumni from the London School of Economics and

said, based on your experience, should our country ban cryptocurrencies?

No.

What is it you say?

Yes.

No, I don't hear they're not important or you don't

have a clue about anything.

How many people say, Yes, Raise your hands.

One, two, three, four, four, one.

A fan.

Crypto.

Okay.

How many say no cop and then left and let

them live.

15.

How many people say, I only care?

They're not important.

Okay, let me see.

How many people do we have in the room here?

I'm not going to do this, by the way.

But remember, that follows that anyone does this to you

to not just pick an opinion.

So who wants to tell me why you want to

send them?

We need a little money from you.

But I can't do this.

Of course you.

Can.

I think it actually could be that they're not so

relevant, but they could become easier if you could invest

in them.

So I think, yes, we should ban them, because it

seems to me there's no control over over these cryptocurrencies.

So, for example, if suddenly we have inflation in cryptocurrency,

which is going to there's low interest rates to regulate

inflation, there is nobody that can intervene and see that

investors kind of.

And also I think that we can be very dangerous

because of the criminality, because I think the cryptocurrencies right

now are being used a lot more than people are

being able to launder money from criminal activity.

So just want to ban them almost to take a

strong opposite view to that.

Oh, yes, he's quite excited.

I have to offer you host him.

And then.

I think, first of all, as we talked about it,

there is quite a lot of anti-money laundering in place

already.

So certainly bad ideas, but I'm sure it still is.

But I'm sure that fiat money is used just as

much, if not more especially is, I think, less traceable,

because otherwise I think the important part is.

When it comes to inflation and all of that.

Right now currencies are used more as.

Commodities rather than actual actual currencies.

They just used speculation to advise the weak when it

comes to inflation without it's too volatile to actually say

that currently something that we would use as a as

a as a form of payments.

On the other hand, the reason I would say that

that's not binding is because as much as we can

talk about like use of payment systems and such, there's

actually a lot of other cryptocurrency projects based on the

peer network which incorporates innovation, like, for example, which the

companies which use the blockchain to track the in the.

They're using the fact the fact that I have a

belt, I don't have an extreme view.

But I just think we shouldn't ban them and it

should be regulated.

I mean, I wouldn't say.

Not banning them or just ban them.

But but you shouldn't ban them.

But it should be regulated.

Okay.

Now, now, since now we're following how we want to

regulate them.

I mean, a lot of countries have started implementing the

tax system again on them.

So, you know, that is one way to regulate that.

But that's not the ideal way, I would say.

But but I mean, that's one of the ways to

regulate them.

So you want to taxes.

You want to tax.

It's being goes on and on a lot of countries

and India has done there recently.

So patients are basically you want to tax crypto profits.

Yeah.

Technically, it's just.

However, technically, I'm not.

And I'm saying.

I'm saying that's not the best way to do it,

but that's one of the ways to regulate.

Technically, that's not regulation.

Um, it's.

It's.

It's your daughter's.

Oh, really?

Just going to watch it.

Basically, it's.

It's not recognition, but it's.

It's trying to, you know, minimise the use of cryptocurrencies.

You know, if you want to take the next.

Best thing.

That's already been done.

That's already been done.

So.

So he wants to give me another pending argument.

I don't know.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Because know China's coming, you know, there's increasing Asian population

in China and cryptocurrencies.

Perhaps it was brought to us.

So perhaps this generation can come to understand what is

the same thing, like social stability.

No farther away.

So what he's saying is that basically elderly people are

more likely to fall for abuse.

Suffocation, Yes.

Do you know what is the most likely age group

to be taken advantage of on the Internet?

Financially wise?

In fact, one of the ways you see it, because

this is a tough one, so that I could decisively

stuff score against you on that.

We believe certainly that cohort has little understanding of technology,

but they also tend to be inherently sceptical of things

you think is actually protective is really the.

So it's really 21 year old, if not be not

mostly 75 olds because statistically less pleasantly.

So basically she's concerned with 1% of world's electricity using

to make crypto and a lot of what is done

with dirty coal.

And so, for example, in in Mongolia, in Kazakhstan, in

places like that.

So certainly environmental issues.

Okay.

Anybody else?

I know you have an opinion on this.

So.

Yes.

So just in a nutshell.

As long as they're not important.

I mean, it's natural for governments to abandon plans they

don't support just because of the monetary sovereignty.

So they just explain that to the rest of the

audience.

I don't know the argument.

So you we will not be able to use like

Keynesian theories.

I mean, putting money into the system when we have

a crisis, when you have digital currency.

Dangerous because.

If, for example, we didn't.

And if you want to put cryptocurrency, you know, commodity

prices have been much worse.

For example.

Okay.

I want to cycle back to the point where we

say, like you said, that I have the kind of

human dimension to the which.

This is German.

So he what he is saying is.

If you have to increase the amount of money in

the system, perhaps because you're in a major political crisis

like 2008, the ability to consult this is very important

because otherwise you could end up with a global crisis.

I fully agree with that.

But I'm going to ask you the German dimension to

this.

Germans are quite upset by the 10% inflation since they

had to keep the money in the bank account.

Still quite a big debate in Germany.

Could you say during the recent.

For inflation.

So these sorts of things are particularly important towards inflation.

The Germans also conflate speculative, risky investments.

The bigger argument, they would take inflation in favour of

not trusting some technology with some of the customers.

So it just be what would be my experience.

So yeah, so.

So you're saying the mistrust of new technology would come

with this type of inflation?

Anybody else.

I'll change the question slightly then.

And I'm going to stick to the same question, except

I'm going to take Psy out.

I'm only going to have.

So let's see.

I can only have a, B and D.

So this is Christian to.

You instead of a and become a big hedge fund

has called you up and said LLC can't you?

We are looking at our strategies.

Should we invest in Bitcoin or cryptocurrencies as a hedge

fund?

How many people would say yes and how many people

say no, and how many people who know nothing about

nothing?

How many people say yes?

Of course it would seem that way.

One, two, three, four, five.

Okay.

Five.

How many people say no?

Rest in peace.

Most people miss it to come.

Come.

Now I'm going to take a view.

So why do you say that?

Why do you see enthusiastically.

Some of the hedge funds have different strategies.

I can say personally that you can make a lot

of money in crypto, not even speculating that it's going

to go up.

It's just you can, for example, taking into account regulatory

arbitrage in different geographies and earn a lot of money

that way.

I think one of the youngest billionaires in the world

has made that money.

So it's very profitable for some people.

And I think hedge funds are the ones that are

actually earning quite a lot if they if they know

how to approach them.

And of course, you know, Alicia, a almost more likely

to become a billionaire of the alumni of any other

university would totally do so.

So those of you who would say no, tell me

why the hedge?

Yes, sir.

Because to me, it will.

It was.

So in chasing the other trade deals which you.

And it was.

So what he's saying is just that crypto is realistic

and it's not useful.

So we saw this drop in the price.

Which was completely aligned with the drop of fossil fuels.

So for a hedge fund, maybe it is the right

decision.

But wealth management perspective, if you advise someone to invest

in crypto, I think you should be fired.

Because if I look up and I say well managed.

Yes.

Or very, very deliberately yes.

But the logic is that's why in the beginning the

different logic is essentially for a stock option, I can

evaluate financially a company and explain to me why I

think we can go up or down.

But with cryptos, if somebody is able to do that,

most of the time, I think it's crucial.

It's just pure speculation, to be honest.

That's what I'm going to say.

Okay.

So.

So let's take this.

Yes, sir.

I want to.

I want to add something, too, to that.

And I think a lot of hedge funds operate without

considering the fundamentals, macro economic indicators.

They're looking at things like order flow and they're trading

based on anticipated movements in equity.

Is an asset traded that way as well.

He would take it.

I'm going to I'm going to use a little bit

of both sides.

Thank you.

I personally know a lot of sovereign wealth funds.

Invests in crypto.

This is not this is not something you would recommend.

Let me come back to you.

To your point, I think a lot of you are

misunderstanding something very important here.

And that's your yo.

Your speculation echoes that.

It can't be sensible for a smart investor to buy

an asset they know is worthless.

I think that's the key point and I think you

should grasp of introducing.

That's very important, the issue of health.

This is why I decided not to mention this issue.

If you're a hedge fund and you're trading frequency and

you have smart people working for, you have algorithms that

can protect what's going on of high frequencies.

There's no reason why you could not make very good

profits of trading something you know will be worthless in

five years time.

So from the point of view of hedge fund trading,

or you should be vigilant as a person who thinks

that you are smart and you understand the world, regardless

of what you think about cryptocurrencies, it can make sense

to trade.

You make it look as if it is.

Kind of like foreign exchange speculation, but it's not.

It's basically the hedge fund asking if I can play

poker with your money and tell you to close enough.

I think that's an uncharted view of what the hedge

fund does.

I mean, the a lot of hedge funds are just

exactly what you're describing, Right.

However, however, like this, a lot of smart people are

going into that space.

And a smart person who has technological knowledge and also

the financial support of trading processes work.

There's no reason why that person could not make a

very good profit in our trade asset at high frequency.

No use of them familiarity with trading and technology and

things of that nature.

And so this I think you're you're too negative on

what you're saying.

From a vast management point of view, would you expect

would you advise somebody who's going to invest for the

next five years to pursue a wealth from a family

office company?

I would say no.

I would agree with that post.

But if you think you're smart, you understand our trade

in goods, why should you?

You you should come in and see if you can

make some extra profits and volatility.

A lot of funds make money by trade volatility.

And as it does go up and down, it can

be a profitable short term trading strategy for the right

person.

Because if I think you have to make a team

this.

Yeah, but isn't the current trend for cryptos like Bitcoin

going down right now?

So I feel like.

That's is why this is in business.

But is go up or down.

You can make money by trading.

I think this is a misunderstanding as many of you

have, is you can make money by assets.

So the worst enemy of someone trading is stable prices.

It's hardest to make money if nothing happens, if you

have volatility going up or down.

That gives training opportunities for someone who has access to

the right technology, etc. So therefore you should not.

I think there are two very two fundamentals you click

on.

I would say that it's totally fine if you trade,

but keeping it as a complement is one of the

worst.

I fully agree with that.

This is quite a thing I agree with.

This is the first management premise.

But.

This is why as a hedge fund and not someone

else and nobody should invest in hedge funds unless someone

was willing to take risk and can afford to take

risk and invest in hedge funds.

I would not have faced my mother to do this

right.

And there is no reason.

Lecture 8:

What do you have to say?

I just that.

To say that it's important for someone to.

Thank you.

Thank you so much for having me.

I'm sorry to say, but.

You're going to come.

On the.

Next round.

I was.

Exhausted.

I was just thinking.

35 minutes.

So let's throw this 25 minutes.

And I just want to let you know that I

think I just want to take your questions.

I'll put it through the list.

I'm sorry.

Yes, that's fine.

I know you don't like.

He doesn't think you should put in a system that

wants to do that when you're.

Well, I.

I will come with.

I said, How concerned are you that we can start

each other's sentences in small towns all the time?

Good morning, everybody.

I hope you all enjoyed the lovely London weather today.

Actually, it's unseasonably warm, by the way.

It shouldn't be this warm.

It is 16 degrees today.

That should not be happening, but enjoy.

So today we are discussing foreign exchange and the plan

for the remaining plan for the remaining three weeks is

to take foreign exchange locally administered next week, regulations.

And then in the last week being combined bailouts and

sovereign debt crisis and possibly challenges facing Europe.

From the financial stability point of view, if I get

to sort of the plan.

Any last questions on what we did last week?

Foreign exchange.

So for every country in the world, this global economy

matters, not for your own domestic economy, whether you like

it or not.

And most trade in the world is denominated in U.S.

dollars.

And then the question is, what does it mean when

trade is being nominated in colours?

And that's one topic we discuss.

And for developing countries in particular exchange and for countries

that have a narrow set of exports.

So if you export commodities or single product, you can

really be has the mercy of total exchange rates.

You can feed the crisis for a large country like

the United States, Japan, China, Europe.

Exchange rates are broadly irrelevant.

You have a country before we tell you again, most

of all, consumption.

I think 98 to 90% is on goods produced within

25 kilometres of your house.

Medical services, education, roads, etc..

Spend local.

You realise it's right for me, you realise it.

But most of the construction is local and that's why

the exchange rates.

But basically think of the.

SFX magazine.

There are around 80 currencies in the world.

You get into definitional issues.

What's a country and what's a currency for ignoring that

we have?

And to this day, foreign exchange market governments most heavily

intervening.

And this is why we also we have taken it

out.

Now, the one thing that's happening in the global markets

and therefore the importance of foreign exchange is diminishing global

effects.

I've said this before for the most part in the

15 years ago, if you are a borrower in most

countries in the world, a large company for you would

go to a bank.

Nowadays, large borrowers by and large hold their rescue to

the bond markets and therefore.

That.

That seems to be how the dynamics of how poor

and expensive markets work.

Because 15 years ago, if a developing country was in

difficulty, they would talk to the consortium lending the money

and quite possibly find a solution.

Now, I think you're in difficulty.

People withdraw money out of BlackRock immediately.

BlackRock dumps your fund and EU funds.

Just touch your phone.

And the difficulty much more quickly.

This means 55 markets instead of banks intermediated funds, especially

through developing world, you have a lot more rapid transmission

of what would turn out to be U.S. monetary policy.

So the US dollar is the reserve currency and we

find that a little bit later.

But here is something that is super important.

The dollar trades.

All dollar trades go via New York.

If you transfer the money from this piece to countries,

we train up to Saudi Arabia and the US dollars.

So the oil goes from Saudi Arabia to China.

The money goes from China to New York to South

Korea.

All you are sold is coffee in New York.

Keep that in mind.

And that means global trade is predominantly denominated in dollars,

traded in dollars.

And that makes us monetary policy shift to global importance.

Now currency.

Global fluctuations in foreign exchange rate directly affect companies.

So this is the main source basically for companies outside

of the United States or countries, not the United States,

that is sensitive to foreign exchange risks.

You face a.

If the government borrows in dollars and B, your companies

borrow the dollars but don't have a dollar based export.

So if you are a praesidium company that take every

year.

Is the biggest seller of medium sized jets in the

world by 100% of.

But they send the dollars and they borrow it dollars.

So then naturally it has.

Not a problem.

But if you're a Brazilian expert or a sign of

peace, you cost base is in Brazil, your your cost

base and you're still exporting.

So you still get US dollars committed.

But if you ever a construction company building things in

Brazil, selling to that market income in that currency you

borrow.

You expose yourself to foreign exchange.

Keep in mind that this is one company that is

quite significant when it comes to these policies.

So the foreign experience fluctuates quite a bit.

I haven't these slides go to the middle of this.

It's almost in strengthening since Friday.

But let's do some comparison.

So what I see on here is.

The exchange of a euro visa is two currencies the

US dollar or the Swiss franc.

Again, what you see here and this is noteworthy in

this is how rapid jumps you can see in exchange

rates over a very short period of time.

So exchange rates, they tend to jump often jump by

a surprisingly modest amount.

You're just seeing it just to pick a random example,

from 2017 to 2019, the US dollar euro exchange rate

or the euro weakened by 20%.

I mean this math, this material for both companies, both

sets of countries, if you look at the returns.

You see that the exchange rate flux can fluctuate quite

a lot.

What if you do a component comparison?

So here it is.

Put a put a number of countries in here, all

denominated to the euros, all denominated to have exchange with

112 years ago.

And.

I want to point out the outlier here.

Turkey.

Because here we have creativity.

So if you take the rest of the countries.

She lists Switzerland, China, Britain, U.S..

This is an analogue scale.

So you'll see and you see a 30% change in

the exchange rate over the course of the period.

So if I do a case study on the display

column for Turkey's outlet outlet, because this exchange rate has

fallen by a factor of five or 500% in the

in these 12 years and I'm this put this up,

which I want to discuss.

I want to discuss Turkey later on.

How do foreign needs help this foreign exchange rate risk

compared to the stock market?

So this is one way to measure any of the

volatility of the exchange rates.

So if you go to start with the pound euro,

you have stolen savings from the Swiss franc, Chilean peso

to you and your mom is from 8 to 15%.

If you just pay two random companies, Apple and the

Spanish bank Santander, their annual volume is 30% to 35%.

So by this risk, measurement for next year is a

much less risky asset class than equities.

Just for.

Just for comparison.

So what drives exchange rates?

So day to day movements in exchange rates, if not,

if there's no news.

It is true or false?

So if someone is selling love buys and lots and

lots of foreign goods tries to send money to the

foreign counterpart, that's what moves the exchange rate on a

day to day basis.

Larger movements, like all of the ones you saw in

the previous, they reflect expectations of economics and political uncertainty.

So if what you see, what really shows what this

really plot shows is and when you start seeing a

lot of movement in an exchange slate over a very

short period of time, it is because the market is

believing that one country versus the other has much better

economic fortunes in the immediate world.

And the market reacts very quickly.

But the greatest home hit territory that was stolen very

briefly after this trust, this disastrous media project that is

sent to the foreign exchange markets, tell the government governments,

you must stop.

I love the push for the government to go to

two retracted policies, and now the column is 115 level.

So the market reflects the market reflects the exchange and

reflects the markets.

Just like I said earlier, the bond market is one

of the two disciplining devices.

So if you read some parts of the political press

on the left, basically in this country, if you read

out the far left or the far right, the press.

You see both of them condemning the markets for getting

in the way of democratically elected governments decisions.

This, in a way is interesting from a political point

of view.

The far left and the far right are agreeing on

that.

However, of course, posthumously, if this reflecting someone is making

a decision.

Should you put money into Great Britain or what should

you buy British government bonds or buy something else?

And.

The biggest single finder of these things is pension funds

and insurance companies and such entities anyway.

But I'm not going to get into the politics of

this here.

So for companies and this is outside of the scope

of this course, but if you did, of course, in

international finance, this is what you do in the whole

course.

For most investment corporations, they use a variety of strategies

for dealing with foreign exchange risk.

Hatching and hatching and whatnot, which is something I do

not discuss in this course.

Yes, sir.

And I'm just wondering why.

And didn't mentioned that.

Speculation.

I will mention speculation in a couple of minutes.

You should.

I'm not sure the data.

The idea that the day comes like before asking for.

I think it's under activity.

I'd like to.

Know one thing to keep in mind.

Actually, I should.

I should probably have changed the top line to reflect

current realities.

But I can't do that now.

But keep in mind the following very important point on

a really misunderstood point from for you states.

The unit of account is still relevant.

So in this case, imagine a European airline paying Russian

oil that is priced and paid for in dollars.

This, of course, was before the invasion.

But the more the countries maybe replaced the Russian gas

with Saudi oil just to be neutral, does it present

the disadvantages to either party?

We service an American airline, buy some American oil, paid

for US dollars.

This is often asserted in public commentary and.

Is pulse.

Because oil, like all commodities, is priced in a competitive

global world and it makes no difference what the unit

of account is.

You could sell a barrel of oil in dollars, change

to movie or iPhones if you wanted to, and if

you had the same impact on the fortunes of companies.

Keep it in mind.

Keep in mind that what follows is a common misunderstanding,

that the unit of account matters, and obviously it doesn't.

But if told the power of some of this stuff

to.

But we need to wait to do.

You.

I haven't gone to that yet.

I have.

I haven't.

So I'm just here for a regular company to vote

in regular times.

If you could tweet about.

Foreign exchange market market overview is the biggest market in

the world.

Daily trading across all categories often.

Daily trading across all categories of foreign exchange payments should

a break from the pyramids exceeds $6 trillion.

Just to tell you where those numbers come from, the

Bank for International Settlements, every three years, there's a survey

among every single member state, which includes all of your

countries.

You.

On how much foreign exchange came in and out of

the country and what currency.

Now, they released a survey called three weeks ago, and

they didn't want after the slight statistical numbers.

But I want to check the numbers.

The numbers today look similar to the numbers three years

ago.

There are some small differences, but I love that.

I like both.

Just keep in mind I'm using 2019 numbers and not

to the 22 numbers.

They just came out for the global trade.

Trading across all categories is $6 trillion.

And now we get to the speculation question.

The value of the global economy is perhaps 50 or

$60 trillion.

Three times 667 trillion with foreign exchange trading is across

the entire year.

If you often post up to 50 number of days

in the year, you find global volume of trading vastly

exceeds trade.

So what is behind that?

Of course.

Is it speculation?

Is it hatching?

And I want to discuss that in the seminar part

of the course later on today.

But technically speaking.

If someone buys a futures contract to hedge against falling

prices, changing like airlines.

Is that speculation?

Is that.

What you would call a patsy.

But the person on the other side of this speculating.

Well, you get into difficult semantics here.

If you get into really difficult semantics of both.

What if an airline is not speculating or the counterparty

speculating?

That does make sense.

Then the counterparty say insurance company.

So a lot of the foreign exchange trading is about

information being absorbed by the market, the market deciding what

is the appropriate equilibrium value of exchange.

It's given information to bear.

Yes.

Does the does the party on the other side of

that trade have to be a financial institution?

You could.

Buy a futures contract with.

Somebody.

Yes, I can.

You can.

So could it be another like we're talking about Carrier

as a manufacturer?

Could it be another or an airline on the side

of your car contract to be another airline?

That's hedging is.

But it's.

Not important.

No, the point.

So I mean, this is, of course, sensitive politically.

But my take is that and we can discuss that

later on.

My take is that you cannot separate speculation from investment,

from hedging.

And for for perhaps you need to speculate.

Otherwise, you can't hedge.

So therefore, I'm just I'm just trying to take the

moral dimension off the table when it comes to these

numbers as well.

And I think in most countries we have forward, but

it's not the stock exchange that we use only for

what markets.

So if we are using the forward market, but a

lot of people say.

I'll wait.

There's no question of speculation that.

No business would wait until you see the numbers.

I'm going to break the numbers down for you, by

the way, to slice.

So in the market before a break, the numbers come.

There are, roughly speaking, two tiers in the market.

The wholesale or interbank market, which is big banks trading

with all the big banks.

He loved that.

And then he had direct access.

So this is sort of becoming tech technological, but those

folks have access to other to the trading platforms.

The biggest foreign exchange banks in the world know who

they are.

What are the two biggest effects banks in the world?

City and points.

I think because it affects blacks in the world.

By so much it.

So then the international banks make the markets meet the

supply of liquidity.

That's like Deutsche and Citibank.

Then we love them.

We have non-bank dealers that also trade foreign exchange for

speculative law enforcement purposes, mutual funds, pension funds, hedge funds.

You have bank customers.

Must have national corporations, money managers.

If you want to speculate on foreign exchange, there's nothing

preventing you from opening a brokerage account.

The laws of defiance sell foreign exchange any time you

want for only cost U.S. derivatives.

If you're so inclined.

Oh, basically suggest you don't.

Is your book very likely to lose a lot of

money.

But if you want to and to a certain point,

by all means.

I had friends who lost lots and lots of money

speculating jetpacks, by the way.

I had no friends.

Angel offered me money doing 50 parental types, and they

don't make money speculating on effects.

They make money for free services provided to the effects

market.

This is different.

And then, of course, we had the central banks basically

get to know how you do, how you do, how

you connected to the office, how you treat.

So let's say, for example, if a British company buys

some device, if a British company exports a good to

an Indian company.

Well, actually, I have a Spanish company that lets you

stuff.

One Spanish company buys $1 million worth of goods from

a U.S. firm.

These companies don't know each other.

They don't trust each other.

They just found themselves randomly.

The way this works is the Spanish firm calls this

bank Santander.

Perhaps the Spanish bank follows the exchange rate, in this

case, $21 for euro.

The Spanish banks, The debits and the tax money from

the importers account for the amount of that the Spanish

bank instructs was not to correspond to Spain for the

United States, which does exactly second steps in.

The Citibank is the biggest correspondence bank in the world.

It instructs Citibank in New York to switch to credit

the exclusive account.

Perhaps go to the Exporters Bank on the way.

So what in this case is it is acting as

a guarantor for the payment to go through so the

American company can export to the Spanish company without being

worried about the Spanish company defaulting on the payment later

on.

And of course, the idea really is that some pump

here knows this Spanish import.

Citibank or the for the banks or the tax cut.

In fact, these loans exploded.

So they take the risk of the company based on

its side in experts in the local markets.

And then Citibank sits in the middle and puts a

fee for doing this.

This is how global trade was and has done so

for the past 50 years and continues to this way.

There's a number of fintechs that would like to.

Promised to make this more efficient.

You might might know of one, but I haven't heard

of any significant challenge to this particular business model.

So this is the place Sylvia mentioned.

And here's the day for you by instruments.

And this is why I didn't like you.

If you just think of swaps, it's by far the

biggest component of foreign exchange.

What?

Futures?

So if you go to size.

Swaps are the biggest.

Spot trading is the third or fourth.

And then you end up with some terrible river pipes.

56.

For the latest survey.

The numbers went up, but not by a huge amount.

And the composition is roughly similar to this.

Know, if you look at the trading volume by currency,

that is something that should immediately jump.

But you.

So control of things when it comes to mastering these

things.

Couple of things when it comes to measuring numbers.

If you count, you double count.

So if you look at the Griffiths Tom volumes and

US dollar volumes and Japanese yen volumes in Europe volumes,

there's always two countries.

On each transaction.

So therefore, you've got to be comfortable.

You just keep in mind that as soon as one

out of the 6 trillion earlier, they stop and counting

here.

Because this is U.S. dollar plus a counterparty to $6

trillion worth of trades.

The second biggest was the euro.

This is true, 2 trillion.

And now you have the interesting fact because the Eurozone

is a bigger economy for the United States.

But the eurozone is only a third of the US

dollar trading volume, and this has not changed in the

latest.

So this is not changed.

You go to the third currency, Japan.

That is because Japan is the world's third, fourth largest

economy.

If you come to Europe as one.

You then get the British pound.

Australian and British pound is quite high, as almost is

almost half of of Europe, even a Britain small.

And by the way the pound has become more important

recently, not less important than the Australian dollar.

Minus straight people.

Again, it's a regional trade.

Canadian dollar is the Swiss franc.

And finally, the Changeling.

And watch it surprise you if you don't know what's

happening.

Happening outside the Challenger may be slightly increased, but not

by a huge amount.

And of course, the reason is.

The for all the all the currencies.

They can be globally traded.

But China maintains restrictions on the flow of currency in

and out.

And that means the Chinese currency is not used as

much as other currencies.

I think if you go to and you go to

Repsol style, you do the Hong Kong dollar.

It's just slightly below that.

This has used the service for subtle changes in the

currency.

Less so than it used to.

In China hasn't spoken to the recovery and the second

largest in the world in terms of GDP.

This is why you would expect it to be much

higher.

But the point I'm making, the point I'm making, the

point I'm making, by the way, this is wrong for

you on this.

This is the latest one.

That's actually right.

So this is an interest not only interest in The

fact.

Is China's economy is much larger, $14 trillion, something.

Like the U.S. economy is bigger than Britain's economy.

We chose the Indian economy because of the British economy.

And.

But British pound.

British pound is going to fall in.

The rupee is not on the list.

What is the reason?

It's what the.

Other reason is, right, is that this is an international

financial centre.

So people.

Britain, the biggest export to Britain is financial services.

By the way, that does not change that Brexit.

You can discuss if you want to.

But and that's where I thought this place, Britain, and

that is Switzerland.

The positives.

First Canada.

So this is just on the same number slightly differently

with this trip to take place geographically.

London.

London has 40% of all foreign concentrated in one half,

knows just a thing or two, and that is not

gone down.

I think it was called not.

So.

Why do you think London is so dominant when it

comes to foreign exchange trade?

But those two things.

Are.

The.

Danger for the Europe for Europe.

As well.

Well, this is you know, this is this is greatest.

40% of all foreign currency in the world is traded

in London.

Followed by the United States.

Less than 20% of the third country on the Singapore

commodity markets.

No.

Geographical location.

So it's actually super important because Britain is one hour

ahead of Europe, meaning it overlaps to the United States.

That's actually quite important.

Singapore also because of the potential.

So why is the euro not traded in Paris?

Or in fact, a friend of mine was a friend

of mine who used to work for a global firm.

He explained it to me this week.

One year we set up a trading desk in Paris

for foreign exchange.

And then one afternoon, when the local police union was

having a dispute, they walked across all the computers at

5 p.m. and mine closed.

But the office was positive and disconnected from the power

of any computer Wolf.

So you have lot of work after working those?

So he said, What if they did find everybody in

Germany?

The same German problem is 3 hours long worth of

German regulated working hours.

So for the same position in two places, Germany and

one in London, you have to work a couple of

hours too long.

So they don't want to work in Germany.

They want to work long hours with extend working hours

a month longer.

So this is basically what prevents this, but has prevented

creating a for example, go to Europe as the labour

market regulations.

And by now what what keeps London in its place.

Is all the technology so all the trading technology, all

the lawyers, all the I.T. people, all the derivative experts

are all based here.

You can't just move them across all the places.

That takes place long before the.

Singapore is also here both because it's a very friendly

regime in terms of operations, but also it has a

very good price, but it overlaps with Japan and an

awful lot of Europe.

That's what keeps Singapore.

So then you go down to Hong Kong, of course,

is the Chinese trade.

This is what?

Hong Kong.

Questions.

On list.

So trading really quickly on technology, I'm not going to

spend any time on this.

But 15 years ago, trading used to be done by

voice.

So you would have people selling themselves on the telephone,

mostly for old videos where people sell you on two

or three fold at the same time.

Then trading moved on to computers.

And it's a really nice video.

You have a YouTube.

This is worthwhile.

See a person trading for an exchange.

And what you see is up in price these to

trading platforms.

You can see one.

I go from that 1 to 1.

And I also want you guys to complete eye on

two monitors at the same time.

Yes, that is a key point for both.

Trading platforms have ripped off most of the keys, except

the most immediate.

You just like this whole thing.

And you said he slumped on his body weight.

How could you be mixed in the thousands that make

up?

We need to recruit those people who old men will

start running computer games competitions.

So they would go into the East London round on

16 year old boys in the PlayStation two.

What then was then the game platform, see who was

the best.

And that's the person that.

And then it comes to the 25.

Why do you think that Spieth is one of the

23 white boys?

Only the most hated, the most opportunity for.

So what the reaction to that reaction comprised what, five

people posed a question.

So basic.

All of you are now in the area of slower

reaction time because it's a time and place of a

fraction of the time reaction time the at the top

for.

When it comes to the conclusion.

This is this is what the is what was said.

And, by the way, all recruited.

Before university all recruitment for a pre high school at

a high school level.

Not university level.

And the goal was to make enough money by 2023

to retire.

Battles spectacle on this.

Questions before I move on.

Yeah.

If you could explain to him why this photograph you

showed.

So this is the.

It's the same.

It's the same.

If it's the same, it's the same information.

It's just this show.

This shows this shows the top and counting into the

currency and absolute numbers.

And this shows developed in number and this just developed

in number and thought and.

This should add up to 20%.

I have to cut the check I could to my

neighbours all the.

Off the top of my head.

So if you do the counting, you're looking at 50%,

25, 75.

Oh, this is adding a 200% to.

So this is taking care of the previous ones not.

So.

Trading of the trade receives.

And now we get something more relevant to this cause.

So this is the list of currency issues I want

to discuss.

All of them, one by one.

So this is how countries arrange currencies for themselves.

So a currency union is what a country or a

group of countries use the same currency.

Some historical examples.

Of course, we've taken this one is the euro, where

the eurozone member countries chose to give up their own

currencies to use the euro historical example as the US

dollar, because 150 years ago 50 US states might have

different dollars.

Russian ruble is the same, German market is the same

before the euro.

Indian rupee is the same for a lot of countries.

Going back in time had different currencies, so that could

aggregate it as a currency union.

The you might not know, but Europe had two currency

unions in the 19th century.

The Scandinavian countries had one and the Latin European countries

and called the Latin Union.

But France, Italy, Spain, a couple of others have also

had a monetary union.

Both of them failed in 1914 July for obvious reasons.

We also have a very particular case of Panama and

Montenegro.

Why are those two countries just in Panama?

It's slightly easier to discuss.

So Panama used to be part of Colombia.

Then, after France failed to build the Panama Canal, the

U.S. wanted to build the Panama Canal.

The Panama is located in Colombia.

The U.S. wanted to run it with invade Colombia, and

Panama stole it from Panama, from Colombia.

So it used to be.

I think it's 1903.

The Panama was stolen.

It remained the U.S. colony until about 20 years ago.

And because of the Army history to be a part

of the United States, it used to be US dollars.

And after they became independence, the other love to use

U.S. dollars.

What this means technically is the legal currency of Panama

is U.S. dollars at the central bank of the United

States is the central Bank of Panama.

Same applies to Montenegro, close to Kosovo.

I think these are the only three.

I mean, there are some other cases, obviously, but these

are the these are the best known what these all

small countries.

We then have a slightly weakened case of this.

This is unilateral currency substitution.

The most famous example of which is that it is

when a country decides on its own accord.

To use a foreign currency as money.

And he's seen it before.

The speech impediment Ecuador.

Because we're at war.

What happens if everybody needs dollars to meet liquidity demands?

What is difficult to borrow?

Then obtain the funding from the financial markets.

And in Panama, in dollars, you get them from the

central bank.

And that means the Panamanians arrangement is stable and the

Ecuadoran instance is unstable.

So why would I have to do this?

Well, there are two things that allow you to be

in the situation.

A It is clearly an underdeveloped.

And B, it used to be highly unstable.

And for a country that is very underdeveloped, meaning it

is primarily cash based and non bank based, you don't

run into liquidity issues.

You would run into an A most developed country.

So equitable is exactly the category of countries that can

do this and benefits from it.

But that does not mean all the countries should do

the same unless they are similar situations.

So I think.

So recently.

Why would a developed country have more problems with liquidity?

Because.

So let's say, for example, if you have a financial

crisis, meaning the banks.

Need liquidity to meet obligations or some sort of situation

like we had and called it like we had in

2008.

So if you.

A new country is a highly developed global economy, then

the banks are large.

There provides a huge number of finance, global financial services

to you, to the companies and individuals in your country.

So they might need lots of money, some including a

short notice and stress.

But if you develop the record developed country, your banks

are crazy.

They provide very conservative financial services.

And therefore they would not be exposed to the same

risks.

And so it is a different.

What I want is an independent country and it is

another thing.

The US does not get how they want.

Three policies and fiscal policies will work because if there

is inflation, whatever they will be to reduce this inflation

chain under the first place.

No, they can't do that.

So they come to the floor, they make decisions reducing

the US dollar.

That's it of their problems.

Then all of this solving the local problems, this kind

of problems, and they resist.

Well, let's solve this.

So here's the trade.

If you look at the slightly better case of Panama,

think I hope if you have a history of financial

instability, of currency crises, banks failing, etc., you are making

a decision to sacrifice that fate of control of your

own affairs for the benefit of this stability.

So you are right.

We can't do things a sovereign country might need to

do.

But on the other hand.

But on the other hand.

But the Panama also is has a large U.S. military

base.

This huge number of Americans is in control of Panama

Canal.

It is denominated in US dollars and actually natural.

And Montenegro.

In the only case, they had to smack in the

middle of the eurozone.

So all of the global trade is for Europe.

It was.

So it works for both sets.

So this third down in terms receipts is a tech.

Attack means you fix your currency to a foreign currency.

It can either be a basket of currencies or it

might be to just one on one basis.

So here is the issue that comes after this, right?

You have to be you have to maintain it and

you have to be credible.

So pag is often a very good solution for countries

facing instabilities.

Because it gives him credibility.

But this means for detective work, the countries have to

be able to.

They have to do two things.

And I'm going to show you on the next a

little bit later on what happens when you just behave.

If you misbehave, you might come under attack.

I'll show you an opinion is what happens.

We then have the option in case of currency board,

which is Argentina said it fixed exchange because the Argentina

and passive from the US dollar.

But then to make it stick, they said every Argentinean

dollar we have one for every for every.

So we have we have one U.S. dollar in research.

So we can always convert associated the dollars from.

The problem is they lost control of the money supply.

And because they lost control of the money supply, money

supply grew to rapidly.

And that meant the PAC was more of a credible

target.

Parkinson's is like a currency float in science, a little

bit lower after a lot of fun.

The most successful case of a currency board of Parkinson's

is a Hong Kong talwar.

This system, by the way, was designed.

The Hong Kong system was designed by an LSU professor,

Charles Goodhart.

The 1979 1980.

It's a really nice story about how they made it

credible.

And we can discuss in the seminar this involved the

seven, four, seven aircraft sitting on an airport in San

Francisco full of U.S. dollars.

This is how they make it actually working in space,

something we get to.

So.

For the Hong Kong and Chinese women and a few

others.

It's still the same credibility issue, but you allow a

little bit more flexibility and then you don't pre-announce the

target, so you have more flexibility.

You just fluctuate a little bit.

Managed float is what you just leave the currency alone.

But if you need to, you have to be.

Either directly or indirectly.

Solely.

This is when most currencies in the world are today.

The US dollar is the the euro is the Japanese

yen is the etc..

So most currencies are managed to float and there is

no case of a true free floating currency.

I know of.

Every country in the world is.

As far as I know.

If you know of an exception to the rule, let

me know.

We have discussed it.

So we have discussed the gold standard.

But I want to discuss one issue about the gold

standard relevant to this.

This is just one type of regime.

This is the most successful foreign exchange machine we have

seen.

It's a gold standard, basically in effect from 19 1870s

to 1940 and before and after.

Trump on the gold standard and the benefits.

This stability problem is it benefits capital, exploiters and the

wealthy citizens of countries most on money.

And so therefore, Great Britain, being the biggest exporter of

capital in the 19th century, profited enormously from the gold

standard.

And do you know what all?

Do you know which country dropped off the greatest gold

standard?

India.

It's a little behind behind the stability of a very

nice article.

But if you enter into that sort of history.

Basically inexplicable to Britain wasn't exactly keeping the system alive

in the 1890 and the 1890 and early 1900s.

Problem is that the gold standard is.

The problem is that it's essentially a tax on the

poor people and so essentially a tax on put on.

Natural resource exports.

And what killed it in Britain was universal suffrage.

Universal suffrage.

We tend to think of women being allowed to vote,

but in this context it's support people being allowed to

vote.

It used to be in this country, most other places

in the world, that only property owners would vote.

That means politically, wherever you are from, the conservatives in

this country are the only people, multiple Republicans, United States

votes, etc..

I mean, it is imagined political L.A. Hong Kong is

exactly an example of this today.

So when everybody could vote in Britain as of 1927,

we knew.

We.

Represented classes with finality opposed to the gold standard.

And that led you to be in a policy position.

Now, when it comes to picking a currency, countries have

a choice between fixing the exchange rates.

I can show you on this slide, if you're picking

exchange rates, you have a choice between fixing exchange rates,

allowing money to flow to support this, and to have

independent monetary policy.

It's called the impossible Trinity because you can't have all

three.

So.

Europe today has given not fixed exchange rates but free

capital mobility.

China has fixed exchange rates, but an independent monetary policy,

the blacklist China has to restrict flows of capital.

And by the way, that in turn, as we probably

discussed a little bit later, is the primary reason why

the change in the movie is not changed much for

that reason.

Questions.

Before.

Why not?

Exports are quite often cultural exports hit by imports.

Because.

The problem you are running into is if you are

a single child export of a commodity that has produced

a lot of countries.

You are this team of people who come to the

markets.

So let's say you cannot find Argentina's trade in all

three agricultural exports.

If all of a sudden Brazil decides to produce the

same goods, then.

It's a mexican pizza that they had in all of

us all the time.

But then because of the global competition, the value of

the single export goes down.

And therefore they are facing a currency crisis.

So basically the only the only relevant countries that were

excluded, a handful of commodities at a time, they suffered

repeated currency crisis.

A big deal about pausing because it is not inflationary.

Well, it's exciting.

It's connected.

This is something we discussed earlier.

If you know U.S. history, you know, this is exactly

the gold standard we stand behind to expect the non-moving

party and the impossible, the Silver movement of 1890, a

lot more political instability caused by this time.

I think, by the way, if you're into crypto, this

is the best argument against crypto.

By the way.

Just of the first argument against.

Because crypto would have exactly the same problems as the.

Yes, sir.

But I have another question concerning Argentina and.

So they are poised to take lessons from the violence.

And since then, the emphasis must follow its early prosecution,

but quite a bit in order to exchange.

What they have to exchange.

That's what we got to see.

I think the most important.

I would say, to maintain peace.

Yeah.

But equally, the exchange rate, you know, they have to

be.

I don't know what they have now, but I do

know if you if you go to Argentina, you want

to buy things.

You take as you told us and you sell it

to somebody.

It is what I did.

So this is why.

Yes and yes.

But wasn't I?

I did this analysis.

But that support is illegal.

It's a new.

But that doesn't mean do we take.

The fact that a lot of people break the law

for some reason?

It's not illegal.

Isn't.

So how do you.

How do you.

How do you.

Attack a currency.

And I want to know what it was.

Serious.

Welcome to have some conversation on how you.

Tucker, could I want to start with the concept of

trade.

Extended trade is where you exploit the differences in the

yields between two different.

Countries.

So what does the privacy yield means?

Technically, let's say listen, hypothetically speaking, let's say hypothetically speaking,

you have.

A fixed income government bond is one year and 30

years.

If you buy one and sell the other, you are

exploiting the differences in the yield.

So you borrow one one year frequency.

These are the 530 government bonds.

That's a commitment to carry trade.

The second two income streams that give you different amounts

of money.

So I want to look at the foreign exchange carried

trade and how you can use hot money to attack

our currency.

So this means we borrow in a country with low

interest rates in exchange for currency with high interest rates.

And you profit from two in two places.

You profit from the interest differential between the two countries

and the fact when you transfer money, you weaken currency

you're selling out of.

So therefore, therefore, if you borrow in a low interest

country.

You pay less.

You sell the currency.

You buy the other currency in consequence.

Do you make money on both the currency change and

the interest rate differential?

That's like territory.

That's a pure spec assault.

We were discussing speculation earlier that just pure speculation on

country sports.

And I can promise you one thing.

Every government in the world hates crickets.

I mean, I mean, this is me.

This this happens and this is happened.

A lot of countries probably carried traces.

Money flows in an alien or something close up this

close.

It is highly disruptive on both ends of the transaction.

And when we do macro through next week, what is

it like for approved devices is designed to prevent this

from happening.

So then on the extreme is putting of a special

truck.

And I'm going to ask you a little a little

bit of a copy of the spending question in a

few minutes.

Suppose the country's exchange rate is massively overvalued and the

government is refusing to let its currency fall.

A speculative attack is speculative for a huge amount of

money for a new country.

You sell it immediately on an open market.

Hoping you currency that doesn't force the government to realign

the currency on the spot.

You pay the loans and get profit and profits.

So what are you saying?

This is a speculative attack, good or bad for a

country?

There's still a 78.

Good.

Be.

But see.

Both the.

I know.

No silence.

How many people say a speculative attack is good for

a country?

Oh.

Okay.

I see.

I see.

I see.

I see.

So how many people see a speculative attack as good

for a country?

Nope.

How many say is bad for a country?

I'm going to say this both.

How can it be both?

Same when the governments are refusing not to be where

we think it's supposed to be just occupation.

And there are elements of 1994.

We have the same budget source for Britain.

What does.

All next.

Put it?

Let's fire levels.

The next case study.

Yeah.

So Britain, higher levels would be substituted with $1,000,000,000 shopping

mall.

And why is it bad?

And life is backwards in East Asian currencies.

So for me to take that these patient prices, period,

then in the body double, then speculators, what they put

in cash, they looking at data and cashing their misery

levels.

So do you think South Korea benefited or food poisoning?

Looks like Indonesia lost very badly.

Well, Indonesia had all the things at the same time.

So they have.

The same like.

Malaysia, Malaysia.

I'm not sure, though, more or less these countries in

one day.

The Council on Foreign Relations with Russia, but Indonesia lost

it very badly at that time.

By the way, I have a whole chapter, much of

that.

I have a whole chapter.

My book, Pathology, exactly this episode.

So some colour and more pieces.

Let's continue a little bit.

So who is responsible for speculative attacks?

Who does?

Goldman's sentiment is often the speculative extent.

I the who does it?

Who's the protagonist?

Who is it?

What are the companies defending?

So who attacks Malaysia in in 1998?

What information from that date?

The example of gentlemen.

Yeah, it has been proven.

It is if it's locals.

It is family members.

It's.

That's exciting because because every government says it's the foreign

speculators in New York attacking the poor, defenceless country.

I was in there to Malaysia and that was in

Indonesia.

It is almost always the president's family.

I just don't have business time doing it.

I just didn't connect with locals.

And why is that?

Well, two reasons.

First is that the people who have the best understanding

of the weaknesses in the country is the family of

the ruling elite.

Are you the president's brother or whatever?

Right.

A thief who can borrow large amounts of money in

a country honest with people who run the country and

force it back?

Some of them.

So it's invariably the ruling elites of the country that

are attacking the old country and blaming them for this.

We've seen them again and again.

And again.

And again.

And again.

Christians.

So this is basically how you do it mechanically.

So this is what I just said is to well-connected

local families.

But who benefits?

The empirical evidence suggests that a speculative attack is usually

good for a country, but that for a country not

always.

So see is perhaps the best answer to this.

But you can make a very good case because the

problem is you have a massively overvalued currency and government

is refusing to realign for whatever reason, your country's being

badly hurt by it.

So this forces a country to see sense and they'll

talk sensible economic policies.

That's just a question because.

The assumption you're.

To the contrary.

The currency value.

This mathematics makes it more realistic.

Also, since he and his friend value the value.

You know, because the property.

So when the gentleman is saying this, he is saying,

I'm assuming this crazy is overvalued, but he would also

speculate it's not.

The problem is if the currency is fairly valued and

seen by the market as being fairly value, you're not

going to get the mass of speculators willing to make

up that.

And speculative attacks makes a lot of speculators jump on

the backs.

So if the market thinks the country's exchange rate is

more or less okay, they're not going to take the

risk of doing it.

So if they do the best I can tell you

when we see that $24 rating.

So it's controversial.

I think that's the places they want to consider, $24.

But let me.

So the crop from this source is you mentioned Southeast

Asian countries.

So it's basically become a soft is is Indonesia, Thailand,

Malaysia, South Korea, the countries of attack.

And these systems were to work with Taiwan and Singapore

and becomes unaffected were Japan, India and China the equal

because of the sites.

Right.

So.

The root of the problem was that the banks in

this country, to borrow massively U.S. dollars and led to

no confidence in US dollars.

And then when you one a the of strength in

global markets.

The domestic economy did not keep up.

There were really widespread defaults happening in corporate sectors in

the affected countries.

And by week by devaluing.

They probably came out stronger than would have all of

us.

There's one interesting footnote.

All of this would say five people from a different

course and spent a long time on it.

The ranking of these countries after the crisis, only one

learned from it, which is South Korea.

So if you think of a crisis as everybody has,

then.

But the question is, do you learn from a crisis

or do you not learn from a crisis with interest

in South Korea, a massive reform of this economy, the

reform, the type of sector?

This is a highly leveraged corporate sector and its property

value is significantly by some draconian policies.

The all inclusive.

Often you see the virtues and fortunes of system.

But that difference for.

Everybody shows are different.

By refusing to let a person not before the end

of the.

Problems, I am proved to be, I admit with you,

since I was in the Asian crisis.

I mean, I don't want to get into that, but

I thought it would be a fairly useless institution in

the Asian crisis.

So if I went to my lecture, you could see

it in my chapter.

So finally, let me take a break here.

Here's an if.

This is a real world example of how we can

trade and become a vehicle for future.

So imagine a hedge fund based in New York.

Hellespont is exposed to two countries greed.

And you see that this is exactly what happened in

the 2005.

It's a crisis of memory.

This does happen on location a little bit.

He had spun on this long positioning as a margin

call on this loan.

Lawrence.

Position to fund the margin calls.

They sold the New Zealand dollar its cost incident on

Fifth Street as a crisis.

So the fact you have a New York based hedge

fund sexual speculating too much with candidates and multiple countries

that can transmit crisis and.

Completely.

Different countries.

It's happened you before.

Take a break.

And the last question was not.

Okay.

Different.

The Supreme Court.

It goes for every Beatles song.

So, for example.

They want to make it better.

Not.

Like.

Well, it's all my fault.

Over the next six months, you will see that you

see the level of the liquidity that we have been

doing every single to something that was done before.

We've been able to pay for it and we're looking

for more.

Well, no, I didn't come with the other one.

Of.

I've done this, you know, doing consulting and that sort

of thing.

You look great.

You guys know this?

Yes.

You guys love doing something.

You all right?

With either one of these people for their lives.

So if is something.

That's a little bit.

Different, you can show, Hey.

I.

Know everyone this works.

I'm really good at this and I don't do what

I do.

I do it myself.

But focusing on reducing the risk.

So I just think it's just a if I don't

have a limited amount of time that.

Okay, people might like to grab your seats.

So there's, you know.

A big quick case study on what might be the

most famous speculative attack in history and also one whose

politics affects most of us to this day, because this

one had quite a long tail when it came to

political.

So the euro is known as the euro two of

the common currency.

Before that we had erm one European exchange rate mechanism

and.

So for the European or European Union decided to have

a common currency for the eurozone.

They went through essentially two phases.

The final phase was a common currency.

The first phase was lifting the European currencies in a

narrow band, plus -2.25% off an artificial currency called equal.

But then between the euro a few years later.

And then member countries committed themselves, intervene to make sure

the currency stays in the fact.

It worked fine until Germany decided to reunify.

So what happened is to to simplify enormous amounts of

history.

But I had to simplify an enormous amount of history.

When Germany decides to reunify with East Germany.

We effectively have a rich, large country taking over a

poor, underdeveloped country.

Germany, under both the converted, the East Germany marched to

the restroom and marched to the rate of 1.81.

This led to a massive expansion in the German money

supply.

They also borrowed very large amounts of money to invest

in East Germany.

So the simultaneous expansion of the German one money supply

and the vastly increased government expenditures caused the German deficit

to push up the fiscal deficit to go to 13.2%.

And the central Bank of Germany put the standard German

concern that it should sharply raise interest rates to prevent

the German inflation rate to become too high.

So for 30 years ago, inflation was seen as the

right reaction to inflation, while in the year 2022.

This is highly controversial, but let's ignore that for the

time being.

The problem is the June mark started to appreciate very,

very rapidly pushing spike funds off the top of the

pound.

And so Wally German was for me highly, highly inflation

high interest rate.

UK, France, Italy, Spain were all in a recession.

These countries could not increase interest rates credibly, for example,

hurt the economies and the speculators.

They did not.

The European monetary system would give in Europe would welcome

back this type of system.

So this all happened on September 16, 1992.

Let me correct you.

George Soros and the large number of other speculators started

to borrow large amounts of British pounds in London and

expensive.

And we used to have much.

George Soros was said to have made a few pounds

that afternoon, went to Customs and a lot of other

people made very large fortunes.

The Bank of England raised the interest rate from 10

to 12% to 15 and eventually cost the Bank of

England, meaning 3.3 billion.

That all went to the speculators.

Eventually, the pope left the year end.

Italian lira left it, left the year round, and for

the rest of the European countries shop in white suits

and European currency floated freely.

So here we see something typical with countries with weak

fundamentals.

Certainly Italy and the United Kingdom, at a time when

markets seem them not been able to able to sustain

the crisis.

So therefore, they were up first.

So this is exactly the point you're making earlier.

These speculators are looking at the fundamentals of the week

before the attack.

So.

What happened after this is instructive.

All the countries that left the currency.

Appreciate.

Britain, Spain, Italy.

All of them benefit economically, socially, economically, within all these

countries.

Interpretation Is there some misalignment in the euro system?

Certainly we can learn the Spanish from this language.

And when he came to the European crisis ten years

ago, this was the example everybody mentioned saying how the

ability to realise the scope beneficial in 1992.

Why can't we do that in 2012?

Now there's a political side to this.

I want to mention briefly.

This is quite interesting how this is connected to the

year 2022.

The truth of.

Your previous point.

What is it?

It worked in 1992.

So it worked.

So the point is, the countries that were forced to

do it benefited significantly.

But look, if this was a good speculative attack present.

Unambiguous.

So in 2004, what was the question?

So the two for 12 Europe was having a European

sovereign debt crisis.

Greece defaulted, Spain was in the fate of Ireland was

kept, my fellow.

So the question is, was debate was should is the

exchange rate vis a vis Greece too strong and vis

a vis Italy too strong?

Is should there be a line I didn't Greece leave

the Eurozone completely or should we get sort of a

realignment of sorts?

The way Europe solved the problem was No, but this

the effect is solved by massive transfers from some of

the recommendations which we might get into later on, like

political bands.

I think the reason Britain left the E.U. is because

of documents.

And it's really because of one person's decision.

Chacon comes out of court.

I apologise for the frustration because the Duma, the German

government, promised to intervene.

He pulled this vote, said no.

So the German central bank said, Well, the German government

can affect the German government, can make all the promises

it wants.

Be an independent central bank.

And our commitment and counsel for Paul Colgan was a

healthy oversight at the time.

He went on to say, We will not help any

other country.

The trick with everything.

You could love this one country cocktail about the secret

life of France.

So thanks to the Germans.

Massively for France.

France.

So the French did not exit, but everybody else exited.

So the perception of the Empire's new political faction in

this country was created from documents.

So if you see the names of people most of

the strongest and because of Brexit was all people felt

personally hurt by the decision not to support Britain and

the commitments that should.

Questions on the political.

What do you think is.

Remember, political coaches remember bad treatment.

Not long term, though.

Remember good treatment.

There are certain European countries to celebrate the feats of

compulsory socialism as major part of the national identity.

If you know European history, build a particular country, but

there will continue.

Two issues on how we can handle life's most important

happiness.

Inflows and outflows of currency.

So a country can suffer or enjoy, depending on your

perspective, a high inflow of foreign currency for one of

three reasons.

It's seen as a safe haven, Switzerland.

It is seen as a country that receives heavy trade.

He was told this to Japan for domestic companies to

borrow internationally, which is increasingly large number of countries.

All of these three factors lead to massive inflows of

foreign currency.

The problem is causes is it makes it currency strong.

I just want to fix the type of heart hurts.

I've got a fixed subtitle, by the way.

If you if you want it to be nasty, you

see the protein slick.

But let's not go down that road.

And the problem is when currency flows in in large

numbers, if the people for the entities providing these funds

stop providing the money, then a country can experience what's

called a sudden stop.

Money stopped flowing in and the currency crisis ensues.

That's exactly what happened to Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea and

Thailand, a lot of other countries.

These rapid inflows followed by a second stop and the

term of this is called hot money.

Hot money is a term when a roughly amounts of

foreign of speculators bring in money.

Was then I wanted money.

Like, really, really, really quickly.

Now, this creates political problems because initially it is very

popular.

Because obviously currency appreciate.

Imports become cheaper and all of a sudden you start

seeing people buying foreign cars and expensive holidays and nice

consumer goods, all financed by a currency being artificially strong.

This is very, very popular.

So what can the central bank do?

They can raise interest rates to prevent this.

They can.

They can.

Prevent inflows of money.

Capital controls the next section or the can restrict who

can borrow foreign money, which has become the typical way

of dealing with this.

The reality is most countries I know of, they have

fairly strong legislation to prevent companies and individuals from exposing

themselves, i.e. foreign aid in foreign currency.

It used to be quite common.

Happened in Poland, Hungary, first of all the countries.

But now this is a tax to be prevented in

most places.

So this this last one has become a typical policy

option.

But we also see capital controls.

Here's the policy problem.

The central bank has to deal with this.

So if you are so subject of rapid inflows of

foreign currency.

If you raise interest rates, two things happen.

You attract inflows from territory and you keep on putting

money into a country to get higher interest rates.

Demand for foreign currency loans goes to.

This makes the currency get stronger, makes everybody richer, the

economy looks stronger.

Therefore, the central bank might then go back and raise

interest rates.

So you look for the wrong policy response.

Sue.

High inflows of foreign currency and high inflation is to

raise interest rates.

A lot of countries are falling directly into this trap.

So this this really is outside the scope of this

course, but in technical.

So open.

Uh, uh, in a typical model of monetary policy in

small print economies, the appropriate response is to raise interest

rates.

But I'll just argue that that particular argument is incorrect.

We see this debate playing not.

If you want to prevent inflows, you can do capital

controls.

Capital controls either are designed to control the outflows of

money or inflows of money.

So traditionally the complaints were nationalistic, but is this a

view that we should buy?

Domestic goods for goods are bad for us.

We have to support our companies.

We have to support our economy.

So therefore, we want to prevent.

We want to prevent imports and encourage domestic industry.

Therefore, you restrict the sale of foreign currency.

So that is harder to import.

It sort of substitutes for us.

This was always very, very difficult.

If you ask anybody active in a country with capital

controls, let me tell you the amount of corruption that

happened is phenomenal.

I'm.

I mean, I, I can pull a very quick example.

And I went to graduate school in the United States.

I needed U.S. dollars.

I had to take my plane ticket to the bank.

The bank would stamp it and give me my allowance

of foreign currency that no one would call a particular

company and name some of those You've you basically created

a.

Exactly.

You except in Argentina it is creates corruption.

And what happens is that we well-connected parts of the

country the corruption.

So this is the type of corruption that is quite

beneficial to the ruling classes, if you will.

So for that reason, most countries and that's all lists

capital controls.

Here's a list of all U.S. member states.

This country to be 71, United States 74.

You see that Luxembourg was never had the Belgian counterpart

ever had the.

I'd like to say.

So I'll draw controls of by and large snow only

done in countries on a very severe economic crisis like

Venezuela and Argentina.

But we now have this is much more common inflow

controls.

So a lot of countries have use and use those.

Brazil, Chile, Korea, which you can name a few.

The way this works is you want to prevent money

from coming in.

And the way you do that is.

You try to stop, for example, if you take $1,000,000

into a country.

And if you take $1,000,000 out of this in six

months, you care 10% tax.

So the number two money coming in.

And if the money stays, not if the money stays

for three years or is invested.

It's no tax money goes out quickly.

The tax.

And problem solving at least white.

I mean, you can make a deal with a local

politician and you can do the same thing just by

a little site dealing with some site or with somebody

protecting the capital controls.

They can work in short run.

But if you keep least in for any appreciable amount

of time, the market price of 85%, and that means

there's more and more and more and more and eventually

become useless.

So I think that, no, this seems a temporary measure

in a crisis.

Both Cyprus and Greece got capital controls in the euro

crisis.

Temporarily.

I think.

Britain would system itself capital controls.

Sorry.

Britain would.

So I just threw up in there.

It's okay.

If it comes back to your questions before I go

to the next section.

No.

Milton within the history of capital controls.

Welcome to the show.

Yeah.

Just one question.

Is there a way to selfishly strengthen or do you

export this innovation in the second one?

Um, or twist or whatever.

How do, how does this second segment.

Just because it was almost always you.

Okay, so, so if you take a come to the

multiple exchange rates, what you often see is something like

the following.

So this is the theory that you go to practice.

Import includes medicine.

That's a good extension.

Good stuff.

Are goods that are used for heaps of goods and

authentic stations.

And then tourists, they have the worst expenses.

This is often the case.

This means that what happens is so.

And these are these in such a city whose old

government did some trades in Venezuela has capacities.

Argentina has just a few of the countries that often

raise some of these cases unrealistically to enter the black

markets.

Just like.

This is exactly what happened to you and me.

One size.

Beautiful city with.

I have to say, I spent a month and I

thought it was absolutely fabulous.

I looked.

It is just a second tour control nobody else has.

I think, just one of the most magnificent cities in

the world.

But Argentina used to be the richest.

I think it was the richest country in the world

in 1898.

We.

What's your first question?

Okay.

So coming back to the most famous currency arrangement system

we have had in recent times, if I can call

something that happened 50 years ago recent.

But we are sort of getting out of sort of

at least computers have been discovered when this was still

in existence.

Fixed exchange rates, sensitive system contracted, was named after a

hotel in New Hampshire, United States.

This.

Is this because this was the.

Victoria's powers in World War Two deciding on what they

thought should be the local arrangements for keeping the economy

and the financial system stable.

Soviet Union wasn't invited to join and they chose not

to.

What ended up being the capitalist part of the allies

in World War Two that did not set up.

And it was caused by the Great Depression, of course.

But to there are two political motivation factors for this.

One was the Great Depression, which we had discussed, and

a mistrust of markets.

Mistrust of capitalism was suddenly behind it.

And the other was World War Two.

And as you say, to create some sort of global

war, to come to prevent that from happening was a

part of that.

Every member state.

Would promise to fix the exchange rates to the dollar

and it to all of us fixed to go.

So this was effectively a gold standard vs ABC US

dollar.

And capital controls were used to prevent.

So what was to prevent this unravelling?

And the reason the IMF was created was to act

as a global police force to force countries to behave.

I promise you, that never happens.

Countries don't like a supranational organisation to tell them how

to manage their own affairs for good reason.

So that's the reason I admit it was created mostly

for support system.

Problem is.

The Bretton Woods system was unstable.

And here's roughly how.

You can roughly split the world at the time.

The two types of countries, countries with solid, sensible economic

policy and countries in less sensible economic policy.

Sensible economic policy.

Japan and Germany.

Nonsense.

Sensible economic policies.

UK, France and the United States.

And what was happening is both Germany and Japan grown.

France and Britain and the United States decided to embark

on a disastrous war.

Despite all the money of fighting wars in the colonies,

so the colonies suffered.

The problem, of course, is that when you have a

currency alignment for member states that have sensible economic policies.

And on this I had enough sensible economic policies.

The system is inherently unstable.

Something wicked.

And I want to tell you, I'm going to tell

you exactly what happened, what destroyed the system, what destroyed

the crap system, because the United States in particular, they

decided to do two things.

One.

Was not to realise that Vietnam failed by Vietnam.

It's the only country in the world that has managed

to defeat.

France, United States and China.

In what?

So I assume it has to be, which is quite

some scientific element to the story for the United States.

And the Americans decided to enter.

The women lost.

That was so costly to them.

And then the United States decided to create a welfare

state in this matter.

At the time, they were massively.

Expanding government expenditures financed by printing money.

I'm going to contrast that with Germany for sensible.

The threat was what happens if the Germans and the

Japanese decide we don't want dollars?

We want gold.

Because remember, you you take us up to the dollar,

the dollars to the gold, the $35 to an ounce

of gold.

As the United States was getting really concerned about.

Having other countries effectively taking all of the scope away.

The last where the United States decided to leave the

federal system.

And for anybody who advocates a similar arrangement to stay

as it is.

We cannot.

The euro is a cautionary tale.

So hard to maintain a common currency even when you

have the EU behind it.

And if you don't have the EU behind, it is

practically impossible.

Questions.

Now I want to juxtapose two alternatives.

And the exchange rate too high and keeping it too

low.

So to do that, we have to discuss one of

the Turnbull specialities in foreign exchange.

Should we let the currency?

What is free on the market?

Like in Europe and the dollar and the Japanese yen

will shoot you.

Keep the currency fixed.

More or less like China and Hong Kong.

What does India do?

No idea.

See, that tells you something, right?

If you don't know what your country does.

The floating system is better than that.

It's basically in the airports.

Yeah.

In India, folks, India floats into boats.

They used to fix and clean the dock because it

cost in the crisis.

Oh.

Dear.

At least we were having to rejuvenate.

But now, mostly Boston, I.

Yeah, Yeah.

It's actually really exciting to connect with some social movements

that are used to the fixed political.

So I wonder the way you want to present the

argument in favour of fixed and floating is I could

have presented arguments on both sides of the argument.

In favour of fixed exchange rates.

Often quoted one rate argument.

It maintains the market is an efficient market does not

use information.

It is prone to destabilising speculations.

And the speculators might even manipulate the currency to profit

from it.

This is certainly happened many times.

In the past.

The evidence for that is high frequency.

That sexual activity is high.

Much higher than justified by economic fundamentals.

So you need the intervention to get the correct rate.

The benefits to society are manifold.

On the other side, you have the view that the

authorities of the central bank are incapable of finding the

correct exchange rate.

They've picked the wrong one for political reasons.

It is generally incompetent.

The costs of an incorrect rate this high.

When they intervene, that is distortionary in any way.

When you have speculators, you can't do it.

So gloating might not be less painful.

And the question is Army training day to day volatility

for jumps.

So let's see the famous currency, except for the general

mark and the US dollar.

So this here is the exchange rate of the German

mark from 1959 until.

So it starts at 4.5 marks to the dollar.

Stay stable.

Market prices stay stable, market prices stay stable, and then

it keeps on jumping down.

To repeat, this large exchange rate jumps after this.

It sort of seems to move around in a much

more random way.

But.

If you look at the returns, you see the the

the movements post Bretton Woods happened much, much, much higher.

So just perspective.

Let's do a survey here.

A fixed.

B float.

See?

Depends.

Be something else.

How many people say a floating is generally best?

No party.

Not one of us.

I think floating with some range is better.

Yeah.

Okay.

Let's not.

Let's not qualify too much here.

Floating is generally the best way to do things.

One person to float, one person fixed.

No floating.

That's floating.

Well, two people fixed.

No party Depends.

Look, you look so perfectly acceptable if you are looking

if I focus on the final exam.

If I find this.

You need.

What matters is how you testify.

The answer?

Not what as you come to.

Here's another example, by the way.

I couldn't resist.

However, if I take my take on it, both arguments

are good.

I promise you, no country is happy with its exchange

rate machine.

No regimes perfect.

Every government intervenes.

And just about the only entity that complains about interventions

are economists or libertarian think tanks.

So outside of that, it's generally accepted that exchange rates

are.

With by governments of good.

And bad.

So there is no such thing as a floating exchange

that the world can share.

A lot of examples of currencies like the dollar.

But what about when countries do like a basket of

currencies and things to does?

Is it the same?

Is the same, which.

Is exactly the.

Same?

Because basically what happens is if us a developing country

doing this.

If you had a basket, basket would be composed of

the usual suspects, which would give us all of the

fun in the end.

Right.

The world will go against.

You at the wrong time.

If you have a few civilians around, then countries are

largely depending on the imports and how it will work.

Meaning?

That's a very small country.

Whatever country is thinking about.

Sea, let us say there will be 90% of the

imports of crude.

Imports comes from outside and to a lesser extent, the

dollar's existence.

Even currencies say that they will not pay more than

50.

So how is it going to work.

For the 48 states?

Press TV Development.

What is?

How can we import it?

No, I mean.

I mean.

I mean.

I mean.

Come on.

Okay, let's.

Let's let's keep this let's look at this, like essentially

here.

But I'm not assuming the the operation of this would

be crazy.

But if I.

If we keep the expense of the exchange at the

sensible rates, because in such a large country, almost all

consumption is in these kinds of things.

India's.

And therefore on the margin.

The effects of groups going up and down is very

small in such a large.

So this one, if I lost it, didn't come.

Also, some looks affected by the finding of the film

Quantum.

You perhaps more strongly, but that's fairly small overall consumption

in my country.

Iceland is on the opposite that it's a tiny country

and every extensive movement of vaccines reflected the process.

So if you're concerned that this is really the smallest

of the biggest, let me move on here.

How do you intervene?

Let's just go through the mechanics of this.

The government chooses the regime.

And let's try to do this via basic accounting.

That's just not my strong suit.

But most of your accountants.

I would probably make a mistake when I discuss this,

but that would allow me to do the fitting ways.

So this is the balance sheet of the centre plan

in highly simplified terms.

On the left hand side, it has foreign currency forms.

Domestic currency bonds.

So you saw the central bank issued foreign currency reserves.

I mean, this could be the same as the first

one.

One is liquid, although it's not fully liquid and gold.

So on the liability side to the monetary base, which

is just printing money and and zero and difference, of

course, this network.

So when the central bank intervenes.

It matters how it does it.

It could just so obvious way is to increase the

monetary base.

And you buy foreign currency, you just go from here

to here.

Increase this number.

Increase this number.

Print money and fight for the quote.

Problem is, if you do that, it's inflationary.

So the way the central bank usually does it is

by sterilising.

It doesn't pay.

It doesn't pay for the foreign.

It doesn't pay for the money by printing money.

It pays for it by selling domestic bonds to buy

foreign currency.

So if you print money, this goes this goes up.

But most countries instead, they take they the they sell

this to buy this.

So this goes down to this goes up.

This is how is typically done.

That intervention is called sterilisation.

Because technically the way words works in comics is first

they increase in monetary base, be by the foreign currency

itself, domestic bonds.

To reduce the money supply mechanic to help us.

But it just describes.

And it's it is primarily used in almost every country

in the world, intervenes Sterilises.

As far as I know.

To some significant.

And to an extent, the problem, of course, of life

is you are accumulating foreign currency reserves.

That's.

Can either go against you or for you in the

bad state of the world.

It is easy to sterilise in developing countries.

And of course, this is why they tend to be

much more active users of them.

Because if you have a highly developed financial markets, assets

are substitutable, meaning it's very easy to change from one

asset class to another.

So while and.

This number is certainly out of date.

But historically, China has been the largest sterilisation wheel and

the problem is this sterilised.

Over 80% of interventions is outdated.

It is time to stop intervening on how to keep

their baby from appreciating.

Questions.

What I want to do now is to give you

two contrasting cases between countries overvaluing an undervalued currency.

This phase will become important to understand the two sides

of the issues.

And the current currency becomes overvalued.

You usually it just happens.

Perhaps a country is fighting inflation and decided to fix

the exchange rate to fight inflation.

This is what the IMF has historically recommended to you

to.

Or perhaps it tried to print money to finance itself.

This is Boston Pop and Venezuela posted.

In the short run, it makes consumers and voters happy.

In the long run, it hurts.

Export is no longer compatible here.

Quite often if you keep on doing this, it ends

up with a speculative attack.

Why would a country stay too long with overvalued exchange?

It's a very big reason, is that the empirical evidence

on overvalued currencies is that it leads to the government

using power.

So if you are forced to significantly revalue currency, it's

usually coincides with a political crisis and no government wants

to lose power.

So they keep the exchange rates as strong as possible

so that they will not be kicked out of office.

Let's use your business.

And then if you if you're into politics, you could

contrast the different species of democracy to this dictator.

In a democracy, you could just choose prime ministers and

the dictatorship and give a coup d'etat.

It's often.

So that's perhaps the main reason why you keep the

expensive too strong.

Courtesy.

So this is sort of this state has slightly altered

state but is causing the same, I would say that

as I mentioned earlier.

And so the the 1994 was the year of currency,

currency crisis, 25 globally.

This basically means of of how many countries do we

have to do?

70.

So 15% of countries experienced one year.

So they happen quite often.

The empirical evidence of currency crisis is that three years

after the crisis.

The GDP is perhaps 3 to 6% lower.

However, these GDP losses materialise before a currency collapses.

And high growth after a currency crisis is a typical

situation.

So therefore, a currency crisis is almost a unique type

of crisis that has positive economic benefits, not negative economic

benefits, because it forces countries to see reality.

These are significant distributional effects.

And if you take into the CFP in a particular

case, it led to a whole slew of chances of

showing up afterwards and have very significant political consequences.

That's a different issue.

Fashion is overvalued.

And the volume becomes much more interesting.

It is really a policy that tries to make other

countries subsidise your own domestic industry.

Used to be called back to donate or pull it

back to make a policy.

We used to invest in money to pay for the

currency and you can keep this theoretically indefinitely because the

country's over used to lose run out of money to

intervene and have a crisis.

Theoretically, you can overvalue forever.

Theoretically and the economic impact on undervaluing.

Makes imports more expensive.

Exports cheaper.

This means it's a subsidy given to exporters and foreign

consumers paid for by domestic consumers and foreign competitors.

So you should consider one should always keep both international

domestic and international benefits cost annually.

In this.

And if you want to.

And this is why if you want to explain the

high inflation today.

One factor in high inflation is that trying to stop

the Chinese stocks, trying to keep their data cheap.

And that and enough basically means so so therefore it's

a subsidy given to foreign consumers is China was subsidising

the rest of the world for the longest time and

they stopped doing so.

And that has helped keep inflation down that the rest

of the world.

Well, there's a political cost to this.

It makes all the countries really unhappy.

It can lead to competitive devaluations.

And sometimes a country that does not do this may

end up being the strongest.

Let me give you some examples.

And the problem is, if you keep your currency to

weak recent fundamentals, you are creating a plastic industry that

might not be competitive if exchange rates become sensible again.

So therefore, your economy depends on the weak currency for

it to continue to be strong.

I want to give you some examples of countries that

did exactly that.

And of course, it.

If you take it to an extreme.

And what was once called by the Brazilian foreign minister

of Kurdistan War, which is a very silly label for

these things, because because it's not really as extreme a

huge thing.

If you want to understand.

Today you can look back to understanding the class, of

course.

The Plaza Hotel in New York is not called is

not owned by Donald Trump.

But it's the sex of one of the most important

meetings on foreign policy ever held.

The background to this was that the dollar was appreciating

the Japanese yen and the German luck.

And all the countries, but primarily those two.

And what the United States set.

Both to Japan and to Germany.

If you do not make your currency stronger.

We will not allow you to export to the United

States anymore.

So the basic protocol to the how to make it

kind strong before you suffer the consequences.

But immediately when you both in the shock, they appreciate.

And.

I want you to think about this example in today's

political context, because every single time someone is discussing what

the United States might do.

We think about the trust goods.

And this was always the threat to have vis a

vis China.

It's always the threat they have to be some of

these everybody else.

And because you've done it once.

And everybody in the business knows what you did.

You're going to repeat it.

It's just delicious.

You could just make it be understood without mentioning this.

To keep in mind, the classic code is quite important

in terms of understanding politics.

And then you have France and UK, because this show

both sides of the opportunity as well.

Basically, what happened is both France and the United Kingdom

made a horribly stupid economic mistake after World War One

to complete opposite directions after World War One.

Britain decided to go on to the gold standard of

the pre-World War One exchange rate.

This meant Britain's pound was strongly overvalued.

This led to five years of labour market strife and

disruption to the UK.

And at the time the UK went off the gold

standard in 1951.

The economy formed.

France did the opposite.

They went on to the gold standard.

At Labour Day, they fixed the exchange rate artificially cheap,

about 15% below what it should have been.

And the benefit was France.

So it was the most successful country in the world

from 1924 to 1931.

Absolutely strong economic growth.

France ended up in the biggest overcoat in the world

because if you if you keep on doing this, all

the money comes to.

The problem is once the rest of the world went

off the gold standard and Switzerland was the last to

do it in 1935, the French industry was no longer

competitive to anybody else.

And France entered into a very severe economic and political

period.

You know, France is, you know, sucking both parties into

the late 1960s.

So they are really a good cautionary tale for not

keeping your currency to.

Week.

Just keep it sensible.

Don't make it too strong.

I'll it to be.

If you're going to mess.

I don't want to spend a lot of time on

the statistics simply here simply because I'm running out of

time.

But just one example here, which is dismissed National Bank.

So when the euro came into existence, the Swiss franc

was trading at 1.6 francs to the euro.

After the global crisis in 2002, the European crisis, the

euro was falling.

The Swiss franc was appreciating.

The Swiss were quite upset about that because it was

hurting the Swiss export industries and they decided to artificially

fix the exchange with a 1.2 francs to euro.

Stayed until September 15.

And by the way, I wrote a blog responding to

two days after the event so that we can find

the.

And in the end what happens is the labour problems.

They asked.

They were looking at the entire time period, the Swiss

national franc of saying we have lost 65 at a

rate that is incorrect.

And when we have to stop, we will have to

cease losing positions and therefore to cause a very large

loss on the books of national banks.

And the Swiss National Bank, by the way, quite unique

piece of cooperation.

You can buy stocks, in this case dividends and is

one of the biggest owners of this company.

This is regional governments.

And ultimately political pressure is coincident to stopping.

The tax was rapidly increasing.

But he laughed and laughed.

The point is, what did the Swiss Euros import?

They bought us high tech companies.

So they so they bought up all of Tesla and

Facebook and Microsoft.

We conclude.

This is at a time when many of his companies

have significantly appreciated since the facility came out of this

whole episode.

What is that?

Nice?

So.

Taken together, does it make sense for a country to

manipulate its exchange rates?

Might be easy to take is not.

It might you might see benefits by and large.

Just try to keep them.

Whether you choose to let the market do it or

the central bank is safe.

So some people, the IMF, decide it's a different matter.

But it does not make sense to keep them artificially

too high or too low.

Christians.

Local imbalances.

Few.

Few weeks ago, I gave you statistics on foreign holdings

of U.S. government debt, with Japan showing that of the

biggest.

And then we had the list going down of countries.

Well, the picture is made complicated by the fact that

a lot of governments might own a lot of U.S.

dollars.

But the corporates have borrowed massively in foreign currencies.

So the net position is government plus private sector might

be good around zero.

The problem is we would not necessarily expect us to

fail of the corporate sector and therefore this gross position

is it is a sign of.

Imbalances and vulnerabilities.

So let's look at some places.

Why would you.

Or what makes you decide where to invest and to

borrow?

I mean, ideally, it's best to save lives, invest in

own country, you know, courtesy.

He said, find loss to the United States, for example.

The very sensible thing.

Well, first reason is why it doesn't happen is diversification

will save us save the the of developing country.

You can not necessarily trust your own institutions.

So you put your money into assets that are safe.

This means you put them abroad.

It's it's basic to say with that justification.

And that means money is flown to New York to

try to save us instead of going into the local

corporate sector.

So the local corporates therefore have no choice but to

go to New York to borrow money back.

Rescue helicopters.

This is not a sensible thing.

So this is what I said earlier.

It matters who follows, whether it's a company that is

global or a company serving the the industry.

And we take it we take a summary statistic of

this.

And how important is talking about local policies, these women

or countries?

I mean, this is, by the way, the database I

used to produce these numbers.

If anyone is looking for profit profit.

And it's actually quite amazing.

Yes.

And it has a nice database on what money flows

across countries, bond issuance, domestic and foreign bonds, etc..

So I quote unquote, from, for example, if you're looking

for data for all the purposes.

But if you take.

In the months.

Before COVID does.

This is that it is that this is before COVID

19 because it's just a pain.

Is like I said, for me to explain this slide

takes me a couple of hours and I just can't

be bothered doing it.

That's why they don't associate us.

I mean, it would seem like I could just pull

it out of a database and automatically post it as

the case is actually current automated.

Manually.

And when I know how to do it quick.

But it takes about 2 hours to pick up on

data that works before I could do something.

Let's do a case study of Turkey before we you

the reserve currency that you.

Turkey.

Why turkey?

Turkey is a case study in how not to do

sensible economic policy.

It's almost a textbook case of how not to do

economic policy.

This is why I think.

So here's an example of the Turkish lira.

At one point in time, it hit 1.7 million to

the dollar.

They chopped off 6.

But then.

They still lost control of the exchange with its rapidly

Islamic approach to Athens.

And by the way, I think this is going to

15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Just going up since the kids.

Yeah.

You just didn't want to.

It's not much to say.

It's just wanted.

The saying is if you want a shopping list of

countries and the global importance that we set is how

this is basically how important foreign currency exposure is for

a country.

Then they all are the same.

All the sensors chewed it up and seen in Mexico

a highly, highly vulnerable to exchange for.

This is just this is just this.

This gives you a map for how vulnerable a country

is before it chooses.

I want to use Turkey as a case study for

illustrating the points.

I mean, I don't really want to spend time discussing

only the two countries.

What do you look when you diagnose how a country

we really want to diagnose?

The macroeconomic stability of a country.

The first number to look at is what's known as

the current account balance.

Your current account balance gives you a net trade in

goods and services that is imports and exports.

Net earnings on cross-border investments, money coming in, coming out

for investments, and that trust payments typically from your workers

work abroad to take money back home.

So this means for the country as an aggregate economy

for companies is positive.

This country is a net lender to the world.

It is negative.

You're net borrower from the.

So therefore, every time anybody looks, start comparing countries, this

is almost the first instance.

So he has some well known cases.

So if you take the top line.

So I like to say this is going back to

2017.

I shook up the sport because of an issue.

Germany has a very strong, persistent, positive current account balance

is which of course then has caused causes no end

of political problems in Europe.

819, which is the eurozone member countries.

They are sort of an aggregate sample, slightly positive.

So the eurozone is a net exporter of money as

well.

If you take Italy.

It has become an increasingly strong exporter of money to

the world.

Of course, this is caused by Italy being highly indebted,

and it has to.

It added.

But.

But.

But it is.

But what this means in the context of this new

piece of equipment composes positive.

It is improving the net.

The position of Italy is improving.

Not getting worse.

Greece.

Look really bad.

His crisis happened 2010.

But now Greece is basically it's almost impossible not to

be so.

So Greece is no longer borrowing from the world, but

it's stable, meaning therefore, to be paying that to foreigners

for the time it's good for the economy.

And then we have Turkey.

Basically from 2000 until at the LifeLock, we expected to

stay strongly negative.

So what this is saying is Turkey over time keeps

on borrowing 5% of GDP from abroad.

Well, it desperately needs sensible economic policies.

But then on top of that credit, meaning that banks

are allowed to lend.

It's increasingly determined by the government.

And the reason I'm taking Turkey out is because the.

So that breeds high interest rates are inflationary.

So therefore.

Every time there's a problem, he puts his interest rates

down.

This caused the turkey to fall in global markets.

It makes absolutely no sense.

And then if the central bank complains, he fired the

governor.

So basically the governor of the central bank with 35

tons in portfolios.

Houston's.

Every time a club scores, the Governor Hutchison fires.

Which is quite convenient for my purpose.

So the problem is.

The instability is both if governments continue to keep and

the financial sector expulsions who choose who to use is

rapidly increasing, making Turkey increasingly vulnerable to.

Any foreign exchange chances.

So therefore it is therefore just the summer inventories is

not going to peak.

If you want to diagnose where a country stands, one

want to look at the current account balance.

And make a plot like this to see how it's

evolving all the time.

Yeah.

Question So are the going like there is no way

that he's actually stupid, right?

I mean, he's the president.

So why is he doing it?

I have.

So I don't know personally, but I have I haven't

I haven't seen that very senior people have taken me.

I spent quite a bit of time there.

I finally I well, the reason I wrote a paper

for the Turkish crisis.

The only country study ever written for people.

I don't know.

You were right.

There's no way of political leadership.

But what happens is that people power following the good

offices and reading this book on the stuff that interested

some really good in one domain of human activity before

they put anything.

So you see, for example, someone who's a really good

doctor.

He thinks he understands economics.

What?

A super lawyer.

In some sense, medicine flunky sees all the time.

Someone succeeds in one domain of human activity because they're

smart.

They don't realise that they spent 25 years of their

life studying something.

This is why they're good at it.

But then they translate that into all people means.

Even Musk is doing this all the time.

This would be helpful and description of a person like

that to have political been a very good politician who

does not understand economics.

Believes that he is because he's such a genius in

politics.

He must also be an economic genius and refuses to

listen to people who criticise.

And also, by the way, I forget who said it,

but some famous people cuckoo clock for somebody said every

political career.

And some figured it.

Every political cover and some for.

Because our son gets into politics.

They stayed too long.

And you stop listening.

Take advice to stop it.

Think all of this right?

And eventually, if a politician to the law of public,

he or she is always right, you can stop making

increasingly stupid mistakes.

And that is often a funny thing for us.

I'm just.

I'm just thinking.

Okay.

So I know you can play.

No, you're crazy.

Oh, okay.

But people are also more adventurous because that's exactly what

they're doing, is because of inflation.

They're investing in the commodities.

You know, everything.

That Mike never said he would buy a second hand

stuff.

And within a week, there's he's finding his price rising

and then he's to a second.

So he's not feeling the pinch of inflation places weighing

up temporarily.

So that baby, you know, keeping the people somewhat happy.

Depends.

You don't think that was taken by you?

What do you think about what he just said?

I'm sorry.

I didn't hear.

That's okay.

Even if it was from the distributional aspects of this

content.

To answer your question, all of us are winners and

losers.

If somebody profits.

It's a competitive thing, which is happening.

So the last thing I want to do and so

basically the way I've been doing this lecture more than

usually is I've been mixing in the discussion over to

the discussion afterwards, because for me, science is a topic

that lends itself naturally to the much more often of

the topics.

So let's take let's take a quick break and maybe

make or break things we learn called the reserve currency.

This is a topic that we're going.

To call it, and then we can discuss.

Very.

Oh, yes.

Yes.

I can't do it.

Oh, I don't know.

I guess I just.

Because I don't see any.

So which was good enough, but.

Oh, yeah.

Yeah.

Well, so much for talking with it.

That's good to know.

But if we want to get anything straight.

I'll make it.

But I'll make it.

I'll make give you an idea.

Because you seem so pretty.

Yeah.

So, like, I will like to dance with you because

of strategy and.

So, I mean, it's.

What's the truth?

Yeah.

It's really just kind of funny.

I think I did it in 2000.

Yes, it's a good one.

It's good because it the door.

Did you get that response when I.

I'm going to use this book for people to resistance

the consequences of reductionism.

Although something like this in a lecture given the testimony

of a.

I don't think that's right.

The first time I met somebody, you know, it was

at first it was it was like good email.

And they said on Wednesday.

Yeah, I think so.

So that's why I say no versus first to speak,

actually.

So.

Yeah.

Okay.

Okay.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Okay.

Uh, so there's a lot of them, but I know

this is different.

So this is my stuff.

I don't.

I don't know.

It's nice to meet you.

Yeah.

It's nice.

So you think I should go?

It was like all the black folk being all.

I want to talk to.

You that way.

So I stopped talking.

To.

You.

The last coffee gives us a chance to pull out.

This is Uganda, and we can maybe use it as

a basis for our discussion today as well with the

concept of research partnerships.

Because that's where everything comes together in terms of of

of foreign exchange.

So the reserve currency is the currency in which global

transactions take place.

It is the one country standard form of research and

violence.

Sensible economic efficiency dictates it must be a single currency.

And it's not often we shouldn't love the two currencies.

Historically, it used to be gold.

Then it really does come off sterling.

Then it became the US dollar.

And will it be?

It may for Europe, Bitcoin or something else, and it

transition from one reserve currency to another takes a long

time.

So the British pound was the reserve currency and in

1920 the US dollar started taking over from that fund.

But the last two countries to use the pound as

currency were Kuwait and Canada.

And they used to pump until 1970.

So it took 50 years for that transition to fully

take place.

So it's not something that happens quickly and there's nobody

at these sites.

Police citing these kinds of quantities.

So we can't see just some countries come together and

make it.

No.

Some advantages that are both true and not true for

the owners of reserve currencies.

First is one year earlier, which is not true, which

is a major product of price to own currency and

thereby eliminating currency risk.

This is not important because major products are priced in

a local competitive market and the currencies only have been

nominated.

However, what is important is those three things I am

about to mention.

This is about foreigners holding your currency as a reserve.

Now the benefit is considerable because what it means is.

If you hold the U.S. forces, you are giving the

Americans goods they keep on your paperback.

This is quite a nice deal.

So every country in the world holds us dollars as

a reserve currency, especially this year, -10% for the previous.

I.e. us gets good naked people you.

Secondly, and it's a big benefit to us first.

Because if you're U.S., you borrow and you own currency.

Well, if you pursue if you borrow in foreign currency.

So therefore it has the competitive advantage of US firms

versus non-U.S. firms in the direction of U.S. stocks.

Little a little bit more significantly depending on the market.

So there are people who have studied this in detail.

So certainly there are certainly there are benefits to it,

certainly that have benefits to your company.

Finally, this is the collective view, controversial one which is

global transactions linked here, video systems.

So every US dollar transaction.

What does it mean to clear?

It means if I transfer money to that lady, U.S.

dollars, she has a bank account in some bank in.

I have a bank account.

$10 in my bank because my money goes from my

bank to New York into the account.

That's what it means.

Every transaction volume, dollars goes is clear.

This sent me the New York Federal Reserve System.

That is not a trivial power.

Have me.

And I'm picking this country deliberately.

If Iran sells oil to China in US dollars, the

only way China can pay for Iran is in dollars

is by the money travelling via New York.

Was it a bit difficult if you happen to be

a country under U.S. sanctions?

But.

Sticking to your line.

The only.

There are two ways you could fly illegally from the

United States to Iran and back.

To listen to the eyes of some diplomats.

So the president of Iran who applied to the U.N..

Equally on the on the Iranian plate.

Secondly, the United States to this day, still exports.

Dollars in paper form to Iran.

I mean, it was talking recently, but they used to

a couple of times a year a jet would fly

from New York to to Hilton full of Thomas, come

on the plane.

So even without the sanctions, they would still supply them

with dollars.

And this means, in light of New York, clearly is

a very powerful tool.

So why would say a Chinese company honour American sanctions

on Russia?

Well, the obvious way is the Americans could say, if

you don't, you can no longer trust the money.

In New York, you cut off from the economy.

That's a death sentence for a lot of firms.

So you can tell basically the rest of the world

how to behave.

And this is a yeah.

But it's more is the United States take advantage of

this.

The less to do list, the more power they lose

as a result.

Ah, this is so like what he's saying.

You're basically saying what I'm supposed to say.

So.

So let me repeat that.

If the US uses this post guarantee.

It's very powerful.

If he uses two all the time, it creates incentives

for other countries to look for alternatives to use public.

And the United States has been very active in U.S.

support recently.

So if we can just make Europe and India China

just.

Three.

Have been fairly vocal in what the alternatives to U.S.

experience.

Just for example.

Just for example.

Just and again, Iran is at the middle of this

because India's, I think, the single biggest importers of Iranian

oil.

And that causes no amount of problems for the two

countries.

But so your question.

Yes, but let's just take one fact that is in

there.

And another thing that I have been clear in office

and then recently there was sanctions on Russia.

One big private company from India.

Yeah, it made it was up against Chinese yen.

The Chinese used it to jettison it.

The renminbi.

Yeah.

The Chinese currency and then security.

Exactly.

So what you're seeking is.

So what?

So.

So what you start to see, especially in countries under

sanctions.

I mean, Iran.

And this just the.

Is the only case of serious symptom of a large

country that could take North Korea.

Off the table.

Q But this is fairly mild, the sanctions, none of

these.

So it's really about exports of Iranian oils, two of

the countries.

This is primarily India and China and of course, Kuwait.

The reason this happening is an Indian exporter would pay

the Iranian state in Chinese women be shared via the

Chinese food chain, Chinese kimchi.

And then when it goes for they U.S..

But that still leaves the Iranians.

Who What are you going you do China Some.

So it adds to the costs of exporting oil from

Iran.

And if you're from Europe.

So this is just not not for the benefit of

either party.

Question.

So just in general, the trade between Europe and China

doesn't happen.

Let's just take trade with Europe and China have $2.

That's.

I didn't have sex, but I could ask.

What sectors of the.

Will not be able to sit quietly if need be

this week.

This is a hyper efficient system.

If a European importer, what exporter is doing business with

China and pays for the transfer?

Of course in New York some.

There's no problem for the typical European or Chinese company

to.

It is a problem if you listen to someone.

Sanctions like Iran.

So the way to take the extreme case of North

Korea, while there are plenty of banks that would want

to provide financial services to North Korea.

Evade the United States and forces them safe.

And, in fact, that this business of Korea, we will

you will no longer be allowed to be in New

York.

It is not possible to see us.

And I don't know.

Whether or not not all of us.

Because otherwise it not possible to all.

But okay so let's say if let's say and there

have been no cases of small banks of the American

people.

Thank you, Michael.

A few years ago I was providing banking services to

North Korea.

But the United States target the defence business would with.

Though the other banks in Macao, they want us to

look for even one thing that will never go to

the US for a trade.

You can take that also.

This is a backpack pack.

This is how.

So you could trade in the pressure of the United

States.

One of the things that you could trade with Europe,

but then you had to deal with the European name,

but also for business with the United States.

And that effort to convert to sanctions would be prohibited

from clearing the individual.

It's the end of the year.

And the things I've been trying to say under the

radar are as much as possible.

If you roll.

You know, you can easily trace.

But hang on to say.

Are you discussing sanctions or something else?

No, not sanctions.

Just this one reason why.

So there's one reason.

So, for example, before the Russian invasion, the European Union

was increasingly upset about European oil imports for paying for

Russian oil.

Useless.

But the Europe was unable to move away from that

state.

The EU was unable to move to clear up trade

in Europe.

The inputs didn't comply.

They just.

You're upsetting a lot of established business practices and traditions

and things of that nature.

And because to use those most liquid currency to look

at whether the business will go through, if you're going

to trade, you would rather trim bills and anything else.

I would consider it in terms of the European Union

vessels.

But then the Russians have acquired the Euros and the

Russians have too.

The Russians reserves are almost solely with the Russians on

this last transaction, only to be used.

I mean, I can't imagine, of course, like, what happened

is.

But it's a complicated thing.

But but certainly to this day, we are seeing the

use dollar clearing being the most powerful tool.

To.

Use with sanctions arsenal.

And this is taking too long.

So let me speak up a little bit.

What you're seeing is China is taking steps into this

direction at the moment.

It's not China that's not looking to maybe to be

able to sell currency, possibly make the case on their

front.

China is taking steps with three of the countries using

China's claims.

So.

What I told you about the effect swaps earlier.

But the importance of the United States, I ask you

could if you provide to reinforce in my colleagues, I

was listening to them, so I'm not going to repeat

that.

But the US dollar assumption of currency has been strengthened

recently because of what we can and what we've seen

at the moment with the euro and falling and the

US dollar strengthened is further reinforcing us on role as

a currency.

Is it.

Inevitable?

But for us.

All that we made use of currency.

Well, let's first speak about loopholes.

In this discussion.

And one common mistake that people make is that they

cannot tolerate a relationship incorrectly.

You say that.

You say, oh, China has two or $3 trillion worth

of US dollar reserves that gives China control over the

US.

So if you are the country that uses U.S. dollars

as a currency, that gives U.S. power over, you look

the other way around.

So that's it.

First misconception is the way this whole relationship is usually

represented publicly is incorrect, is opposite.

You know, the youth because, let's see, take the credit

since oldest of us step to Japan or China, one

of the all the last ones what they have to

southeast these times and that can be huge.

They said that the last loss would be hugely destructive

to.

So it's much easier for us to swap that.

Same for them to deal with the fallout from such

the high cost of China to unwind the US dollar

positions.

Well, not to the US.

So that's where the problem lies.

The US.

So what about the Chinese women?

Now, of course, China's growth has come under strain.

Most of them come back to China from as common.

Growth has come under strain, so it might not surpass

the US, but the largest economy in the world will

try and.

China certainly is very unhappy about the US dollar being

the currency.

Should we become the next to surprise your questions?

Yeah.

You can also argue that the U.S. is dependent on.

China.

Deficit.

So what happened is China.

Years that.

It is.

It is these changes in numbers.

I think China holds less than 10% of the debt,

still less than.

10%.

What?

Like.

If I could, I could get the numbers for the

change.

Soldiers who use government, that is, you know, person.

To like in one day.

So perhaps what was once a few years ago.

They don't even know they actually control the direction there.

China's intervening to keep the renminbi component.

If 7000 made this stuff two years ago.

They just unwinding slowly.

So I have about 3 minutes left.

Allow me to do this really quickly.

I got this question, by the way, because I was

in basic a few years ago, I was asked to

talk to the LSU Alumni Association from fishing about anything

like that.

It was a discussion at some point.

Ortiz asked me the question, Do you think the Chinese

women will become the next two subclans?

And I thought about the question before I said no,

and then I thought about innocent.

I don't think the changes would make be any time

soon become the reserve currency for the following reasons.

A chamber like capital controls and is unlikely to chase

that any time soon.

It would have to be seen as more transparent and

more credible because neither of these seems to like.

So I think the subconscious status goes against how China

sees economic policy.

Please see a conclusion.

I was just going to say that Russia already has

the Chinese currency as reserve currency.

Course it does.

It does.

And I guess that means that countries that align their

political views with Chinese or don't have a choice would

probably use their currency as reserve currency.

I would not use the political dimension in this.

No, I would stop before it, because what is happening

is an increasing number of countries, whole Japanese yen, also

some sort of currency.

Changing me.

So you're seeing that diversification away from you.

All of this is happening everywhere, but it's not not

fully swallowed.

I mean, I mean, you might see an acceleration of

the current events, but.

The only data on the pre war research studies that

show that was slow movement, but she was still premier

of the US.

And this makes sense because it's like it's an oil

and gas explosion.

So I don't think we mean we will become a

reserve currency.

We will see women being increasingly used because as an

object of the test and vote initiative, which connects to

the use of Chinese payment systems.

So you will see an increased use in certain countries,

but especially in most developing countries, which are not done

under Chinese law, which we're seeing a lot more of

recently.

But that seems to be confined to a small subset

of countries.

15 years ago, we thought the euro would be the

next reserve currency.

Nobody would serve to say that anymore because the euro

is not that credible.

I could spend a bit cold.

It not be the next reserve currency.

I'm going to have to make a prediction by the

time you people retire.

And I say it's probably for the be of the

same time given lifespans.

The US Dollar LP is tough currency.

The fact is, of course you can't collect money back.

Exactly fucking I am.

You could take from me that I was 70% on

the dollar still being said currency for a years.

The next 50 years at least 50/50.

Will be what these people will retain for years.

And I look that in for two years.

That's why I'm doing it.

And I look at this place as it is.

I the.

See, it's not a verifiable.

Lecture 9:

Thank you so much for watching this show.

We want to hear from.

It's always possible to do something like.

Has to be.

I feel like that's.

Something that I have done.

But I feel.

So that's the roadmap for this picture.

So why do we regulate finance and finance is more

regulated.

I believe that any other part of human activity is

highly regulated and it's always been highly speculated.

Now, one reason is the banks have power over people

in governments.

They have to be kept.

And because they're so powerful, governments must basically make sure

that they don't get too powerful.

And I think what we saw in China recently is

exactly an example for the banks get too powerful with

governments, get nervous in countries externalities, they cause damage way

beyond their activities.

They are highly technical.

And most people, as I told you before, they can't

do basic financial math.

30% of the population cannot do percentages.

70% of the population do not understand the value of

money.

And if payment payment, the third payment next year.

And that is why we want protection and we want

to be ready for the crisis whenever one comes along.

Now, there's a direct conflict.

If all regulations will force banks to take risks.

We call this.

Any way.

We can make an economy grow.

You pay for things you want.

And we do know that if you have you regulate

finance excessively, you regulate the economy respectfully.

But with risk comes the chance of failure.

And you can't have a good banking system without the

patient.

Say, you remember the survey with you the first week

when I asked you if you want to live in

a country without crisis?

That's exactly what a trade off is.

And I showed this to you before.

But we are society.

We in a way, we fluctuate often from being fairly

preferring.

I don't like regulation to be productive.

So we tend to say you should be regulated.

But that's it's really about the intensity of regulation rather

than the amount of regulation.

So this is wrong to use generally.

This is why I say intensity.

Q For 2007, for a crisis, intensity of regulators will

no longer be scared of growth.

After the crisis in 2008, it was all about safety

and low growth.

And I think controversially, a big part of this speculation

we've been feeling experienced in Europe has been about this

safety emphasis.

Now, with COVID, this I mentioned this, we get to

this, but in COVID, we saw vaccine intensity go down.

And I mentioned that would be how they did that.

And I think the I was speaking back slightly.

Okay.

So this is sort of how I see the landscape.

Little business that's always a trade off.

Anyone who says there's no trade off between safety and

growth.

Is this not understand the economy.

We can debate the magnitudes.

You cannot dictate the existence of this table, but you

can certainly dictate where you put the trade.

Nasser told me before, regulation is the law of the

land.

The drive on the left side for this country.

And when cross over the telephone comes on the front,

which I've done quite frequently recently on the train.

You immediately drive on the right side of the boats.

That's the war.

We enforce the law says you probably left in the

UK, right?

In France, you stop on red.

You go on green.

And all the all the traffic rules.

Supervision is the enforcement of traffic rules.

That is the police giving you speeding tickets or not

as the police move, is that right for not giving

a speeding ticket?

And I've seen both happening the next time I've been

travelling and not having country.

And if you take traffic, traffic rules tend to be

very similar across the world.

But I promise you, enforcement is very different across.

When I got to meet three people from India.

Give me the example in my in my book about

this.

This is Consul Consul India and it was while driving

on the road from New Delhi.

I grew up and my experience with that highway, for

example, in my book.

So this is the distinction we.

If you work with these people, they care about the

distinction.

They care about the distinction between regulators and supervisors.

Most people don't, and I usually don't.

But for the purpose of this course, to try to

be consistent and care about these things.

So regulations, generally speaking, as micro and macro.

I sorry.

And used it for my friend, my girl.

What do you mean?

Michael Macroprudential, not economic.

This, by the way, can be quite funny when you

have an economist who is supposed to talk about macroeconomics

and macro regulations.

These are macro reports.

You don't know which two person meets.

I've seen that more often than not.

But you keep in mind you have to keep the

context.

Macro is about a system, about the stability of the

system and whether this system delivers to society on the

services the system promises.

Micro is about individual.

It's all about whether we take advantage of individuals and

banks who not all the time.

I mean, the if you're from this country, you may

have to pay for AP scandal and I'm sure your

own country has had multiple scandals with banks, a few

people.

You cannot see a country where that did not happen.

That is my.

The crypto exchange service that failed spectacularly last week was

all of a micro sold.

There's a conflict between them.

And I'll get to that when we get to it.

So let's do the extreme position.

Is Lacey Fair Lacey first of friends.

So you could those who can't stand.

Correct me, believe me.

What is what is least for me.

So much for funds.

Let them do things for us.

Let them do.

That.

Let them.

Let me do what you want.

That laissez faire means politics.

And in this.

You do not.

Government does not exercise control.

But in absence of regulations, that's what it means technically.

In.

Common parlance.

Banks should prosper like every other economic enterprise.

We have seen this multiple times in the past.

Hopefully next week I'll have a chance to discuss the

biggest banking scandal of the 19th century.

This happens and this basically here 150 years ago.

And by the way, if you think the world is

corrupt now, if you have been permitting late 19th century

London.

However corrupt your country is the de facto worst.

And I'll talk about that next week.

That was the root of the scandal, which funded 1866.

I hope to have discussion next week because this launched.

The context is 1866.

Cause banking to be regulated is that before and after

1866, everyone wants.

It's a hugely important crisis.

So I mentioned 1907, another crisis.

I have not discussed much here.

I mentioned Argentina briefly in the 1990s.

My take is the following.

Most people expect the government to protect them if banks

fail and a lot of people are unprotected.

They will take it out on the government.

And the government will have to react.

And it's worse if government react in a time of

crisis and is not prepared to act.

That is my argument for why we need to regulate.

And.

You certainly see why.

I mean, the two countries represented in this room were

crushed last.

Possible private losses have become highly political recently.

This is both in Italy and China and cause very

serious government concern.

And you see it in other places as well.

So keep in mind the.

You do not want people to lose money in banking,

that really upsets them.

So that's why you regulate.

And be prepared.

So we had discussed this before, but I'm really focussed

now on this part of the government financial policy that

is about financial stability and systemic risk.

So that's roughly how we do it.

And keep in mind the financial stability is not an

objective.

It's a tool to get a look.

Society.

If you ask a typical person, do you care about

financial stability, they will say, No, I care about keeping

my house, my schools work and my hospitals working.

But then what?

I mean, that's a social objective.

This is affecting the individual.

Financial stability is a tool to get stuff, and this

is often misunderstood by people who work in the official

sector who say.

Financial stability.

Some objective.

I think that's just missing the point completely.

And.

And I showed you this block before, so I'm just

going to summarise summarises what it's all about.

So I showed it to you and the first week

is all about, do you get it if you're on

the right path.

Do you think it's purple or green?

And nobody can tell you which you get.

So basically the you cannot prove.

But more or less, stability is good for the social

objective.

You know, too little respect for it.

You know, too much is bad for it.

But the range is impossible to identify, even as some

people claim to have done so.

Okay.

So.

Capital.

And you want your people to forget everything you know.

If you haven't, what?

So I know most of your accountants.

Not all.

I promise you one thing.

Bank accounting is different and other accounting.

But she managed.

The terminology is different.

And whatever you've heard about capital before.

If you have not studied regulations, you will not understand

what capital is.

Capital is a fund that is fundamental to implementing regulations.

No.

And I just maybe only have a slight.

So if we both called coloured Marks and Adam Smith

together.

But how Mark Adam Smith said in his most famous

book written is the foundation of the modern capitalist economy.

It was the commission, He said, be part of a

men's stock which he expects to forth in revenue.

Karl Marx Exactly the same, I think.

So it is wealth used to create more wealth.

Except Smith saw positively and march negatively.

But the same idea.

Modern use is full of both, and it's very contradictory.

We talk about the market capitalisation of or market cap

of a corporation.

I can ask Siri right now, what is the market

cap?

Hey, Siri.

What is the market capitalisation of arm compute?

I found this on the Web.

Useless.

And by the way, you saw what you saw.

Amazon is closing down its Alexa division.

This is hard to say because this doesn't.

It works.

I mean, it works.

She can work better.

Don't you think?

In any case.

Market.

Couple IPOs were closer to $2 trillion.

Plus market capitalisation as the market value of a publicly

traded firm.

If you have a study on economics, you might see

capital being one power output compared to label.

So machinery is capital when it comes.

Capital in regulations is what your government calls capital.

It's a defined accounting term.

It has nothing to do with these commonly accepted public

uses.

Keep in mind, capital is what the government calls capital.

And that does not make me laugh.

Might not make any sense to you.

But it's not the legal definition of it just keeps

letting my phone confuse it with common uses.

Capital has two purposes, and I'll show you how they

both work.

A It's a reserve against unexpected bank losses.

Why do you expect that most?

Come on, you most of your accountants, you could tell

why this carpet to knock on is like this.

Expect losses.

And because you had prohibitions against them.

So it's really we serve our customers against unexpected losses.

And the second point is even more important.

It limits leverage.

I.

And this is really.

Those are two of the key things.

The higher the capital is less levered.

A bank is therefore less likely to pay.

You see exactly what I mean when I when I

do the mathematics on capital.

A little bit later.

So take the balance sheet of a firm in a

really, really simple policy.

On the left hand side of your asset.

From the right hand side you have equity and liabilities,

and assets minus liabilities is called equity.

And here is a simple numerical calculation for how you

can get equity, how you accumulate profits and losses over

some time.

Life gives you equity.

Nothing surprising here.

However, capital is that it is not equity.

I know this sounds contradictory, but stay with me.

The way the government chooses what this happening.

So they are looking at things like loss absorption, meaning

if something bad happens, how this company can absorb losses

and what you want is losses before bankruptcy, not losses

after bankruptcy.

Permanence is is a protection short term and long term.

This is flexible, meaning you can optionally choose not to

make payments and not be in default and things of

that nature and how those conflicts will affect bankruptcy and

how this will affect the freedom of the authorities to

solve a failing institution.

And as a general rule, the more.

So perhaps equity is the basic component of capital.

And in more equity like you are the effective protection

it gives you according to this shopping list of desirable

properties.

So you're looking for things that are equity and looked

like look like equity, and it's only evaluated based on

these four bullet points.

So this becomes extremely complicated.

You sort of boringly.

So I went and discussed the possible codes in the

next section of tell you what is comes from.

But in the current regulations that apply to all of

your countries, I promise you, regardless of where you're from,

assuming you're not from North Korea, Cuba.

And this gaggle, of course, now in front of North

Korea and Cuba.

But in most countries, all of them are verbal people,

but not those two.

If you want to hear from North Korea.

I'm not sure that of the regulations apply to either

place, but this is my speciality.

So equity is called c.

E.

T.

One.

Common equity tier one that is equity assets minus liabilities.

See, it's called See if you want.

And in banking I to the fossil fuel regulations you

know basically the law and then it's split into two

categories.

She wanted to.

She had one capital T, one is ct1 plus preferred

stock plus retained earnings.

She had to consume is revaluation reserves, hybrid instruments, subordinated

debt loan reserves, undisclosed reserves.

And by the way.

The details differ by jurisdiction.

So the national differences may affect what goes into what.

So in some countries an instrument might be tier one

and another tier two and the third country not be

not be allowed.

So this I don't want to get into this into

this detail.

I'm just simply giving you what is typical shopping list

of things that make it into property.

So seed capital is tier one cost to be used

to tier three capital plus no more in current regulations.

It gets more complicated.

So capital is actively because all the things.

It could be a 30 year bond, usually one which

is subordinated, meaning the default losses the first.

So it's a long term funding.

It could really serve you control down.

They used to have convertible bonds, but the banks up

used them.

So that's.

But they're no longer allowed by the the convertible bonds

is.

We mean.

One of the main reasons why we thought banks were

highly capitalised before 2008.

Well, it turned out not to be capitalised.

So convert to host can be converted from debt to

equity.

I'm not allowed in.

However, they are allowed in something else.

So it becomes complicated.

And it does not involve Cocos.

If you accept indirectly.

No, this is a basic statement of the health regulations

work capital people are equal to assets, liabilities, equity because

of the things.

The capital ratio is capital divided by assets.

And that has to exceed Songs Festival called for.

I called out Fight for the purpose of my slides.

An 8%.

So I'm going to take you through a series of

numerical examples to try to drive the point home.

So imagine competition is $12.

And this is a $100 capital raise.

The minimum ratio is is 8%.

Therefore, the capital ratio of 12.

Capital divided by assets is 10%.

You exceed the regulatory minimum.

And because the leverage ratio is the inverse of the

two.

It is not this hundred divided by 12.

I want you to be careful of one thing I

should tell you when I get to.

So now you see how increasing the cup ratio reduces

leverage.

No.

Too important to keep highly practical post.

To keep in mind you.

First.

A bank is declared bankrupt.

If.

Capital over assets falls below the threshold.

Fuck that is not legally bankrupt.

Its assets minus liabilities is negative, is declared bankrupt before.

So therefore it's different than other corporations, I believe.

Even though I am not an expert in law by

any means.

So keep in mind that banks bankruptcy is defined by

the threshold.

This happens before you run out of money.

And this means, of course, that the idea is loved.

The hope is not to declare a bank bankrupt before

anybody loses money.

Let's hear the.

Of course, it doesn't quite work in practice for reasons

of how to show you.

So this is all clear.

So now you understand the basic principle of the capital

ratio.

How can any of you detach it?

Now we get into the bad stuff.

Suppose the bank loses 3% of its assets.

This is $3 in my local example.

Well, you subtract three from both the numerator and denominator.

But because the numerator is a small denominator with lots,

the chance in the numerator is 12.

Minus three is a big number.

100 minutes vs a small number if the capital ratio

falls from 12 to 9.3.

What this means in practice because of high leverage, a

relatively small loss.

A highly leveraged bank can drive it into bankruptcy really

quickly.

And a fee for sample assets is not a huge

loss.

So what are you seeking?

Credit Suisse over the past few months?

That's exactly is what everybody's looking at.

It's exactly this type of calculation.

So.

Even if even if $1,000,000,000 may not be a lot.

The Credit Suisse.

If it starts driving towards the threshold and it happens

quickly, then it can go to bankruptcy for that reason

alone.

For this reason.

Banks and all the capitalist.

Highly capitalised.

So there's a buffer between the minimum and the key.

What happens is as you get closer to the threshold,

the government monitors you more and more and more intensity.

So by the time you're almost 8% critical and is

probably probably running off the clock running itself a half

percent.

No, there are two types of capital ratios.

And now I want you to not get confused.

I use the term leverage ratio differently in the chapter

on torture industries.

Leverage ratio and bank regulations have some definitions.

There are two ratios to capital ratios Leverage ratio.

Risk weighted ratio.

Leverage ratio in banking.

Means tier one capital divided by total assets.

What's the definition of race relations?

And that has to be 3%.

So a minimum of 3% for the.

The problem with leverage ratio is it treats all assets

in the same way.

If you lend to a safe entity, often compute so

that you have a government.

The risk is the same as a loan to a

riskier hotbox.

But the Japanese government.

So therefore.

Because capital is expensive.

You have an incentive to make loans to the riskiest

borrowers.

Because of the because of the lack of sufficient.

Before 2008, American banks regulated based on a leverage ratio.

And European banks regulated by the restraint ratio so defined

in a few minutes.

But now that's no longer the case, as I'll make

the case for later.

So that means obviously you risk way.

The higher the risk of a loan is, the bigger

the risk rate.

Meaning the smaller the denominator becomes.

This is a big, big, big moment and it becomes

the smaller of the cotton operation.

So let's.

Make it slightly more complicated.

We have two assets low risk A1 and high risk

assets a two.

And now the capital ratio is the capital provided for

risk weighted assets one.

Plus risk weighted assets.

So how do you get the results?

Well.

I told this to you before, and now I can

make the point clear by law, regardless of where you're

coming from.

I think.

Government bonds are, by law risk free.

Which, by the way, this made for a very peculiar

treatment when Greece defaulted ten years ago.

So the Greece action people did is Ponce got it

cut it by 50% but still funny Wall Street.

Which does not make any sense whatsoever.

And I don't know of a country that doesn't do

that, but there's no European Union peculiarity.

There is an EU directive to that effect, but every

country does.

Why does the government make its own plants risk free

by law?

Come on, give me a kiss.

Be cynical.

But I want to make more government bonds risk free

by law.

It was interesting.

Not because he was more cynical.

Over the concept of anything.

No, there's no confidence of him being discussed.

Republicans have expressed.

How often is in their performance.

Yes, what I'm saying is often zero.

Well.

In effect, it artificially increases demand for those bonds because

banks can hold them.

And thus one step more correctly is one step further.

Because it is a cheaper way for them to then

it isn't like it lets them fill their refresh rate

requirements.

Okay, well, you're correct.

It's a way for the government to finance itself cheaply.

Yeah.

Because the capital regulations force banks to own government bonds

A and B, because it counting treatment by law.

So is it under your account the state of any

other asset class in accounting, which is what law companies

have called treat this asset as perfectly safe.

What?

But the economist that we know that's not possible.

The less you put into the Central Park office in

Central Park and people.

So it is the same thing.

So.

Economists call this financial repression.

No.

And I'm not going to spend a lot of time

on this.

But in the EU, this has been a huge problem.

If you take the United States U.S. banks.

I thought we could own about 3% of U.S. government

bonds.

Italian banks and German banks own almost 25% of Italian

bonds and German government bonds, respectively.

And one reason is the way the ECB used to

do QE.

They had issued reaffirmed bonds to do it.

So.

But then the problem, of course, is because the risk

free these banks look artificially safe in case discovery stops

people, things creates all sorts of interesting discussions.

But basically in the EU, it is certainly a concern

how much government bonds are owned by their own banks.

It would make much more sense if the French banks

all the time government bonds and Italian banks own French

government bonds.

Not in this sense, but perhaps they post to buy

bonds to subsidise the foreign governments.

Yes.

So just besides the liquidity controls or.

Is a.

In the national jurisdiction.

And it's an EU directive.

But I mean, so like for a U.S. bank with

like a very low.

Yeah.

If the thought is that the U.S. government.

Would be replaced.

So basically, what's the law and what's regulation become slightly

blurred?

Yeah, it's in the rule.

The banks are required to treat us once.

Even if it's done.

The US, not us.

So if you own your own bonds, what you want

generally.

This means that if a French bank owns Japanese government

bonds, which are basically triple.

You have to put put a high school on top

of the.

It used to be.

So always people were more discreet, but that they changed

with us, you see.

So.

No.

Currently, government bonds in the own government have a way

sell.

A truthfully rate of cooperation might attract one.

While a triple C corporation might keep rates might be

waited this open six.

A lot of wealthy borrower with a steady job like

might attract weight of 15% while a loan to somebody

with no assets.

And irregular employment might await or prompt seven.

So this is also how the government.

So therefore, by changing these ways, the government can also

direct bank lending.

This is a very sneaky way for the government to

contract with banks, lend money to Athens regularly.

The change these rules include, for example.

Just one recent example.

And technically high risk loans are called subprime.

Now we get pro cyclicality.

Suppose a company is.

Suppose a company is doing well, it's that has risk

weights 20%.

Economy enters into recession.

Company has the same amount of debt, but the risk

on its debts might go to 40%.

So we see that as we get into recession, risk

weights could go up and in good times, risk rates

go down.

The problem is this is highly pro-cyclical.

How can this place be positive to continue along with

the example I gave you earlier?

Right.

So this is the example that started out with $12

divided by risk with a one to make it simple.

$12 divided by $100 is 12%.

The meeting the constraint of 8% because the bad news

or the economy went into recession, the risk was increased

to 1.5.

You both lose $3 in the numerator.

You lose $3 on the denominator.

But now that is increased because the risk with my

pocket.

So all of a sudden you are no longer meeting

your risk constraint.

This is pro-cyclical because if you take off, basically unless

you have, as I told you the first week, unless

you come from the United States.

Almost all men beat New York country clubs.

We have banks in Spain.

It's like 94, 95%.

Germany 92%.

UK TV clean 4%.

I mean, basically every country in the world except the

United States.

So this means if the economy gets into a recession,

the risk rates go up and bank losses happen, banks

lend less.

And because banks lend less, there's less investment, less consumption.

The economy contracts.

Q More losses, higher risk based cyclicality.

It's a direct cyclical mechanism.

No, if you follow or have noticed in your home

country controversy over lending to small and medium sized enterprises

over the past ten years, for example, within the EU,

this has been highly controversial.

Why would banks lend more?

Why do German companies have no problem borrowing?

Well, companies in Italy and Spain can afford.

Highly controversial.

Why can big companies borrow but not small companies for.

What is because of these risks?

After the crisis, they increased the risk late on the

economy and as fairly small, medium sized companies and increased

the risk weighed on small borrowers.

So.

Q Money flows into the big companies and money flows

into Netherlands and Germany, but not into small companies and

not into issues.

So by just tweaking those two sentences, how you come

this way.

But we've done right.

It's led the EU significantly across several categories and across

borders.

Yes.

But think the same.

This was more.

Let's go to you.

Mr..

So it's still.

Okay.

It's long.

I mean.

I mean, what you need to keep in mind.

Right now I'm giving you an abstract definition for risk.

I'm just showing that basic the basic calculation of the

connectedness to regulation.

So for Mexico, this is certainly is the law in

every country you are from.

Let it be conscious of where you are from.

Okay.

Yes.

So they want us to go what we want plus.

And they will go up this risk.

But it's great in this.

Place, this highly competent, highly accomplished youth.

Etc., that the.

Can can I.

I can explain a little bit.

A little bit for you.

I was.

Okay, let's get to.

Because I need to.

I need to discuss current regulations before I do the.

Okay.

So in Switzerland, there's a lovely city called Castle.

Anybody from Boston.

By the way, however.

Right.

I see.

For those of you who don't know, peculiarities of European

geography lives, it's an intersection of Germany, France and Switzerland.

You must walk from one country to another, one step

each direction you go from one country to another.

And the Apostle Airport isn't Germany.

But it's fun to walk out from one site.

You have to Switzerland altogether.

France, Germany, France, interest home check.

But the whole cycle of all things.

The reason why.

These is called fossil fuels because the Bank for International

Settlements was identified in a few minutes.

But.

Backgrounds.

Until 1978, banking regulations were exclusively domestic.

Each country would decide on what regulations it wanted.

Frank Loomis So in the years after World War Two,

that didn't matter because banks were not allowed to operate

across borders.

There were a handful of exceptions like Citibank could.

But they were primarily to servicing American companies abroad, a

total of 17 German companies overall.

They do not really operate beyond what this.

That was changing after the Bretton Woods collapse.

After the Washington consensus that helped open the capital account.

Maybe you could at best buy for support.

This all happened in the early seventies.

I told you about the banking crisis that happened the

first bank in Germany I told you about earlier, 1974.

I mentioned Ambrosiano and mentioned KCCI.

And the reason I discussed all three, they were a

major impetus for global regulations on bank and support to

pass on regulations named after Pass Switzerland.

By the way, you don't pronounce the French for farm

regulations.

The city's two main bars in France and Barcelona, Germany

most also do possible.

Tip offs are not the first.

This makes it very confusing in this country, as the

Brits pronounce fossil defence defensively.

They say follow.

But then they saw the farm regulations and decided on

parcel to be slightly more confused by European peculiarities.

So we've been just basically circling.

A lot of us would point.

Just come in and do some explanation of what.

That what I talked about for cases I talked about.

First of approaching a thesis, you are running.

Your record of what you.

Would hear because you have missed a lecture.

You have a promise.

In the book, I discuss all three.

The P.C.C.

And I remain interested in the same set of standards.

I discussed all three.

So to meet the UN entity called the Basel Committee

on Banking Supervision, p c P.

S was established in 1974.

It had two major financial centres of the world at

the time.

Quality time.

Which included its.

We all felt this in Luxembourg.

It's just not a big country because the person who

was the impetus for doing this second was from Luxembourg.

And I thought, Well, he did all the hard work.

Let's keep looking with a half membership to the Hoffman

machine.

No, they are hosted in.

But distinct from the Bank for International Settlements in Basel,

Switzerland.

So you can be careful about this.

The secretariats mean the administration offices are held posted facilities.

But these are separate government organisations and you should not

confuse them if you're ever going to talk about these

things.

You need to know the state.

They don't possess any power as such.

They are a vehicle for agreeing on common standards across

the regulatory body.

Individual member countries then implement the regulations.

Currently they are a subcommittee of the G20.

Which, as you might have noticed, left in Indonesia last

week.

A list of the two.

I don't.

So.

So what can this I mean, I don't want to

get into this work in a statesman of G20 includes

United States, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Indonesia.

South Korea.

Japan.

China.

India.

Saudi Arabia.

Turkey.

I mean.

I mean, I'm.

I'm reaching here, however.

Right.

So basically what happens is they decide, they come at

us for membership, they decide on the regulations.

They commit themselves to implement them domestically.

And if you're not from a G-20 country, if you're

still European, the EU imposes on all EU members.

And.

If you're not in that category either.

Every other country in the world also a boxer.

Because if you don't follow the and regulations, you are

essentially told the world you are outside of the world's

community, most financial community.

So just about every party is the banking system implements

fossil sweep.

If you go to North Korea without any private banking

system, you don't need to follow this.

But if you have private banks, you probably do have

this in some shape or form.

Christians.

Within this, there are three main areas attracting capital charges,

a capital charge in this language.

Is something that makes banks have to hold.

So that's a technical term.

Capital charge means you do something, you lend money to

Trump.

Dilution was a risky person.

But the traffic cop in charge.

AII banks to hold capital intensive loans that he made

to me.

It makes me.

Just as just in linguistic technical language the use.

And there are three types of areas requiring capital.

Operational risk, which is I.T. systems, which is the front.

Anything to do with the bank's operations, not do his

job properly.

They have to hold capital against the staff.

Banking book, which means credit lending in a broad sense,

and trading book means things you trade on the open

market like stocks.

Now, this becomes complicated because what is in the trading

book and what this is a very penguin book.

And when U.P.S. went bankrupt in 2008, it is because.

They were trading credit.

How was credit?

But they were treating it as a banking book assets.

So therefore they have high risk bonds, basically junk bonds.

But because of capital investment, they have a risk free.

Just because of the peculiarities of calculated risk.

And the banks are very active in moving things around

categories and therefore you can increasing them under regulation stipulating

what is what.

I do not.

I mean, I think it's a whole course on the

classification of these three groups, if I was really, really

important.

So Basel Basel Committee was set up in the early

1970s.

We have undergone three revisions of.

What a fascinating court it is, this growth of regulations.

The first was set up in the year 1992, lasted

until the crisis in 2008 and because of the crisis

in two.

And then parcel two was meant to take over.

But because of the crisis, it was recognised that Parcel

two wasn't that good.

And then this started, we decided Parcel three.

Which has I think is still not fully in effect,

but has legally been put into effect from 2019.

I think they do cope with and I think there

are still some parts not fully implemented.

And I suspect by the time you people retire, you

will be a fossil fuel.

I would not expect fossil fuel to have for the

next ten or 15 years.

See the time between the sticks.

1992 to 2000 2008.

In fact, it was 15 years.

These are big global agreements and they require a very

huge amount of lobbying and national concerns.

They are extremely slow to negotiate.

And now we have a little something extremely small.

With your Apple Music library.

You can ask me to play a radio station or

ask for your music on a different.

Q So please tell me how Syria decided to swamp

this one.

Good to see you soon.

Did you just listen to me?

By the way, did you hear of Facebooks?

Artificial intelligence aid must be.

Fantastic for Facebook.

Thought to have really fun.

The next level of aid they create and to.

Summarises scientific papers.

So every bit of bibliography research you just asked me

Facebook and can you give me all the relevant information

on the scientific topic.

And then you found out after three days that it

could distinguish between fake science and real science.

And couldn't connect, cautioned fighters, etc., etc. So Facebook had

to withdraw all but pledged to become the conclusion of

fitness.

And so forth.

But also what might be implemented.

It is being discussed that any policy exhausted of 2003.

But you're not seeing any major discussions yet.

So I wouldn't be surprised if you had to wait

20 years for it to be implemented.

So.

I'm going to take a break of after after the

next after this flight.

So Parcel One also lost a member of Congress in

1992, and the reason it was signed eventually was because

of Japan.

If you have been living in London or Frankford, Paris

or Washington in 1985, you could have very long you

had a 40% chance of borrowing from a Japanese bank.

This might be surprised as you never see the enemy.

I mean, all the Japanese paying for the costumes, the

city and I've been in a few, but now we

all use these Japanese companies.

Then we speak major banks.

The reason why the Japanese space is so big is

because they're required to 4% capital of banks in Europe

and the United States requires an 8% capital.

That meant the lending was cheaper and riskier than taking

over the European U.S. banking market.

European banks said he was it eight games, 4%.

Also, that must make the Japanese corporate.

When I was working at the Bank of Japan a

few years later in Tokyo, they called Pass and won

the anti-Japanese support.

Because what happened is when the Japanese banks had a

few years to increase competence of what to eat, that

almost cuzsome of the bankruptcy was a major contributing factor

to Japan.

Having a major crisis in 1992, from which it is

very far from recovering to say.

Japan has completely two histories before 92 and after 92.

A positive one was a big contribution to that.

This is an excellent.

So let's take a quick break and then we continue

on with the rest of the stuff.

I mean, I didn't realise.

You see things like that one.

Things that I didn't even know.

You could put.

But.

You know, it's funny.

Yeah.

It's always hard to get there.

So I called and said, Let's go to Singapore.

Right.

I mean that.

That's why I was doing this for five years, especially

with all the money and.

This is one of the difficulties, so much so that

I asked him to do something on this book.

I think for that because I would have thought I

would have voted.

I don't think seen it on the subway.

So, yeah, I just you know what I do know.

But I think I think I think in the words

that it was about to be the starting point because

I want to get there.

So, yeah.

I don't know.

I think that I think it was that kind of

thing.

Yeah.

It's interesting because, you know, I do realise I mean,

I'm not ready to say I was like, Yeah, but

I want to know what I want to know.

That's why I like to call it this way.

Those are the things like this.

And this is all kinds of laughter.

And so it's really just I think it's just this

because I don't know.

I don't know for sure.

Because I able.

But I do wonder if the case has changed.

You know, obviously.

Time for us to do so.

So if you could use the other.

Yeah.

If she could give me a list of all places

for the girls.

Oh, man.

Yeah.

I mean it.

Good.

Like I always say, the only question.

I think I very special.

Like the people on the street in the first part

of.

Quiet.

I like to sell tobacco positions so I can continue

on with the the the.

And I will be able to ask you a question

in a couple of minutes.

Boston one was seen as working properly.

Successfully.

That is objectives.

It does indeed define the types of eligible capital along

the list of what I said earlier.

So this set the framework.

It set the capital ratio of 8% of risk adjusted

assets, but it was recognised at a time that the

way that did the risk assessment was for it defined

always, always city governments at risk.

We know that a lot of always city governments are

very far from being risk free and it created and

this is some that not gone away incentives for enormous

amount of financial engineering to do what is the most

capital structure of the trust limit.

So this is a very lucrative business for lawyers and

accountants.

What it means is some parts of capital costs more

costly than others.

And so capital structure of the trust is all about

making capital look.

But not being costly to the bank.

So in the crisis of 2008, many of the banks

and I used amount of capital also failed because capital

proved to be an illusion of use to mistake.

This is a very profitable business to be in.

If you're looking for a well-paying consulting job.

Capital structure of the trust for everybody.

Every bank of note does this.

They soon afterwards introduce market risk because the risk of

losses in your trading book is a concept called value

at the time.

Not discussed in this course of all is couple of

things.

Value of risk was created by Jp morgan and incentivised

to load the capital.

It's estimated to the reason they came up with value.

So it could reduce their market confidence.

Jp morgan proposed in 1993.

Thought it was time to pass regulations.

1996.

No, no.

You get to your question.

This took two internal models.

Let me discuss that on this slide.

Here.

So this slide summarises the previous two.

So the bank sector holds the profit and against credit

risk, the bank can cook market risk for the U.S.

trading book, an operational risk within that.

There's one very important group of banks.

This turned out to be particularly controversial in Europe and

especially controversial in Germany.

This particular issue.

Class of 3000 was initially intended to only apply to

the largest bank.

And that is not a problem in Japan or the

United States or the United Kingdom.

We will change the law.

Most of the countries thought it is a huge problem

in Europe because politically it means different regulations for the

biggest banks and the non big banks.

In Europe.

We have all we have this European Union is level

playing fields in this.

Throughout the EU regulatory structure and the EU push for

law enforcement capacity.

This applies to all.

Which is was something strongly opposed by the rest of

the world.

EU conflicts will.

However, now we get to your question.

Turn this risk, please.

There are two ways I find what's called the stand

up or advanced approach.

Standardised approach, says the Government authorities classify things in the

classification of risk into categories.

So that might say, for example, hypothetically speaking, more and

more work is given to someone like Trump.

Danielson attracts a certain risk, let alone given to a

certain type of company, attracts a certain risk.

Weight loss is standard best approach, and that's the approach

used by most banks that are not very thick.

They just take them by the government and not in

terms of risk.

They use the profits.

And what that means in practice is that it's just

a bunch of consultants BlackRock's out of thin air into

the quickest, especially for them.

So the banks to outsource all of customisation what to

an AA and consult by consulting.

If you are very big, you can use what's known

alternatively as the advanced approach or internal rating.

Based seems to say for longer.

Internal ratings basically means the bank rather than analytical engine

classifies everything it does in the risk categories.

So the bank's a risk model.

And that risk one says this loan of this asset.

Yes, this restates the idea being that all these banks

are sophisticated and they know what they're doing.

The problem, of course, is both approaches have problems.

We standardise approach is highly critical.

Because.

It classifies all risk in the same way, and they

may expect to be at this risk in the same

way we are using the same services from Citigroup.

The advance approach for the IFC approach approaches, the less

prosaic you could sit back and do what you want.

But here the problem is if banks can end up

cheating or optimising, depending on what language you want to

use.

Yes.

Both supervised by.

Oh, yes.

And I have not the next thing else to say

it, the EU, the ECB would very closely scrutinised the

models used in the advance.

Banks are underneath FEMA suits and they cannot do what

they want.

The problem is this is really is the reason why

this has become so controversial and particularly controversial in Germany.

It's for the following reason.

This sector has very high fixed costs, treating everybody the

same.

So the biggest banks can easily pay the big fixed

costs, but the smaller banks find it difficult.

Well, most countries don't have these small banks.

Germany has a huge number of small banks and they

are absolutely curious about being treated the same as everybody

else.

If the company is to compete politically, submit to an

extent you don't see in other countries nearly as much.

Yes.

What I don't understand is.

What kinds of things?

Yeah, but Germany, as I said, doesn't go.

Because of your collection of small things.

What did you think?

But I said, What?

Know, it's a competitive advantage of the spark hustle.

But I felt like the small things that the juniors.

What do you think about last week?

Yeah, but I mean, six months is no small things.

To take the next one.

The UK is projected to lose by a small factor

this year.

It wasn't important in the lot of the EU countries.

It was important.

The problem is, is that you then add on top

of the low arguments.

The consequences, I suppose.

Supposed this get into this.

Okay, So this is the stuff that we have a

lot of questions.

So let me let me then to Policy three, which

is what we had a moment.

So Basel, too, was meant to take effect in 2008.

The crisis not yet related to the patient.

The United States never put it into effect.

Very quickly after this crisis, this committee decided on.

The next round of regulations called fossil teeth.

It was wrongfully in, implement, implement.

It was mostly agreed to go to 13 to some

years to refine it and a lot of things were

affected.

The operation of 2003 from about 2015 60.

While still hasn't completely taken effect, it is like a

99.9% already.

In effect.

And there's a huge number of things in fossil fuels

that we do not want to discuss, but I do

want to discuss the technical details.

So a.

Banks have to have.

8% tier one capital.

Off which.

4.5% at least has a, b, c, p one common

equity tier one and.

Well, actually, I know more than 1.5% of additional instruments

retained earnings preference share something like.

She had to camp and soon has to be at

least 2%.

And that includes this.

All the characters I just mentioned.

We then have three or four more clusters of this.

So the first is called cognitive conservation, but.

I think the conservation that sits on top of Tier

one and two two fully composed of C one should

not be a C it it tends to be C.

If you want to take a picture of this, we

can remember to fix it.

You see it in one of the.

Now when COVID hit two and a half years ago.

Si Taiwan was launched.

So what happens is c one is a buffer.

Directly related can increase or decrease based on a bank's

specific circumstances.

So when things are looking good, the banks have to

hold two and a half percent of C at one.

But in a recession, the authorities can reduce that to

CEO.

And this is what happens in most countries with COVID.

They would use the capital factors to zero.

Yeah, they do that, too.

Increase lending is to incentivise banks to increase funding to

keep the economy afloat.

Well, the idea was didn't work, but it was the

idea was that if they could cheaper to lend, the

banks would lend to companies, but then more into the

economy.

It because what it does is it lowers the cost

of living.

It's another thing like I mentioned a few minutes.

What the data shows is that back then left more

than half of the fire on the floor.

So the banks didn't want to take risk anymore.

Chicago.

You can change to control and control banks, but you

can't force them to.

And offensive things to play.

The all the fine requirements affecting finances and leverage ratio

says minimum tier one of total assets has to be

at least 3%.

So there have to be two plus two types of

buffer.

Something is one risk weighted with the tier one and

two, two and one total asset focus, which is the

last one.

But it gets more complicated.

We also have the countercyclical capital budget, which affects all

banks in the country.

So if the country is in a boom.

You could impose up to two and a half percent

of extra capital requirement banks could have composed of C

if one.

And if the whole country goes into recession, you could

reduce that to zero.

In COVID, they all should roll with CCP compensation.

Compensation or.

And it's called countercyclical because it's explicitly designed to come

through on it, become the cyclical mechanism.

I gave you an exception a little bit earlier.

And finally, for banks classified as systemically important.

Well, this gets more complicated.

Because.

Luxembourg has suspended important banks.

Germany has suspended important banks.

But the banks in Germany.

Locally, systemically important.

We mustn't Luxembourg.

Who cannot lawfully.

He said his globally systemically important banking system is the

biggest bank from Luxembourg, whose name I could be a

little more complicated.

Every country has.

So if you come from a big country.

Your 6ag suits.

If you come from a smaller country, you tend to

sit and not you six.

So that means total capital is the composition of all

of these things.

All clear.

We are confused about to make it more confusing.

So.

I am not going to get lost.

There are people who debate these ratios endlessly.

I'm not one of them.

I might take is both liberals and the parts of

risk weighted ratios that had their own pros and cons.

And to me it's sensible to require both.

That's my take.

That's my private take on this.

But of course, one can certainly spend a lot of

time on this.

Yes, sir.

And.

Maybe just an exaggeration of the chemical composition of particles

in the.

Because it could be moved up to one.

It's a minimum finding, but it's finding there has to

be that number one, the one the one that all

the two property can be moved up in the amount.

If somebody was reading the listings today, they were chosen

to run for classification, would it just come from somebody

deciding on a naming scheme?

Well, yes and no, because you didn't name the system.

I was confused.

If you were, you and I had to make up

an old name for a different.

This year later, the glucose doesn't work a single percent

or more than 10%, even if anything else is working.

And it's a blessing.

For me to repeat.

That is why the regulators doesn't want a signal plus

signal for a worker.

One more than 10% of the capital in a bank,

even if it wants more than that, is working there,

etc..

So.

You know, you are confusing.

That's what's happened.

So.

You did exactly in the state of the country because

you're conflating conflating come to us in.

She is the first person to make me look to

the concept.

No, no, I'm not asking in this contest.

But generally, ladies have been there.

So why do so?

What he's asking is why there's a single shareholder is

not allowed to own one X percent of a bank.

And if it owns more because of control, The reason

is that this is not the case in all countries.

So if you have India and India specific regulation.

So it's not that other countries all this is support

part of.

But the reason is because if a single person owns

or controls the bank, they cannot use it by forcing

the banks to lend to them.

That's the reason.

It's for the same reason you don't.

So you're protecting the banks from influence.

Because in the end, regulators and many people doesn't want

Indian corporates to promote their bank.

But that's not to say that's not the case.

More countries.

It's sort of.

Yeah.

I mean, I could spend more time on it, but.

But a lot of countries have similar regulations, but they're

all national.

They're not partial.

Then you have more purpose.

We have another buffer called the liquidity coverage ratio, and

that has been in effect for the past seven years.

No.

This ratio is sensible.

What it says is that the stock of high quality

liquid assets helps to a.

Divided by the total amount of cash flows over the

next 30 years has to exceed one.

Meaning.

The bank has enough cash.

I mean, hates purely can be more than cast but

it has to be directly cash converted can be converted

into cash at a moment's notice to help a loss.

Central banking services.

What do you think of the central banks it serves?

They have to be they have to have enough cash

on hand to meet or exceed the outflows over the

next two.

The reason for this is that before 2008, some very

large banks, they were they were making 30 year mortgage

with overnight borrowing.

So the funny thing is of all the night to

make 30 loans because overnight loans are cheapest.

So does this shorten the maturity of a number of

teachers because they were making money by led by borrowing

extremely short, lending extremely long, But what it could we

find those post 30 day loans.

The banks were facing bankruptcy in one day.

So what this means is that since you have enough

cash to meet all outlays over the next 30 days,

if something terrible happens.

Both the government and the bank have 30 days to

find the solution.

Is it basically what it basically what it means.

So I think the LCR is sensible as an instrument.

This reissue is not sensible in my view.

Net Staple Funding ratio.

It says it's the ratio and it becomes slightly technical.

This is the ratio of the amount of available state

and funding.

All of the required state funds can help to add

on slightly because if you know.

I need only to add another bullet point into it

because it doesn't make sense as written.

Problem is I have this endless debate with most of

the homeless people who put them aside for we're supposed

to.

It takes them out of the normal as a tool

too much and have to put it back in.

What it says is one we want to thank.

What is trying to do is is trying to introduce

a long term maturity match between borrowing and lending.

So if the bank is making if the bank is

making five year loans.

A certain fraction of the money for the five year

loans has to come by a five year bond.

So you have the maturity match the sources of money

that are left out.

And the critical point is one year.

The problem is.

If you are for one a year, you are in

for this.

If you have a loved one yet you're not in

for this.

The banks then respond by making 363 loans.

So the short two, the implementing the vague and then

tell the banks borrowers you can just roll this loans

over.

But if you're a corporate borrower you are faced with.

Having to borrow short term or long term projects or

pay extra.

This is again, costlier for the borrower.

Often this is the part the delays, especially during the

crisis and supports their housing loan companies delay delay for

24 years.

For 30 years.

How is it possible for them to raise money, the

kind of money they should appear once everywhere?

There's no problem.

You can search for the funds today.

For whom doing so.

Long, repeated by 20 opponents.

In developed countries, they are playing the game, developing.

So unfairly.

I mean.

So it is if.

If there's no reason why people to oppose it, any

you people have.

This prediction about the infrastructure market that comes out of

this?

I don't know.

I guess the report, Yeah, we could be fine if

we find this off this long forms entities, this move

type that keep liabilities, pension funds and insurance companies that

they've got to dispose of their pension funds.

Well, you people paying the pension funds you're expected that

they have.

That is around the year 2000, 2194.

You expect the dip.

That is 2090.

It's a 70 year maturity for your pension payments.

You start making the next leap from this year.

So the pension funds have had enough risk so they

buy long term bonds.

That's not very risky.

Insurance companies.

They also have to mature to match match liabilities and

assets.

So if an insurance company's insurance say.

I think insurance contracts can easily span multiple decades for

certain types of assets and they have to mature to

match.

Such as well.

And that is also.

So if you don't have a market for 20 or

30 year olds in India, it helps with China.

You don't have a lot of insurance companies and pension

funds.

Or you have very high inflation risk.

You don't have to take the risk.

One of these one of the two would be my

guess.

If there's been some funds of insurance for this that

exist ten, 15 years back.

And you've got private.

Sector.

And by the way, if you take it, it's a

special case because there's something this is a very you

said statistically the quickest all the gold in the world

is in households.

Because extreme mistrust of the institutions of state needs them

to take hold.

Goldman's a completely non-productive investment.

So you could ask yourself why?

Why are Indian households buying gold?

It's a return to zero.

Instead of buying bonds, you turn on what.

I think one of the biggest reasons is I mean,

it's just that Indian tradition has been coming up so

long that that's probably one of the most contributed.

The Yeah.

I divide as a jewellery.

I guess I get what you're saying.

I mean, like you and I agree to it, but

I.

I funny what you say by what you're saying is

I've been doing it very, very comfortably.

Exactly right.

So everything it just revolves around me.

However, a lot of countries used to have that.

It's not the.

Are you?

I think there's a high correlation between household gold consumption

into dowry and things of that type.

And.

And mistrust of institutions in society.

The second point of the idea that that makes sense

and the mistrust that know is absent.

Okay, let's move on.

I think I feel like, by the way, this is

a punch in the slightly irrelevant to this topic.

And finally, to make it even more complicated, we have

something called T.

Which is called total loss absorption capacity.

And to to play a little bit of his previous

question why this is called this may seem like his

call to luck in those a capital buffer because they

won't even recall the capital for political reasons.

But he called it something else.

It's a political space.

It's it's not a capital buffer.

It's a more relaxed set of instruments allowed into.

But it's not called capital.

So these are instruments that I continue to like, but

they don't want to call it capital and they don't

wanna use to capital in the definition.

So this effectively is not the capital buffer.

No.

I haven't updated this list for a few years because

it's a pain to do this.

But this is what, three or four years old?

I can't imagine it being a lot of changes to

it.

And within the GS of global adjacent categories about four

years ago when I made this new five.

But it's based on how big your city spaces received.

Jp morgan it was two biggest banks was the first

category.

I want you to notice one thing when you read

this list.

How many banks I Europe and how many banks and

small European countries.

So if you just keep on going down the list.

UK has HSBC, Barclays.

There's another one, this one here.

BNP Paribas versus German.

Credit Suisse.

Swiss.

BP via Spanish.

CPC.

France.

Agricole.

French.

No, dear.

Swedish sometime.

This is the Spanish section and all friends instead of

each other.

Griffiths.

UBS is Swiss Credit Union.

It's a concern that so many of the world's largest

banks are European because they say it percent its.

Basically said there is something wrong with the European banking

system.

The fact is so many so many European banks in

small European states.

And I would be especially I'm going to hear some

statistics on this a few minutes.

I would be especially concerned with Sweden and Switzerland.

So how do we know that?

Like I said, these these are just sample numbers here.

I choose our species annual report, and I hopefully will

never have to do that again.

So this is why this is still so resistant to

16 numbers.

But if you go to the annual report, sort of

regulatory addendum, this the regulatory information.

If you want to see this numbers updated, I'm going

to show you some updated stats in a few minutes.

Bloomberg has an updated cut for HSBC.

Total tier one capital was 172 billion.

Total assets were two.

Were 2 trillion.

375 billion is easily leveraged raise.

Leverage ratio.

The ratio of it to no because there are differences

in accounting rules.

Parts of cases we see are in the United States,

IFRS and all the countries, some hybrid or third countries

are different accounting rules.

So this is total assets.

Based on each national accounting system.

So when the regulator calculates total assets, this is the

same accounting standard across and across every party.

While total assets in the bank's books annual statement statements

based on national accounting rules.

Leverage ratio for HSBC was 5.4% risk weighted assets out

of Ltd..

857.

Of those cooperation, lending was the biggest part and retail

loans for a third.

And with the most generous definition of capital, Tier two

capital, its capital ratio was 17%.

So HSBC is seen as highly capitalised.

So now we get to the steering table.

So I, I actually do have this data updated because

I, I extracted the rule book every year, but I

forgot to update this table.

But I wanted to take a look at some of

the numbers of numbers that might concern you.

So this takes a lot, takes these people is discipline

and takes a lot of justice in her country.

So if you take the United States, Jp morgan, the

total assets in this old national comes.

$2.6 trillion.

The ratio of J.P. Morgan's total assets to the GDP

of the United States is up.

This means that even if Jp morgan is entitled to

default, it lost every single asset.

The United States would have no problems bailing them out.

But that's the takeaway point to you.

But on top of that, Jp morgan have leveraged space

to up 6.4%, a very good number.

Take China ICBC.

Almost as good 27 trillion renminbi.

But it's much bigger to China's GDP, and Chinese state

would have difficulties absorbing its total loss.

But it has a very healthy leverage ratio, a good

thing.

And when I look at this numbers, I look across,

I always start with a leverage ratio because no, no,

because it goes just like the Germany total assets of

1.3 trillion or 40% of GDP.

Now, Germany is not highly in depth and you could

have swap.

Deutsch, Just.

Default.

All the European states would not be able to handle

some similar flow.

Germany has a pretty low amount of public debt, but

the leverage ratio of deutsche is 4.1%, while the risk

weighted ratio was 17.5%.

I want you to compare and contrast those numbers.

So Toyota has always, as a bet, has a really

bad reputation in the community of people monitor banks.

And that is why it is so close to the

regulatory minimum 3% that a very small loss would trigger

it into bankruptcy.

Also sent a signal looking to see how small the

alarm is to auto in compared to ICBC in China.

I read the ratio of leverage ratio to risk weighted

assets.

This looks more healthy.

So this is signalling.

I thought this is a very clever in using financial

engineering to make things look better than they actually are.

If everybody who thinks thinks about this knows this.

Yeah.

There were so many rumours of what Bush went bankrupt

in the last couple of years is still low, is

very low.

And this is highly, highly connected to the rumours of

high prices.

Bankruptcy are directly connected to that low leverage ratio.

But however, let's make this slightly more scary.

UniCredit in Italy.

It's assets to GDP of 50%.

BNP Paribas in France is 86% of GDP.

It's a very small leverage ratio of 4.5.

UBS in Switzerland.

Total assets to GDP 135.

Percent and a fairly small leverage ratio.

I should give Credit Suisse something.

What?

I mean, I just picked the big one.

Let's make this.

These numbers are up to date.

So let me tell you how I calculated.

You know.

You know how big the space shuttle is and if

it hits 3%, it's bankrupt.

So the difference between if you just take J.P. Morgan's

case, you can 6.4% and 3%.

Tells you how far we've taken the Oakland A's from

bankruptcy.

Or how quick a loss it can take before it

goes bankrupt.

And if you then take that as a fraction of

GDP, you can see how big the loss is to

GDP.

So now.

I just lost two people.

So I think we see in China could lose and

this is a us Donald Trump's.

I think we see in China could lose $210 billion

before going bankrupt.

Jp morgan could use 18 $9 billion before they go

bankrupt.

It's just U.S. 64.

Mitsubishi 5636, for example, 36.

UPS 20.8 billion.

And RBC in Canada, 14.

And now?

We're getting into numbers that you could imagine could happen

in the past 18 months.

So while Jp morgan looks quite healthy, I see.

Preceded by healthy.

Now you can see the concerns of all about which

I am key enough, you see.

And UniCredit.

And if you take UniCredit, it would take a country

that already is affected 250%.

There's no ability to absorb how this is going to

pay.

Germany could absorb it.

So this is a really serious way to look at

bank stocks.

This gives you hope in this Credit Suisse.

It's small.

I for the purpose of this slide.

This slide is the because.

Problem with these rooms are some the to prepare.

So he's just part of the group, but.

Not this year.

But I think I just picked the biggest keeper country.

So.

When looking at their risk internally, these banks, they look

at these numbers and go, okay, we have to maintain

risk controls that mean we can't.

That means there's no potential for us to exceed these

amount of losses.

Q Let me rephrase the question with A No.

Okay.

So what he what he's asking is, are these banks

cognisant or do they appreciate the higher risk in their

face?

When I came, the case object was copied sort of

a few weeks ago.

The answer, of course, was it probably office offered in

Hong Kong that if someone expects.

Jp morgan was one of the prime brokers.

Goldman Sachs was another Mrs. Clinton.

Goldman Sachs could use this as well.

They they had very good increased risk management reaction.

So to me, it.

JP on this list you will the healthy.

They reacted quickly.

Credit Suisse.

And Mitsubishi is on this list.

Credit Suisse Mitsubishi.

They reacted very late.

We lost billions.

Why is all the opposite?

So if you are because if you if you are

down the list in the highly competitive investment banking world.

And the profits.

Is to increase risk.

So I think it's almost off track.

I think credit, the sort of Credit Suisse is an

example.

Questions.

Okay, so why does India not have a global systemically

important bank?

Further.

Just 47.

India is not a small country.

See that parameter of something looking at $4 trillion and

then thinking, well, you can.

Somehow I feel that that is a wrong way to

look at things because 141 I think the Indian population

is very have one by 140 something like the $1.6

trillion, whereas you know, you pay DST, so maybe 70

billion people producing $4 trillion.

So there's a big gap between these two.

That's why I don't want to look at things like

that.

$4 billion, you guys.

No, I mean equally.

So the but but India doesn't have international banks.

We don't have international banks because you will have international

banks when they produce a lot of wealth for themselves.

It is cleaner.

We are producing country is not producing anything.

Well, the reason India does not have international banks is

predominantly because of the historical legacy of the very heavy

in banking regulations.

That is the that is the predominant reason that I

would not be surprised if this in ten or 20

years in the in bank it was to teach.

And of course I was an Indian bank on this.

You know, collecting it down on the list.

Now I'm projecting how I would not be surprised if

so, if India continues on this trajectory.

Yeah, I would expect them.

Which would be a good thing, by the way.

Yeah.

Any questions, by the way?

So.

Let's take a quick break now and then I'm going

to challenge some regulations.

I just beat up.

My friends like the people I did because it's so

easy to.

I don't think so.

I suppose it is all about the High Commission for

my own business or something else.

The main concern is that this is.

Not a big, respected.

Indian state.

This is the state.

Yeah.

But you know what I see?

I see.

Yeah.

I says it is because they are the biggest crowd.

Yeah, that's right.

I love my kids.

Oh, I see.

So I can easily EFSI, HDFC Bank are the two

biggest predators.

So when you.

Look at these numbers, what a total assets using.

These because that's where that's a lot of this is

low but I would like to see it just to

be respectful.

Yeah.

I mean, I'm sure there should be something, which is

probably.

Yes.

Because they told me I'm saying this because I think.

Why do I have so.

In fact.

It seems that it.

Shouldn't be the most important to be the most important

thing.

Terms of private Banking.

ICICI You could not be overflowing with the biggest financial

assets.

Yes, I just wanted to get the clients.

I think it is good that the State Bank is

around senior point seven 7 trillion, so that was a.

Smaller.

Number that existed.

But let's just say I can't see it because it

usually is that.

I mean, as you said, you can get both in

the same with the registry.

You might not want to produce a paper.

I know, I know.

I'm certainly one that you said if you get the

same project through the next few, you see that you

should definitely, you know, it isn't even yet exactly what

all sorts of 70000000 my goodness.

Ruby, all of a sudden you come back.

Oh, yeah.

You.

Because I wasn't sure it's because of the license service.

Yeah, I know that.

That's not the reason for this is a Japanese fancy

Chinese place.

The only service here.

Yeah, but it's just like most of my friends, right?

Yeah.

Yeah, Just not all of them.

I like it, but not the other way down.

Because this is the place to see this.

Because this is about something.

Yeah.

This is why we give.

Yeah.

So.

So was the issue.

So yes, I am a bit worried that I know

my husband is.

Okay, people.

I feel like.

I'm created equal to my shopping list of challenges and

regulations.

I can do it quickly because there's a lot of

slides, but it's basically discussing each and every one of

these points.

So I would try to try to do it quickly.

You said you want to discuss macro proof before I

leave today.

So first problem with banking regulations is it is not

sufficient to say, here's a social problem that needs regulations.

When you start regulating, it creates secondary problems off then

the secondary solutions.

So you take a small step towards regulations.

But then you realise you if you take one, you

have to take a lot of steps.

So you can't regulate little.

Either you regulate everything or nothing.

This is this is why regulations end up being fairly

intrusive.

You then have the problem of a lot of countries

which see the banks are much better resourced governments when

it comes to regulating.

The regulators get paid little.

They have little resources to investigate private banks by the

government, by the private banks.

And let's have a lot more resources to fight regulations.

It was an uneven game when it comes to regulating

banks.

The third problem is the regulations transfer responsibility to the

state.

At this point.

This trick is tricky because the bank supervisors make it

private information.

And they have they the legal power to react if

defence failed his supervisors all sort of play.

And the banks know that.

And the banks therefore behave in a way that deliberately

shifts the burden.

With the government.

So the government has some responsibility for the bank failure

Mr. Banks can take advantage of.

And then we have the incentive for supervisors in China.

The traffic piece, the aircraft is that it used to

be five kilometres, but it threatened the space with an

aircraft.

Europe and the United States is about two kilometres.

Why is that the case?

The reason is that in China, like a traffic controller,

is an accident on his or her watch, they get

punished.

We get no reward if things go well.

So therefore, there is an extreme risk of this while

an infected controller in Europe or the United States, if

you have an accident and the required immediately, they don't

get punished.

If they don't report, it does get punished and it

can't move swiftly.

They get bonuses.

So the idea is that fuel they emit.

So the Chinese air traffic controllers are much more risk

averse on the way here because we see space between

aircraft is bigger than China.

What is the use of reporting after the accident?

Because because you can learn from it.

You see, if something happens, you hate it.

Almost happening.

Hate it.

And you can learn from it.

Plus, the Supreme Court is called if the queen sent

this report.

Things can possibly go wrong by all this sort of

hype and problems.

So so regulators continue to discovers.

And then you have the problem of tick the box

regulations, which is regulations comes with checklists.

We walk into a bank and you see you have

this in place.

Check.

You simply check this place.

Check.

But you don't look at the objective of regulation.

You just monitor whether you comply with something specifically if

you do this.

Okay.

If not, you get punished.

That means you could have very intensive regulations of a

composite.

So it's not enough to check post address complaints.

You have to check compliance with the objectives of regulations.

And then we have the opposite to risk aversion regulatory

capture.

So let's take the United States as an example, employee

vehicle.

So there's an aeroplane called Boeing 747 max.

This.

Many of you have flown in, I'm sure.

So important was developing this claim.

The regulator outsourced regulation two point.

Just think about it.

You have a company making aircraft.

They meant to be monitored by government.

If government asks your company to verify a company's compliance

with speculations.

Computers.

Or something.

That was the root of the problem.

The stuff is an aircraft.

This is called regulatory capture.

But the regulation that a government agency does not work

for society, that works for the regulated entity.

A very common problem.

And then we have the perverse consequences of regulations because

everybody tries to avoid them.

I'm just going to give you in the United States.

You have a huge problem of some control that controls

money market mutual funds.

Which doesn't exist anywhere in the world in the same

way.

But it's an institution that put money into that institution.

And it's almost like putting money into a bank account.

Money is much more safe.

The reason why these things exist is that because 60

years ago, the government of the United States.

For high interest rates when inflationary.

Makes no economic sense.

But this was part of the time 60 years ago.

So they had this regulation known as regulation Q.

It was a cap on interest rates.

So this meant if you if you put money into

a bank in the U.S. in 1970, they would give

you a colour TV or a motorcycle, a car.

If you had a lot of money, kids.

But according to interest rates.

But in response you've got this parallel taking money market

mutual funds to start this.

Even though the stupid recognition cables of almost 50 years

ago, these funds still exist, they still cause problems.

So you one bit of misguided regulations can create a

whole mess arrangement that lasts for generations and is highly

inefficient.

And then you have the problem of systemically important banks.

If.

Big, systemically important banks are very costly and very dangerous

for society.

Everybody knows.

So why do they not only exist, but why is

the problem of these banks becoming.

Because people have become.

Well, there are two reasons why.

One is the fixed and variable costs of finance and

the.

One problem is that the fixed cost of regulation, some

very high risk, means there's an increasing return to scale,

making you become cheaper to comply, and therefore you end

up with fewer, fewer fuel packs.

If you take the United States, the number of banks

in the US has been falling at the rate of

two and a half percent per year for the past

40 years.

Actually, a very steady rate.

So every year the number of banks to.

And the euro.

The ECB, as a matter of policy, does not want

fuel tax.

They want things virtuous.

They want fuel tax.

As a matter of ECB policy.

And then in crisis, because you have small banks of

faith and merging them with other banks.

And the older you would have because people banks.

But then you also see that all the threats in

the country are in.

This is the same slide as utility, by the way,

so I shouldn't have repeated to.

This is the issue of fixed and variable costs I

mentioned, and then we have to pay to change.

And here I am quoting the former attorney general of

the United States with a Senate testimony set.

I am concerned about the size of some of these

financial institutions become so big that it becomes difficult to

prosecute them.

Here's a context to this hiatus.

We see the Mexican subsidiary cases.

We see what's called money laundering for Mexican drug lords.

Which is not allowed.

But the U.S. government refused to prosecute the bank.

Because if you have prosecuted.

Second largest bank in the world going bankrupt.

And that could have caused a systemic crisis.

So because.

If you have a system, if you look back, it

is a secret.

The government should not prosecute the bank for crimes.

But it would have prosecuted smaller banks because by doing

so would trigger them into bankruptcy, which causes a major

crisis.

So too big to jail called get out of jail

card business like Monopoly applies to these big secrets.

And then we have the most really good top metaphor

of the Chomsky cut and is professor emeritus.

His office is upstairs.

And if you are from Hong Kong, Japan Society, the

monetary arrangement for the Hong Kong dollar for a few

years, of course, is still in place.

So he has this metaphor that says a very troubled

rise into a new town late at night.

She wants to go to Apple help.

But.

Taxi.

This one takes you outside this train station.

The trouble goes to the tax, he says, Take me

to the hotel.

And the taxi driver says no, because there's a sign

on the wall says local regulations require that at least

one taxi be outside the station at all times.

I see one taxi.

Come use it.

His metaphor is the best tool that can be used

in terms of failure does not work as an effective

protective buffer.

So capital punishment, given the protections, should have given.

And then we have what I've discussed many times before,

capital structure of the trust, which is there's so many

ways to manipulate capital legally and otherwise.

And equally, there are so many different ways you can

calculate the risk weights.

That is allows banks to manipulate the capital ratio as

well.

Then, of course, we have the problem I mentioned many

times before to mention again earlier today, this is banking

is parasitical and regulations.

Make the pro cyclicality be worse.

And regulations themselves.

A process of.

Because after a crisis, regulations get very intrusive, highly costly.

With them affects the economy in a negative way.

Causes.

This has been the problem in Europe in the past

decade.

And then you deregulate or you relax regulations which then

causes a boom.

Then justifies the need for more regulation.

So regulation, intensity and economic growth are also pro-cyclical with

each other.

And.

Because capital is based on the threshold 8% for the

risk weighted ratio or 3% for the leverage ratio.

It causes cliff effects, meaning everything is okay until you

get from them, but then everything is horrible.

So it sounds simple.

No problem.

A problem like that, instead of a smooth transition from

one to the other.

Questions.

Before I move on to Michael, approve this song.

And why is there something.

You know, sometimes it's just like a big national institution,

for example, with the former finance minister, you know, tends

to apply to.

Much is than Bush, even though great sort of system

is used to.

So you ask a very good question.

So.

So he's asking a specific question that's arisen in a

lot of countries where the two biggest bank conservative congresswomen

voted for almost two years ago and the finance minister

of Germany pushed for this.

You see, the same discussion happened in a lot of

countries.

It's because a politician.

So a lot of issues that affect a politician.

Some are short term.

Some are long term.

Systemic risk or financial stability is a long term problem.

So well.

Well, why don't you call Spike points if I can,

Congressman?

Both of this week.

Banks.

By merging them, you can maybe end up with a

strong book that.

This is a short term good for Germany, long term

to create systemic risk.

I don't know why he felt this way.

I'm just.

Trying to think like a politician.

Politician is trading off short term benefits against long plans

like the old only.

And by the way.

If you ever know anybody in the Ministry of Finance

in any country.

See their time horizon for problems is one week.

They think about next two weeks, five of them.

One year is eternity.

So, Minister, a famous decision, a very, very, very short

time, all of it.

The maximum is the annual budget.

We don't think beyond the annual budget.

So the all these are extremely short term in the

thinking.

I think that might have been one contributing factor.

You do this just as a political discussion.

You like to think.

Oh, you.

I think.

An optimal size of a pair is enormous size work.

The country can do the same and to trigger a

major financial crisis.

I mean, I know this is.

How did you find?

But if you take, for example, Jp morgan, given the

fact the United States could have sworn to stay with

Jp morgan without any problems of trust would not appropriately

horrible without major problems.

Jp morgan is is not to be a big part

of this.

I also put in line with the country can properly

deal with state.

And that is affected by a lot of things because

probably the drug problem in the United States is compounded

by the US being highly indebted and France to pay

exactly what Germany has looked at.

So there's a lot of factors that come into this.

Look.

I want to do this really quickly.

And actually, this is a short section.

It's not much content in it.

It's a lot of bullet points.

While prudential regulation is a new name for something we

used to know about.

If you have talked to.

A British or a German or American or a French

central banker in the year 1900.

The biggest concern would have been the stability of the

financial system of the country.

The operating backdrop crucial for modern Labour's.

Bye bye.

Bye bye.

2007.

If you ask the same person, the same job description,

they would have told you there is no chance of

a financial crisis.

They would say we have solved the problem of financial

crisis.

All we care for is price stability.

As it turned out in the fourth round, Robin Falls.

So in response to the 2008 crisis we get, how

did they use that?

We get macroprudential regulations.

And by the way, there is no single definition of

that.

If you go to the website of the ECB or

the Bank of England or the Federal Reserve, you find

multiple competing and inconsistent definitions.

So I make my own list.

This is a case of distilling what I tend to

see.

And I just want you to keep in mind that

this might not be what you are used to seeing.

It might be different in some of the contexts.

But my definition is.

You want to prevent excessive financial risk in your country?

You have to contain crises when they happen.

And you have to make sure that the financial system

contributes to the economy.

So these are the three objectives of Michael in my

book.

And there are two ways you can do that.

By how ambitious you want to be.

So what you say classify as passive is your focus

on rules.

The whole always hoped.

And have have effective rules for dealing with failure.

I often worry I have a favourite mark food.

And I mean, one should not have favour regulation of

any part of the US economy from X to excessively

something.

But my favourite food comes from the United States.

It says you can not fly as a regular person

in the United States.

Buy stocks, borrow money.

I mean, this has not been relaxed in 1928.

You borrow $10 to put at $1 for $10 and

pay $11 to the stock.

With Americans, it routinely.

In more of the ten countries average after the Great

Depression.

This was bought up as part of the ownership reform.

Said regular retail customers can not borrow to buy stocks.

That's my favourite block for food and that holds across

the site with all these foods.

Yeah, that's what regular people trade derivatives brokers are.

Well, this is because this has been complex like this.

This was this town for 70 years.

And this was never the case.

It was only in the United States.

From.

Basically.

New rules didn't anticipate derivatives.

This didn't exist.

You'll know futures in in the 1930s, the type of

derivatives you have now just didn't have.

Inconceivable that by the time the rules have been in

place, you can't to.

By the way, I don't think nobody should borrow money

to buy stocks, by the way, just.

It was a sale and so someone was put out

in the stock market.

The ambitious Michael proves they try to lean against had

been actively so if the economy is in a pool.

You tighten, say, increase bank capital, asset companies, cyclical buffer.

And in a recession, you lighten lighten the rules to

encourage more lending.

And of course, this promises to be very helpful to

the to the to the market, to the economy.

No, no.

We get into an interesting problem.

Who should run.

If you take most Latin American countries and you take

most Asian countries, it's the central bank.

If you take the United Kingdom, it's the central plains,

mostly in the United States.

It's all over the place.

The Fed is the central bank trying to gain control,

but finding politically quite difficult in the European nation and

in Europe.

Macro crude is the domain of nation states.

So usually means the central bank.

But the ECB is increasingly trying to gain control over

basically in Europe.

ECB is regulations is micro that does not do macro.

This is still the nation's great.

So why is it the central bank?

Central bank?

Well, the idea is that the central bank can create

liquidity on demand in it infinite amounts, and therefore in

a crisis, it's the only institution that can respond quickly

enough and forcefully enough to fight the crisis.

By the way, there is one footnote to be had.

You.

Some of the most powerful MacBook Pro Tools.

I'm about to discuss of tools in a second.

Implemented in countries like Hong Kong, like Singapore, like Malaysia.

Because this a connection between the degree of authoritarianism and

the ability to implement rational.

So much for Singapore can do for itself simply because

it's not a democratic country.

It's much more powerful in macro sense.

And Europe can do what the United States can put

Japan into.

So this is why you see it and you start

looking at the old country and the power of lack

of proof in your own country.

You can often directly correlate the power of macro to

the degree of authoritarianism.

Now in order to deal with microbrew, they have what

they called the tool kit.

So the kid is instruments.

When I met you with macroprudential regulations.

So these tools, they're meant to do something positive.

Perhaps you want to make financial institutions more resilient.

Perhaps you want to reduce leverage.

Similar, but not the same.

Perhaps you want to reduce interconnectedness of crisis to flow

across the system strategy as before.

Perhaps you want to be sure that the real economy

is still funded in the crisis.

So the micro pool tools are all designed to meet

some of the objectives.

I want to discuss two sets of tools in particular.

One is the real estate computer.

And this is really where you see this of authoritarian,

which is a normal authoritarian type.

So in the macro approach tool kit, there are basically

five major tools.

The first is loan to value ratio.

Which says if you buy a house.

We can only borrow 80% of the houses with.

In some countries in Europe, you borrow 120% of the

house.

Why would you borrow 120% of the value of a

house?

The son of Denmark and the Netherlands.

Because you can deduct interest on a mortgage.

So because you can deduct interest in a mortgage, you

own a sort of over control so that you can

lower your taxable.

And this means that most people in the Netherlands and

Denmark haven't been recently.

If the mortgage goes below, assume the mortgage, refinance your

24 to 30%.

This is completely, utterly stupid.

Different people have invented what they've over the phone and

that would be a plus.

Some say this is a huge house price problem, but

it's because they're trying to slow it down.

But it could be politically extremely difficult to prevent.

It took the billions of mortgages.

So nobody is facing a big problem if they have

a similar problem.

But it will go that six and seven.

I think they encourage people to borrow Swiss francs.

In.

Order for them.

No, no, no.

The last ten years before.

I did not get an answer before.

No doubt that they are on the verge of bankruptcy

because courts are reversing the decisions, ordered them to get

this lost back.

So this is exactly correct.

In Poland and Hungary and a few other countries you

could borrow from.

You could buy a house with of the money in

Swiss francs of Japanese yen currencies.

That's that's a cool rule that I also like, Danny.

But I'm just wondering, I mean, for interest, you paid

for open.

It must be higher than the.

Because if you give credit and the house prices call

you what you see.

I mean.

Yes, yes, there was a credit risk.

The full extent the credit history.

I mean, you would not see it in Germany for

obvious reasons.

But in the Netherlands, this is a massive problem.

And.

In this country.

You cannot be.

The United States is also followed, but not to the

same degree.

They have their own crazy, more consistent.

Their second rule is DTI debt service to income ratios

meaning.

If you buy a house, you can only borrow, say,

three times in annual income.

You can earn 100 in all only for three months.

The third is debt service to income ratios, meaning that

if you have 100, you pay 40 in taxes, you

have a 60 net income per year.

You can only borrow 20% of the.

Tax deductible interest rates, closing them and start due to

new taxes on selling houses.

Which is which is in this country.

They've been going.

So all of these tools are use to various degrees

in most countries in the world.

Both the countries most aggressive players in the Singapore, Hong

Kong, Malaysia, Thailand and Thailand.

Every country in that country is in the United States

is politically impossible to do this, any of this.

And in Europe, it's practically politically impossible to do this.

I mean, I was once completely lost sight of once.

In a conference with Europe on the talk on exactly

this issue and the way the regulators explained it across

the European Union member countries is the argument is always

if you do any of these things, you're preventing people

from buying.

Why are you preventing?

Why do you go on the train today?

But I tell people to come to my house in

the comfort of my house.

That's the argument.

You can't win.

That's a common.

Practice.

So this is this is.

And by the way, this is one thing Lucy has

not seen.

And in both Denmark and Sweden, the trend is just

a bit post cold.

So requirements.

So if you bought a house in central Copenhagen or

Stockholm.

The capital requirements on the mortgage to those parts of

the country are much higher for everyone else, so they

become more costly to buy a house in central Copenhagen

or central Stockholm and other parts of the country.

This was discussed in the UK or five years ago

and I never got to the states or the newspapers.

But I can promise you the opposition was so strong

in the political space because this was not feasible.

Christians if a woman.

So this is what I discussed earlier.

This one thing outside the developing countries.

I've talked about this before, but I want to reiterate

it because this is a correct space for this, which

is prevent inflows of foreign currency.

This connects a little bit to your pull this example.

Which is which is saying.

Consider the following.

You don't want hot money to come into your country.

You had restrictions on imports of hormones.

So we discussed this earlier in the context of foreign

exchange.

But this is really how it fits into the policy

spectrum.

And by now.

In developing countries.

This is very much a part of the macro toolkit.

As I said, this has been used in South Korea,

Colombia, sugar.

Just to mention a few countries.

Question before I move on.

In order to.

Be effective.

A microbrew authority has to be able to estimate systemic

risk and how it affects the rural economy.

It has to have effective tools to implement policy.

It has to be seen as legitimate.

It has to be seen as impartial and it has

to have, most importantly, political support.

Because all of these policies are unpopular.

But problem is remarkable to authorities they have.

Among all government policy domains, they have these power.

If you live it.

I know that you you people don't live in the

policy world.

Some of you will.

In the policy world, the most important is monetary policy.

Because that's the value of money.

That's what dominates everything below the field, like Oprah.

Nobody really understands how this works.

Everybody thinks it's important.

It doesn't affect anybody badly.

So, you know, if you don't have it, people get

taken advantage of.

So there's a lot of power in the political landscape.

Mark It's very often in conflict with the micro pool

within monetary policy, but is usually is subservient to them.

So in other domains, they tell Michael what to do.

Michael, could you not tell the other 2 minutes what

to do?

This becomes very clear both in terms of politics and

the real estate.

So if you take real estate.

House prices can rise.

There is a big reason for that.

In recent years, it's historically low interest rates.

Also historically behind that is government restrictions that prevent building.

And I can hardly think of a country that does

not increasingly restrict food supply.

So why is there no control over licenses to build?

There's no controls over.

Interest rates still hold.

This is a real problem to deal with.

So how can you deal with the problem when you

have no authority to deal with the root causes of

the problem?

I kept mentioning this measurement of systemic risk lists allow

me to be able to click here.

But here's a little story.

Or four or five years ago, I was in a

European Central Bank.

I can't tell you which one is on NPR, but

I can tell you the following story.

I was asked to give a talk, macro and micro

to the macro property and in my property.

And imagine a room like this one on one side

where all the macro people.

On the other side were all delightful people.

And the little boy, if you could just see that

they look like each other.

By the by that.

The fact is it is a question.

This is a huge problem, especially with this macro being

dominated by micro.

Now, this all connects to the problem of central bank

independence.

Now, I mentioned this before, but I'm going to keep

on repeating this.

The powers given to central banks are extraordinary for a

democratic country.

I'm going to pick up Janet Yellen, by the way.

It's no longer she was hired by by Donald Trump,

someone to replace her.

It doesn't change the argument.

Certainly, central banks in democratic countries are the most powerful

organisations of those countries in authoritarian countries.

Central banks are not independent.

But in democratic country there are.

So who is the more powerful, the governor of the

Fed or the chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff?

What has nuclear weapons in his arsenal?

The Fed does not have nuclear weapons.

Differences.

The chief of staff reports to the president.

And the chief of staff might have nuclear weapons, but

he could not launch them without the president given approval.

The Fed can do anything it wants.

The Soviet government approved it.

That's the difference.

So the Bank of England declared the ECB to have

no powers, no organisation in those countries have.

Now, this is justified in terms of monetary policy, because

for monetary policy, your policy objective is straight forward.

One measurement inflation.

2% once.

To tools.

The price of money and the quantity of money.

So you can delegate to an unelected, democratic and unelected

entity.

I think that the only way you can do that,

if the objective is clear, like inflation and you are

to succeed.

The lack will prove these causes fluffy and affects people

and also finding the because it faces a few steep

price of money affects everybody.

Backdrop food can affect symptoms in an individual.

That's a tricky thing for a central bank to deal

with.

So I think there's a paradox with more power in

the central bank, the less powerful it becomes.

I see the ECB is about to start seeing the

limits.

They keep on grabbing power.

Now they're very active in the east and the environment.

I think all that whole expansion could also lead to

increased political oversight by the European Commission.

I lose independence by people who walk home.

And then.

So we pay is you make the central banks do

you make these central banks will not go through because

they are the most credible institution in society and that's

a correct.

You might use the opposite.

But given the central thing.

Back liquefied petroleum like mackerel.

You undermine their ability to do monetary policy.

And I think that's exactly what we're seeing at the

moment.

The pain facing the country much harder to respond properly

with inflation because there's all of these conflicting objectives, so

affecting them on multiple levels that it didn't have.

And finally.

Let me just define that.

This is a single SIM smartphone.

This is somebody left.

I think all major macro potential economic events are political.

If you take the biggest financial crisis in the world,

two big things will entirely.

Almost everything big in the financial financial system in the

domain of Michael Prue is a consequence of a political

decision.

Good or bad?

But how can a central bank.

Are supposed to regulate financial stability.

Regulate politicians and he can't in the form of authoritarian

countries, it just won't be allowed.

And then democratic country is unacceptable.

So if the biggest risk factor facing central banks in

terms of executing the mission is the one thing they

cannot control.

I mean, can you imagine, Christine, I can't tell you

what to tell you.

The head of the commission, what you should do.

I mean, it's impossible.

It's not not acceptable, except a very small degree.

Or is it that all Donald Trump what do.

The leftist leftist is not possible.

And that ultimately, I think, takes us to what I

think is a problem that is something like running macro

through, which is a trade off between lack of democracy.

Faith in government and the ability to make difficult decisions.

If you're North Korea, you can do what you want.

Nobody keeps.

If you are Sweden when you sing, then you can

do a lot simply because the population trusts if government

is not out to get them.

If you're Italy, you should instinctively say, Oh, the government

is doing something.

They're going to harm me.

You can't reform.

We actually have difficult policies in countries where people don't

trust the government but still have power over what the

government does.

Are you a democratic state with lack of faith in

the state?

So this means we will both create what we want.

But in the middle, the worst place when it comes

to.

So questions before I stop.

I want to conclude.

I am not.

I know I'm gone a bit rapidly, but it is

just I do want to finish it today so I

can next week I can do both bailouts and and

foreign debt crisis.

So COVID 19 now I can discuss with COVID 19.

Reaction was, no, I've done regulations.

So when COVID happened two and a half years ago.

We saw several different types of policy in the actions

of power.

They were both in the category of supporting the wider

economy, supporting individuals, but.

In terms of regulations.

What we saw, as I said earlier, you saw relaxation

of capital buffers, both the countercyclical and the.

I don't have a price.

It's both a system wide and institution purposely lowered from

two and a half percent to zero.

The idea was the banks and big banks would lend

more to companies in difficulties.

And the empirical evidence was it didn't work.

Questions, people.

I know a lot of people.

Questions before I stop.

Yes.

I think Boston for my.

Be in effect in 20 years.

So is there any aspect of the puzzle?

So what has Fossil three has a huge number of

problems.

The problem with all of this is you have to

get a few 24 to.

So you have to remember that this would be very

difficult to get 20 countries to approve on.

Make a consensus lofty list with one of the G-20

members decide to work with some members on insights of

the very difficult to do so.

And that is not the companies.

So I would think you might see small changes to

policy.

But.

A whole big revision of the current political climate since.

There's one footnote we had to evaluate, which is that

it was a small change, but three years ago, something

called asking for permission.

It just came on with that.

Agreements in the first place is a pro cyclical product

of the global political economy at a time.

I would say like an even longer horizon positive.

We're headed towards.

A splintered environment where such generalised rules.

As necessary.

So what he is saying, what what he is saying

is we might be this might look, if I can

interpret what he is saying, is this not important because

the world is bifurcating into two or three pull of

two or three political senses and each one with its

own set of regulations.

The thing that I think is set.

At the most extreme.

Possible.

I'm not a political scientist.

I try not to give thumbs to your politics too

much.

But I would.

I would not be surprised if you would still have

the current regulations in place in 2025 years.

To be perfectly honest, I'm very, very surprised with those

two chimps.

And what even be in place when you retire from.

Okay, people, get on a plane.

So.

Lecture 10:

It's so good to see this.

So you know what I would do?

Yes.

No.

Oh, no.

How about you?

So know what you're doing now.

What exactly did you do again this time?

This is really supposed to be the.

Most interesting.

Kind of love.

What?

Yeah.

Yeah.

It's your best bet.

That's all.

Well, it's a good bet with this secret.

Is not good.

So let's try to deal with an elephant.

There's always.

I wasn't going to celebrate with.

One.

I used to play tennis.

That's right.

You want to know what kind of.

He's going to get.

With.

Just.

Her.

Right.

So that's where I sit.

Okay.

Good morning, people.

As you know, this is our last time together.

In the last few weeks and weeks.

The street a bit before we get into all of

this.

So unfortunate consequence of this institution being in Texas.

There's only one exam and not exams in the summertime.

I have nothing to do with this.

The way this school operates.

This one, it's not the according to LSU regulations.

Unless, of course, is the same structure.

If I change the ten strokes, I have to give

you a longer term.

And if that happened, the exam would look more or

less.

Look to.

The past years.

When you look at past, it says don't get too

concerned.

If you haven't seen a particular topic recently, talk to

people.

I mean, I always take the easy way to try

to be thoughtful about the things which mean something.

So what is this?

Something that I remove or it's something you would walk

from injury part of your brain walk in the exam

two years ago for obvious reasons, and most of them

were call coded four years ago.

So just keep that in mind.

The content evolves over time.

The structure is unchanged.

And the one very important couple of things, very important

to exams in.

Let's see.

Well, and this matters.

So I've taught this course and other courses in universities

abroad, and I guess the marketing standards are much, much

higher.

I have seen other universities locally.

So so basically what I've done is in the Europe

in European schools, what might have been seven or eight,

there might have been six or five here if you

had the same markings that would keep in mind.

And normally, as you see a longer what you would

expect from your home institutions.

I mean, I don't know that there are exceptions to

all of this, but my experience is that in LSC,

we expect more detail and longer pants than what you

might also be used to from your home institution.

Keep that in mind very much.

Secondly, most exams are not marked by the faculty members,

but by students.

I give them a detailed.

List of what is expected as soldiers and you hold

the faculty member.

But this means something very important.

Do not try to be clever.

In other words, if I ask for a answer, he

won't also answer for the coffee.

And students would think you're truly clever trying to answer

too many things.

Show how smart they are.

They are almost invariably little smocks.

Speak to us, then ask us very precise questions and

stick to that.

That's not one of us.

And a couple of things about how to get High

Marks LLC is not creating a curve so everybody could

get a first.

Conceptually, the easiest way to lose points on the exam

is pad, and writing is by far the easiest way.

And this stack on this for conversation.

And let me tell you why.

In expectation when somebody is marking your exam, it is

23 degrees outside.

All different is a Sunday afternoon.

All the friends on the barbecue, on the park and

is stuck inside reading your script.

They don't like you very much.

They keep having to do this, so don't make them

like it because.

You always.

Keep in mind.

Always keep in mind as a human being, you should

rethink your answer and try to make this job easier.

Good handwriting is super important to most things about how

to answer.

I'm sure you've heard this many times before.

The second way you use points is by not going

all over the place.

Be very, very organised.

I often suggest to students, if you have a problem

with work on this section, don't stop writing it.

Think about what are the three main points and the

reversal of bullet points.

A lot of people do, but you say the main

part in this in my answer is APC.

It'd be like five words and then have a paragraph

of each.

Don't have a rambling text tactical go back and forth,

back and forth, back and forth.

That's the way you lose points on assessment.

The more localised it will logically you are.

It's how you use your market for foreign equivalent knowledge

getting.

Few organised serves.

There is no correspondence between the number of volunteers and

how long your answers should be.

In some courses there is, and then the faculty members

should tell you that I.

Because the thing is, you have to keep in mind

the management of expense.

First, you have to make sure that almost everybody can

press.

So there's always a number of very easy questions with

a lot of marks just so that people pass unless

they're really bad.

But then they get progressively more complex.

Just keep that in mind.

So it might be a super easy ten month question.

But that might not require a lot of insight.

Just just keep in mind, in all the courses of

state, in my case, this is how stuff done.

Finally, in answering questions, the length here is the life

cycle of lengths and locks.

So imagine the y axis is the market.

Yes, the x axis is the length.

You say nothing.

You get nothing.

You keep on writing.

You hit the peak.

But if you keep on writing, you start losing points.

And back at Sue.

And the reason is the question is asking you about

something specific.

If you say, look, if you just can't stop, you

tell me you don't know the answer.

You are trying to write everything you can think of.

You might think you'll be so clever.

I'm going to tell everything I know and brilliant.

That's not how you proceed as a quote person stuck

into what we can do.

I don't hate you for it.

Find the optimal length.

See what you have to know more and more on

this.

Yes, ma'am.

Sorry.

Do you have, like, the reference of, uh, usually how

long and the answer should be to me?

It is.

So students often want to get on an account of

how long as it should be.

The problem is, you might be able to give a

brilliant answer to three lines, and the student next to

you might be ten.

Really?

Depends on how you do it.

Right.

So if I tell you, you should have this length.

Problem is, you are so different.

It wouldn't be fair to you to say that.

It's simply because everybody is different and they need this

number of words to get to the court.

So I don't want to stipulate to length.

But all this, keep in mind.

Right?

Even as a as a says, is this correct?

If you just say yes, you could still.

You always have to say a little bit of context.

Explain the answer.

Summarise as always, provide a context and sense and summary

in how you respond to.

Anything else on?

Yes, ma'am.

I was wondering if you ever.

And I'm about to talk about all the complications, but

everything else on this site before you get the solution.

So then the question is, should I say one more

thing?

People who mock exams hate the answers.

There's nothing they dislike more.

I mean, I don't know if a secret confession likes

to read their own words, but you must think you're

being very clever.

I memorised what the officers said on this topic.

I'm going to put it all the.

They will not let you go.

Coffee?

Bullet points and slides.

Put them unchanged on an answer.

That means it sends a signal.

I don't think voice sends the wrong signal.

But you're meant to think.

You're not meant to memorise.

But this is not kindergarten, so keep that in mind

here.

Yes.

But if you look to.

I mean, if I say what if I if I

ask you define systemic risk, you could have closed this

court to the one out of the out of the

textbook.

That's correct.

But the problem for you is.

If you memorise, it probably means you don't understand.

Very, very few people have have.

Men can memorise everything perfectly and usually memorisation substitutes for

understanding.

If you actually look at work, text basically signals.

I do not understand what on writing this is.

I mean I for this woman then go to court.

It gives you a sense of the sense that bad

signal about you.

So I would try even if I asked what is

systemic risk, but I don't remember the body definition that

teaches, of course, once a year.

But if you say something like the following, the systemic

risk is the probability of a really bad financial crisis,

then the probability of a bad economic recession.

That's in some.

But here's how students usually get this question wrong.

I put it on the extent defined systemic risk, and

they say it is caused by an interconnectedness in the

system or some such thing.

That is not the definition.

That is how it impacts, not the definition.

So anybody answering that question was saying that on slides,

there are two parts to this flight.

If you put the second part of the first part,

you get nothing.

Is this about the definition?

So just keeping this precise questions.

I think quite precisely.

This is.

Should we also always give an example for what year

it's been or be on the street?

Depends.

I mean, it depends on it depends on you because

some people are really good with examples.

But examples can take a long time.

So remember, you are trying to convince a person, but

you can go this stuff.

You can do it many, many different ways.

And then this a question of this question.

Have you all the course of taken with this non-specific

what might cause.

But if you expect us to provide the smarts.

You will.

But the thing is that some people are good at

examples.

If you think good examples, then it helps.

But if you think and what if you think abstractly,

it does not have to depend on how you personally

approach the problem.

To come back to your question about solutions.

I have continued.

If I keep thinking about this, it benefits you to

get answers to solutions.

And I actually think it does not.

I hate to be the question.

That's why I don't do it.

I mean, it's mostly because I'm a mean bastard, which

I am, but it is because I don't seem to

benefit from an abstract because you can see the answers

in textbook and in this life and in record is

anyways.

But however, here's what I taught.

You can't do what anyone who comes to my office.

I was written down as a promise of reading in

front of you.

And tell you what is good and what is bad

and give you a great I'll tell you.

This is a turn off.

This is a ten.

My question.

I'm going to give you eight.

This is what you've got, right?

And this is where you want some.

And I would expect about one third of you to

take advantage of this.

But a lot of people come in to the office

not knowing how to answer questions properly.

And when you see what's expected, it helps them to

help frame the answer.

So if you're concerned, I would suggest you don't go

through the whole exam.

That is too long.

But plenty of time for questions.

Right.

And thumb on the clock.

Come to me and then I'll tell you what is

good and what's bad.

I think you might use your benefit much more from

the.

For me, this was I didn't know the answer.

Even finally, assuming you could, you can find the answer

on the question.

You found the answer.

So therefore the benefit is more than a miracle.

Quote course with that helps verify your calculations.

Perhaps we can see a benefit.

Not.

And of course, like anything that's on the exam.

So there are two topics I want to do, and

I'm doing this in a particular way because I want

to prioritise sovereign debt crisis.

And then I want to do bailouts.

And these are almost completely opposite in terms of methodology

because sovereign debt crisis, some well-understood problem is primarily legalistic.

So I'm just repeating.

Facebook and lawyers have said.

They love this new content.

It's actually unique and is causing to as whole network.

Paul McCartney study is on iTunes.

So.

First of all, sovereign debt is money owned by a

sovereign currency, and that is not necessarily whom you think

it might apply to.

It is the central government.

In most countries it is not local governments.

It depends on the country.

So you can't it can't make it absolute.

It does not apply to regional governments in most cases.

But it depends on a country.

So safety can be fought, a state can be false,

and that's not a sovereign people.

Unless the single exception is if they have a central

government guarantee, which you may or may not do.

But also if you take the United States, the government

on state of funds like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,

with some workers funds there, that is not sovereign debt.

There are two types of deaths.

Domestic and external are defined as often a few minutes,

and the failure of the government to pay back in

some form is called the sovereign people.

But.

This.

You have to be really careful.

The two things a sovereign people is different from a

private default and B, what I might call a sovereign

people.

Someone else might not.

So so therefore, when you start looking at how many

defaults as a country have, that's actually controversial.

People debate that because some people for one researcher might

not get people for another.

I'll give you some examples when to get to it.

So I sternal stepped in this pill form that all

the foreigners in foreign currency and the foreign law.

The typical case is Argentina for American dollars in New

York.

Foreign law almost s almost entirely decided the New York

law.

For London for.

Well, Singapore.

Now increasingly Chinese law.

And the reason is the the.

The the.

The common law system that this country has is much

better for sovereign debt and the role of justice that

most of the world has.

And also New York has specialised judges, something to deal

with its outsiders.

So this stuff can only be issued in capital markets

by bonds borrowed from commercial banks.

Opposite is domestic that.

Which always has been to me.

Basically everything doesn't.

You either external or you're domestic.

So domestic means followed by your own people, issued in

your own currency, own your own law.

The euro makes it more confusing.

So yes, domestic, that is always the preferred that it

is two thirds of that issued in the last century.

And basically all the advanced economies and almost entirely issue

domestic.

But the only form of foreign currency you can't borrow

domestically.

And domestic.

The U.S. government lost more power to people directly or

indirectly, than external debt.

Perhaps by creating inflation as a country before the United

States.

Further, this part of the world was deliberately in 1947,

by creating inflation for a year and a half.

No, that's the type of people that you might call

people, but not call it people.

Different people would label it differently.

Quantitative easing could also be seen as a form of

default, depending on where you sit.

I don't want to get into these type of debates,

but I'm just telling you these are controversial things.

Sovereign theft in Europe is complicated.

It's issued into domestic currency euro.

But who holds a ticket to Greece?

The Greek people.

This really illustrated this.

When Greece people did ten years ago, 14% of Greek

debt was issued in London and the month before and

86 in Greece and the Greek people.

He has no handcuffs on long.

It should be that only on Athens issued Greek debt.

This was often called the Greek nuclear option.

And the reason this Greece could have this was always

a threat that is easy to Greece.

Under Greek law, the Greek parliament can decide we are

now going to legally haircut 50%.

The government can say all of that.

Is that because a lot of people think that because

legally the government can say the theft is worthless, but

is it equal to other people?

Now you get into of the the Greeks could not

fill up a lot of debt.

This is why lock was never haircuts.

So there's a nuance and a context that makes it

more complicated.

So a sovereign default is inherently different from a bankruptcy

of a company because countries do not have gold dust.

Companies can not go bankrupt.

Instead, a default is the result of a country having

a cost benefit calculation.

This involves the economic, financial and political social aspects.

If you just take, for example, the Greek people who

live in some of the European Argentinean.

Greece couldn't solve the Acropolis before it was able to

solve the huge amount of stuff for the four of

the Greek state owned the post of the debt.

So they have assets that could be excluded.

Same applies to every country.

So a country can almost always pay for that by

selling the stuff that is assets to foreigners.

It just choose not to.

That's the difference between a company and a state.

And almost always a country defaults long before it runs

out of money to pay back that.

And now we get into the another complicated thing.

There are exceptions to this, but this practically no global

legal framework for sovereign defaults.

We you take whatever country you want.

There's a law that says if a company does not

pay back loans, the creditors can go to court.

The court says the companies, if you do something with

the company based on the law of your country, different

people could put a promise to your country.

That's a well-defined left legal mechanism for dealing with bankruptcy.

There is no such thing for sovereign debt.

There are two exceptions to this, partly because the debt

is issued in New York.

But then you get into enforcement.

There's no police, global police.

And secondly, some especially debt for very poor countries, falls

under the terrorism course, which is under the French law.

And there's a pretty good system that deals with that

in a complicated legal way and understood properly.

But by and large, there is no such thing.

Therefore, sovereignty for depends on the ability and willingness.

So people will continue paying.

Just keep that in mind.

Sovereignty.

Therefore, if you want to keep something you should not

call the people's.

We do this diesel is has a particular legal definition

which is not relevant.

The sovereign people, the owners in common from simple to

eight council 1500 to 8 1799 and never since.

Spain defaulted several times in the 19th century.

Defendant Six times in the preceding three centuries, not after

all, knew all the words openly, but by and large,

developed countries defaulted when they were growing.

And then after World War Two, when we got a

huge number of independent countries, they started defaulting.

So in the 20th century, India, people default comes into

this year 514, six, seven.

If you are from one of this country's new questionable

numbers, they come from the vocal range of data based

on sovereign defaulted people look at what they classified.

So this is what I said.

These are controversial things.

If you don't if you think.

But if I mentioned the country don't agree with a

number of quite possible.

But this is how Rogoff Reinhart defined it.

And they go through every one and why they classify

the since the conclave to vote, compared to me about

the numbers, this is just this is the way they

defined it.

Be of sovereignty for this usually restructuring, perhaps swapping high

interest rates for a low one.

We been supportive of lengthening maturities.

Now, for a country with external factors, external people is

correlated with global economic factors.

Like.

It's not like the global economy, commodity prices, interest rates,

capital inflation.

And keep in mind sovereign for external borrowing, this type

of security.

So in a global developing world context.

Rising interest rates.

One of the main drivers of sovereign defaults to the

extent they are happening at the moment because the U.S.

interest rates are a key driver of I mean, there

are this will be coming up when we talk to

other probably about four, four or five or six countries,

about two equals four, depending on who you talk to

a little bit about this.

And what happens is times are good.

They borrow and borrow and borrow.

The money starts coming in at a time when fragility

is high and then they can't repay.

Countries tend to borrow too much when things are good.

This is really what's behind this.

And you certainly don't have to be a developed country

to be there just to take to European countries.

United States, you know, the Kingdom of Italy, all the

cases of countries that I've owned have been able to

get the borrowings under control.

They keep on borrowing even when things are good.

Same with France.

But some countries man knows quite well.

I'm not going to get into that sort of comparison.

So why would you pay back sovereign debt?

Reputation, risk, meaning if you don't pay back, you might

not be able to borrow in the future.

What?

What Generally you might not be able to access foreign

capital markets is borrowing all the things money transfer.

Suppose of all those things, including disruption to trade.

And to be able to enforcement in the next section.

Foreign direct investment is discouraged because a country that people

might not be seen as a good destination for foreign

direct investments.

However, there are people who debate the importance of these

things.

I'm not going to get into that.

But reputation cost a significant foot long was short lived.

You take, for example, they can be very selective when

they pay Venezuelans and people do not pay for the

same time.

This because Venezuela, I think this time I think they

still own a big U.S. energy company, of course, has

petrol stations all over the US, and this state still

owns that.

And they've been very careful how we pay.

So the New York courts will not take over the

US properties.

The people that are the border looks like China and

Russia because they have no leverage.

But in that case, the leverage is with property.

How important is this?

I was once personally involved with one of its discussions

on sovereignty was a learned one thing that.

The bankers, creditors, they would come to your country.

They would.

Threaten you.

Everything under the sun.

They're going to take away your children when they travel

abroad.

I'm not quite, but almost.

But for people, then the first person to call to

say if you've got a heart.

Because after you default, you'll note that you can borrow

more.

Just keep in mind, this is a strange business, this

sovereign lending business.

Now to understand how much you can borrow, we need

the concept of debt tolerance.

How can Japan survive the 240% debt to GDP to

the highest in the world?

Well, all the countries like Argentina, people to 40.

Couple of things you really have to keep in mind.

Is that even though you almost every public commentary on

sovereign debt says debt to GDP.

That is highly, highly misleading.

It's exciting, why, of juxtapose those two numbers.

The ability to service that is much more important like

that to foreign income of foreign debt.

So we have this.

A lot of factors do not.

If you get into don't look at debt to GDP,

it will lead you to debt intolerance.

Countries that can't handle a lot of debt tend to

be places with weak institutions, problematic political systems.

And because of the borrowing, the project can be tempting

for a government that is unable to do this, would

want to take on decisions.

This is a place, of course, both developed and developed

and lost.

And part of the argument applies to the developed and

developing world.

But borrowing abroad is usually a symptom of both weak

institutions and problematic politics.

On borrowing generally is to be, say, a lot of

difficult things.

But how much you can borrow depends on things like

its history of repayment, how the captain has, and how

macroeconomic the state of the country has been over some

time periods.

A lot of things fit into this.

Take Japan.

Japan borrows in Japanese here.

Most Japanese theft is held by Japanese agents.

I'm Ali Velshi.

Bank of Japan holds almost half, as I showed earlier,

for Japanese households.

Japanese banks hold a significant portion of the rest.

A lot of sort of Japan is a type of

country with the family.

Savings are held in government bonds.

Interest rates in Japan have been zero.

And that means if the interest rates are so low,

you can borrow infinite amount of money.

But now see the program.

This post is for Japan.

If Japan, they would like to have inflation, but they

would like not because they have all of the deflation

prices do not move in Japan.

And in fact, it is holding back on.

Economic growth in Japan is having increasing demographic and otherwise

problems.

And these steps very severely limit the ability of the

Japanese state to meet challenges.

So, so long as that happens.

Okay.

But when things go bad, that that might be seriously

damaged.

I would not.

By the way, this is why Japanese theft I think

is really top would be.

Escape is high risk that.

Some others.

Mexico defaulted by 47%.

Argentina 50.

Debt to GDP of exceeding 100% is only a small

minority of recent defaults.

And like us, just keep on saying, Come see that

this is stereos defroster.

Argentina has weak institutions, persistent inflation problems.

If this is so used to crisis to, all of

it feeds on itself.

To make crisis and sovereign debt crisis, it increases the

likelihood.

Of course, this is how you proceed.

And fortune is a painful cyclical.

And even worse, a lot of countries borrow short term

because less cheaper problem is less to the one year

maturity.

If you borrow, if a one year maturity, you a

rollover, you tie it up every single year.

It left me in need of some.

Something bad happened.

You find this in spite of.

But that also means you're subject to very high exchange

rate risk.

I gave you the global finance numbers earlier for a

number of countries.

And then you can see how vulnerable the sovereign debt

is to rising.

And at the moment, this is why there's so much

concern about the US monetary policy, as I mentioned several

times before, because what's happening globally is you borrow the

dollars dollars, the USD interest rates are sharply rising, which

by the way, offsets this country, upsets Europe.

But Europe can deal with it.

But if you are a weak developing country, it's different

then the USD strength dollar strengthens.

Europe could care less.

But if you are a mid-level developing country, you are

hit both by strength and by rising interest rates, which

make a crisis increasingly like.

And therefore to keep him within his fifth paragraph you

can jump from everything's been looking good and overnight a

sudden stop and everything ends up in tears.

Christians, it's.

Best of luck.

Yes.

So in one of the slides you showed that deflation

can help reduce usually the death of the country.

Yeah.

The last time I asked you, you said it was

not possible.

If you are looking for refinancing.

Are you a little bit careful?

Right.

So take.

Also take the case of the United States in 1947.

This is sort of relevant to this.

So United States was the most tolerant country after World

War Two, had a very high debt.

They were growing massively.

They had massive deficits, so highly indebted.

But it's a fairly closed economy.

So it was easy for the United States to create

debt.

We create inflation to devalue the price of space.

Just because of the kind of place the United States

was in at the time.

So you need the context, you have to put it

into the country specific situation, and then you can say

it doesn't make sense from us.

So now, for example, you should take to the country.

We have no such countries.

But it makes sense for the debt that we have

amassed.

Okay.

I would I would it's going to is the first

question I'll ask.

The first question I'll ask is what is the maturity?

That's because there are two forces here.

So.

So if you take France as an example of French

process, I don't think that high European inflation makes the

real value of France go down.

But, Heidi, rising interest rates make the refinancing rates of

debt to go up in France affect the deficit.

It has to keep on refinancing the entire thing that

every few years.

So the refinancing costs go up and the value that

that goes down.

This stubbornness depends on the maturity.

So if you have a very long maturities, 15 years,

then the depreciation dominates.

If you have a very short maturity, you're refinancing on.

And that's what I would ask myself, and that is

that I would try to find these numbers been really

hard to find numbers on something maturity.

But I do know that Spain is below what some.

And also what is fair to keep up on.

But I keep on asking people in this business.

And this is the heart of.

And I'm just wondering if you borrowed it from Argentina

and.

Does it not?

Do you think they can still.

Of course.

Of course.

You sort of passively appreciate because of foreign policy capability

back home.

So.

Appreciate all of you.

Well, what happened?

I mean, this is what happens is you take Argentina

as a place to study.

For this conference again and going again.

Since the macroeconomic environment, Argentina's approach to foreign policy.

It has to appreciate every point.

Argentina move healthy consumption, boom, economic boom.

This then leads to more imports and less exports.

This means and then when the price of commodities falls

locally, they can repay the loans and people.

That's just like.

Well simplified.

What does it say?

I mean, basically it doesn't make sense when you borrow

in the first place, but that's a different issue.

So in practice, what kind of reputational risk objective is

facing?

Because I think inadequate in 2438 was based on the

things that.

I didn't see and there's nothing bailed out by creditors

but what the reputational risk means.

I mean, I'm from a of enforcement and the case

on the team that becomes relevant.

But if Argentina goes.

One would expect them often to price the floral locally.

They would have to pay very high interest rates and

the maturity would be very short.

Possibly.

Yeah.

Is that happening?

It appears that Argentina certainly has much.

Yes and no.

Yes.

You know, people object.

I mean, I don't remember the specific point issue, but

I think that the uniform very long view of this

is, yeah, that's on the side of the spokes.

But everybody is astonished that people have bought up on.

Because.

Anything else on this?

I want to enforcement next or something that.

And we also learned that sometimes they will willingly decline

always.

In 1951, losing.

The crown was always.

What?

What?

Willingly before.

I mean, I think he sold his soul.

So take the case of I mean, take the case

of Greece ten years ago, just to take one to

Greece of debt to GDP of a time from 30%.

Cutting services there.

But Greece sold everything to foreigners to pay the debt

back.

The Greek state assets like this.

If you saw the European press at the time or

the German press particularly would say Germany should just take

on the Greek islands.

They could have sold the islands for a very high

amount of money or to the Acropolis or various other

sorts of assets.

If Greece are sold, they could repay them the same.

But of course, we didn't want to ask lots of

different different assets.

That's what of corporate people's.

Instead of giving foreigners Greek islands, it shows love repay

loans.

Yes.

And I don't know as much.

Defaulted in some.

I'm not sure because if you want to go into

lot of do but then you want.

You want to default.

Makes sense.

Even I equally value me.

After the Ukraine issue.

I'm just not sure about you.

Okay.

So you have to be really careful about Russia in

the year 2022.

Russia's not paying them.

If there is no U.S..

That's.

Not only do they exploit oil, which is doing quite

well to use as the Russian has very large reserves.

So therefore they are not the Russia does not fall

into this category of countries.

You kidding?

What's happening in recent years?

Russia is making concrete key to this.

Europe, a European country says.

Russia is no longer allowed to use the money it

has in one bank account to pay a loan and

another bank comes.

Is that people well, you know, you get legal issues.

I think in 1990.

No, that's a different issue.

But in the year 2022, the Russia has enough money

to repay all its obligations.

And what prevents that is sanctions.

And then that gets you into complicated legal arguments.

I'm not competent to talk with Russia in any of

this, since it's a separate issue.

It would make sense to take a little four years

before you want to talk me through.

Yeah.

Like you say, you want to make Ukraine and you

want to isolate yourself from from from from the West,

whatever.

Then you can just people.

Now, the problem for Russia.

They would be the best look just to see the

Russian shipment of oil.

You know, the Russia stuff, although it goes through Europe,

is what it is.

I mean, look, nothing but European oil firms and European

insurance companies and European staff members move Russian oil to

around the world.

If the people all but the deceased.

So that always depends on how many assets you have

outside of your country in terms.

Of how much pressure you can.

Of course.

I mean, but keep in mind the quality me just

to give you one example, one example, I believe the

World War one when the axis so when Austria and

Austria and Germany were war with France and UK.

German companies still pay most British banks adrift, despite companies

state backed loans to Jim Banks, even if nothing is

what should became a financial centre.

I mean, it's is a complicated thing.

If you have some specifics in mind, we can discuss

it.

But I won't get into those details.

Was this the case in the beginning of the war

and this time in April that they hesitated to pay

back the interest?

Uh.

And it would be.

Nice if you.

People know what happened.

This is more complicated than that.

They said.

You rest.

You will not allow me to take money out of

my bank account to pay back the loan.

That's what.

That's what happens.

But they did it in the last few hours.

They had they did by the day.

This was facilitated.

It was made to happen.

Well, nobody would want to disrupt people.

The Russians.

Didn't.

The investment banks didn't invest in common.

But keep in mind, it is a purely political position,

not friendship.

I don't want to get into the politics of this

issue.

And by the way, one thing perhaps relevant to this,

the most competent central bank governor of any large state

in the world is Russia.

She is absolutely social.

What's her name?

I can't.

I can't.

I don't know.

I come from up in name, but she is by

far the most she's the most competent central central bank

governor.

And the reason why they've been so successful, she has

such extensive connections and it's just a good management of

the financial system.

Not if you know something.

She went to Yale.

I think I pass it because I want to get

into those issues on the enforcement.

So that issue at home and the domestic law, you

can be forced on it whenever you want, that this

is a fraud you can't be forced on.

There are no, as I said earlier, no industry, no

political framework for dealing with sovereignty, with their exceptions.

But by and large, it doesn't exist.

You do have the Harvest Club, which deals with.

The poorest countries in the world.

So it's not just like outside of peace.

It's only with a very select group of countries in

a particularly difficult situation.

And by the way, the Paris Club is now being

very actively undermined by China.

This is why the let me see what happens with

the club, depending on the club, because China has recently

changed the rules.

Especially when we have saying that we cannot enforce the

14 day event.

That will be point.

Now, I think China is emerging as an alternative to

inflating its own system because it is letting the most

of the countries by making some private agreements.

You pledge to enforce federal funding.

You've let your big island group up to do so.

What are they going to do in the default?

So let's China is doing is China on this front

the Chinese law, they usually insist on all the cost

being hidden.

So so therefore, a New York based lender would not

know China made the loan to a developing country and

they would not have even know what private arrangements had

made.

So this is basically lenders have cooperated over the past

50 years and how they deal with a country default

and China refuses to cooperate.

That's what is causing a huge amount of disputes among.

Not that we used to use the military written.

And France invaded Egypt.

In.

1892 and made Egypt a protectorate and by the way,

wanted to do something like that.

When you do something like that, what you're taking over

is a customs office.

Because they control the imports and exports.

We just put tariffs on imports and exports and that's

how you get the money back.

Britain invaded Istanbul in 1877, 1876, after Turkey defaulted to

stay at home.

The United States invaded Venezuela in the 1890 and the

US invasion of Haiti was certainly motivated by temptation.

I don't want to get used to that.

I think the most odious.

Case of sovereign debt in the world's embassy is heightened.

If you're interested, there's a really nice series of articles

in the New York Times that came out about five

months ago, basically came out after a meeting of Slate's

has voted not for them, but for two New York

Times to find.

And what happens is when Haiti causes independence in France,

the second half of 18th century France government insisted that

the new state, by reimburse the slave owners so that

when Britain freed the slaves, the British government really pushed

the slave owners.

The French government insisted that the Haitian state was, in

fact slave owners in Haiti.

And they could never be paid because the way we

paid was exceeded what we couldn't produce.

And every time we couldn't pay, there was a military

intervention to force it to pay.

We just had, of course, a very long way to

explain why this is a terrible state at the moment.

Eventually, quite a feat like that was fought by Citibank

in New York.

This is why the US Marines became the enforcement device

of the original French troops.

I think this.

But if you're interested, I think this is the most

potent use case of sovereign theft in the world.

And you could certainly look at the New York Times

article.

This came out like a few months ago about this

very hot.

Christians do not.

Newfoundland is a more interesting issue because if you ask

the typical Canadian, they'll have no idea about the system.

But if you ask a Newfoundland, they would certainly know.

Because remember the difference between a company and a country.

You can't make the two countries.

This is the only place I know where a country's

sovereign state could lift the day because of some difficult.

So what happened is in the great Newfoundland, which is

the easternmost part of Canada, now used to be an

independent country, basically became, you know, Canada and Newfoundland, and

they basically became independent around 1855.

This sense of operated as independent states.

And Newfoundland was one of them.

In fact, to GDP hit because the export of fish

and there was equal exclusive debt to GDP.

I thought that was the greatest banks written tests protected

and.

Asked the prime minister of Britain at the time said

no part of the British Empire has over yet defaulted

on this loan obligations.

Bankruptcy is at best a healthy work and a student

loan.

It's a nation, even one an individual will be able

to avoid quite like Britain before, at least three times.

In the 1990, the early 20th century.

First the light was a different issue.

So this means the British army invaded Newfoundland, but became

a British protectorate.

Then after World War Two, they had the referendum.

What do you like to say?

We want to be independent.

Well, world powers Canada, the United States and Britain disqualified.

So there are three options at the four options.

One, Newfoundland is independent.

Two because Canada.

Three, it becomes part of remains of three or four

becomes a part of the United States.

The US tried very hard to make it become a

part of the United States.

Canada did not like that.

So Canada prevented the option the the the of referendum

in Newfoundland in 1949.

Overwhelming majority of Newfoundland to said independence.

They arrested basically entire families of the country as among

the referendum.

They still want independence, even with the arrest of everybody.

So.

So they voted overwhelmingly for independence.

They after they were told you are not committed.

So both Britain and Canada basically overruled that very democratic

election twice.

And that's how Newfoundland became part of Canada.

And if you ask a Canadian, they will not know

this history.

You have a look in this room.

What?

No idea of this until now, but it's very much

true.

And but if you ask a Newfoundland, then they would

very much notice history.

So this is the only case I know of where

a country was liquidated because of sovereign debt.

What the you.

Now sovereign theft committed four years.

Imperial Russian theft is still alive in the modern Russian

state as an honourable and.

Extra sovereign debt attracts or loans vulture funds.

So I'm quoting the Guardian here.

The Guardian reports billionaire Paul Singer in 1996 painted $11

million for kind of Peruvian debt that threatens to bankrupt

the country.

Must Tatum 58 million and feral pigs.

They suited a perfect Concorde recipe before that.

For me, that particular attempt came from Yugoslavia.

Basically what happened is Yugoslavia.

As a single.

Country, sold tanks to conquer Russia.

Well, he quickly found out the tanks were not suited

to the terrain for them to used.

And then Yugoslavia went into a civil war afterwards.

Definitional repeat for single elite, the social forces that can

fight everything we could to force Congo-Brazzaville to pay.

And the way you do that and are the same

same values, you do the same Argentino, The way you

do that is the way you do that is you

try to take all the foreign assets a country.

So, for example, they took over.

You can't think of a military asset with a very

famous case with Argentina where there was a.

Military training.

Same old saying she looks to into a navy on

the train.

Sailors that land in Ghana, Africa and the Ghanian court

see it on behalf of al Qaeda.

And if they can't visit a military ship of state

bullshit, there's a nice Ukrainian case because Ukraine used to

own this incredible move by the Soviet Union 35 years

ago, destroyed earlier this year.

But because Ukraine wasn't, people can half the world, but

not the rest of the world.

That aircraft being the biggest in the world was very

valuable, but it couldn't land anywhere.

So they had to take a very strange route around

the world, depending on what the local courts would see.

Eventually, someone in Ukraine made a mistake and landed the

aircraft it fell to.

If Tom Felt was not.

Participant Busby was participating in a play called Seats of

Health Discussions on behalf of the Ukrainian, paid for paid

and got the case of the Russians destroyed at the.

But that's a different issue.

So usually there are carrots and sticks.

When it comes to sovereign debt.

Creditors don't like formal defaults, so they often decide let's

not default, but maybe they can lengthen the maturity.

And the issue the issue is and this is how

you can think about the rhetoric is somebody asked earlier,

is the purpose of false assignments.

Remember, I mentioned three passive losses a few weeks ago

and they become super important in in solving people.

Because if people don't want part of a loan, you'll

declare that people can call the others.

And the way you deal with this is you write

into the contract what is known as exit consents and

collective action forces.

So exit consent me all focussed, agreed to restructure debt.

They give, they.

If the state officials at that some power that can

make all forms less valuable.

So basically what happens is if you agree.

To restructure debt.

But somebody else refuses.

You can restructure only the death of those who refuse

to participate.

So therefore you need more attractive.

To participate in restructuring.

What is the remainder of the creditors to participate?

And to deal with that, you might end up with

collective action clauses that permit the majority of bondholders to

unilaterally change the terms of this agreement off the credit

issuer.

One big problem, Argentina, for the issue that about ten

years ago it did not do this properly.

So they messed up the legal agreement with the defaulted.

Some creditors held out, refused to participate.

And because they hadn't done the concerts and collected arts

and it properly, they were able to hold hold up

through structure.

He was close allies of Senate Elite associates, but.

And the lessons on how you deal with sovereignty for

the common law.

You called me book hype, but I just took it

out of his anarchical office.

I also had some interactions with him in this space.

So he is perhaps the world's most recognised vehicle of

work and sovereign.

And he finds the sovereign people.

Chances are you find this me somewhat in the discussion.

And he has rules on how best a country can

deal with sovereignty.

First, don't let a sovereign debt problems inability to pay

take down your banking system.

These could be.

Don't, therefore don't delay recognising that you can't pay back

the loans.

Three Make sure you know how much that you have.

So this issue is Spain, Argentina and China, where there

are issues of issue sovereign debt that might or might

not be sovereign local governments.

So if you have theft issues and issues of intent,

you have to know it and keep control over them.

When people make sure the evil is big enough.

When do you default?

Be very, very efficient.

The reason people did this, because you are a huge

number of all the problems in your economy.

Deal with those problems.

And finally.

But this really comes with foreplay China nowadays.

We even have the country all credit just to say

do not let geopolitics and promises of long term benefits

change some minds.

So basically treat every credit to the same regardless of

what they promise you.

And regardless of how powerful.

And I think we about to see some of this

testify, some questions before the break and we'll want to

things.

So sovereignty goes a bit tricky to deal with because

it's primarily legal.

And I'm not a lawyer, so I'm sort of I'm

not a this advantage in doing this.

For that reason.

But.

Anybody all.

Okay.

So we'll take a break and move.

Yes, sir.

Just a quick question about the last point.

Why?

Why?

What's the narrative?

You could argue that you should.

What do you then?

But you need.

You need.

You need to pardon everybody in the future.

So if you see the pressure of a major state

historic in life in the United States, no, this might

be China.

Then this gives you access to credit from the rest

of the world.

What if you take a case like this to our

country?

Most of this debt explodes in one single country.

Which is.

You think and you got provisions in that in the

next two decades it's going to stay like this.

What I think would be rational.

To keep.

It is an interesting case.

Because it's increasingly.

Important.

Turkey doesn't play geopolitical games.

As you know.

They've been delaying a sense of getting into seem to

me sold is refusing to cooperate on.

On issues, Russia, Ukraine and things like that.

But if the People's Republic goes back to the U.S..

So I don't know.

I mean, I don't know.

It's hard to figure out.

And so I think we might see where Turkey is

heading, but that's outside the scope of this.

Ongoing, intense sovereign.

Debt.

Crisis led to the financial crisis.

Veterans don't like the economy just like the one we're

seeing in Sweden.

I don't remember the exact number.

If you're curious, you can go to the local private

database that mentioned, for example, that, like you said, sucking

the numbers for them, they will match all these crises.

So you can look at that like I'm in a

sovereign debt crisis doesn't necessarily mean so basically to some.

You still have a sovereign debt crisis without a banking

crisis.

But if you take, for example, Italy, if and when

Italy has a sovereign debt crisis, probably these banks will

be immediately closed.

I think.

But it's.

What are the implications?

Shows this willingness to.

Especially on Italian bonds.

I remember correctly.

Because this is a complicated issue.

So it's.

Kevin, If I start talking to one of the principal

long term plans for Camelot.

If you're curious, you can do this offline.

He's asking for Eurobonds.

And it is taking too long to be able to

get the property.

Okay.

Let's take a break and come back and discuss bailouts.

Which.

You know.

I went in and I it was a of a

big logo.

And I looked at it and I was like, you're

like runs liquor stores, like.

You know, let's.

I'm not so.

And I will go outside.

No, because these are exceptional cases.

Have you recovered?

Yes, I think so.

Yes, I know.

That's exactly what do you doing?

I mean, it's not the place we want to be

done to in order for us to be able to

make this possible.

I still have to be aware of what it's like

for those.

We could use some.

I want to be justice because I see you as

nothing with yourself or anything else.

I just feel that the time.

Well, I think I know what you are saying, that

you know that every time you go to security.

Why you like those little baby dolls?

Yeah, just like the chicken that was closer to home.

So what kind of.

And in some.

Places you can do.

These.

Things.

What were you thinking?

I don't know.

Right.

I know he wasn't able to go through the ballot

box office hours and he was having.

But I don't know why was that?

But if you could do.

Something to make sure they were.

Behind this, because it was true, we didn't have any

idea that these pictures were like that.

I have no idea.

That's why I say we have a choice of putting

in Texas.

I want to be very clear that I find this

to be something because it has a lot to do

with our understanding of our right to exist.

We've got to make good on that.

But I.

Also think it is.

Just something you have to be careful what you see

it, because some people are going to.

Suggest.

You.

Get away with it for.

And so I.

Just say the official descriptions.

So you.

Don't say, we're.

Going to be like, okay.

We will just say, I.

Said, I didn't like this analysis.

I think it was very clear in the credit, I

think this is good for you so that we know

when you will come on the Web.

It's been great for us.

Yeah, I must admit, because I think I did something

like that.

I don't know if I can.

I don't know what the hell.

I feel as if it's like that.

Yeah.

You know, I don't just quite.

So have you.

Yeah.

Yes, I've had a couple of highs and lows.

Yes.

Things I remember.

Oh, yes, yes, yes, that's right.

Yeah.

And you know, we at this and this is amazing.

And I think we should.

All be proud.

About this.

Yeah, I think it was strong for me.

But particular case.

It was like the day before I had to get

American water, and you?

Well, I have, Yeah.

Okay.

She pulled me out of.

This particular chapter of my book was a half this.

Right.

And I will tell you one thing about everything else

I've done in the course.

I've just followed.

It's just for reasons.

But I can just say I just basically want to

put it put it there because is what other people

would do similar things to other people's work.

All the people, some not a package, just mostly I'm

just repeating what is the existing body of work on

these topics?

Problem is when it comes to bailouts, there is no

such treatment.

So this was the only chapter where I couldn't draw

on sources and make myself too easy to be made

straight.

So that's why this is why I found this chapter

particularly difficult to write.

And you may find this chapter therefore free more this

organise all the chapters for that very reason.

Just keep in mind that unlike the rest of the

book, everything has to be done right.

Context.

The thousands of people writing the following very good analysis

which I used here.

I hope to make it up to a much greater

extent, which makes it more disorganised.

And just just keep that in mind as we go

through it.

So imagine the following.

You are the finance minister of your country.

By the way, since LLC graduates disproportionally become famous ministers

is probably quite likely some of you will end up

being that.

So you, the finance minister of the country, the CEO

of your largest banks, walks into office as she demands

a $50 billion payment.

She'll tell you if you don't give me 50 billion

by end of business today, there will be a systemic

crisis.

Do you agree or do you not?

But we.

Now when you think of bailouts.

You have to think of bailout in the context of

such questions.

Because I promise you, no party wants to give bailouts.

Why it happened.

And was this scenario very stylistic?

This is the type of scenario that gives rise to

fade love whenever that happens.

Video this.

So let me see if I can.

Here's another insurance company.

By the way.

By the way, by the way, before I play this

out here, there is a there is this I have

a show called South Park.

I haven't been they a from, by the way, in

Colorado.

I'm in the detour when I was travelling to Lot

hiking in Colorado to go see the place.

So they have this episodes after the global crisis 15

years ago.

So another insurance company.

Is going under.

Now determining those prudent move for insurance company.

An out of print movie, the bailout, bail out the

insurance company.

Okay.

I apologise for being excessively creative, but I have enough.

Government, We are too in a crisis to recognise that

this is much closer to the truth and you would

want it to be.

And there's a background to this, Right.

And.

They seem to be passing understanding a country's authorities have

on the situation prior to the fact that they're able

to react to these events that happen.

But normally, this just ends up being an overreaction and

random policy interventions.

It's just, trust me, very, very, very confused.

So successful and unsuccessful failures.

The textbook good bailout is.

I've talked about this before, but this is pretty textbook.

They did a ruthless good bang, bang, bang model.

The crisis resolution costs them 4% of GDP.

They kept onto the good assets.

This is sold assets, the captive fat assets and administrative

losses.

It took over shareholders money.

By the way, in the energy case mentioned the United

States bailed out.

They took over 79.99%.

She is today not 80, but 79.99%.

Because 80% would have triggered a would have triggered.

It.

With CTO payouts, CBS payouts.

So so they bailed them out up to the point

where this bailout would have happened.

And if you.

See this fail, did you buy insurance on a company

not paying?

Yes.

I can buy insurance on.

You paid back the debt for CBS.

But I'm afraid this old chap warns of dangerous instruments.

If you want, I want comments quickly.

You look it up in the book.

And by the way, if you're a European saying this

was not a European problem.

AIG was a New York based insurance company as a

state regulation, New York regulated.

But all the problems were caused by a subsidiary that

was French.

An operated in London.

So it was actually under French jurisdiction to prevent or

allow this to happen.

Why not New York State in.

For instance, it wasn't to those mandates.

That they will take as part of that.

So Sweden is the shareholders lost all in money.

But bank owners shareholders I should.

There was no bailout for the owners of the banks,

which is the right thing to do.

You want to make this whole business.

Everything I learned was opposite.

So the Irish crisis days.

Tragic but typical.

So I'm not discussing this because no reason except for

the handicapped.

That example was a classic problem.

Same as in Sweden.

Real estate bubble.

Overextended banking system.

They had the second biggest banking system in Europe and

bank assets to take a peak of 930% and the

gross debt of the country to GDP was sharply increasing.

So here's what happens.

But I have missed banks held in 2000 and 2008.

The Government of Ireland decided.

To give the banks a loan guarantee and without proper

loan guarantees in a few minutes.

But what it means is they said if these five

banks can't pay back the loans, the Irish state will

on the debt.

Now, what I want you to think about What?

How this is to see.

So one of two things can happen.

Either you believe that the market will take this?

Oh, everything's under control.

I trust the Irish government or all the banks will

say, Oh, the situation is not that I want my

money back.

And the banks, the second, remember, they always believe the

worst.

The Irish government promised this.

It was taken by the markets in the worst possible

way.

And one reason is the debt exceeded what Ireland put

on.

So if you have less than if you're ever government

minister, you've been asked to give a guarantee.

Make sure your guarantee is credible.

How could you say I have this guarantee was not

credible?

And the market called the government's bluff.

And.

The problem is by doing this, they transfer private debt

obligation to the sovereign.

The banks private.

That became sovereign debt.

No.

Why did the Irish government do this?

Well, it's not because they have a stupid spy.

Far from it.

But what happened is that we now know because the

ECB released this document, the head of ECP at the

time.

Shell shocked shape.

He forced Ireland to do this.

And the reason is, I think credit to the Irish

banks.

Were banks in London, Paris and Franklins.

So the German, British and French governments said we can

not let our big banks or many have to take

big losses.

You have to force Ireland to do this.

So they were forced to do this all with gunpoint

by the ECB.

And this, by the way, this is putting what you

can actually now look up the conversation between the government

and the in.

That was the good news because some of the things

you talk about the use of using.

As.

When the offensive against the 13 threes wasn't the same

thing here.

Okay, so be careful.

So gunpoint is a metaphor, right?

Yeah.

It's easier for the police, the European Union of police

if they have a lot of powers.

They think they have a cover.

So they can.

They can.

They can.

Give you liquidity.

They can subtract liquidity, they can give you funds so

they can not give you funds, etc., etc..

Some use low levels that they can push.

And so.

We thought we left this on.

Saying.

Maybe if you leave the debt to shame to the

government of Ireland, it's a very explicit fact.

But take a look at the letters to see what

is taken that I read left for a few years.

I can't remember.

Spain, Italy thousand 17 and Banco Popular Spain failed in

2017 because taken over by the Spanish bank Santander at

the cost of 1.

So what happened is a medium sized Spanish bank fails.

The Spanish government took it over.

So it's a cycle before 1.

There's just no cost to the Spanish taxpayer.

The correct way of dealing with things in Italy the

same year spent $17 billion.

It cannot afford to rescue two banks in the vineyards

and in Italy.

And business should not be allowed to continue.

But they what they did is, technically speaking, never meant

the EU's bank resolution laws, but to use Italian company

bankruptcy laws.

This probably shouldn't be allowed to do, but the ECB

allowed them to do this.

And you can if you're interested, we can discuss why.

No.

The general term we hear about bailouts is a token

lending of last resort and all along.

So we said this before and I was just repeating

things I've said many times before, but this happens all

the time.

The government authorities announced banks on their own.

The banks say, of course, you never need government help.

Your right wing is always supposedly pro-market.

They say let the market decide the winners and losers.

Governments shouldn't get into private contract thinking moral hazard.

The left wing agrees for different reasons, says the government

should help more people not bail out its bankers.

This is the politics surrounding these things.

But however, the problem is we want banks to take

risks because a country should grow.

This is a political empowerment.

To give you more colour on what I said earlier.

Now the problem is after a banking crisis, the cost

of a crisis outweigh.

The cost of bailout thus far has not been juxtaposed

to the $50 billion in open smoke.

So the government has to compare.

Cost of bail up to 50 billion.

Cost of crisis is hundred 50 billion.

We have to bail them out.

Let's not confuse them.

Therefore, it becomes very difficult for governments not to give

bail out.

The problem is because the banks know this.

They have been incentivised to be responsible.

This is why you had regulations, as we discussed last

week.

Therefore, as a general rule, we have the spectre of

having a prop machine, which is the legal machine in

this context for dealing with liquidity and bailouts.

The paper in 2008 in Europe and the United States,

what have you got?

Proper regime in place is why the crisis became as

bad as it did.

And the reason why the developing world was not hit

by the global crisis in 2008, because most developing countries

are so used to crisis, but they have the proper

regime in place and much more competent government officials to

deal with.

Yeah.

The show notes the sum of all possible terms.

Management.

Of the.

Things just.

Failed because of bad management.

Okay.

Okay.

So for me is asking can make management responsible for

sales.

Over.

Other sports writers have just published.

I have a few pages on that very question, like

the answer is no.

That is a complicated issue.

It turns out a lot of almost three pages, Kaufman

says, is not political.

Unless.

Unless there is corruption.

Well, it is corruption.

The problem is that by and large, these banks are

careful not to break the letter of the law.

That's why the Constitution.

I'll give you an example in my country.

Once they asked the question, they did some of this.

They a special judge gave them, gave them all the

money.

They wanted it.

How involved the police force in investigations, The bankers in

Iceland, they use what you call an isolation prison.

They put in solitary confinement for years to try to

get them to confess because they didn't break the leprosy.

He stayed but rock and roll.

Former head of the IMF for one of the Spanish

banks into bankruptcy.

They can't keep on using his corporate credit cards.

A statement.

Jane refuses corporate credit cards.

This normally would be a slap on the wrist.

The state decided to.

From my Ukraine.

You have a major punishment.

Just like you.

It's a complicated.

Um, okay.

Um, so I know that they, um.

Um.

Have like a similar situation because they just, you know,

impossible.

But imagine you have the same regulations in place and

you have no.

No, no, because incompetence is not equal.

And the regulations are they?

But they never do.

Right.

So.

So.

I need to keep a technical answer.

I want to know what's your background?

Financials.

Financial history.

Okay.

These are kind of relevant stuff.

So you mention risk.

How do you make whisky machines?

How do I distinguish exports after an event?

But the loss happened because you were fortunate.

We had bad luck.

You can't.

You can't because this cannot be measured.

This actually is the top of the bill.

So you look at something, this post was sent to

you.

You can never properly prove unlucky, incompetent or corrupt so

long as they comply with all the letters of.

Just the law.

I mean, you talk about, you know, boy.

Okay, so.

So here's here's the problem with what is a problem?

What is that situation?

This is the I think the financial system is the

most complex thing human beings created.

I call it infinite complex.

Like this means a number of things that can go

wrong and you can never let peacefully make rules for

the infinite number of things.

It's an infinite number of places you can be equally

if you live an infinitely complex system.

This is why I think the only way this is

why this is why in the group argument, you have

to go to North Korea and come to a private,

private system punishing people and talk to support.

Yes.

Could you not think about a 90 seconds like that?

So basically the country would buy out the thing but

would impose.

Some senior executives are paying for things like this.

All kind of big.

Okay.

So that's a that's a completely different issue, right?

You will find that nobody.

He was a senior banker in any bank in United

States, in Europe.

That was difficult in 2008.

The smell of hope.

A wholesale cleanup of senior management could all be over.

That's not.

But that's different than what you say.

You say.

It's much easier to find somebody than it is to

hold them accountable when they fail and firing them.

But they cleaned out it.

By the way, the regulators were equally at fault for

2008.

They control.

Bank compliance and the regulators profit motive.

Some cases.

It's a complicated issue.

Let me let me through the closing argument, if we

can come back to this in the 7:00 and of

course, if you still have time.

So here's the trade off the private.

The argument is that these.

The public cost of a crisis outweighs the public cost

of a failed.

So let me take you through this all starts.

This is basically 10 minutes enough to get you sit

alone.

So in the 19th century, by the way, this a

great book written about this.

It's a site called the games from the.

Example from Finland in the 19th century was the world's

financial centre.

In 1866, it was only world financial centre in the

world.

You've got some left from the century.

It was mostly corrupt.

You might think your own country is corrupt now.

Wherever you are from, a promise you looked at in

1860 was more corrupt of just about the most corrupt

place in the world today.

So they all.

And what happened is, Peter, the of the world's biggest

bank and we'll see this on next slide.

One failed and then they were sent to the Royal

Courts of Justice next door.

That they hired the government's chief lawyer.

So the solicitor general was the boss of the judges

to defend them.

So they walked into the courtroom next door with it.

My understanding was the boss of the justices approved the

case.

Just imagine how this went.

Right.

Got to be.

There was no more of a political finance.

So I know most of you are accountants.

You are legally allowed to lie.

You have no annual statements.

But you could easily lie about anything you completed.

And I'm going to show you a case on the

next slide.

If you were a government official, you didn't get salary,

but you got the budget, you would pay your son

what you needed.

You just take money out of your accounts.

They any amount you wanted.

No more private payments except theft and fraud.

It's only what you execute for.

Central Australia and the Bank of England was a profit

making private bank that was competing with all the banks

in the system.

It's just a simple story.

Let me get over it, actually.

It was the biggest bank in the UK, and that

means the world.

The people were rounded with just about the wealthiest people

in the United Kingdom.

If you go to Norfolk in this country, if you're

from near the overall Norfolk.

This is a lovely part of the country.

You're still on to the best used family in the

UK.

Super wealthy.

They decided to back on what was then the high

tech business of the time.

Just shipping.

The company that could set the both fastest from the

UK to New York or UK to Sydney or UK

to New Delhi had enormous profits once they landed on

New Delhi, Sydney and New York gave it almost a

monopoly on all the high value.

That was what that would be they felt was the

wrong technology and the bank was effectively bankrupt and had

a bigger proprietorship, which is why the things you are

opposing seem to be different.

But they were a proprietorship.

When they were people seemed like a for weeks before

they knew it was coming.

They had an IPO in London.

We argue this bank has no bedtimes.

So in an IPO, they were legally allowed to say.

Even though we were bankrupt, we had no fat.

And that's why you have prosecuted someone who's gone through

theft.

I is a private prosecution and the court rules because

you are not legally required to prove this is not

fraud.

In fact, the strongest comes in on what we conclude

is a strong signal of how corrupt this was.

In any case.

Now we get to why we're talking about this after

the film.

It's sort of the help of the Bank of England.

Bank of England refused to bailout the bank.

This caused perhaps the most severe financial crisis of the

19th century, and that led to the first modern regulations,

which is why we are talking, by the way, completely

a signpost since you are economic historian.

But five years ago we had a job market candidate

in my department.

And she had done a PSA on the consequences of

this event.

The eye for an eye.

I wanted the house.

We didn't make an offer, but I voted for it.

She had traced how all the port safety funerals were

affected by the failure.

What happens is that if you work in India or

China or Latin America or Africa, those heavily exposed to

certain banks that fail, those people get sick.

These the second tier cities today.

Yet specifically, two of those cities were exposed to the

great banks of them are still made to ports.

So we are feeling the effects of this impact in

the year 2020, 250 years after the time.

From an economic history point that people absolutely fantastic.

That's.

I'm a big advocate of using economic history to inform

the present, and that's why I think my favourite example.

But.

What happened to the family?

The family family's name was already included and a third

partner continued to be forced to.

Even though it is a partnership.

It's his own limited liability.

The family was able to put all its wealth in

the bankruptcy.

And couple of years later start a new bank called

Barclays.

It still exists.

So basically these people and the biggest shareholder of the

operation Family was the biggest shareholder.

So the entire ten years took over.

Over.

So.

Ugly partnerships didn't work then.

So.

But here's why we're talking.

The Bank of England in English at least.

Right.

And interesting, just when you write the bank with a

uppercase P, that means the Bank of England.

Study how they should respond to future crises and.

The editor of the Bank of England and a future

banking platform was the face of.

You published a white paper on the topic.

Establish these principles.

I what?

This one's called the lunch sweets.

And if in fact you can still download the read

picture into this sort of thing, then it's nice to

read.

But he said the principles of the lender of last

resort is in the crisis.

The central bank should lend free, meaning it's required to

lend.

In a crisis, you always land.

Because what happens is that Bank of England, when when

a bank walked into the Bank of England, government bonds

wont be pumps to the city.

The Bank of England said no.

And the reason why the Bank of England second, though,

is that because it was in competition with them in

what the competitors were paying, all that was the central

bank cost the crisis.

So the central banks have lent freely after penalty rates

of interest and given underpinned by good banking securities.

So this is like a blast.

This is a liquidity injection we still talk about to

be.

We have dispensed with, we could still do one.

Was two or three.

Question Before I move on to the previous.

Slide, we discussed a good company.

Is it this.

Simple thing Who started It went up in length, so

it is still their company shares and lost 300,000, which

led to this 1866 event.

So what I'm saying is this will be companies in

this same company which show up at least in their

company shares.

And lastly, and that goes polls.

I don't.

On this.

I don't think so.

I mean, I'm not sure.

Actually, it's a good question.

When the East India Company did not exist in 1866,

but the captain.

I think, is dead.

Now because they think that it is India company.

And the fact that it becomes state owned by the

countries.

So basically this piece of the pie is what the

East India Company had seized to become easy to become

a state institution effectively and if it solves.

Yeah, it could have been.

It was.

It.

The East India Company had not been important.

Basically, I've lost almost all inflows for 1838 and 15.

And by the way, a great book about the book

came out a few years ago, but that's a different

issue.

By the way, the East India competition mentioned that that

is the single biggest theft of private property and almost

the entire wealth of this part of India.

That is probably what was transmitted to London by a

small handful of people.

And they are so rich that they're embarrassed by it.

So the early 1800s, the alumni of this school was

so enormous that it became an embarrassment.

So payloads.

So first of all, we have to make a distinction

between illiquidity and insolvency.

These are central to all of this.

A firm that is insolvent is bankrupt.

And I know I've said it before, I'm just repeating

and repeating.

The third largest insolvent is bankrupt, meaning its all its

capital has been exhausted.

Problem is if a firm can't pay its debts.

You don't necessarily know if the firm is illiquid or

insolvent.

And the example I gave you and I always give

is that if I have a thing meant to pay

100 by 2 p.m. today.

I have a house in London.

I can't sell my legal obligation.

Eight people on loan.

Even if I'm worth more than the cost.

Do you think you could be in default?

Even if.

You are solvent.

And the reason why in a crisis everybody wants cash

is not to be in a situation where everybody transforms

assets into liquid money.

It's not to be hit by this issue, I stress

at the time.

The problem is, of course, you don't know at the

height of a crisis is a firm is bankrupt or

not bankrupt.

There's so much uncertainty about the state of the balance

sheet and all the relevant issues because of all the

enormous uncertainty.

You cannot distinguish between insolvency and illiquidity.

That's the technical problem.

And then the opening example in the chapter.

That's why if the government can't distinguish between those two,

they make you happy.

So what's a bailout?

A bailout is when some entity is given funds to

prevent its bankruptcy.

We are discussing this special case of a bailout with

the entity receiving money.

It's a financial institution, and the entity providing the money

is a government.

And that one would expect that not all this has

just happened that way.

This only happens when an institutional failure threatens society because.

In normal times, if a bank fails, you have regular

laws forbidding.

So something needs something is happening that prevents you from

using existing mechanisms to deal with the failure of the

system.

To all of us you do live in you.

Surely this is such an important, dangerous event that you

have to do it and you have to bypass existing

rules.

In other words.

So you almost think of it as an event where

existing rules are being insufficient for dealing with the crisis,

although as you do that, the existing rules.

No, I categorise bailouts into three main categories.

Direct bailouts is when the government gives a private entity

money.

This can be done in different ways, and I think

that normally is done by the Treasury, the Minister of

Finance, and could be done by the central bank, but

usually comes from government funds.

The second time is plenty of last resort for all

of us dumped by the central bank, which is whereby

a private bank takes some security.

Gives the security to the central bank to get liquidity

back.

So they borrow with a security security.

That security could be if government bonds or it could

be a corporate bond, it could be something else for

that matter.

But let's ignore that we can't be.

This third type of bailout is a liquidity provision.

Is either lowering of government interest rates or quantitative easing.

How you just create money for the whole system.

And I am trying to create an arbitrary categorisation here,

but I just want to pick.

We want you to walk away from.

The record, recognising the same bailout could fall into more

than one category and depending on how it is.

So this is artificially pure in the real world.

So in direct bailouts, the first category.

Banks and taxpayers have the absolute opposite preference.

What we want for these bailouts.

So basically you can you can do four things.

And.

You can debate these categories, but you can inject equity,

meaning you take away some of the shareholders money, some

of you could issue preference shares.

You can lend them money on loan guarantees.

So if you are a if you are a borrower

bank in difficulty, what do you prefer?

And what?

What does a bank prefer?

Come on, think, people.

You mean the shareholders that own your bank or the

management?

Let's not let's not distinguish between the two.

Let's look maybe let's just say a fan.

Leicester City's on the other night is not.

A pretty good indication.

Look.

Whatever dilutes the shareholders the least.

The answer?

Okay.

What if you are running a bank and you own

the bank?

What is it that you want?

Prefer among those.

It's what you have in the bullet point.

That's in reverse order.

You prefer loan guarantees?

Then loans, then preference shares and then equity injection.

Why?

On principle establishing a solution.

The is that you don't want it.

Over debt to business.

So that's why you buy the guarantees of loans.

I wanted.

Increase the leverage ratio.

And more obligations.

And between the equity injection and the Fed preference shares,

you prefer the present shares because they say it's not.

And they there's no obligation.

In the same respect as.

As for.

Okay.

So basically, you know, basically Correct.

So if you are finding difficulty, long guarantee costs nothing.

All you can do to benefit from this is what

I learned in 2008.

If you lend the money.

You have to repay the loans.

I mean, I could put asset purchases in this as

well.

You have slightly money.

So loans you have to repay a preference.

It's like a loan never expires.

You have to pay until the end of time.

Reverse of that preference.

And an equity injection means you lose control of the

bank and you have a small share of future profits.

So you prefer I and if you, the government, the

taxpayer.

What does the taxpayer prefer?

And why?

Oh.

Well, of course this is obvious.

Yeah.

Guarantee.

Why?

And next.

People think about this.

This is important.

And I wish I could have said more than once.

But what if you're a taxpayer?

You are faced with those four choices.

What is your preferred most preferred option?

And why?

Nobody wanted to take the risk of answering yes.

Because they will have to apply for ownership if they

want bankruptcy.

Sounds like they.

Have more ownership.

They prefer the.

You don't have to have all your rights.

Different subjects would have more control it.

And you can.

Everything you do next.

I'm not really sure what the.

I mean, what was the.

If you don't fit that spectrum of honouring application.

If it is an order to transfer.

Come on, people.

By the way, if if banks pay for it in

this quarter.

The government was put through the opposite.

What?

By definition for exactly the same reason by the.

The government.

If you have taxpayers exactly as you said here, you

prefer equity injection because it gives you control and it

gives you a part of the upside.

It's the tax avoidance.

Then preferences shift because the government gets money and time.

See.

You just lend it back and you get the money

back.

But the.

It's I know it is a cost to anything, but

it means that these banks get all the benefits another

5%.

So at least one of the three options to get

something back as a problem for the last one.

Good luck with that.

Look, if you are looking at your own country and

you have a Fed.

So when you say tax credit, do you refer to

the government?

There is a reason I am distinguishing the taxpayer from

the government because.

Or you could.

I am thinking about as a person who lives in

a country, what you were as a person, any kind

of country and a tax payer is just a short

term shorthand for that.

I just mean as a regular person.

The problem is the government has multiple objectives.

I'm just saying, if you live in a country, what

would you prefer if you don't own?

I still don't understand why the taxpayer.

Prefer you said ascertain.

Older person shares.

Because A is equity injection you have our organisation is

one.

So, so so you can tell the banks to do

things you can't do.

Easy for you to do.

But that in every case is that.

Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.

Let's come back to.

And secondly, if things go well for the bank, you

will get most money back.

If things go badly, you lose money in all of

them.

But if things go well, you get the highest profit

if you own the back of your pocketbook.

So.

So basically, to contrast this to a binary outcome, contrast

is to a binary outcome.

Bank succeeds.

Bank face.

If the bank fails, you lose money on all of

them.

I think that spends more than $1 of these things,

but they don't work for them until the baby's coming

and then injecting equity, that is taxpayers, one money.

Or the taxpayer.

Of course they don't.

But you have to do something about.

But if it fails, you lose money on all of

it.

Just just keep that in mind.

If the bank succeeds, this gives you highest amount of

money back.

Next, Highest, third, highest.

Getting nothing.

Back.

Yeah, I'm sure you know that.

That doesn't mean you don't have voting rights.

You cannot exercise any control of the business and you

don't have rights to the sale proceeds or whatever.

Capital appreciation.

Exactly.

So our preference here is.

It's a sheer wreck.

It's a shame the fact that you own part of

the bank and smooth the purchase of the country, by

the way, is complicated.

But you do not have voting rights.

And all you get is a fixed amount of money

paid to you every year.

You would then spend that preference in time, so.

You get paid before the advance, like you get paid

before dinner.

After all, creditors sort so preference share my guarantee.

You get 5% of the value of that preference in

perpetuity.

That's what.

It is.

I think in terms of liquidation, that's what's going to

get.

One of the defendants liquidated if they can have a

paid developer so they could liquidate along with the rest

of the shareholders.

But if the bank, the shareholders lose money first, then

they preference shareholders and then the creditors.

So therefore, in your own, if you think about the

last crisis your country suffered.

What did the government do?

And if you did not get this letter, if you

did, if you did not end up with this lottery,

then either your government was incompetent or it was corrupt

or both.

So it's a very simple way to evaluate government policy

in crisis.

By the way, this is taking longer than I expected.

Let's take a regular break now and come back to

the rest of it after the break.

I think you're.

Just looking for somebody else to pick up the pieces.

Okay, that's fine.

I feel like I'm going to be able to do

that.

I feel like I'm doing the right.

So know, I think it's mostly thought through a lack

of willingness to pay for that.

Yeah.

Well, that's true.

But it's definitely something that I think I think I

think on just as you said, it's just going to

like to everything else.

So I guess you know what I want to say,

but how we go through it because she's so.

It was me so series that I have a little

bit.

You know what I mean?

Okay.

Hmm.

Yeah.

You know, there's one thing that I.

Two months ago.

I know someone's been asking me.

You should know that.

You know that everything I do.

Because people that I know just like you.

Just because I couldn't figure out that this was something

that we do, that they have a professional of trying

to help.

No, I didn't.

I didn't do that.

Yeah.

So then you have to go away.

I mean, just look at the developments in the business

world that we were going to the.

This is.

I didn't hear you talking about that a little bit

more than what I thought.

I figured I mean, I think it's another time for

this investment on my part.

US.

We have to do it first place.

No, no, no, no.

Just.

Just like that.

So that's it for us?

Yeah.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Okay.

So when it comes to bailouts, he's often classified us

into some combination of win, win, win, win, win, lose,

or who wins and who loses.

And you're looking at banks with investors and taxpayers.

So those are the three entities or the creditors, all

from investors.

So when the government offers to buy back assets, so

what?

Let me put that question to you.

This one, compensation I didn't do on the last life.

This is asset buybacks.

So I think it typically sells assets to the government.

That is not something recommended generally because the parents have

an incentive to sell these worst assets to the government,

which is known to happen in most of these types

of multiple countries.

And therefore it's a normal case.

We should not have the government buy assets from buying.

Events like that, by the way, they actually like democracy

put not to loan guarantees, but from the taxpayers point

of view, that's the worst outcome possible.

So now you have a way to write your own

government reaction to either your last or the next crisis

that has to do with liquidity provisions.

Central Bank directly increases the money supply in response to

crisis.

Before the crisis in 2008 was used, after the crisis

I showed you earlier of the 911 crisis, these things.

Such actions became known as the Greenspan putsch after Greenspan

was the head of the US Central Bank.

Because it was said that every time there's a problem

in the US financial markets, the central bank stands ready

to provide liquidity, underwrites private losses and incentivises excessive risk

taking.

And therefore our actions have become clear.

That's the problem with government oversight, is when they when

the government provides liquidity in a crisis.

It also incentivises bad outcomes.

And finally, completely aside, not completely aside, I have a

recent paper and the Boston Globe.

If you like.

Executive summary.

Exactly.

Outlining how the COVID 19 liquidity injections cause increased moral

hazard as a consequence.

Exactly how is this happening?

And then be careful and think of last resort, which

is during a crisis.

Some banks or even all banks might find access to

cash curtailed, and you might even find that what you

would normally expect to be perfectly safe, like shorting government

bonds can often monetised, meaning you can not use them

to get cash from the central bank.

Usually we have some repo agreements.

This is a technical arrangement that can cause a liquidity

crisis and financial crisis and an economic crisis of the

type we have discussed many times.

And the idea isn't we discussed this earlier, but this

is just to make an informal single organisation.

The central bank accepts securities as collateral for cash.

This is central bank because paper money.

Now, it used to be in theory only safe assets.

And I got this quote from 200 years ago from

the government, from from from this country's crisis in 1825.

And basically this quote is correct today.

What he's saying is we left for every possible means

and most never adopted before we took stocks, government bills,

etc., etc., etc..

The situation was so bad we had to do what

it could, said the Bank of England at 1825.

So what happens in a crisis is that the government

this is why the patience rule doesn't work properly in

a crisis.

You have to you and provide the liquidity with any

possible cheap asset.

Our security.

So you see the theory, you just use government bonds.

But what if the entity doesn't have golden bonds?

Well, you might have corporate bonds.

What if it doesn't have corporate bonds?

You might use bank loans.

You might use equities.

Yeah.

Equities are great.

And what has happened, of course, is that in 2008,

you could use anything you wanted.

Just like that quote here.

And in the ongoing European situation since then, banks were

able to repo pretty much anything.

And by the way, in the Europe and Europe over

the past ten years, we got into the really funny

situation with banks to buy bonds of each other.

And then we could use using ECB to get you

to.

It's just strange.

Now.

You do this?

Anybody know?

What the UK did in 2008 when they did Lender

of Last Resort, they went as far as forcing all

banks to accept lend to go back to source so

that the market would not learn which bank was being

helped.

So let me repeat that some greatest banks would have

difficulty.

So nobody will discover that.

Expensive and difficult to name it all.

Thanks for.

So he could hide his support.

And that became known when you got it a few

years afterwards.

So this is a clear case of transparency being overrated

at this point to keep on mentioning.

If you want to learn to go like this, what

you should not be transparent about it.

And I'm about to show you the US case in

a couple of the sections down.

So otherwise you get political to a stigma effect.

I gave you an example early in the Great Depression.

The resolution finds trust in the United States, which was

the government agency set up to provide bailouts.

They want to do the private.

The Congress forced them to make that business public, which

meant that everybody in support was hit by a bank

run and failed.

So you in a crisis, you really want this to

be kept secret?

Which, by the.

Way, it was.

Well.

This is the this case is the United States in

1932.

I have a slight on this and tempted to actually

did to a whole.

I think my point is that.

Connecting back to.

Then, of course, you can ask yourself, is this a

recipe for corruption?

Any doubt that this has been abused before will be

abused again.

So.

And the ECB.

Has been a practical use of last resort tools in

that it has become still is a major funder of

banks.

So what is happening is instead of lending only been

done in the crisis in Europe, it became a primary

vehicle for funding banks.

Especially.

The fact is Southern Europe, places like Portugal, Spain and

Italy.

So it became so because the states could raise funds

otherwise, or they would then issue bonds.

They could then report directly to the ECB.

You could.

It's I think, is not the way one should run

monetary policy or financial stability policy for lots of different

questions.

Before I go on.

So there is a conservative to all of this.

This is called for in.

And if you only Europe, this current European policy is

to do a phase in.

A failing is a legal device such that the creditors

of a big bank, especially one that's systemically important.

They have to assume losses if a bank gives them

a difficulty and you do that well, if bank is

still a going concern before the bank goes into bankruptcy.

So what happens is.

And by the way, this has become politically sensitive because.

You forced banks to issue what's in their debt.

And you can look particularly, of course, because they said

our banks don't need more money.

Why should the issue such that if we can't handle

cash for deposits, so much blood for some European countries,

we forced banks.

It's just that one minute that they shouldn't believe that

in a crisis you can then force the whole to

such support that losses.

I would convert it into equity.

What is Let him take the losses directly and he

do the crucially for the bank fence.

So that bank is still a going concern.

For the better.

Still call it.

Then you.

Then you force that pain to happen.

And also crucially in the narrative is.

This is done by the regulators, not by the bankruptcy

court.

And crucially.

There's no visible rule for how you do this.

This is a non-transparent process by definition.

For all of us.

You can game it.

So they say we still have one minute before midnight.

Meaningless phrase.

They will not tell you under what conditions they do

it.

But if you say it, this is a right.

We have rooms locked in a big safe in the

ECB building in Frankfurt.

And when a crisis happens, we do it.

Otherwise, the banks can gain the trigger.

And investors can speculate on it.

What we don't want to happen.

Yeah.

Palpatine stays controversial, of course, but everything these banks fear

as this pushes up the funding costs.

Like the Japanese case of his earlier.

But it does have certain benefits.

It prevents bankruptcies.

That if we should do it before thing is bankrupt

and therefore you make it much easier to deal with

a problem and you protect the taxpayers fully.

Now, if a single bank fails, it works, can work

quite nicely.

But if you're a system by bank failure, it doesn't

work.

And by the way, when I say connection, the cocoa.

Cocoa is a convertible securities of some form that can

be converted into into equity.

But that's a good rule of good be the ECB

or the European Union has made Baileys a centrepoint of

its financial regulatory policy over the past ten years.

Yes.

So I was concerned you created this whole thing?

No.

So what it means is a really simple level.

You have a you could you have your fans you

have a support group that.

Or in fact, you're forced to use the bank your

most is to supplement that.

Has a feature that the regulator can tell the bank

not repay.

So this is new day.

This is not new that you are.

I hate to say it, but things are good today.

You are good and everything is fine.

You sell bonds worth 100.

When you say complicated, you no longer have to lead

with payments on less than 200.

That's what it is.

Because.

Well, I don't know.

But it becomes more complicated and it becomes more complicated

and by and large, is.

Not all you need to do even after the revision.

On a supported issue.

Ask woman who supported that this issue supported it.

Because, I mean, it's just that, you know what, you

are in the bankruptcy hierarchy.

If that's what I mean.

Just lost.

You're supposed to take losses.

That's what that means.

So.

No.

So.

To be technical, and it depends on your country, by

the way.

But basically.

So if you like it, if there's your first loss

is taking supported by regular debt holders, then we get

into a complicated situation, a situation depending on your home

country.

Because of the legal system.

What basically it's either employees salaries.

It is because it's.

And you should come next one or the other.

Then we could go to Texas.

And then we get payments to be winding down.

And the consultants don't want to come.

So that's not that doesn't look good.

But the question is just to support it.

Constantly over time, will you have to have a certain

one, one report issued at all times?

Okay.

This is a separate article, but it's unsecured.

It also means.

And one reason this has been controversial because in some

countries the banks don't see the point of it.

I mean, in Europe, it's usually pretty obvious.

If you take Greece, for example, that was a huge

issue because in Greece.

That opposite problem we had to avoid in the Greek

Cyprus is Cyprus.

The problem with the Cypriot banks and too much cash.

But she did not know what to do with.

Why should people then have to step back from pocketbook?

They can't invest because they have already.

But basically this is a sample point.

This is a step point to EU and EU financial

policy.

In the past ten years.

And this, by the way, is what should happen in

Italy in the case of Future Fund to the some

17.

And didn't.

For political reasons.

The other alternative is something known as forbearance.

For parents is when the regulator does not use its

powers to shut somebody down, when they should shut them

down.

So you have a firm or a bank just in

bankruptcy, but you don't take them through bankruptcy proceedings.

So you are almost like that walking dead.

You are under no circumstances.

You would be cool stuff.

But because is fear that if you close the bank,

you cause a crisis so your loan operate, even if

this should be shut down.

This certainly happened in Japan and this happened more incorrectly

in Europe.

So the use of European insurance companies when they changed

insurance regulations and all of a sudden European international markets

are facing technical insolvency.

So the European authorities obviously are your private insurance brokers

in Europe.

So insurance companies will not be shut down even if

they should be shut down.

That was just because of technical glitches that triggered some

unexpected bug.

That's an example of regulatory forbearance which says you're not

doing what you're supposed to do.

Some government securities.

As a government government agency deliberately does not do what

is supposed to do.

Happens all the time.

Okay.

Problem.

The bailout is moral hazard.

So demands a demand for government bailouts of private institutions

can be very, very, very difficult for the government to

resist because it's a key policy.

A relatively small crisis can become a big crisis.

The problem is politically, and if you follow events in

politics of the past, if you follow politics.

The taxpayer is given money to pay for a profit

from banks.

So it creates a very strong moral dimension.

And what has happened since the crisis in 2008?

While the United States and most European states bailed out

a large number of banks and other financial institutions, I

think for this reason it is not politically possible to

do that again for a very long time.

Memories are still.

People still remember what was done.

And politically, these bailouts have fuelled a lot of extremism,

both on the far right and far left, both in

the United States and in Europe.

But something completely outside of the scope of this course.

Of course.

So.

Bank receives underpriced government guarantees for a price.

There's no moral hazard.

And what you are betting on is that the externality

from a failure of a large bank that is letting

the bank fail outweighs the long term moral hazard of

failing the bank.

How are you encouraging investors to misbehave?

And the government will do this risk return trade-off in

real time.

But the banks know this and then incentivised to misbehave.

Which is why I keep on saying the bigger, the

more dangerous, the worse run interconnected a bank is, the

more likely it is to be bailed out.

This incentivises them to do all of these things, which

is not what you want.

You could almost implode support if you want.

If you want a poster child for this sort of

logic.

And then you get the more basic morality of bailing

out banks in the AIG cheated banks said earlier.

The employees, of course, AIG could fail.

They were asked by the government to stay on to

help fund bank deposits.

People are paying millions of dollars a year.

Then their actions cause a global crisis.

They can benefit from the government needs to deal with

the crisis.

And many of them got these bonuses and only signed.

And then they said, How could that happen to me?

I was attacked so much they left.

So they explain.

So morally, we employees across the crisis should not be

attacked for having kept composure.

So policies causing the crisis.

And that's a theme with.

So full disclosure, the slide to the soft and let

it be you see coded the notion in 2008, I've

said.

We just put in a name for a name, But

I didn't feel I put this name into it.

He had dreams of looking forward to recession in order

to profit from a dream of another moment like this.

Anybody can make money.

Opportunity, not sin.

One moral problem of giving somebody like that.

Lots of black people profit from the crisis and costly

they cannot bail out.

And this is paid for by everybody else.

So it's not easy.

It's not an easy question.

Christian.

She had promised more.

I mean, I'm not a moral philosopher, so there's not

much I can say about this.

And I tried to contain a confine myself to things

I know is all I can say on this topic.

But keep in mind, when you're thinking about it, this

is a political discourse, isn't it?

Is there any way to make the banks incentivise them

to take on less risk?

You could certainly force them to.

I mean, the way you do that at the moment,

you see increased capital and the useful.

If you just increase the capital ratio, they take less

risk.

For them, the problem is all your small and medium

sized enterprises screen I can borrow.

Well, the solution is low little.

That's been there.

Well, that that's part of it.

But so but if you take the political discourse over

the past ten years.

And.

Sort of a very large, loud complaints from banks not

lending to small and medium sized companies, especially start-ups.

And the reason is because a capital increase up to

2000 increases.

So you don't see this growth and these small and

medium sized companies have a lot of political influence.

This all feeds into the into the discussion process.

Did some zombie zombie companies.

Why do we keep on bailing them instead of.

Allowing them to fail?

Well, some big companies, they might be owned by the

president's uncle in Italy.

Purely political or an assault on keeping the Italian example,

because that is instructive.

What happened is that banks at a particular small local

community in Italy, they were servicing that local community and

it was felt that if those banks had failed, it

was so bad to put people there.

And those people, as you know, for people like you,

disruptive, they get very, very, very angry.

The protests very loudly created the political problem.

So you might think the government spend some money, keep

it going instead of closing the country.

Instead across the country.

That's what is.

Happening.

Sorry, it's there in multiple countries.

We're seeing this problem all year.

I'm sure almost every country.

So we completely assigned an LLC, Professor Shiva, who's been

reading my book on basically a thesis of this book

is The Bailout is it's a middle class group.

So the middle class demands bailout.

That's why we have it.

So it's a really nice it's a really nice way

of discussing the problem and interested.

Finally, and I think I've just about the right time

to deal with this is the bailout in 2007.

I'm going to show you statistics, which I bet you

have never seen before, even though this is compared to

the.

So the United States government had the big program called

Troubled Asset Relief Program announced in October 2008.

The government committed 700 billion.

Eventually left out 443 taxpayers.

But it may have cost the U.S. taxpayers 19 billion.

But this is a small this small amount suggests by

itself that the US crisis was stupidity not solved.

But.

So the largest TARP bailout recipients, the private sector, the

U.S. was Citigroup.

Jp morgan.

Wells Fargo.

GE.

Morgan Stanley.

Goldman Sachs.

They received and repaid back all that money.

But here's the interesting part.

The United States announced a program to send my secrets

to Italy.

Everybody knew about it at the time, but it wasn't

made public.

Number five, the Freedom of Information lawsuit against the Federal

Reserve.

And then forced to make the loan book public.

So now you can go to the website of the

Fed and download all the long haul to show you,

which I did.

And I made most lights out of that.

But you could do the same with that.

So this is Federal Reserve emergency lending throughout the crisis.

I think this is a fantastically useful plot.

Beginning of the year, the little bastards failed to lend

up the 300 billion.

Lehman fails, lending hits 700 billion.

And then these loans are paid back over the next

three years.

And this really to me, said the peak of the

crisis, which is December nine, 2008.

However, here's the thing.

The Fed would lend banks 50 basis points, and if

banks could then deposit their money back with the Fed

at 75 basis points.

I think of all the facts and make it a

15 basis point profit from getting liquidity liquidity support from

the US government.

Which sounds funny.

If you take the outstanding numbers.

And Peter, the four biggest borrower is Citigroup, and now

you start interesting things, like you start in foreign names.

Royal Bank of Scotland, seventh biggest.

Buckle the belt sparkle Prince's sparkly spikes in.

By the way, you sometimes hear the narrative from especially

Goldman Sachs, that they never receive the bailouts.

Yeah, right.

That just shows you two plots.

They've got TARP money and they've got these secrets that

oftentimes secret credit facilities of the of the US government.

So Goldman Sachs certainly was bailed out in 2008 no

matter what it like to tell you today.

However, there's another very important thing to note.

Geopolitically foreign banks.

UPS, Credit Suisse, Barclays points in the note on the

list, you see a lot of other foreign news.

The United States, when provided the credit assistance, it provided

an equally platform and U.S. banks.

So as a country with a reserve currency, that's how

you expect that to be achieved.

So when I give the argument why I think the

U.S. dollar will be the reserve currency when you people

retire.

It is that sort of example.

I don't see any other major country to sing for

us.

I hope to see something less, but as willing to

do what's best for the system instead of what is

best to have quality.

I think this is for music.

This is a key reason why the US will be

a little sceptical.

No, I was just thinking that it was the it's

the same principle of the Marshall Plan.

That's what I had in mind.

This is a very good analogy and the same principle

isn't covered to support this war in support of a

few weeks ago.

I think this is exactly you know, you're right, we

lost.

It's a good example of the Marshall Plan.

But this also is why the US didn't make it

a dominant financial power.

The US dollar remains the same.

Currency finally profits.

Because remember the 50 basis on borrowing, 75 basis point

deposits because profits were made by Citigroup, Bank of America,

obvious, and then running down to Dexia and its cost.

Dexia is a Dutch, Luxembourg is Belgium bank, a failed

and of course was a British disaster benefit.

Somebody was asking about what happens to bankers.

Look at what happened to the boss of his boss.

Okay, people, this be a ton of time.

Enjoy your holidays.

Don't work too hard.

And feel free to walk into my office with some

solutions.

If you want to see how to answer them.

I may be away for the first few weeks of

the term and require that office hours from an office.

So I do on Zoom or in person.

Most likely.

So for the first three weeks and then mostly in-person.

What you of this from.

Well.

You know, I like my cheese is quite concentrated.

I have.

I have.

I have a lot of all the stuff.

Lecture 11:

Well, you ever Me?

No, No.

Whereas we don't.

Well, it's.

She's an invalid because of something.

See what I'm saying?

So.

Yeah.

So.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Mm hmm.

So we couldn't think of what to do.

Good for both of those who have been.

It is probably the most dating site.

Please.

Please.

Seen.

They have to do what you have to focus on.

Okay.

She.

Thanks.

There's a long.

Oh.

They should have a.

And.

Just.

For me.

It's changed.

Since.

Good.

Uh, I don't know.

So that's.

The jury.

Really?

Well, at least my stomach and my brain.

For the last.

We should look.

So.

Sure.

Are you going to use this one for?

If you find yourself in my and.

But, you know, I think also this is always, always

open.

This was a horrible incident.

And so we're just not enforcing the laws.

The market colonisation is coming.

So I think, you know, if you.

Are willing to.

Do one thing and doing it any other.

What?

Is that the changes in the.

Or if don't.

And so the introduction.

Reduces the size of the revenue.

What will I do?

Well, you put this in with it.

No, I didn't do it Other.

You are on the page.

No.

I want to know what your your fees is.

Your profile is all good.

Should I have people?

The.

Wait.

Wait, wait.

Did you go with.

Something else.

You don't have to have.

A mother who has.

Just offended you.

Your life can be in the same place with this.

There's so many things I know.

Now, let me let me just say.

So you.

But it's really going to look like the soap for

no reason.

But you can't hit Boston, You.

Want me to do the presentation.

I think we have one day left to go.

It's not funny.

It's sad.

How long will it take?

Oh, so long.

I'm so.

Because if it was.

By extension, take no.

More than.

Two.

Oh.

Just put it.

Yeah.

So you can go back to sleep, sweetie.

Okay.

Then when you were presenting, you can say.

I mean, I just think.

Sure the rule has been placed in order to make

sure.

So like.

Like I ask if some people can.

Sure look more like the.

Some people question this increase.

So I think I can answer your question together.

Yeah.

Know.

I was present, right?

Yeah, right.

You know, we can talk about awkwardness, but.

We don't talk about the.

Reference to that very same.

So I'm going back.

Broken.

I mean, he did work on.

Just a.

Just.

Servicemen and.

Women.

Because it is just.

And so I'm doing the Q&A.

And again for.

You can take.

I have no.

No.

To go to.

What do you think with.

Mean, just say there's no much information.

Trying to relate that to the article.

I am not able to.

But like.

If you have a situation, how.

Do you balance?

Oh, well, you were doing well in the film there.

I did.

Did you have any difficulty or that sort of thing

So you were still concerned about.

Because he doesn't have to share the philosophy elsewhere.

You know.

They lost the war.

So what is the use when it comes?

So you're asking.

Yeah, that's.

And I'm sure that your concern about the percentage of

equity that.

That's basically, for the record.

A That's just why this doesn't have anything to.

But there's always been.

So I just want to show.

A few students that the lecture hall was okay.

So this is like this is just a on this.

Look, you have to.

This is the one that I have.

Oh, yeah.

No.

But I need some.

Some questions.

What I would do with this.

Such a thing as to to colour my presentation as

well as at other brands to.

Otherwise.

In my.

It's like I.

And we can reduce.

No, no words.

All right.

Thanks so much for.

And these people can see from.

Yeah.

The meeting.

How Goebbels was the presentation.

We haven't.

Also.

And they.

Yeah.

The able to help.

Oh.

Where I can sleep.

Where I can sleep.

Also contributions will empower.

It's kind of confusing because this is basically where.

Benefit, but if the contribution is for the better.

But it's some kind of you.

No.

No, no, no.

No.

Say.

Which is usually.

Look at this thing.

This one's for you.

And.

What?

That's.

I just.

Please.

Yeah.

So that.

I didn't do that.

No.

Yeah.

That's why we need another copy.

Which is the.

Two oh.

Four.

Oh.

Oh.

That's right.

Yeah.

This.

Fuck you back.

You can choose this one.

Yes.

So this one.

This is a.

World that's going.

So no.

Matter.

What sort of.

Okay of thing.

So at present, tomorrow, percent more personal losses.

I'm opening for them.

That's.

Asking.

Don't panic.

No.

No.

Why do I have to?

Yeah, well, it's a process where we learn something through.

Also I think when one person.

I'm just thinking of our.

Yeah.

And certainly with those, it would be the right thing

to do.

I competitors lined up.

Okay, so there you have it.

I think it was like five.

And guess good it.

Yeah.

What if I'm going to give you a.

I mean.

If you're just.

All day.

All day?

Yes.

All day.

All day after?

Yeah.

So what?

Yeah.

Well.

So up on the screen, we want.

To know who is supposed.

To go to jail.

Okay.

What do prison.

Tomorrow is tomorrow or is tomorrow.

So we could finish by as much as I can.

Five six.

And have said we we're going to do something.

Yeah.

Then I could do.

All that just because.

I'm able to go to tomorrow with myself here.

So that will.

Give us.

Some idea of what they're doing.

So.

My.

So that script.

I don't know.

I'm done in front of the site, so I'm just.

Usually they're saying, just look, I was thinking like, Oh.

Okay.

Sounds like you're.

Maybe I was like, Jesus, we're just.

And so this morning was the last chance was in.

Time, I think like the.

Before this notification.

Well, you can.

See how just.

People like me are as far as 70 and.

I as myself.

So me just mention this.

But if Harris.

Has not mentioned those important points, that's when there's an

absolute need to show them.

But if it's too much work, just ignore it.

It's only 5%.

And it is to say that for the first time

you are closer to what I was so basically making

them.

So, you know.

Responsible for.

You want to see it?

Some of.

So more on this show.

So.

Yes.

So.

Mr..

Here.

When I was in New York in.

I'm going to go.

To the Asian Games.

Them.

So what's the solution?

I mean, so computers.

Patients continue to subscribe to those because it basically creates.

Like everyone else.

Suppose so.

Like.

The subscriber gets looks.

And.

Oh, yeah.

Many of these comments live.

And I know the bathrooms when I was growing.

Oh, it was terrible.

Just like that.

So you speak English?

Uh, yeah.

Yeah, It's all the friends of friends.

Well.

Because they are all waiting for me to.

Maybe we'll just meet tomorrow.

We're just going to sit.

Well, it's easier.

You know, it's done.

Like I say, looking at it.

I can do.

I'm talking about this.

The.

And then she said, It's fun.

So just.

Okay, So I was.

Or.

Oh, yeah.

When I back.

Which one?

Have a.

Good time.

Excellent.

To.

Because if we're not getting that for a.

I do my best to finish with this group.

Is not.

Who am I supposed to?

So know.

Yeah.

-30.

Thursday of this week.

Yeah.

Oh, no.

So I wasn't there.

Yeah, I know.

I'm not.

Yeah.

So do you have some markets?

What does this mean for you to.

Okay.

I'm just, you know, I just do the first one.

We still need to be part of.

Our make up institute to graduate.

Um.

I don't know.

I don't like, uh.

Are you?

So I'm.

Hello.

Oh, I.

Oh, no, I important.

I just want to hear about.

I do like.

Really?

Okay.

This.

Was.

Which was about.

Or for that matter, or for the theory.

Navigation.

Original analysis of.

And there's something else that.

And corporate finance.

So I knew I have to.

The Russian parliament.

I.

Interesting story.

I know.

I'll see if I can pick.

Social.

What?

Social life.

You have social life.

Oh, I wish I have.

Well, you know.

So now I'm.

No, I saw that.

So, I mean, we'll stay here after next week, right?

Oh.

Yeah.

With this whole thing.

Yeah.

Yeah, I really, um.

I was like.

Oh, yeah, you're going to go for that.

Oh, yeah.

How do I go on?

I think I'll just go now.

So you've been watching this?

Yeah.

Oh.

Yeah.

To know.

Yeah.

I've done all the roads and everything, you know.

It's boring.

And I don't like going to the school.

Now just go home.

Okay?

Yes, ma'am.

Tomorrow rather than morrow.

And.

No.

So you're not coming into the morning clothes?

Oh, I didn't know that.

And I.

Eight.

True.

I don't think I thought.

I agree.

I'm proud.

Of you.

And thank you for signing in here.

Oh, if I go, I'll sign.

707 The signature.

So.

Most people.

This was followed by.

This is one the.

Trends such as.

She died of natural.

Oh.

So it's.

Why?

Well.

So it's.

The concerned.

Responsible for.

Which is contrary.

The same situation.

Still.

They're supposed to.

Be.

So sharing.

Information sharing.

So it's.

Yes.

Yeah.

Um.

Okay.

Wow.

That's really cool.

Yes.

That's cool.

So eventually, to shut down, which has always been a

problem, but.

So now.

Yeah.

So?

So, in addition.

They also announced that what they are facing.

6004.

So when we go to.

Due to a loss of subscribers.

This is the lowest revenue growth in the last decade.

While revenues increased, they fell short of what analysts.

He aims to sustain double digit revenue growth going forward.

1 to 2 subscribers and for one person.

So that of us.

Then are increasing from six when I was high profile

and in more cases a year ago, which is the

company's first.

To be very, very.

Working in crisis.

I am much more focussed.

Oh, sure.

Every day I try to make sure.

And then also that.

So there's got to be.

To.

Oh, that's right.

The.

Hello.

You have to.

Like.

Um, yeah.

Our current site for it is for you.

Yes, exactly.

Yeah, I will.

And you want me to.

Do that again?

Yeah, I'm sure.

I'm not really supposed to.

That.

Oh, who was another person?

This size is wide open.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Control.

You want to make sure you know.

You know.

Uh huh.

That, um.

Yeah.

Yeah.

This morning.

Incredible.

And what about.

Do you have any interviews?

No, no, I'm.

I'm.

I'm on hand with you, and I'm so tired of

this.

I just work for, like, 2 hours away from work,

and I really need a break.

So, you know.

Um, so they will, they will give me feedback.

They told me that they will.

Only me.

I knew.

What does that mean?

It's friends from Texas and.

These.

Yes.

I'm sick of.

Yeah, Just in case I make it easy, just to

sort of.

Yeah, know.

It's not.

True.

Yeah.

Through the subjects of.

For.

To.

I have a feeling of community today.

What has happened?

I don't know.

Just for many.

Yea.

Yea.

Yea.

Yea.

There another where though?

Class is there all the time.

Did everybody go home before?

Yea, I figured like everyone went home weekend and just

before Christmas.

Just like you get 3 hours person to attend.

It makes it quite likely that we're going to get

a phone call.

I forgot my calendar.

Okay.

I don't know what that is, but just my cell

phone.

And they changed the room.

I mean, I mean, the question is I mean, apart

from like the first one was like mostly.

Yeah.

Interpretation.

Yeah.

So I don't think without I don't think we have

anything else.

So as long as we was another on Thursday, I

think, I think that was I think we're going to

go today.

Are you.

Let me know what you're talking about because we have

we have the we have another.

That's a more conceptual.

Yeah.

Which is more like we're multitasking more.

Really?

Yeah.

Okay.

But I remember, like, initially when they said it's.

It's good to push back, but.

How did you say you have a sometime this summer?

I, I don't think it's because of the time.

You know, I'm not sure what to do.

Oh, sorry.

Okay.

Say, I think it's close to my house, and I

got my chair, and I'm.

Just going.

To start speaking about what was the address, because.