I
V•
i
♦
!,
* I **.
r. *
f. 
’14
+•
L'l'
j


r
r




A SHORT HISTORY OF MODERN GREECE
1821-1956




A SHORT HISTORY OF
MODERN GREECE
1821—1956
hy
EDWARD S. FORSTER
THIRD EDITION
REVISED AND ENLARGED
BY DOUGLAS DAKIN
GREENWOOD PRESS, PUBLISHERS
WESTPORT, gCONNECTICUT
99
Connetquot Public Library 760 Ocean Avenue Bohemia, New York 11716.


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Forster, Edward Seymour, 1879-1950. A short history of modem Greece, 1821-1956.
Reprint of the 1958 ed. published by Methuen, London. Bibliography: p. Includes index. 1. Greece, Modem-History—1821- I. DaJd.n, Douglas. II. Title. i;DF802.f6 1977] 949.5'06 77-11620 ISBN 0-8371-9803-8
Copyright (§) ig^8 Methuen & Co. Ltd.
All rights reserved.
Originally published in 1958 by Methuen & Co., Ltd., London
Reprinted with the permission of Methuen & Co. Ltd., on behalf of the Academic Associated Book Publishers Ltd.
Reprinted in 1977 by Greenwood Press, Inc.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 77-11620
ISBN 0-8371-9803-8
Printed in the United States of America


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION
THE entry of Greece into the war in October 1940 has sug¬
gested that the present is a suitable occasion for carrying out a
project which I have had in mind, and for which I have been
collecting material, ever since my return from service in the
Army from 1915 to 1919 as an Intelligence Officer in Macedonia
and Constantinople. My interest in Modern Greece dates from
my first visit to that country in 1900, which was followed by
two years’ residence there from 1902-4 as a member of the
British School of Archaeology at Athens and by several visits
both before and since the war of 1914-18.
The book falls into three periods.
Part I is a summary of the story of the birth and early struggles
of the Greek Kingdom and its history down to the year 1914.
It makes no claim to originality and necessarily owes much to
the many authors who have dealt with this period in greater
detail.
Part II deals with the story of Greece during the war of
1914-18. The political events which occurred at Athens and
Salonica during these years were full of dramatic interest, though
their significance was overshadowed by much more momentous
happenings elsewhere in Europe and Asia ; an account of what
was occurring in the political sphere in Greece and its connexion
with the military operations may be of interest to the general
reader and, in particular, to those who spent many long months
with the forces based on Salonica and must often have wondered
exactly what was happening in the rest of Greece, and how it
was that pohtical events delayed for so long the advance of the
Army which, after three years of waiting, achieved the glorious
victory of September 1918 and drove a nail into the coffin of the


Central Alliance. After a year spent as an Intelligence Officer in
the field, I was attached from 1916 to 1918 as British representative
to a bureau of the French G.H.Q., which was in close touch with
the poHtical activities of General Sarrail and his successors, and
thus had the opportunity of gaining some first-hand knowledge
of what was happening in that sphere. The account here given
of this period is an abbreviated version of an account which I
wrote immediately after my return to England in 1919.
Part III deals with events in Greece from the Armistice in
1919 down to the ItaUan invasion of Greece in October 1940.
It was a period of constant political change in Greece which
seems to necessitate a year-by-year treatment of events. Such
interest as is offered by the history of the earlier years is provided
by the struggle between the Monarchists and Republicans and
by the attempts of the Balkan States to patch up their differences
and form an Entente which might act as a single Power and
present a united front to possible outside aggression. Towards
the end of the period the interest increases as the crisis comes
nearer ; and an attempt has been made to describe the reactions
of Greece to the course of events in Europe in which she herself
eventually became involved. More attention has been paid in
this part of the book to economic matters, which assumed an
importance which they lacked in the earlier periods.
A final chapter gives some personal impressions of the
modern Greek people.
Any one who writes about the events in Greece during the
years following 1914 has to make up his mind whether he
supports the Royalist or the Venizelist party. Much has been
written on both sides and, in particular, much skilful propaganda
has been used in the attempt to prove that King Constantine
was a martyr and M. Venizelos an unscrupulous adventurer ;
but an impartial survey of the evidence has brought the convic¬
tion that M. Venizelos was right in the drastic measures he took
to bring Greece into the war on the side of the Allies and that
the results have justified his policy.


The Bibliography at the end of the book forms a record of
the more important books which I have consulted and wUl, I
hope, be a guide to those who wish to supplement what is
necessarily a very brief account of the events which it attempts
to chronicle. In Part III I owe a debt of gratitude to the admir¬
able publications of the Institute of International Affairs, which
are a mine of accurate and authoritative information, to the
files of The Times, and to the historical summaries in the Annual
Register. I would recommend those who desire more detailed
information about the Greek people and about Greek political
personalities to consult the writings of Dr. WiUiam Miller, who
is the historian par excellence of modern Greece in this country.
The spelling of place and personal names gives rise to difficult
problems ; I have tried, perhaps at the expense of consistency,
to use those forms which I think will be most familiar to my
readers. I have to acknowledge with thanks the help of my colleagues.
Professor G. R. Potter, who read my MS. and made many
valuable suggestions; Mr. W. S. Maguinness, whose careful
scrutiny of the proofs has been of great service ; and Messrs.
A. M. Woodward and F. E. Tyler, who have given me advice.
I have also to thank my neighbour, Mr. Charles Boot, for the
loan of numerous books from his library at Thornbridge Hall.
EDWARD S. FORSTER
March 31, 1941


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
IN preparing the third edition of this book, I have retained the late Professor Forster’s account of the years 1940-45 and I have made each section of the Epilogue of the second edition a separate chapter. All I have done is to delete the concluding paragraphs in which the author looks back on the events of the war years and states the problems of post-war Greece. The author’s account of the years 1940-45, though written by May 1945, is very adequate and it would be difficult to improve upon it in the space available. I have, however, added one or two notes supplementing the account in the light of more recent knowledge and linking it up with the new Chapter XXVI dealing with Greece during the post-war years. Finally, I have transferred the chapter. The Greeks of To-day, to the end of the book, having merely deleted the last sentence and having added a few remarks to round off the book, using chiefly a form of words from the original concluding paragraph to Chapter XXIII. Should the reader seek a fuller and contemporary account of the Greeks of to-day, I can recommend him the excellent volume, Francis King, Introducing Greece (1956).
viii


CONTENTS
PART I
GREECE FROM THE TURKISH CONQUEST TO THE
OUTBREAK OF THE WAR OF 1914-18
CHAPTER PAGE
I. THE GREEKS UNDER TURKISH DOMINATION AND THE GROWTH
OF NATIONAL SENTIMENT ..... I
n. THE GREEK WAR OF INDEPENDENCE : GREECE UNDER KING
OTHO (i82I-<54) ...... 10
HI. THE REIGN OF KING GEORGE I DOWN TO THE ANNEXATION
OF THESSALY (1864-81) . . . . .20
IV. THE RHGN OF KING GEORGE I FROM I881 TO I908 . -30
V. THE YOUNG TURK REVOLUTION AND THE BALKAN LEAGUE
(1908-12) . . . . ... .40
VI. THE BALKAN WARS (1912-I3) . . . . -50
Vn. FROM THE TREATY OF BUCHAREST TO THE OUTBREAK OF THE
WAR OF 1914-18 (1913-I4) . . . .62
PART II
GREECE DURING THE WAR OF 1914-18
Vni. GREECE AT THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR OF I9I4-18. . 73
IX. POLITICAL EVENTS IN GREECE FROM JANUARY TO OCTOBER.
1915 ....... 81
X. GREECE AND HER OBLIGATIONS TOWARDS SERBIA . . 90
XI. THE ELECTIONS OF DECEMBER I915 AND THE BETRAYAL OF
THE RUPEL FORT ...... 99
Xn. THE BEGINNINGS OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT . . IO5
Xni. THE EVENTS OF 1ST AND 2ND DECEMBER 1916 IN ATHENS . II4
XIV. GREECE IN DISUNION . . . . . .122
XV. THE TRIUMPH OF M. VENIZELOS AND THE ALLIED VICTORY IN
MACEDONIA . . . . . .128


X Contents
PART III
GREECE FROM 1918 TO 1957
CHAPTER PAGE
XVI. THE PEACE CONFERENCE (1919-21) . . . -135
XVII. THE GREEK CAMPAIGN IN ASIA MINOR AND ITS CONSE¬
QUENCES (192I-2) . . . . .141
XVIII. THE TREATY OF LAUSANNE AND THE FOUNDATION OF THE
REPUBLIC (1923-5) ..... 148
XIX. THE DICTATORSHIP OF GENERAL PANGALOS, AND THE
RETURN OF M. VENIZELOS (1925-8) . . . I59
XX. M. VENIZELOS IN POWER AGAIN (1928-32) . . . 169
XXI. THE REACTION TOWARDS MONARCHISM AND THE RESTORA¬
TION OF KING GEORGE II (1933-5) . . . 181
XXII. GENERAL METAXAS BECOMES DICTATOR (1936-9) . -193
XXIII. THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR IN I939 AND THE ITALIAN
ATTACK UPON GREECE ..... 204
XXIV. THE GERMAN INVASION : THE OCCUPATION OF GREECE BY
THE AXIS (194I-5) ..... 213
XXV. THE LIBERATION OF GREECE : THE CIVIL WAR OF I944-5 . 221
XXVI. THE RECONSTRUCTION OF GREECE DURING THE POST-WAR
YEARS : GREECE, AND EUROPE, I945-56 . . 227
XXVII. THE GREEKS OF TO-DAY ..... 244
BIBLIOGRAPHY ....... 256
. 259
INDEX


MAPS
THE BALKAN WARS, I912-I3 ......
POSITIONS OF THE GREEK DIVISIONS BEFORE THE HNAL OFFENSIVE
ON THE MACEDONIAN FRONT (SEPTEMBER I918)
THE GREEK CAMPAIGN IN ASIA MINOR ....
THE GROWTH OF THE GREEK KINGDOM TO 1922 .
GREECE ....... At
PACK
51
133
143
149
end
Drawn by Stephen J. Dernie


N
\
TO
H. S. F.
AND
A. S. F.


PART I
GREECE FROM THE TURKISH CONQUEST TO THE
OUTBREAK OF THE WAR OF 1914-18
CHAPTER I
THE GREEKS UNDER TURKISH DOMINATION AND THE GROWTH OF NATIONAL SENTIMENT
The Turkish
conquest of
Greece.
THE modern kingdom of Greece owes its origin to two main
Th ■ ■ ffh • primarily, to the spontaneous impulse e ^ q£- Christian population of the Ottoman
* ' Empire, and, secondarily, to the practical sym¬ pathy of Great Britain, France, and Russia. The preservation of Greek national sentiment throughout the dark ages of Turkish rule is one of the most remarkable phenomena of modem history. The conquering Turk found Greece an easy prey. The gradual decline of the Byzantine Empire had led to decay and stagnation in its outlying territories. Further, since the time of the Fourth Crusade, which had turned from its main object, the recovery of the Holy Land, to conquer Con¬ stantinople, there had been Frankish feudal principalities in the Greek lands, whose misrule and incessant quarrels had reduced the Greek inhabitants to a state of miserable servitude. The Turkish armies after the conquest of Macedonia and Thessaly, where their rule was firmly estabhshed some years before the close of the fourteenth century, obtained a footing in Central Greece in 1396. The complete subjugation of Greece was, however, delayed by the danger which threatened the Turks from the Mongols ; and the Byzantine Empire, making a final effort before its own end came, succeeded in destroying Frankish rule in the Peloponnese in 1430. After the fall of Constantinople in 1453 the conquest of Greece was not long delayed, the Peloponnese being finally reduced in 1466—the year in which the Parthenon at Athens became a Turkish mosque—and Euboea


2 The Greeks under Turkish Domination
in 1470. Mohammed II, after deliberately exterminating
n- t ■ 1 the remaining Frankish lords and the Greek
1 he 1 ufktsh ^
. p notables, handed over their lands to liis OAvn sys em tn recce, established the Turkish system
of timars, or fiefs, held for hfe as the reward of distinguished military service. Under this system the Greek cultivator remained on his lands paying a fixed revenue to his overlord, who in his turn was under the obligation of giving his personal service to the Sultan and providing a band of followers varying according to the size of his fief. Every unbeliever was also compelled to pay the haratsh, or poll-tax, from which all Moslems
Thp Were exempt. Mohammed also imposed the blood-tribute of Christian children, one-fifth of the males being collected every four years and carefully educated as Mohammedans, thus providing the Sultan with a standing army and a devoted body of household slaves. These forcibly Islamized Christians for two centuries formed the chief basis of the Sultan s personal authority and of the mihtary superiority of the Ottoman Empire. These measures effectually subjected Greece to the Turkish domination and abolished the last traces of the political system inherited from Imperial Rome by the Empire of the East, and the political history of Greece became merged in that of its Ottoman rulers. The Hellenic race during this period sank so low in the social scale and became so reduced in numbers that he would have been a bold prophet who had foretold that it could ever lift up its head again.
The Ottoman Empire, under the direction of a series of able and energetic sultans, reached its culminating point in the reign
The zenith of Suleiman I, the Magnificent (i520-1 $66), who the Turkish ruled from Buda-Pesth to the Persian Gulf and Empire. threatened Austria, while his navies menaced countries as far apart as Spain and India. The seventeenth century marks the beginning of the decline ofTurkey, which may be dated from the unsuccessful siege of Vienna in
1683. In Greece a Western Power, Venice, again asserted itself, and it was in the bombard¬ ment of the Acropolis at Athens by the Venetians in 1687 that a cannon-ball landed in a Turkish powder magazine in the Parthenon and caused an explosion, which partially destroyed it. The
The beginning
of its decline in
the seventeenth
century.


and the Growth of National Sentiment 3
Peace of Carlowitz in 1699 gave the Venetian Republic the rule of the Peloponnese, which it retained until 1715, when the Turks won it back again. But the great days of the Ottoman Empire were over and henceforward, instead of being a Central European Power, it became a definitely Eastern Power, and Europe was freed from the menace of a Turkish invasion.
The only Christian administrative authority which was not abolished by Mohammed the Conqueror was the Greek Church.
The Greek Patriarchate of Constantinople was left , j undisturbed, and the Patriarch was the head rr t. t f j not only or the ecclesiastical body but also or
1 urkish rule and 1^1 • 11'^
,■ the Greek community, and was the representative
Us preservation of ^ , „ , . . . 1 1 • ^ • 1 1
^ »• or the Greek nation in its dealine-s with the
Creek nationality. „ „ 1 • 1
^ Ottoman Government. Such questions as those regarding inheritance and marriage were referred not to the civil courts but to the ecclesiastical tribunals. The great mass of Greeks, however, was scattered in isolated communities engaged in agricultural pursuits. Here the parish priest and the head-man of the village decided ordinary judicial cases between Christians, holding a kind of court in the church with the notables of the village, including doubtless the schoolmaster, as assessors. This semi-ecclesiastical communal system did much to keep alive the sentiment of nationality. The debt of the Greek nation towards the parochial clergy and the schoolmasters during the dark ages of the Turkish domination is one which cannot be overestimated ; more than any other classes they contributed to keeping alive the flame of Hellenism and national patriotism amongst the agricultural population during the long centuries
of Ottoman rule. The decline of the Turkish Empire which set in during the later part of the seventeenth century had the effect of improv, , , ing the position of the Christian population. eec me oj gradual breakdown of the administration t e ttoman loosened the hold of the Central Government
more distant portions of the Empire,
while the growing power of the neighbouring Christian peoples forced the Ottoman Government to conciliate the goodwill of its Christian subjects. In the agricultural regions money payment finally took the place of personal service and the Greek peasant


The Greeks wider Turkish Domination
became in many districts practically the free owner of the land which he tilled. In the urban communities the improved position of the Greeks allowed their intellectual superiority to assert itself in , two spheres, the official and the commercial
ie ree s as ^orld. The Ottoman Government no longer
Turkish civil -1 . . , ?
carried on campaigns against the great Christian powers of Europe, with whom its relations became more and more those of diplomacy. A career was then opened for which the Greek with his keener intellect and imagina¬ tion was much better fitted than the Turk. There thus arose the important class of Greek officials in the service of Turkey, who had received the name of Phanariots from the quarter of the capital in which the Patriarchate is situated. Though at first they were employed only in secretarial duties, their aptitude for affairs marked them out for more important posts. The celebrated Grand Vizier Achmet Kyopriilii after the conquest of Candia in 1669 created for his Greek secretary, the Chiot Panagiotakis, the post of Dragoman of the Porte, a position which rapidly became one of great political importance. A similar position, that of Dragoman of the Fleet, was afterward created in the service of the Capitan Pasha, who was charged with the administration and the collection of taxes in the Islands of the JEgezn. Alexander Mavrocordatos, also a native of Chios, succeeded Panagiotakis and gained great credit for his conduct of the negotiations which led to the conclusion of the Peace of Carlowitz in 1699. The creation of the positions of Voivodes, or Christian rulers, of Moldavia in 1712 and Wallachia in 1716 gave the Phanariots further opportunities of distinction, and the holders of these offices naturally chose their subordinates from among their own nation.
The Phanariot influence was partly good and partly bad. It was good in that the Greeks, through the important positions
The Phanariot occupied by numerous members of their comGreeks munity, exercised an enormous influence through¬ out the Ottoman Empire, and the whole nation gained vigour from the improved conditions under which it lived. Moreover, the necessity for Hterary instruction which was required for official duties acted as an impulse to education. This education, moreover, was essentially Hellenic and did not


and the Growth of National Sentiment 5
merely aim at producing competent officials but disseminated a more general type of culture. Even the great Phanariot princes found time to be men of letters as well as administrators.^ On the other hand, the Phanariot officials were naturally closely attached to the ruling power in Turkey, and it was to their interest to support the existing state of affairs, which gave them wealth and enabled them to hve in luxury. It is, however, to their credit that their position as servants of the Ottoman Government did not lead them to adopt either the Turkish language or the religion of Islam ; they were, without exception, staunch apostles of Hellenism. Just as the declining vigour of the Ottoman gave a fresh scope to the Greek in the sphere of official life and diplomacy,
Greek trade another field the indifference and contempt
, , ^ , which the Turk has always felt for commerce
under the 1 urhs. i ^ i ■ • r i i •
gave the Greek genius an opening of which it was not slow to avail itself. Even as early as the period immedi¬ ately following the Turkish conquest, the strong government of the early Sultans had given a scope to the commercial activities of his Greek subjects and a considerable trade was carried on with Italy and even with Spain. Greek commerce naturally benefited from the prestige enjoyed by the Turks throughout Europe until the end of the sixteenth century, although it had , . to meet the competition of the numerous Jews ejeti s m expelled from Spain by Ferdinand and Isabella
' at the end of the fifteenth century, whom the Ottoman Government allowed to settle in Turkey, especially in Constantinople and Salonica, and to whom it extended its protection. But the unsettled conditions which ruled in the seventeenth century, the prevalence of piracy, and the increasing maladministration of the Ottoman Empire restricted enterprise and gradually extinguished much of the commerce with the outside world which Greek industry had built up. Further, the Venetians during their occupation of Greece established monopolies in their own favour which materially damaged Greek commercial interests. The
Extension of
Greek trade in
the eighteenth
century.
eighteenth century, however, saw a marked revival of
^ For example, Alexander Mavrocordatos wrote Moral Essays and a Treatise on the Circulation of the Blood.


Rise of Greek
communities
outside the Otto
man Empire.
6 The Greeks under Turkish Domination
Greek trade, especially in its second half, when commercial treaties concluded between Russia and Turkey gave the Greek merchant the protection of the Russian flag. During the period of disturbance throughout Europe which followed the French Revolution, the Ottoman Government for a long time managed to preserve its neutrality, and Greek merchants were enabled to make enormous profits. During this period the foundations were laid of the great carrying trade which is one of the principal industries of Modern Greece. The Greek merchant soon realized that his enterprise could find a scope outside Turkey, and wealthy commercial houses grew up not only at Odessa, Moscow, Trieste, and Venice but even in London.^ This rise of Hellenic communities in foreign countries had an important influence, in that it impressed upon many Greeks that a great future lay before their nation if it could win for itself a Greece freed from the Turkish domination. The Greek resident abroad also became famihar with ideas of liberty, such as found no encouragement in the land of his birth. The improved condition of the Greek race in Turkey in rj. f/^1 the eighteenth century may be illustrated by . . taking several types of Greek communities.
cormnum tes southern Greece Hydra, Psara, and Spetsai
under the rule r i r-ii i ^ i
^fYk tormed a group or islands whose ships carried on a lucrative trade and which formed the training ground of the Greek fleet of the War of Independence. In northern Greece the town of Ambelakia on the Peneus was
u j n ^ important manufacturing centre, famous for c , ■ tts dyed thread, and had direct commercial rela^ ■ tions with Western Europe. Amongst the islands of the iEgean, Chios, which has produced some of the most distinguished sons of Modern Hellas, was a highly flourishing
Ambelakia community, celebrated not only for its silk and cotton goods but also for its literary cul¬ ture, and enjoyed the right to collect its own taxes, the Greek
^ The princely generosity of Greek merchants and bankers settled in other countries in supporting the national interests of Greece with their personal fortunes is probably without parallel in any other nation. Numerous examples might be quoted from the time of the Greek War of Independence down to the present day.


and the Growth of National Sentiment 7
authorities paying the Ottoman Government a fixed annual sum
Chios which was shared on an equitable basis among the families of the island. But perhaps the most remarkable of all the Greek communities in Turkey was the town of Aivali, or to call it by its Greek name Cydonia, on the
Aivali west coast of Asia Minor, opposite to Mitylene, which in 1740 was established as an independent Greek municipality from which Turks were excluded by a special firman of the Sultan and was famous for its spacious pubhc buildings, its educational institutions, and the wealth and culture of its inhabitants. But the description of a few com¬ munities does not give a true idea of the peaceful penetration of Hellenic influence throughout the Ottoman Empire, where not only the greater part of the trade but practically all the learned professions were in the hands of the Greeks. The growing importance of the Greek element in the Ottoman Empire could not fail to attract the interest of the neighbouring powers of Europe. To Russia in particular the Greeks were bound by the tie of a common religion, and. during the eighteenth century the fact that there were frequent conflicts between the Russians and the Turks inspired in the minds of the Greeks a hope that Russia might assist them in their aspirations for freedom. Many Greeks entered the Russian service and acquired influence with the ruling powers there. In 1770 a project was formed by Gregory Orloff, a favourite of Catherine the Great, for establish¬ ing an independent principahty in Greece. In April of that
The risin in ^ Russian fleet appeared off the coast of
f Laconia and the whole of the Peloponnese rose
the Peloponnese . ^ ^ , . . , ^
^ agamst its masters. The rising, however, was m 1770. abortive and was suppressed chiefly by Albanian
troops, who remained in the country and became a terror not only to the Christian but also to the Moslem population. The internal disorder which resulted led to the increase of the im¬ portant class of outlaws known as Klephts (‘ brigands ’), who took to the mountains and lived in open rebellion against the Ottoman authorities. They were destined to play a great part in the War of Independence, and the ballads which tell of their doings are among the most precious heirlooms of the Greek
Russian
sympathy for the
Greeks in
Turkey.


8 The Greeks under Turkish Domination
race, breathing as they do an ardent patriotism combined with a dehcate sentiment and chivalry which makes them unlike
anything else in literature^ i r i In spite of the failure of the rising of 1770 the seed ot revolu¬ tion was sown, though conditions in Greece itself and the state rr r of public opinion in Europe were not yet The effect of favourable to its growth. It is to the French the French Revolution that we must attribute the final Revolution. impulse which led to the achievement of Greek
Independence. The ideas of hberty which it inspired, not only encouraged the Greeks to hope that freedom was at hand for all the oppressed nations of the earth, but also gave rise to a growing sympathy among the free peoples of Europe with those races which were still in bondage, and. The Greek particular, a desire to do something for the literary country where freedom had had its birth. The renaissance. ferment caused by these new ideas produced a
literary renaissance amongst the Greeks. The leader in this movement was Adamantios Coraes, who was born at Smyrna in 1748 and was not only a literary apostle of modern Hellenism but also one of the most
distinguished classical scholars of his day.^ In 1803 he read in Paris before a learned society a ‘ Memoir on the Present State of Civilization in Greece,’ in which he insisted on the imperative necessity for Greek national emancipation, and issued to the Greeks his SdXiria-fia iroXeixia-T^piov, a spirited Rhigas. appeal to revolution. Constantine Rhigas
(1753-98) had already written his stirring national songs, which hold a high place in modern Greek literature, and had founded a society which was the prototype of the celebrated Hetairiai (literary and political unions), which rapidly sprang up in every Hellenic community. The most famous of these which became par excellence the National Hetairia was founded T e Hetairia. four Greek merchants at Odessa in 1814* It
soon became an immense organization which extended wherever
Greeks were to be found and was beheved to have embraced
^ Numerous collections of klephtic ballads have been made, the best
known being those of Fauriel and Passow. * A good account of Coraes is to be found in Platon E. Drakouhs, Neohellenic Language and Literature (Oxford, 1897), pp. 48 If.


The British in
the Ionian
Islands.
administration and commerce.
and the Growth of National Sentiment 9
200,000 members, who adopted mysterious signs and ceremonies not unlike those of the Freemasons and described themselves as the agents of an Unknown Power which in due time should deliver Greece from the Turkish yoke. Meanwhile the Greeks had been brought into contact with Great Britain through the protectorate estabhshed by that Power in the Ionian Islands in 1815. Here, though the inhabitants did not enjoy all the liberty which they might have desired, they at least experienced the advantages of an equitable of justice and the encouragement of industry At the same time the presence of a British administration in the Ionian Islands helped to familiarize educated opinion in Great Britain with the aspirations of the Greek nation and the problems to which they gave rise. Remarkable evidence of the interest in Greece taken by individual Enghshmen is to be found in the large numbers of travellers who visited the country at the beginning of the nineteenth century in the course of die ‘ Grand Tour ’ undertaken by many rich young Enghshmen as part of their education.^ These travellers returned to their native land with the impression that the internal state of Turkey could not much longer remain as it was. We have now briefly reviewed the condition of the Greeks under the Ottoman domination and traced their rise from a state of subjection till they formed an important element in the Turkish Empire, assisting in its administration and carrying on the greater part of its trade, inspired, however, by a strong feeling of nationality and a desire for hberty. We have further seen how from the middle of the eighteenth century onwards circumstances had brought the Greek race into contact with the Christian countries of Europe, in particular with Great Britain, France, and Russia, with the double result of strengthening in the mind of the Greeks their aspirations for freedom and of inspiring the sympathy of friends who would help them when the moment came to strike a blow for hberty.
^ It was to this class that many of those Philhellenes belonged, who placed their personal services and fortunes at the disposal of the Greeks during the War of Independence.
Summary.


CHAPTER I
THE GREEK WAR OF INDEPENDENCE: GREECE UNDER KING OTHO (1821-64)
The abortive
rising under
Alexander
Ypsilanti.
THE first attempt at revolt was made in 1821, when the Hetairia appointed as its leader Alexander Ypsilanti, member of a wellknown Phanariot family which had produced several Princes of Wallachia and Moldavia, and who was himself an officer in the Russian army. With an insignificant following he raised the standard of revolt in Moldavia and apparently expected a general rally of the peasantry to the Greek cause. He received no support from the Rumanian population, who had chafed under the Phanariot rule, and his rising was quickly
TUp Rpvnhitinn supprcsscd. Simultaneously, however, the re
prcchimed in the Peloponnese and Peloponnese. ^^^^ked the begmnmg of the glorious War of ^ ■ Greek Independence. On 6th April 1821 Germanos, Archbishop of Patras, unfurled the national standard at the monastery of Hagia Lavra near Kalavryta, a day which has always been celebrated throughout the Greek world as a Greek Independence Day.
This is no place to rewrite the history of a war which has been the subject of graphic contemporary accounts, which have
The Greek War great deeds of Kanaris and his fire
4Independence. ^arco Botzaris, and of the feats of Odysseus the Klepht and countless others. A brief outline of the chief events must suffice.
The movement spread rapidly and was joined by the islands, especially Hydra and Spetsai, which provided the insurgents with a useful fleet, and by Central and Northern Greece. The Turks replied to the rising by a massacre of Greeks at Con¬ stantinople, including the Patriarch, Gregory V, who was
hanged on Easter Day in the gate of the Patriarchate. Similar
scenes were enacted in Macedonia, Thrace, and elsewhere.
10


II
Greece under King Otho {1821-64)
served to widen the breach, the Greeks in retahating on the Turkish population in
which only exasperation
Greece. The early years of the war saw the balance of success inclining in favour of the insurgents, whose courage attracted to their
„ , f ranks a large number of foreign Philhellenes. ar Y successes of ^ change for the worse occurred towards the t e insurgents. 1824, when the Sultan Mahmoud II
induced his vassal Mehemet Ali, Pasha of Egypt, to invade the Peloponnese with an Egyptian army under the command of his _ . son Ibrahim. Quarrels and even fighting broke i^uarre s amongst the Greek leaders, and the trained amongst t e Egyptian army was able to inflict serious defeats
upon its adversaries. But several magnificent incidents such as the defence of Mesolongi, where Byron had died in April 1824 and which fell into Turkish hands in April 1826, appealed to the imagination of Europe and If increased the sympathy felt for the Greek ideal ympat y oj freedom. In Russia popular feeling demanded
that the cause of Orthodox Christianity should not be allowed to perish. The Tzar Nicholas I, who succeeded the weak and vacillating Alex¬
ander in November 1825, was not unwilling to take action, while in England and France strong sympathy was felt for the Greek cause to which they had already given many volunteers.^ At the same time the reconciliation of the rival parties in Greece, who met and elected Count John Capodistrias as President in April 1827, seemed to augur greater unity in the insurgent armies—a promise, however, which was not destined to be
fulfilled. In July 1827 a Triple Alliance was concluded between Russia, Great Britain, and France, who undertook to mediate between the Turks and the Greeks. An armistice was proclaimed, which was accepted by the Greeks but refused by Turkey. An Allied fleet, there¬ fore, set sail for Greek waters under the command
of Admiral Codrington and made a demonstration off the west
1 Sir Richard Church and Lord Cochrane, one of the greatest seaman Britain has ever produced, took over the commands of the Greek Army
and Fleet early in 1827.
Russia,
Great Britain,
and France.
The Triple
Alliance under¬
takes mediation.


12 The Greek War of Independence :
coast of the Peloponnese. Though there had been no intention
„ t r of engaging the Turks, the action of the Otto
The Battle of ° ® ° j • r • r »
Navarino commander in tiring on a man-ot-war s boat sent to parley precipitated a battle in which the Turkish fleet was annihilated at Navarino on 20th October 1827. This victory of the three Allied Powers set the seal upon Greek freedom. In the following spring the Russo-Turkish war broke out, but the troops of Ibrahim Pasha remained in the Peloponnese
The end of until the threat of the arrival of a French force the war ^ under General Maison compelled them to evacuate the peninsula. The last engagement with the Turks took place in September 1829, when Demetrios Ypsilanti, the brother of Alexander Ypsilanti who had first raised the standard of revolt in 1821, defeated a retiring Turkish force in a narrow defile between Thebes and Livadia. In the same month the Peace of Adrianoplc was concluded between Russia and Turkey, which expressly recognized the independence of Greece.
Early in the following year the London Conference of the Alhed Powers discussed the establishment of the new state.
The Conference protocol on 3rd February 1832. The rj t ■' new Greece was restricted to the Peloponnese, j on on. Central Greece, and the Islands of the Cyclades,
the northern frontier being drawn from the Gulf of Arta to the Gulf of Volo.^ It thus excluded much territory which could
The boundaries b" Greelc, in of the new ^tate P^>^ficular Thessaly, Crete, Samos,^ and the Ionian Islands. It was a settlement which left the majority of Greeks outside the pale of freedom and
failed to satisfy the essential principles of nationality. It was in vain that the plenipotentiaries announced that ‘ the Greek question was irrevocably settled ’—subsequent history has another tale to tell; but at least it was a beginning and the nucleus of an independent Greek State had at last been formed.
The crown of Greece was first offered to Prince Leopold of
^ See map on p. 149. 2 From 1832 onwards, Samos was ruled by a Christian governor as an independent Principality under the suzerainty of Turkey.


Greece under King Otho {1821-64) 13
Saxe-Coburg, who later became King of the Belgians, but after
rv, • some hesitation he refused it. The choice was
Otho of Bavaria . 1 • • • • 1 ,
, . f a wise one, and it is mterestmg to speculate what
Greece would have been the result of his acceptance. Meanwhile in Greece affairs became more and more disordered, and opposition to the autocratic rule of Capodistrias increased until, on 9th October 1831, he was assassinated at Nauplia by two members of the powerful Mainote clan of Mavromichalai. The subsequent condition of anarchy was such that the Allied Powers saw the necessity of setting up some form of government and chose as king Prince Otho of Bavaria, son of Louis I, who was known as an ardent Philhellene. It is interesting to note that the choice of a Bavarian prince was dictated in part by the feeling that Germany could never have any possible locus standi for interfering in the affairs of Greece and that the selection was an absolutely neutral one. Otho was in his seventeenth year when the throne was offered to him, but it was nearly a year before he arrived at . Nauplia early in 1833, accompanied by swarms Bavarian officials and attended by Bavarian ^ troops. His arrival was hailed by the more sanguine of his subjects as the beginning of a new era for Greece. As he was not yet of age personally to assume the rule of his new kingdom, a Council of Regency was established. This consisted of three Bavarians, an arrangement which effectually excluded the Greeks from any real share in the government. The promised National Assembly, which was to draw up the Constitution, was never summoned. Every department of the administrative and educational system was filled with Germans. The administration was entirely centralized, and no advantage was taken of the communal system which already existed and might well have been used for local self-government in a country of which the physical features necessitate numerous isolated communities. The financial state of the country, with the load of debt incurred during the war, was hopeless from the beginning, and oppressive taxation drove many of the peasants to take to the hdls, and brigandage became once more a serious danger. The free expression of popular opinion was curtailed by the muzzling of the Press. The disputes which arose between the members of Council of Regency only made confusion worse


14 The Greek War of Independence :
confounded. For allowing such a state of affairs to arise the three Allied Powers cannot be entirely acquitted of blame ; they had brought the infant state into being and were morally responsible for its upbringing imtU it could stand alone. In 1835 Kmg Otho came of age and took over the govern¬ ment at Athens, whither the capital had been transferred from ^ , Naupha in the previous year. He determined to ^ govern the country himselr and presided m ^ person over the dehberation of the Cabinet. In spite of the strong recommendations of Lord Palmerston and Sir Robert Peel he consistently refused to grant a Constitution. German influence was still predominant and caused growing discontent. The desire of the Greeks of the ‘ enslaved ’ territories for inclusion in the kingdom of Greece gave occasion in 1841 to a rising in Crete, but the revolt was suppressed by the Turks, and the failure of the Government to support this national . movement added to the unpopularity of Otho’s
ofi th^e t Finally, on 15th September 1843, a blood^ ^ ' less revolution took place, which forced Otho to yield to the desire of his people for a con¬ stitutional regime and for the dismissal of the Bavarian chque. A new Ministry entirely composed of Greeks was formed, and it was agreed that a National Assembly should be summoned, by whose decisions the King consented to abide.
Thus at last Greece was freed from foreign domination and took its place among the constitutional states of Europe. The Bavarian camarilla had not only failed to administer the govern¬ ment and finances of the country but had prevented the Greeks from acquiring the apprenticeship in the art of statesmanship which the young nation so much needed.
In spite of misgovemment, Greece had already made no Httle progress, both commercially and intellectually, since the founda
Prooress of kingdom. The national aptitude of Greece under Greeks for the sea had led to the increase of Kino Otho Greek mercantile marine and to the growing ^ ■ importance of the ports of Syra, the Piraeus, and Patras, while the currant and silk industries had made material progress. In 1837 the University of Athens was founded and
immediately became an important centre for the propagation of Hellenic culture and a training ground for the learned professions


Greece under King Otho {1821-64) 15
of which full advantage was taken by the Greeks of‘unredeemed’ as well as free Hellas.
The National Assembly met in November 1843. It is interesting in view of subsequent events to note that Greeks
The ConuUution Epirus took part of 1844 details or the Constitution, which ■ Otho swore to obey on 20th March 1844, do not concern us here, since it was superseded by that of 1864, which forms the real charter of popular hberties in Greece. It may be noted, however, that it estabhshed two chambers, a Lower House and a Senate {Tepovcia), and that it declared the Orthodox Church of Greece to be autocephalous and administered by a Synod of Archbishops. Party faction, brigandage, and financial difficulties continued to afflict the country. In 1847 the British Government demanded ^ . the payment of the interest which was in arrears on the guaranteed loan; while it was undoubtedly within its rights, the other two Powers abstained from doing the same, and the British action was regarded as unfriendly. Other difficulties arose over the claims of a certain Don Pacifico and other British subjects.^ Further, on the out¬ break of the Crimean War, Greece found Great Britain and France, two of the Powers who had brought about the recogni¬ tion of her independence, ranged against the third, Russia, and actually supporting Turkey, the hereditary enemy of Hellas. The bond of a common rehgion decided the sympathies of Greece in favour of Russia. Otho, enthusiastically seconded by his queen, Amalia, placed himself at the head of a national move¬ ment for the extension of Greece ; and unsuccessful, and indeed hopeless, attempts were made to seize Thessaly and Epirus. Otho, hke Constantine at a later date, failed to reckon on the importance of the command of the sea, and the result of his illtimed movement was that the Anglo-French fleet occupied the Piraeus from 1854 to 1857. It may be admitted now that the Crimean War, though due to other causes, resulted, as far as the Balkan States were concerned, in prolonging the power of Turkey to repress nationahsm and liberty in the Nearer East. The fact, however, remains that the attempt to profit by the disagreement between the Powers which had helped her in the
^ The details are given by W. Miller, The Ottoman Empire, pp. 179 If.


i6 The Greek War of Independence :
past only brought Greece into a humiliating situation, whereas a restrained attitude of neutraUty would have placed her in the debt of Great Britain and France. Be that as it may, this abortive attempt to increase her boundaries was evidence of the irrepress¬ ible enthusiasm of the Greeks for the freedom of their ‘ enslaved ’ brethren—an enthusiasm that has more than once refused to listen to counsels of inaction which would have better served the
cause of Hellenism. The fortimes of Greece were never so low as in the years which followed the Crimean War. The state was bankrupt,
rr., , . r brigandage was rife, the army was disaffected,
I he abatcatwn of f . . j. i ^ c
K'n Otho rismgs occurred m several parts or Greece, * ■ while the popularity which Otho had gained by his championship of national expansion was fast declining. Matters came to a head in 1862, when Otho had for a second time to face a popular revolution. This time he bowed before the storm and abdicated after having occupied for nearly thirty years a position for which he had no real qualifications. The right of the Greeks thus to take matters into their own hands was even at the time generally recognized in Europe. The words used by Earl Russell, the British Foreign Minister of the day, in a letter to the British Minister at Athens, are worth quoting : ‘ During a long course of years the British Govern¬ ment endeavoured to impress on King Otho the mistaken nature of the system of government which he pursued, and the necessity of adopting a system better calculated to conciliate the affection and confidence of his subjects and to promote the prosperity of Greece. The kingdom of Greece having, by the transactions of 1832, been acknowledged as an independent State, the people of Greece are entitled to exercise the rights of national independ¬ ence ; and one of the rights which belong to an independent nation is that of changing its governing dynasty upon good and sufficient cause. Her Majesty’s Government cannot deny that the Greeks have good and sufficient cause for the steps they have taken.’ These words show a genuine appreciation of the right of the Greek nation to decide its own destiny and must have helped to heal the wounds caused by the treatment of Greece by Great Britain and France during the Crimean War.
Of Otho himself the Greeks of to-day have learned to judge


The throne of
Greece offered to
Prince Alfred
{Duke of
Edinburgh).
Greece under King Otho (1821-64) 17
less harshly than their forefathers who deposed him. If he had
The Greek given Greece an heir to the throne, born in
estimate of Greece and brought up in the Orthodox Faith, Kino Otho subjects might have forgiven him much. He was indefatigable in visiting every part of his kingdom and making himself personally famihar with his subjects and the conditions of their Hves. The unpardonable faults which caused his downfall were his refusal to satisfy the legitimate desire of the Greeks for a democratic constitution and his interference in matters which should have been left to the decision of a responsible Greek Government. The question of a successor to the throne became the im¬ mediate pre-occupation of the whole nation, who fixed upon Prince Alfred of Great Britain, Duke of Edin¬ burgh, second son of Queen Victoria, as their choice. It was made clear, however, that the understanding arrived at between the Three Powers in 1830 excluded from the throne of Greece all members of the reigning houses of these Powers. In spite of this, when the matter was put to the democratic test of a plebiscite. Prince Alfred received the over¬ whelming majority of 230,000 out of 240,000 votes. It is interesting to note that only 93 votes were cast in favour of a repubhc and only 6 in favour of a Greek. In view of the impossibihty of the acceptance of the crown by Prince Alfred, the British Government imdertook to find a king for Greece, thus taking upon itself a responsibihty which made Great Britain in a special mamier answerable for the future welfare of the country. The choice fell upon Prince WiUiam George, second son of Prince, afterwards King, Christian of Denmark. The recent marriage of his sister, the Princess Alexandra, with the Prince of Wales was a close tie with Great Britain, while his subsequent marriage with the Grand Duchess Olga of Russia, daughter of the Grand Duke Constantine, was a bond with another of the Protective Powers. The National Assembly acquiesced in the choice of the British Govern¬ ment all the more readily in that it was announced that the Ionian Islands would for the future belong
Prince William
George of
Denmark
chosen king.
The Ionian
Islands ceded to
Greece by
Great Britain.


i8 The Greek War of Independence
to their rightful owners and form part of the Greek kingdom^ This concession, the justice of which had been recognized ever since the visit of Gladstone to the Islands on a special mission in 1858, was a happy augury for a reign which was to see other important accessions to the territory of the Greek kingdom. The Three Powers also undertook each to remit ^4000 a year from the interest of the loan of 1832, which was to be added to the new king’s Civil List. Prince William George of Denmark, who arrived at Athens on 30th October 1863 and ascended the throne as King George I, , . f was, like his predecessor, only seventeen years of
K'n ^George I accession. The National ^ ^ ' Assembly had already been sitting for some months framing the new Constitution, but it was only on 28th November 1864 that its work was finished and the new
. , King took the oath. This Constitution forms
The National ° r 1 1 • 1
one or the most democratic documents ever drawn up and fixed the limits of a constitutional monarchy which King George religiously observed throughout his long reign. A large majority in the National Assembly voted in favour of the abolition of the Senate set up in 1844, and the Chamber
of Deputies (/SovXn), therefore, became supreme
The Constitution . 1 ^ \ t 1 1^11
in the State. Its members were to be elected by
of 1864. direct, secret, and universal male suffrage. It expressly stated in the Constitution that the deputies represented the nation and not the districts for which they were elected, and their numbers were to be determined in proportion to the population of each constituency. No deputy might be elected until he had completed his thirtieth year, and he must be a native of the district he represented or have resided and enjoyed political rights therein for two years.
The most interesting portions of the Constitution are those which lay down the position of the sovereign. The Royal
The nature of prerogatives were strictly limited so as to pre, , elude the possibility of such intervention in both e monarc y. political and judicial affairs as had characterized
the rule of King Otho. The form of government thus set up has been well described as a Monarchical Democracy. The
r See map on p. 149.


Greece under King Otho {1821-64) I9
sovereign is the head of the State, not by the divine right of kings but by the will of the people whose servant he is. Though possessing both legislative and executive powers, he could exercise them only through, his Ministers and was thus a passive organ of the State in the administration of pubhc affairs and a channel for the transmission of the will of the people. In such a constitution the personal influence of the sovereign has no place, and any arbitrary interference by the Crown in the affairs of the nation is the negation of the essential principles of democracy ; the will of the people expressed through their elected representa¬ tives is the only source of power in the State. A few other points in the Constitution of 1864 may be noted. Local self-government was established on a system resembhng that of the Code Napoleon ; the freedom of the Press was asserted and guaranteed ; the independence of the Orthodox Church of Greece was again proclaimed in terms almost identical with those used in the Constitution of 1844 ; and, while nothing was said as to the religion of the new King, it was enacted that the heir to the throne must be a member of the Orthodox Faith. Finally, it was laid down that a revision of the Constitution could only be contemplated, if, after a period of ten years, the Chamber in two successive legislatures voted by a majority of three-quarters of its members in favour of the reconsideration of specified provisions. By this Constitution Greece at last obtained, after more than forty years of independence, a regime under which she could be governed by Greeks for the benefit of Greeks. Henceforward the Greeks of the Greek kingdom were masters in their own house, but it was still a house from which a majority of the
national family was excluded.


CHAPTER III
THE REIGN OF KING GEORGE I DOWN TO THE
ANNEXATION OF THESSALY (1864-81)
IT was not without reason that King George I assumed the title not of ‘ King of Greece which had been borne by his pre^ decessor, but of ‘ King of the Hellenes This e pro em oj embodies the aspirations of the Greeks for
tile mcorporation m Free Hellas or all their ‘ unredeemed ’ brethren, which is the keynote of Greek history from 1864 onwards. The problem of en¬ slaved Greece cast its shadow over the first fifty years of the new reign, and the powerlessness of the nation to attain its ideals did much to hamper internal progress. The inclusion of Thessaly was, as we shall see, the only addition made to Greece during this period. She had won her liberty and her democratic con¬ stitution, but, until the rise of M. Venizelos, she produced no statesman capable of leading the nation along the path of national expansion.
The position of Greece as a small state under the protection of greater Powers forced her to fix her attention on international
Greece under the ^ particular the doings of the Protection of the * Concert of Europe rather than on her own Powers ^ internal affairs and material progress. At the same time the barrier of Turkey stretching from the Adriatic to the ^Egean effectually cut her off by land from the rest of Europe.^ The Turkish Empire had been apparendy on
The rise of point of dissolution for so many genera
Bulgaria ^ seemed scarcely worth while to ^ ' cultivate a garden which might at any time be converted into a larger domain. The problem was further
^ The fact that Greeks leaving their native lands for France or England uiU talk of going to Europe is an excellent illustration of their feeling of isolation from the civilized world, caused by the barrier which formerly existed across their northern frontier. 20


21
The Reign of King George i, 1864-81
complicated by the rise of the other Balkan nationahties and, in particular, Bulgaria, with their own ideals and plans for national expansion and their own intrigues to enlist the sympathy and help of the Great Powers. A brief summary of the principal events which affected Greece during this period will best illustrate the difficulties which the country had to face. There is probably no district which is so essentially Greek as the island of Crete. Its occupation by the Venetians from the „ Fourth Crusade down to 1669 may have resulted ^ in a slight infusion of Western European question. blood, but its isolated position saved it from any
Slav or Albanian admixture. The Turks made no attempt to foimd settlements in the island and were never more than an official class and an army of occupation. Even the Cretan Moslems are Greeks by race and have retained the Greek language, in spite of their conversion to the rehgion of Islam. That such an island should feel the strongest possible sympathy with the Free f Hellas and a desire for union with her was only
and’^^8 ^ natural, and we have seen how in ,1841 Crete ^ ' rose in insurrection. Another rising had taken place in 1858, which ended without much bloodshed in the recall of the Turkish Governor and the promise—the Porte was ever lavish of promises—of some degree of local self-government. , . , In 1866 a petition was presented by the Christians e appea to ^ ^ Crete complaining of financial oppression owers, 1 . generally of the maladministration of the
island. This was followed later by an appeal to the Sovereigns of the Protective Powers for union with Greece or, failing that, some measure of pohtical reform. The British Government, which had received reports from its consular authorities in the Ionian Islands representing the inhabitants as having suffered as the result of the cession of these islands to Greece, refused to support the union of Crete with Greece. At the same time the Porte was not indisposed to encourage an armed rising which might serve as an excuse for handing back the A control of Crete to Egypt, to which it had subject as recently as 1840. Egyptian Sphakta. troops were sent to the island, and various
concessions were promised if the Cretans would consent to


22 The Reign of King George I
union with Egypt. So far were they from accepting that a Cretan Assembly held at Sphakia proclaimed the independence of Crete and its union with Greece. There was strong Greek sympathy for the cause of their suffering brethren, but the King and his Prime Minister, Boulgaris, reahzed that Greece was from a military standpoint quite incapable of going to war with Turkey, and they could only assume an attitude of benevolent neutrahty. Volunteers, however, flocked from Greece, and the island was divided into three mihtary districts ; but the tide of success
r r soon turned against the insurgents. The heroic
The defence of , ^ re r a i j
. , j. detence or the monastery or Arkadion, near
Arkadton. • i i ' r • i
Retimo, where at the moment or its capture the Abbot fired the powder-magazine and involved both the de¬ fenders, who preferred death to defeat, and their assailants in a common destruction, inspired Europe with a sympathy for the Cretan cause and modified the attitude of the Governments of the Protecting Powers. France even proposed to allow the Cretans to decide their own destiny by a plebiscite, and Russia supported her ; but Great Britain refused to consent. Mean¬ while the insurgents still held out, and their enemies, though they were able to spread fire and the sword through many parts of the island, had themselves suffered such heavy losses that the Sultan became anxious for a settlement and sent his
The ‘ Or auk Vizier to reorganize the administration . f 0^0 • of Crete. His proposals were embodied in the Organic Statute or 1868 , winch nominally gave the Christians a larger share in the government and temporarily lightened the load of taxation. The resistance of the Cretans still continued, and the assistance sent to them from Greece almost precipitated a war between Greece and Turkey, for which many Greeks were anxious and which was only averted by a change of government. Finally a con¬ ference of the signatories of the Treaty of Paris met to consider the Greco-Turkish question. The Greek Foreign Minister submitted a statement of the wrongs of the Greek nation and demanded a settlement of the Cretan question and a rectification of the boundaries of Greece. The only result was that the Porte agreed to suspend the measures which it had inaugurated against its Greek subjects, while the Greek Government undertook to forbid Greek subjects to take up arms in favour of their ‘ en


down to the Annexation of Thessaly {1864-81) 23
slaved ’ brothers. The Cretan insurgents, seeing that they
could no longer count upon Greek support, gave up the
struggle and the solution of the Cretan question was again
postponed. It was not long before another event occurred which, though
not directly concerned with the Greek kingdom, had a grave
, . , effect upon Greek national interests. Ever since
, ^ 9J Turkish conquest, the Patriarch of Cont e u garian stantinople had been the head and representative
xarctate. ^ Christian subjects of the Porte. But
the growing sentiment of nationality amongst the Bulgarians,
largely fostered by Russian propaganda, chafed against a system
which subjected them ecclesiastically to a Greek authority. The
Turks, who had hitherto placed all the Christians in their Empire
in a single category under the comprehensive title of Rum,
welcomed any quarrels, ecclesiastic or otherwise, which might
create divisions among them ; as long as the Christians were
busy with their own dissensions, they were hardly likely to
combine against their common oppressor. When the Patriarch
refused to listen to any demand of the Bulgarians for, a separate
ecclesiastical organization, the Sultan was appealed to and on
28th February 1870 issued a finnan constituting the Bulgarian
Exarchate, which, like the Patriarchate, was to have its head¬
quarters at Constantinople. The sphere over which the Exarch
was to hold ecclesiastical sway was not limited to the Vilayet
of the Danube, which afterwards became die Principality of
Bulgaria, but extended also over the Vilayets of Adrianople,
Salonica, Monastir, and Kossovo. The result of the estabHshment of the Exarchate was to set
up a rival ecclesiastical system in regions whose religious affairs
, . f had been for centuries administered by the Theperversion of to place in the hands of the
the Exarchate to an instrument which they were not
political ends. pervert to political purposes. For a
period of forty years nothing so much tended to perpetuate
Turkish misrule in Macedonia and render reform impossible as
the dissensions between the Patriarchal Church and the Exarchate
and political propaganda under the disguise of religious
enthusiasm. Not many years elapsed before a train of events was started


Excitement in
Greece.
24 The Reign of King George I
in the Balkan Peninsula which ended by again indirectly involving
The Russo Greece. The Slavonic provinces of the Ottoman
T h h W f hitherto shown themselves less UT IS ar oj Greece to assert their rights, but in
''' 1875 a rising occurred in Herzegovina and
another in Bulgaria which eventually led to the Russo-Turkish
War of 1877. The Greeks had at first remained passive spectators,
but, as events proceeded, the growing sympathy
shown for the cause of Bulgarian independence
could no longer leave them unmoved. In 1876
meetings were held throughout Greece urging the Government
to take measures to press for the rights of Hellenism in view of
the possibility that the Powers would enforce a Balkan settle¬
ment. In June 1877 a party truce was declared at Athens and
the ablest politicians of all parties combined to form a Coalition
Government under the presidency of the aged Admiral Kanaris,
one of the heroes of the War of Independence. The Foreign
^ . Minister, Charilaos Trikoupis, afterwards a
’ distinguished Premier, approached the British
Greeks Government and expressed the willingness of the Cabinet to use all its influence to prevent
the rising of Greek subjects of the Ottoman Empire, provided
that, when the time came for a Balkan settlement, the claims of
Greece should be taken into serious account. Though no promise
of territorial expansion was accorded, an undertaking was given
that the claims of Greece should be given the same consideration
as those of the other Christian nationalities. The Greek Govern¬
ment, therefore, refused to accept a Russian invitation to join
in the struggle and share the spoils. However, the victorious
advance of the Russians inevitably caused a popular movement
throughout Greece in favour of war and brought about the
resignation of the Coalition Government. The new Govern
Risin s in ment, in which M. Koumoundouros was Prime
Thpcf I F • Minister, not only encouraged risings in Thessaly,
and Crete Epirus, and Crete but announced the dispatch of Greek troops to the Greek provinces of
Turkey. Meanwhile the victorious Russians were at the gates
of Constantinople (February 1878) and an armistice was pro¬
claimed. The Greek troops who had been sent to occupy
Thessaly were, therefore, recalled, but the movement in that


down to the Annexation of Thessaly {1864-81) 25
province was already far advanced and was only checked by
British intervention and the promise that Greek interests should
be supported. Hostilities in Crete were similarly brought to a close by British mediation.
On 3rd March 1878 a Treaty between Russia and Turkey
was concluded at San Stefano, just outside Constantinople. Thw
The Treaty of which was subsequendy supserseded by
San Stefano ^ Treaty of Berlin, absolutely ignored the claims of Greece. Its most important feature is
that it sought to establish a ‘ Greater Bulgaria comprising not
only Bulgaria proper and Eastern Rumeha but the whole of
The claims of Macedonia, with the exception of Salonica and ^ . Chalcidice, as far as the Lakes of Ochrida and reece ignore . extending from the Danube and
Black Sea to the Albanian Mountains. Ethnologically and geo¬
graphically it was an impossible settlement. For Greece its
most serious effect would have been to extinguish for ever the
just claims of the Macedonian Greeks. Amongst other absurdities
it would have left Salonica in Turkish hands but without the
adjoining territory, and made Albania, Thessaly, and Epirus
detached fragments of territory under Turkish rule. The
Treaty of San Stefano was an attempt at an essentially Slav ^
settlement such as could not be tolerated by any impartial
judge ; unfortunately its impossible provisions have ever since
remained the Bulgarian national ideal and have encouraged the
Bulgars to aspire to a position in the Balkans to which neither
ethnological nor any other considerations entitle them.
It soon became apparent that the Treaty of San Stefano was
an arrangement which Europe could not ratify, and the British
Government insisted on reopening the whole
question of the Balkans and exacted from
Russia an agreement to modify the pretensions
of Bulgaria. This demand was dictated no
doubt chiefly by the desire to prevent Russia
from making Bulgaria a protectorate, and it was supported by
Austria, which could not remain a disinterested spectator while
an arrangement was being made to block her path to Salonica.
The Powers re¬
fuse to ratify the
Treaty of San
Stefano.
^ The Bulgars are, of course, not Slav by blood but an Asiatic people akin to the Huns, Avars, and Finns ; their language, however, being Slavonic, they were naturally included in the Pan-Slav programme of Russia.


26 The Reign of King George I
At this juncture Bismarck exhibited himself in the new role
of a peaceful mediator and proposed that the Powers should
, f meet in conference on the neutral ground of e ongress oj discuss the Treaty of San Stefano.
*”■ After some delay on the part of Russia, the
Congress of Berlin met on 13th June 1878, under the Presidency
of Bismarck himself, and set itself to settle the affairs of the
Balkan Peninsula practically without consulting the peoples
whose destiny it took upon itself to decide.
The details of this Conference and its conclusions are so
famihar that it will only be necessary here to note those provisions
which directly or indirectly concerned Greece, Lord Sahsbury,
in fulfilment of the desire of the British Government that Greece
should not suffer for her observance of neutrahty during the
Russo-Turkish War, pleaded for the admission of the Greek
delegates and pointed out that, while Bulgaria enjoyed the
championship of Russia, Greece had no one to support her
claims. He was only able, however, to procure that the Greek
representatives should be allowed to state their case without
taking any part in the dehberations of the Congress.
The Congress of Berlin, while recognizing the complete
independence of Serbia, Rumania, and Montenegro, reduced
The claims of Great Bulgaria of the Treaty of San Stefano „ . j to a small self-governing Principality tributary
^ ‘ to the Sultan between the Danube and the
Balkan Mountains and created to the south of it, between the
Balkan and Rhodope Mountains, another state under the title
of Eastern Rumeha under the direct authority of the Sultan
but enjoying ‘ administrative autonomy ’. As regards Greece,
the Sultan and the King of the Hellenes were to come to an
understanding for the modification of the frontier of Greece,
and, if they failed to reach an agreement, the Powers undertook
to mediate between Greece and the Porte. But for the moment
nothing was done regarding the extension of the northern
frontier of Greece, while Crete was definitely left under Turkish
dominion, the Porte again undertaking to put into force the
Organic Statute of 1868. Thrace, Macedonia, Epirus, and
Albania, which remained under Turkish rule, were promised a
new form of administration, the details of which were to be
decided by special commissions. The Porte, however, took


down to the Annexation of Thessaly {1864-81) 27
care never to carry out these provisions, and its misrule, especi¬
ally in Macedonia, was destined to be a constant source of
trouble and discredit to the Powers who permitted it to continue.
The only possible source of satisfaction which a Greek could
feel in contemplating the results of the Congress—beyond the
vague promise of a rectification of the northern frontier of
Greece—was the fact that the ‘ unredeemed ’ Greeks of Mace¬
donia still remained under Turkish rule, or rather misrule,
from which they might one day be delivered, instead of being
handed over to Bulgaria, from whose clutches they would
never have been released. Thus the feeling of the Greeks, who
had hoped for so much, was one of profound disappointment,
while the failure of Great Britain to secure any satisfaction for
them tended to lower British prestige in their eyes. Moreover,
The British revelation of the agreement between the „ British Government and the Porte, by which occupy yprus. Britain was allowed to occupy Cyprus,
where the majority of the population was Greek, and in return
guaranteed the Asiatic possessions of Turkey against invasion,
could not leave Greece unmoved.
The settlement of the Balkans laid down in the Treaty of
Berlin nominally remained the Charter of the Peninsula until
the formation of the Balkan Confederacy in 1912, but its pro¬
visions were on several occasions violated with impunity both
by the Signatory Powers and by the Balkan States when it
suited their convenience to do so.
It was three years before Greece could obtain a settlement of
the question of her northern frontier. The Porte had nothing
^ to gain bv a speedy solution and the discussion
The question 0/ 1 ® 1 ' 1 1 ■ r
I I dragged on until the accession to power or
t e nort ern Gladstone’s ministry of 1880, which was hailed frontier of Greece. 11/^1 1 • . r 1 •
by the Greeks as a good omen m view or his
championship of the Greek claims to the Ionian Islands. A
Conference was held in Berhn in June of that year at which the
British and French delegates proposed a solution which would
have gone far towards satisfying Greece, since it suggested a
frontier extending from the ridge of Olympus on the east to
the River Kalamas on the west and would have included Jannina.
M. Trikoupis on behalf of Greece eagerly accepted the pro¬
posal, which was hailed with general enthusiasm. The Porte,


28 The Reign of King George I
however, refused its consent, whereupon the Greek Army was
mobilized. Meanwhile a change of government in France
turned the scale against the Greeks, and a consequent difference
of opinion between the French and British Governments regarding
, , the Greek frontier question stiffened the opposie onjerence porte. In the end the question was
oj onstantt- decided by a Conference held at Constantinople
nop e, 1 1. in 1881, at which Lord Goschen, the British
delegate, did his utmost to obtain Preveza and the Olympus
frontier for Greece, But Turkey resolutely refused to cede the
former, and Greece could not risk hostilities,
of frontier was, therefore, eventually drawn
'' from a point a little north of the historic Vale
of Tempe to Arta on the Ambracian Gulf.^ By this arrangement
Greece received the rich plain of Thessaly and a small portion
of Epirus. It was a settlement of which it may be said that it
might have been much less advantageous, and would have been
so but for the support accorded to Greece by the British
Government.
Crete, which, as we have seen, was left by the Treaty of
Berlin in Turkish hands, was offered by the Porte to Greece in
return for the abandonment of her claims to
Thessaly, but the Greek Government naturally
preferred to increase its territory on the mainland. Crete
had, therefore, to be content with another promise of the
enforcement of the Organic Statute of i868. This time the
Porte reahzed the necessity of making some concessions, and
these were embodied in the ‘ Halepa Pact which established
a form of Parliamentary Government and a General Assembly.
Moreover, the appointment of Photiades Pasha, a Greek by race
though a Turkish subject, and a man of considerable adminis¬
trative ability, did much to conciliate the Christians of Crete,
and his long period of rule was one of comparative calm. In
1889, however, another disturbance occurred, which had its
origin in the political strife between the parliamentary parties,
one of which, to embarrass its opponents, inopportunely brought
forward a proposal for union with Greece. This gave rise to
^ See map on p. 14.9. * So called from the suburb of Canea where most of the foreign consulates were situated.


down to the Annexation of Thessaly {1864-81) 29
collisions between the Christian and Moslem inhabitants, where¬
upon the Porte reduced the numbers and powers of the Assembly,
thus to a large extent annulling the provisions of the ‘ Halepa
Pact Thus the Cretan question, which ought to have been
settled once and for all by the Berlin Treaty, dragged on and
was destined to cause more trouble and bloodshed before its
final solution.


CHAPTER IV
THE REIGN OF KING GEORGE I FROM i88i TO 1908
DURING the fifteen years which followed the annexation of
Thessaly Greece was mainly occupied with internal questions.
„ , , The expenses of placing the army on a war
Greece under the r ■ ■ i 1 ^ 1 1 •
lit- r rooting in order to support the Greek claims
Trikou h greatly added to the burden of debt. For^ ' tunately in Charilaos Trikoupis modern Greece
possessed for the first time a statesman of real ability, whose long
premiership, which began in 1882, did much to restore, at least
temporarily, the financial position of Greece. For a period of
twelve years he guided the helm of the state except for intervals
when his rival, Theodoros Delyiannis, managed to oust him from
power. From 1883 until his retirement in 1895 Greek politics
were a duel between these two men, the one a genuine statesman,
the other a clever parliamentarian. To Trikoupis it is due that
the policy of road and railway construction was inaugurated,
which has done so much to assist the exploitation of the country ;
and the confidence which he inspired attracted foreign capital
with which to develop to some extent the mineral resources of
Greece. That he was unable to achieve more than he did was
due to the fact that his rival was always ready to pander to the
‘jingoism ’ of his fellow-countrymen and took every opportunity
of thwarting the policy of better relations with Turkey, which
Trikoupis regarded as necessary if Greece was to consolidate her financial position.
The only external event which affected Greece during these
years was the Union of Eastern Rumelia with Bulgaria and
Union of B I subsequent recognition by the Powers in
g"ZZ^ue,« "olation of the Treaty of Rumelia Berlin. It gave rise to intense excitement at Athens, where there was a national feeling
that any aggrandisement of Bulgaria should be accompanied
by territorial concessions to Greece, so that the balance of power
30


Excitement at
Athens.
The Reign of King George I from 1881 to 1908 31
in the Balkans might not be disturbed. Delyiannis, who was in
office at the time, raised a large loan and pro¬
ceeded to mobilize the Greek Army. After
several times warning Greece against undertak¬
ing hostihties against Turkey, the Powers, with the exception
of France, established a blockade of the Greek coast which
TU u u j f lasted for two months. This led to the fall of
Greece^ ^ ^ Delyiannis Cabinet, and the ministry which succeeded it put an end to the mobilization,
which had only added to the Greek debt without obtaining any
advantage, and Trikoupis shortly afterwards returned to power.
In 1893 disputes with Turkey again gave Delyiannis the
opportunity of mobihzing the Greek Army and incurring further
debt, with the result that Trikoupis was again recalled to office.
This time, however, finding the restoration of Greek credit a
task which was beyond his powers, he retired from politics in
1895 2nd died in voluntary exile from the country for whose
best interests he had struggled for so many years. It was not
long before the removal of his restraining influence had a
disastrous effect upon Greece.
In 1896 fresh trouble began in Crete, where the appointment
of a Christian governor was a signal for attacks by the Moslems
on the Christian population. The latter formed
a Committee with definitely political aims, a
proceeding which only served to widen the gulf between the
two religious parties in the island. In the summer of 1896 a
serious affray occurred in Canea which induced the Porte to
promise reforms, including European commissions to reorganize
the gendarmerie and the judicial system ; but, as usual, nothing
was actually done—partly no doubt because the attention of the
Powers was distracted from Crete by the Armenian massacres in
Constantinople. The state of affairs in Crete, therefore, became
worse and worse, sanguinary encounters again taking place early
in 1897. In Greece, where Delyiannis was again Premier, sympathy
for the cause of the Cretan Christians became more and more
, , , intense, until in February Greek troops under
^ bassos landed in the island with the
^ ■ express purpose of carrying out its annexation
to Greece, whereupon the Powers intervened and occupied


32 The Reign of King George I
Crete with an international force. But anti-Turkish feeling in
Greece, fomented by a newly-formed ‘ National Society was
now aroused to such a pitch that nothing would satisfy it except
war with Turkey. King George, in view of the evident resolve
of his people, pubhcly associated himself with the national
demand. The prospects of success, however, were hopeless from
the first. Whereas the Turkish Army had been recently re¬
organized by a German mission, Greece both from a military
and from a financial point of view was unprepared for war,
while the presence of the naval forces of the Powers in Greek
waters prevented any real use being made of the Greek fleet,
which might have achieved some success, such as the occupation
of some of the Turkish islands, or at any rate prevented the
transportation of Turkish troops from Asia Minor to Salonica.
Again, no co-operation could be expected from the other
Christian peoples of the Balkan peninsula, who were warned
against interference by the Austrian and Russian Governments
and conciliated by timely concessions on the part of the Porte.
Nevertheless the Greeks flew at the Turks, ‘ as if the bird of
Athena should fly at the eagle ’. The ‘ Great Idea ’ has always
induced the Greek patriot to throw prudence to the wind on the
slightest provocation, and there was no statesman strong enough
to oppose the irresistible impulse of popular excitement.
In April Greek irregulars crossed into Macedonia and a few
days later Turkey declared war. The four weeks which followed
rf. , 1 i saw the complete defeat of Greece. Hostilities
■' „ took place m two theatres of war. In Epirus war on reece. Greeks crossed the frontier and engaged the
Turks at Pente Pigadia, thus preventing an advance on Arta.
On the Thessalian frontier Edhem Pasha, advancing through
Elassona, after forcing his way through the Melouna Pass,
successfully engaged the Greek forces, who offered a strong
resistance, at Reveni. Thus the northern portion of the Thessalian
Defeat of the hands and Larissa was Greeks ^ occupied after the Crown Prince Constantine’s army had fled from it in hopeless disorder. At
Velestino, however. Colonel Smolensk!, the only Greek com¬
mander who distinguished himself, repulsed the Turks in a first
engagement, but in a second attack the enemy won the day.
Other defeats took place on the historic battlefield of Pharsala


from 1881 to 1908 33
and at Domoko, which opened the Phourka Pass and the road into Central Greece.
Meanwhile intense excitement reigned in Athens, and King
George was never so near losing his throne. The pohtic^
The Powers situation was only saved by the intervention of
rescue Cree e D^^i^trios Ralhs, the leader of the Opposi¬ tion, who hurled himself into the breach and
assumed the Premiership. Greece was only saved from disaster
by the Powers, who brought about an armistice on 20th May.
The Turks remained in occupation of Thessaly for some months,
until a peace was concluded in December, under which Thessaly
was restored to Greece, though a shght modification of the
frontier gave certain strategic points to Turkey. Greece was
also forced to pay an indenmity of ^4,000,000, and an Inter¬
national Financial^ Commission was established at Athens which
took over the Government monopohes and the harbour-dues
of the Piraeus and guaranteed the payment of the war indemnity
and of the interest on the National Debt of the country. Thus,
though the rash enthusiasm of the nation had brought it into a
humihating position, materially Greece lost little. The result
j. r for the future Kine Constantine was, however.
The disorace of ^ ,
n • serious, smce he was, perhaps not without some
the Crown Prince. . . , ^ 1 r ^
justice, made a scapegoat tor the disgraceful
flight from Larissa, and he lived for many years under a cloud
of unpopularity which was never entirely dispelled until the
Balkan War of 1912. The position of the future Queen Sophia
was also rendered far from pleasant by the fact that officers of
the army of her brother, Wilham II of Germany, had trained the
victorious Turkish Army and had actually taken part in the
operations against Greece.
Meanwhile Crete, which had been the original centre of
trouble, remained in the occupation of the six Powers, until
Crete under the ^ ^ Germany and Austria withdrew as not control of the vitally interested in the Cretan question.
Powers ^ island was divided into districts controlled by British, French, Russian, and Itahan troops,
Candia being assigned to the British and garrisoned by a battalion
of infantry. In September 1898, however, after a rising against
the British had occurred at Candia, in the course of which the
British vice-consul was murdered, it became obvious that a


Prince George of Greece as High Commissioner in Crete.
34 The Reign of King George I
radical settlement of the Cretan question could no longer be delayed. In November, therefore, the last Turkish soldiers were dispatched from the island and a National Government formed with Prince George of Greece as High Commissioner, though the suzerainty of the Sultan was expressly recognized. A Constitution was drawn up and the Cretan
Assembly met for the first time in 1899. Crete had thus at last achieved autonomy, of which the outward and visible signs were a Cretan flag and a coinage and postage-stamps of her own. The only thing lacking was union with the Mother
Country. The history of Crete during the nineteenth century provides an excellent example of Turkish methods of misgovernment. The policy of dividing the island into two hostile camps constantly making attacks on one another, and the continual refusal to do more than issue, under external pressure, firmans and statutes, which, though they would have done much to redress the existing grievances, were never carried out, perpetuated an intolerable state of affairs and could not fail to excite the indignant sympathy of Greece. It was a policy from which Turkey had nothing to gain and which made it certain that Crete must finally be severed from the Ottoman Empire. The Governorship of Prince George, which was originally an appointment for three years, eventually lasted for eight years. The chief interest of these years is that they first brought into prominence a statesman who was destined not only to mould the future pohcy of Greece but also to become one of the most striking figures in the political world of Modem Europe—Eleutherios Venizelos. He was born in 1864 in Crete, but was the descendant of a Greek family of the mainland ; ^ his grandfather had fled to Crete from Adiens before the War of Independence in order to escape from Turkish tyranny. He was educated at Syra and afterwards at the University of Athens, whence he returned to his native island and soon made his name at the Cretan bar.
Venizelos as a Cretan statesman.
^ It is necessary to insist on this point in view of a rumour, which obtained a wide circulation, that Venizelos was not a Greek at all but ofJewish descent, his name being a corruption of Ben-Israel—a derivation which will hardly stand the test of philology.


from 1881 to igo8 35
He took an active part in the revolt against Turkey in 1896, and, when Crete became autonomous, quickly made his mark in the Cretan Assembly, becoming Minister for Foreign Affairs and Justice. When Prince George showed an inclination to take too much power into his own hands, he met with a resolute resistance from Venizelos, who placed himself at the head of a party of opposition, which eventually seceded to Therissos, where it set up a Provisional Government and proclaimed the union of Crete with Greece. Thus for the first time Venizelos was driven to become a rebel against absolutism—a step which he was destined to repeat in far graver circumstances. The insurgents maintained themselves until the winter of i905-<5
The ResigmHon J"** ^
r j. . Powers mtervened and Prmce George was
of Prince Georoe. 11., . 1 1 v
obliged to resign. He was succeeded in 1906 by M. Alexander Zaimis, a conservative pohtician who had gained credit as Premier at the time of the conclusion of peace after the Greco-Turkish War. Under Zaimis’ regime Venizelos became the leading statesman of Crete and the idol of his fellowcountrymen in spite of his opposition to any premature agitation for union with Greece. His career as a statesman in Crete was an admirable preparation for the larger pohtical sphere in which he was destined to play a leading part. The years which immediately followed the conclusion of peace after the Greco-Turkish War present no striking incidents
r ,1 tU ^ far as the internal history of Greece is conreece un er e j chief political leader of this period
^M^Theotokis Theotokis, who had formerly served under Trikoupis. It was a period of internal development and in particular of the growth of the larger towns—Athens, the Piraeus, Patras, and Volo, which rapidly became an important outlet for the agricultural produce of the rich Thessalian plain.
An external problem, however, in which Greece was vitally interested was rapidly reaching an acute stage—the Macedonian . question. The growing sentiment of nationality
The Maeedon^n ^
question becomes . i i r ' i r
various nations to look tor new spheres ot influence which might eventually be added to their domains, and Macedonia offered a suitable field for their


36 The Reign of King George I
operations. The Hellenes remembered that Macedonia had long formed part of the Byzantine Empire, while the Serbs and Bulgarians recalled the shorter periods when a Serbian or a Bulgarian Emperor had ruled there. Ever since the Turkish conquest, however, the Sultan had misruled a medley of racesGreek, Turkish, Serbian, Bulgarian, Vlach, Jewish, and Albanian —some of them inextricably commingled. For the first four centuries of the Turkish domination the chief bond of union between the Christian nations of Macedonia P . , . . . had been the fact that all came under the ecclesi
Macedonia astical jurisdiction of the Greek Patriarchate, and that such culture as existed was Hellenic. But the estabUshment of free nationalities in the Balkans and the apparently impending dissolution of the Ottoman Empire in Europe gave rise everywhere to a growing desire to ‘ redeem ’ the still enslaved Christians, and the first step of each nation was to stake out its claims in Macedonia. It was a proceeding upon which Turkey looked with a not unfavouring eye, since, as long as the various nationalities quarrelled among themselves, they were unlikely to combine against the common enemy. The most striking example of the playing off by the Porte of one nation against another was the concession already mentioned of the Bulgarian Exarchate as a rival to the Greek Patriarchate. To the Greek, who is apt to fix his attention on the events of bygone history rather than on the hard facts of the present, it was obvious that Macedonia was a Greek land. The abortive Treaty of San Stefano, however, had envisaged a ‘ Greater Bulgaria,’ which became the ideal of the Bulgarian Imperiahsts, who drew fresh encourageg I . ment from the ease with which Eastern Rumelia had been annexed. The Bulgars, therefore, claimed the whole of Macedonia, including all the ^Egean coast (except Chalcidice, which was too obviously Greek), and extending as far as Lake Ochrida on the west and Monastir on the north. Greece naturally claimed Southern Macedonia, while Serbia demanded ‘ Old Serbia,’ which included parts of Northern and Central Macedonia. Thus the claims of Greece and Serbia did not clash, while Bul¬ garia, which aimed at a Balkan hegemony and sought to drive


Rumania.
from 1881 to igo8 37
a wedge between Greece and Serbia, came into conflict with both these nations. Then Rumania, not to be outdone, discovered that the nomadic KoutzoVlach shepherds were their long-lost brothers and became their champion ; and the Porte welcomed, as a new element of discord, a theory which was never hkely to lead to a demand for annexations from a state which was not co-terminous with Macedonia. In the process of time, under Turkish rule, the Slav-speaking population of Macedonia had become ‘ Mace¬ donian ’ rather than definitely Bulgarian or Serbian and was therefore regarded as a legitimate prey by Bulgaria, whose propaganda was first in the field. There were thus two main pairs of rivals in Macedonia, the Bulgarians and Serbs striving to win to their side the Slav-speaking population, and the Greek Patriarcliists and the Bulgarian Exarchists struggling to maintain the numerical superiority of the two churches and, as a result, of their respective nationalities. At first the struggle was waged mainly on ecclesiastical and scholastic lines, and the Bulgarian educational propaganda, which had obtained a start over its rivals, managed by questionable methods to attract much of the youth of Macedonia to its schools; but the Bulgars showed that the policy might in the future become less pacific by the brutal manner in wliich they treated the Greek minority
Bui arian Eastern Rumclia after its annexation in ^ j 1886. The success of the Bulgarian propaganda propagan a. shown by the fact that numerous pupils of
the Bulgarian schools in Macedonia were induced to migrate to Bulgaria, where many of them attained to important positions
-pr r> 1 • and set themselves to agitate in favour of their e ugarian Macedonian brothers. In 1890 they formed a ommt ee. Macedonian Committee at Sofia, of which the
watchword was ‘ Macedonia for the Macedonians ’ and which addressed a petition to the Powers asking for the establishment of an autonomous Macedonia under a Governor at Salonica who should belong to the ‘ predominant nationahty ’, that is, ofcourse, Bulgaria. When this petition produced no result, armed bands were sent across the frontier into Turkey, one of which burnt the Moslem village of Dospat. Though it failed to produce the effect for which they had hoped, the action of the Macedonian Committee showed that in the future force would be resorted


38 The Reign of King George I
to rather than guile for the Bulgarization of Macedonia. Mean¬ while in the ecclesiastical sphere the Porte pursued its usual policy of granting concessions which would serve to intensify racial hostility. In 1890 the Sultan allowed Bulgarian bishoprics to be founded at Ochrida and Uskub, and a few years later at Veles and Dibra. In 1896 a similar concession was made to Serbia by the permission to establish a Serbian bishopric also at Uskub. The defeat of Greece by Turkey in 1897 and the consequent unwillingness of the Porte to pay any further attention to the
Buharian grievances of its Greek subjects emboldened the comitad'is Bulgarians to resort to more drastic measures ^ ' for converting the Macedonian Greeks to the Bulgarian cause. Bands of comitadjis were formed at Sofia and sent over the border to institute a reign of terror, and from 1897 to 1904 they had matters their own way, massacring prominent Greeks, priests, and schoolmasters and burning the villages and crops of all who refused to accept Bulgarian nationahty. In 1903 Austro-Hungary and Russia found themselves obhged, as the Powers most interested, to demand the apphcation of a scheme of reform, under which Hilmi Pasha was appointed Inspector-General of Macedonia ; but the uselessness of this measure was illustrated by the increased disturbances which in the summer of that year led to the most considerable rising that had yet taken place in Macedonia. By 1904 the position of the Greeks in Macedonia had become so serious, and so little attempt had been made to impress upon the Sultan the necessity for taking drastic measures to restore order,
comitadiis ^ number of Greek officers and other patriots realized that the only way of saving their brothers in Macedonia was to equip armed bands to deal with the Bulgarian comitadjis. This naturally served to increase the confusion of the unhappy province, Greeks fighting against Bulgarians and both against the Turkish irregulars, who, being unpaid and ill-fed, indiscriminately plundered all the Christian nationalities ; but at least the action of the Greek bands arrested to some extent the progress of Bulgarian propaganda and encouraged the Mace¬ donian Greeks not to despair altogether of the national cause. It was during these struggles that a Greek officer, Paul Melas, was killed under circumstances which raised him to the rank of a Greek national hero.


from 1881 to igo8 39
As a result of a meeting between the Tzar of Russia and the Emperor of Austria the so-called ‘ Miirzsteg Programme ’ was
The'M" issued in September 1903, which included a
r, f ^ proposal for the establishment of an international
Programme . ^ S , 1 • 1
* gendarmerie m Macedonia ; but it was some time before the financial details were settled, and the scheme was not ratified until 1907, Foreign officers, however, began to arrive in 1904, the Drama district being assigned to the British, Serres to the French, Monastic to the Itahans, Salonica to the Russians, and Uskub to the Austrians. But their efforts did httle to arrest the interracial struggle, which called for much more radical remedies. In 1905 the British Government, in view of the unwiUingness of the Sultan to carry out reforms, persuaded the other Powers to join Great Britain in a blockade of Mitylene and forced the Porte to agree to the recognition of the financial experts who had been sent to Salonica by the
Powers. It is interesting to note that, while the other Powers were striving to find a settlement of the Macedonian question, Germany ^ .. refused to co-operate and set herself to cultivate ermany cuti friendship. In 1898, at a time when the
f other rulers of Europe looked askance at Abdul Jrien s tp. Hamid as the author of the Armenian massacres,
Wilham II and his consort visited him at Constantinople on their theatrical journey to the Holy Land, and Germany as a reward obtained the further concessions for the proposed Bagdad railway. In return Germany deliberately flattered and supported the Sultan, and, by refusing to send officers for the international gendarmerie and to join the other Powers in the blockade of Mitylene, encouraged Turkey to regard Germany as its only friend and to employ every device to avoid carrying out the demands of the other Powers. Thus German influence con¬ tributed to the continuance of the reign of terror and bloodshed
in Macedonia. But a new movement was destined soon to arise in Macedonia, due to causes other than the grievances and disputes of the Macedonian Christians, and was to lead eventually to a solution of the Macedonian question very different from the poUcy of
internal reform contemplated by the Powers.


CHAPTER V
THE YOUNG TURK REVOLUTION AND THE
BALKAN LEAGUE (1908-12)
THE Young Turk Revolution of 1908 affected the Greeks both by its results in Macedonia and by its indirect influence upon the
The Youn internal pohtics of Greece. Its details belong to
I nr ^ . the history of the Ottoman Empire rather than Tmk Movemeut. J kingdom. It was the
result of an underground movement which had long been smouldering and finally burst into flame at Salonica. Of its organizers some were exiles who had been expelled from Turkey for their opposition to the Hamidian regime, but the prime movers were unscrupulous adventurers, many of them not of Ottoman blood,^ who were inspired as much by personal ambition as by motives of patriotism. They obtained ready aid, especially in finance, from the Jews and Judaeo-Moslem Dunmehs ^ of Salonica, where the masonic lodges were hot¬ beds of propaganda ; and it was not long before the loyalty of the army was undermined. On 24th July Enver Bey and his fellow-members of the ‘ Committee of Union and Progress ’ proclaimed the constitution in Macedonia and the two Mace.1 f f „ . f donian Army Corps threatened to march on amt Constantinople. Abdul Hamid could only bow
^ before the storm and issue an Irade restorme; the constitution, which had been m abeyance since 1878, and summoning an elected chamber of 280 members. The new movement was welcomed with enthusiasm not only in Macedonia, where all the conflicting nationahties indulged
^ Enver was son of a renegade Pole, Talaac a Bulgarian gipsy, and Djavid a Dunmeh. * This curious sect, which includes some of the most prosperous merchants of Salonica, consists of Islamized Jews. Their doctrines are somewhat obscure, but, while outwardly practising Mohammedanism, they retain certain Jewbh ceremonies.
40


Young Turk Revolution and Balkan League (^igo8—i2) 41
in an orgy of reconciliation, but also in Western Europe,
The Revolution granting of an elected chamber was welcomed in regarded as the panacea of all pohtical troubles,
Macedonia. Macedonian question seemed automaticaily to have found its solution. The foreign governments, however, took the opportunity of the momentary disorganization of the Ottoman Empire to further their own ends—Austro-Hungary formally annexing Bosnia and Herzogovina, and Ferdinand of Bulgaria proclaiming himself ‘ Tsar of the Bulgarians ’, a title which was in itself a challenge to the rival peoples of the Balkans as recalling the old Bulgarian Empire which had temporarily enjoyed a rule far wider than the modem State. Elections were immediately held, with the result that, in spite of attempts at coercion on a large scale, eighteen Greek
The Turkish deputies were elected, while four seats were elections. Bulgarian subjects of the Sultan. The new Chamber was opened by Abdul Hamid, who solemnly declared his intention of ruling henceforward as a constitutional monarch. But his long reign was almost at
The counter- April 1909 a counter-revolu
revolutionandthe ^ Constantinople, no doubt under the auspices of the Sultan, and when the news of it reached Salonica, the Committee of Union and Progress decided that the Macedonian Army Corps should march upon the capital to uphold the Con¬ stitution. On their arrival fighting took place in Constantinople and Abdul Hamid was deposed and relegated to a villa outside Salonica, where he remained until the Balkan War. His successor, Mohammed V, who had passed his life in enforced seclusion and had no knowledge of affairs, was an easy tool in the hands of the Committee. In the disturbed condition of the Ottoman Empire the army, the only organized body in the state, naturally tended to become more and more powerful, and the fact that its organization had long been in the hands of the Germans, who accepted the new regime without any protest against its antiChristian bias, opened the door for the German penetration of the whole Ottoman Empire.
In Macedonia the effect of the Revolution was for a time to arrest the interracial strife, and the comitadji warfare came to an end ; at the same time it forestalled, as no doubt it was intended
deposition of
Abdul Hamid.


42 The Young Turk Revolution
to do, any coercive measures which might be contemplated by the Powers. But it became obvious before The effect of the constitution was a mere
Revolution in pretence as far as the Christian subjects of the Macedonia. Porte were concerned, since the Young Turks
soon showed themselves even more intent than Abdul Hamid himself upon maintaining the supremacy of the Moslem element , ,, , and carrying out with still greater thoroughness The Young Turk policy of ‘ Ottomanizing ’ the Christian
pohcy of ^ population. Amongst other measures which were Ottomamzatwn . opposed to the interests of the Christians
were the attempt to introduce universal taxation throughout the Empire, thus annulling privileges which had been enjoyed for centuries—for example, by the Albamans and the imposi¬ tion of mihtary service upon the Christians and Jews. In the European provinces the closing of Christian schools and other
^ , j measures for suppressing the non-Moslem eleThe Greeks and ^ reconciliation between the Greeks
Bulganans com- Bulgarians of Macedonia and Thrace with bine for the object of combining against the Young election oj igii. the election of 1911. An arrangement
was made whereby eight of the eleven seats allotted to the Christians of Macedonia were to be occupied by Greeks and four only by Bulgarians, while in Thrace three seats were allotted to Greeks and one only to Bulgarians. This agree¬ ment, which received the blessing of the (Ecumenical Patriarchate and the Bulgarian Exarchate, is interesting as an official admission by the Bulgarians that the Greeks enjoyed a numerical superiority over the Bulgarians of Macedonia in a ratio of 8 to 3 and in Thrace in a ratio of 3 to i. It is also of importance as pointing to the possibihty of a more general rapprochement between the two nations, which was afterwards to be realized in the Balkan League. We may now turn to the effect of the Young Turkish Re¬ volution upon the kingdom of Greece. It was only natural that the Greeks of the autonomous state of Crete should regard the beginning of a new regime in Turkey and the difficulties which had arisen between the Porte and Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria as a favourable moment for throw¬ ing off once and for all the trammels of Ottoman suzerainty.
The effect of the
Young Turkish
Revolution on
Greece.


and the Balkan League {igoS-iz) 43
M. Zaimis, the High Commissioner of Crete, happened at the time to be absent from the island, where a meeting of the Chamber
Crete proclaims ^ proclamation issued declaring its independence. union of Crete with Greece. A committee offive members, one of whom was M. Venizelos, was formed to carry on the government in the name of King George. The Athens Cabinet, in which M. Theotokis was then
The dilemma of was thus placed in an awkward M. Theotokis ‘lilemma. If it satisfied the aspirations of the Cretans, it might offend the Protecting Powers as well as incur the hostility of Turkey ; whereas if it failed to do so, national feeling not only in Crete but also in Greece would be outraged, and a golden opportunity might be lost for ever. It is not improbable that, if the Greek Government had taken the bolder course of admitting Crete to the Greek kingdom before the fall of Abdul Hamid, all might have been well. The
Premier, however, preferred the more correct attitude of declaring that the Greek Government could take no official cognizance of the action of the Provisional Government in Crete, and matters remained for many months in a condition When the military party had finally asserted itself in Turkey and had inaugurated its nationalistic poUcy, it was tempted to cover the mistakes of its domestic administration by diverting public attention to foreign politics. The question outstanding with Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria had been settled to Turkey’s disadvantage, but the Cretan question was still undecided. Extravagant demands were therefore formulated, which even included a modification of the conditions of autonomy granted to Crete in 1898. The result was still further to exasperate public opinion in Greece, and M. Theotokis felt obliged to resign on 17th July 1909. He was succeeded by M. Demetrios RaUis, who, however, found it necessary to postpone a dissolu¬ tion, since a new election would place him in the difficulty of having to choose between excluding the deputies who would certainly be elected in Crete and so alienating pubfic sympathy, or risking hostihties with Turkey if he decided to admit Cretan representatives to the Chamber. Towards the end of July the Powers finally withdrew their troops from Crete, whereupon the Cretans hoisted the Greek flag at Canea. An exchange of
The Greek
Government's
‘ correct'
attitude.
of deadlock.


44 The Young Turk Revolution
notes ensued, in which Turkey lodged a protest, while the Greek
Premier disavowed any intention of departing from a correct
attitude. The offending flag was eventually removed by a
party ofmarines landed by the Powers, and all danger ofhostihties
was finally dissipated by a declaration of the Powers to the Porte
that the Macedonian and Cretan questions were not merely
difficulties to be adjusted between the Ottoman and Greek
Governments but matters of European concern.
Meanwhile the growing conviction of the Greek pubhc
that the cause of Greek nationahsm was being betrayed gave
The ‘ Militar increasing irritation against the leaders of
, , , . , the pohtical parties. In May 1909 some of the
League at Athens. ^ ^ r 1
younger mihtary officers formed a Military
League ’, which has been described as a second-hand imitation
of the Committee of Union and Progress and which soon
became the rallying point of opposition to the poHticians. On
two points it may be urged that the Leaguers had some show
of justice on their side in demanding reforms; firstly, the
organization of the Greek Army had made practically no progress
since its disastrous exhibition in the Greco-Turkish War, and,
secondly, the constant changes of government with the attendant
evils of the ‘ spoils system ’ had long prevented any real consist¬
ency of national poHcy. In August the League formulated its
demands, and, on the refusal of the Premier to accede to them,
the members of the League, numbering over 500 officers, left
Athens under the leadership of Colonel Zorbas and estabhshed
a camp near the city. Thereupon M. Rallis resigned and was
succeeded by M. Kyriakoulos Mavromichahs. The new Premier
adopted an attitude favourable to the Leaguers, who broke up
their camp and, returning to Athens, made demands which
included the reorganization of the army and navy and the ex¬
clusion of the Royal Princes from all military and naval com¬
mands. Meeting with a strong element of opposition in the
Chamber, the Leaguers threatened to occupy the building with
troops ; but the execution of this threat was forestalled by the
The Greek ^^8’ consented to the removal of the
Princes removed P°? Commanderfrom the services ^*^d his other sons from their positions in the army and navy. Meanwhile the junior
ofiicers of the navy demanded the removal of a number of their


The League
coerces the
Chamber.
and the Balkan League {igo8-i2) 45
superior officers and, when they failed to obtain satisfaction,
organized a mutiny. Finally, the League went so far as to coerce the Chamber into passing a number of measures under threats of force and to demand the dismissal of members of the Cabinet. The condition which affairs had now reached in Greece involved the negation of all free government, and a state of chaos had resulted which almost amounted to revolution, while the dynasty seemed to be tottering to its fall.
Fortunately a solution of the crisis was possible to which all parties agreed, namely, the summoning of M. Venizelos from
Venizelos Crete, where he had proved himself to be
summonedfiom of statesmanship. Qfglg The pohcy of the League had been purely destructive; what was now required was constructive statesmanship, and M. Venizelos was indicated as the man for the task. Seldom have the man and the opportunity been so well fitted to one another. From his first arrival he inspired general confidence ; for none could fail to recognize in him the ideal patriot who cared for nothing but his country’s good. The support accorded by King George I to the man who had contributed more than any one else to the deposition of his son Prince George from the position of High Com¬ missioner in Crete, is one of the many services which that king rendered to the land of his adoption. M. Venizelos immediately insisted on the necessity of summoning a National Assembly to revise the Constitution. The League was dissolved, and the Assembly held its first sitting on 14th September 1910, but the discussions which arose as to whether its functions could legally be regarded as revisionary proved too much for the veteran Premier, M. Stephanos Dragoumis, who resigned; whereupon the King sent for M. Venizelos, who insisted that the only raison d’etre of the Assembly was to revise the Con¬ stitution. Failing, however, to obtain a vote of confidence he
,, , , . , resigned, and the King promptly dissolved the entzeos o atns The new elections gave M. Venizelos
ma^oru'^ ^ ^ majority that he could feel that the whole majority. country was behind him in his efforts to evolve
harmony out of chaos.
Venizelos insists
on a National
Assembly.


46 The Young Turk Revolution
The Second Revisionary Assembly sat from January to June 1911, when it issued the Revised Constitution which , , . included a number of reforms which lapse of e evtswmry new conditions had rendered necessary Assembly. original constitution was drawn up.
The Crown Council was revived; the quorum in the Chamber reduced to one third; officers on the active list were declared ineUgible to sit as deputies; and the civil servants obtained a guarantee of security of tenure. Primary education was made compulsory and gratuitous. A new post of Inspector-General of the Army was created and bestowed on the Crown Prince, who was thus able to return to
Athens. The completion of the work of the Revisionary Assembly brought back its normal hfe to the state, and at the election,
. f which followed in March 1912, M. Venizelos
The restoration of i-i ■■ rr - l
^ j obtained a majority or nve-sixths or the House. ons t u tona Cretans again elected deputies to the Greek overnmen . Chamber, but the Premier refused them leave
to sit in the House on the ground that no action must be taken which might embroil Greece with foreign countries before she was in a condition to defend her national honour. It is a proof of the position which M. Venizelos had already attained that his orders were obeyed without question, and the Cretan de¬ puties, many of whom had already reached Athens, abstained from making any attempt to enter the House. Meanwhile a French MiUtary Mission and a British Naval Mission were summoned to Athens to reorganize the combatant services and did their work so well and found such willing co-operation in all ranks that the Greek Army and Navy were soon in a condition to give a good account of themselves. Any one who, hke the present writer, visited Greece in the spring of 1912 after several years’ absence could not help being
Crp ■ struck by the change which had come over the Greek people and their capital. All classes in a nation formerly notorious for the inconstancy of its pohtical allegiance were obviously inspired with an enthusiasm for their Prime Minister such as it would be difficult to parallel in the history of any country. Wherever M. Venizelos went, he was the object of universal demonstrations of affection and admira


Relations of
Greece icith the
other Balkan
States.
and the Balkan League {igo8-i2) 47
tion. A change seemed even to have come over the city of Athens itself, which in place of its former character of a second-rate and semi-oriental capital seemed suddenly to have attained to the dignity of a great European city. In the provinces there was such security of life and property as had never before been known. Hellenism, which had survived centuries of slavery and, since its emancipation, had passed through nine decades of internal and external dilficulties, had for the first time found a statesman capable of uniting the nation and appeahng to all that was best in the Greek character and leading Greece along the path to national greatness. The fruits of M. Venizelos’ statesmanship were soon ap¬ parent not only in the purification of the administration, the reform of the Army and Navy, and the improved lot of the peasants, but also in a new conception of the relations between Greece and her Balkan neighbours. Turkey’s pohcy of ‘ Divide et impera ’ and the exploitation of national jealousies in her European territories had made co-operation impossible among the Christian States in the Balkans. But a favourable moment for ending for ever the curse of Turkish misrule had at last arrived ; Turkey was embroded in a war with Italy in Libya, her fleet dared not leave the Dardanelles, Albania was in revolt, and the condition of Ottoman finances was even worse than usual. If only the Balkan States could bring themselves to lay aside their mutual antagonism and co¬ operate together, each of them might solve the pressing problem
of its national unity. Between Greece and Serbia, whose territories were nowhere in geographical contact, there were no conflicting claims, and ^ j indeed no formal agreement was concluded Greece and between them until after the close of the First Serbia. Balkan War; but both states had an out¬
standing feud with Bulgaria. During the summer of 1912, mainly through the mediation of Russia, Serbia and Bulgaria concluded a secret agreement, whereby the Serbia and ultimate fate of the Uskub district, which was Bulgaria. debatable territory, was to be referred to Russian
arbitration in event of a successful campaign against Turkey.


4.8 The Young Turk Revolution
Between Greece and Bulgaria the conflict of interests was more acute owing to the inextricable intermingling Greece and nationaHties in Macedonia, which
Bulgaria. rendered impossible any dehmitation of a
frontier between the two countries. M. Venizelos realized that the only possible course was to agree to postpone the question of dividing the spoil until victory had been achieved, and with characteristic skill he succceeded in persuading the Bulgarian Government to accept his point of view. The Balkan League, the unrealized dream of so many Balkan patriots, was now an
accomplished fact. It soon became obvious to observers throughout Europe that a crisis was at hand in the Near East. Anarchy was again
'TL n iu ^ Macedonia, Albania had practically ^ thrown off the trammels of Turkish rule, and against jg^jous incidents were occurring on the Turkish
frontiers; at the same time the Ottoman Government showed no signs of being able to cope with the situation. In August 1912 a final attempt to preserve peace was made by Count Berchtold, the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister, who made suggestions for dealing with the Macedonian question by administrative reforms and decentrahzation and advised the Balkan States to adopt an attitude of moderation. But it was too late ; and before the Powers had had time to ponder over the Austrian proposals, the Greek, Serbian, Bulgarian, and Turkish Armies were ordered to mobilize (ist October 1912), A few days later the Porte announced its intention of at last carrying out the Provisions of the Treaty of Berlin by enforcing the Vilayet Law of 1880 ; while the Powers issued notes promising to safeguard the integrity of the Ottoman Empire and the sovereignty of the Sultan and promising reforms, but at the same time warning the Balkan States that they would permit no territorial modification, even if Turkey were defeated. Thus up to the very last moment the Powers persisted in ‘ back¬ ing the wrong horse ’ and adopting an attitude from which the defeat of Turkey soon obhged them to descend not without considerable loss of dignity. On 13 th October the Balkan Alhes made a demand for reforms in Macedonia and elsewhere far more radical than Turkey could dream of granting. The Porte declared war on Serbia and Bulgaria


and the Balkan League (igoS-iz) 49
on 17th October. The Greek Government had already taken the decisive step of admitting the Cretan deputies to the Chamber, and on the next day, i8th October, declared war on Turkey. The Balkan crisis had come to a head.


CHAPTER VI
THE BALKAN WARS (1912-13)
THOUGH the Turkish Government had been the first to declare war on Serbia and Bulgaria, it was in no condition to justify
The Bui ars putting its forces immediately into , . the field and the initiative rested with the AUies.
^Thrace ^ Thrace the First Bulgarian Army marched on Mustapha Pasha, which was occupied on i8th October 1912, and thus threatened Adrianople, while the Third Bulgarian Army under General Dimitrief occupied Kirk Kilesse on 14th October. If the Bulgars had not been too ex¬ hausted to push on, they might have placed the Turkish forces in Thrace definitely hors de combat, but a delay of a few days enabled the latter to rally. The Bulgarian offensive was resumed on the 28th, and a fierce battle raged at Lule Burgas until ist November, when the Turkish retreat became general; but again the Bulgars were too exhausted to press home their success.
The Buhars November before the two reach the armies were again in touch on the naturally
Tchataldja Lines, ^orimdablc Tchataldja Lines. The Turks mean¬ while had taken advantage of the delay to strengthen their positions both with artillery and spade-work and to accumulate stores; with the result that, when the Bul¬ garians attacked, they were in a position to resist and by an almost superhuman effort succeeded in holding their own in a four days battle and beating back the enemy, thus saving for the moment the last remnant of Turkey in Europe and forcing King Ferdinand to invest Adrianople instead of fulfilling his dream of entering Constantinople in triumph.
Meanwhile in North-Western Macedonia the Serbians advanced towards Uskub with the object of forestalhng an invasion of Serbia and Bulgaria by the Turkish Army in that region and capturing the capital of the Old Serbian Empire. In the battle of Kumanovo on 23rd to 24th October with
50


5*
THE BALKAN WARS, 1912-13.


52 The Balkan Wars {1912-13)
greatly inferior forces they defeated the enemy in what was perhaps the most desperate encounter in the The Serbians -y^hole war, and showed the world what was
^ t expected from the Serbian infantry. The
occupation of Uskub followed, and, while the
Second Serbian Army was dispatched to reinforce the Bulgars
before Adrianople, the remainder advanced down the Vardar
^ Valley, where they met with determined The capture oj opposition at Prilep, but eventually occupied
Monastn. Monastic on 12th November after a battle which
lasted for two days and in which the superior strategy of the
Serbian Higher Command was ably supported by the supreme
qualities of endurance and bravery of the Serbian soldiers. The
defeat of the Turkish Army in North-Western Macedonia was
thus achieved by Serbia without the promised aid of Bulgaria,
and the whole of Old Serbia and most of Albania occupied.
Similar success attended the Greek arms. The Hellenic forces
immediately after the declaration of war crossed the frontier, as
in the Greco-Turkish War, both in Thessaly and
in Epirus. The main army under the Crown
Prince advanced through the difficult passes of
Olympus and occupied Elassona ; then, meeting
with resistance at Servidje, they inflicted a
defeat upon Hassim Tahsim Pasha and occupied Verria and
Vodena, thus cutting the railway communication between
Salonica and Monastic. The Turks divided their forces and
retreated on these two towns. Another victory at Yenidje
Vardar on ist November opened the road to Salonica,
which was in no condition to resist a siege and could only
, surrender. On 9th November the Greek
Salonica Army entered the coveted city in triumph with King George and the Crown Prince at its
head, having thus achieved its main objective in little more
than three weeks after an unbroken series of successes, which
showed how quickly and completely the Greek Army had
recovered from the demorahzing effect of the MiUtary League.
The Greeks had reached Salonica only just in time, for within
a few hours a Bulgarian Division under General Todorof also
arrived on the scene. Ever since the abortive Treaty of San
Stefano the Bulgars had regarded the reversion of Macedonia
The Greek
advance into
Southern
Macedonia.


The Balkan Wars {1912-if} 53
and its capital as theirs by right if ever Turkey in Europe should
The Bulgars partitioned, and the claim of Greece to also reach Salonica in virtue of prior conquest was one Salonica which they could not bring themselves to admit. Thus the first seed was sown of a quarrel between hereditary enemies only momentarily reconciled which was to end in the hostihties of the Second Balkan War. For the moment the danger of an open breach was prevented by the dispatch of the greater part of the Bulgar troops from Salonica to Dedeagatch in Greek shipping in order to assist in the siege of Adrianople. A small garrison, however, of about 1500 Bulgarians remained in Salonica.
Meanwhile the small Greek force sent north in pursuit of the Turks after the victory at Servidje had reached Banitsa, between Monastic and Fiorina, on ist November. Here it was attacked by a superior Turkish force and driven back to Sorovits, where it entrenched itself and resisted until the temporary crisis was relieved by the Serbian pressure on Monastic. After the completion of the occupation of Salonica a force of four divisions under the command of the Crown Prince set out to, the support of this northern Greek force and, after an engagement near Lake Ostrovo, reoccupied Banitsa. Zekki Pasha, however, the Turkish general, succeeded in escaping westward into Epirus, taking with him a force of about one division. Here a small Greek column, after a slow advance through difficult country, had captured Preveza, driving the Turkish Army in retreat to Jannina, which was garrisoned by a force much superior in numbers to the besiegers, especially after the arrival of Zekki’s
troops. On 3rd December 1912 Turkey signed an armistice with the Alhes except the Greeks, who were engaged in occupying , . , the islands and besieging Jannina. Greek , ^ delegates, including M. Venizelos, took part, wit ur ey. however, in the Conference whicli opened in
London on i6th December, when the representatives of the Powers met the delegates of the Balkan States and Turkey. , ^ The Conference ended without any result,
fL largely owing to the attitude of the Bulgarian Oj representatives, who not only refused any com¬
promise with Turkey, but also rejected M. Venizelos’ overtures


54 This Balkan Wars {igi2-i^)
for a friendly settlement of the Greco-Bulgarian differences and
intrigued with the Austrians against Serbia. Accordingly early in February 1913 the truce came to an end and hostiUties were resumed. The two chief centres of , , interest were Jannina and Adrianople. The e capture oj former surrendered on 6th March, four divisions Jannina. having been sent round from Greece by sea to
reinforce the besiegers; and one of the dreams of Greek national¬
ism thus at last became a reahty. At Adrianople the period of the armistice was employed by the Turks in strengthening their defences, but it was obvious
The sie e of town would be taken unless some e siege OJ effort were made to reheve it from without. rtanop e. ^ therefore, conceived of moving
troops up from the Gallipoh peninsula, and a large concentration of troops took place there during the armistice. As a counter¬ move the Bulgarian Fourth Army advanced from Demotika to Bulair at the neck of the peninsula, where fighting took place on 4th February and subsequent days, which ended in favour of the Bulgars and destroyed any hopes entertained by the Turks that they would be able to reheve Adrianople. But the siege dragged on amid the severest winter weather, until, after several attempts, the Serbians and Bulgarians both succeeded in entering the town from different sides on the night of 25th-26th March. It is a question which of the two nations had the honour of receiving the submission of the Turkish commander, and here, as at Salonica, the harmony between the Alhes was disturbed by an event which should have been an occasion for mutual con¬ gratulation. The behaviour of the Bulgarians in refusing to the Serbians any share in the triumphal entry into Adrianople, and the cold and almost hostile reception given to the Serbian troops on their journey home through Bulgaria, was a poor return for the assistance which the Serbians had rendered by sending not only infantry but also their siege guns, particularly in view of the fact that they were under no obligation to send any troops to Thrace, since the Bulgarians had not given the assistance in Macedonia contemplated by the Serbo-Bulgarian Treaty. With the fall of Adrianople the only remaining point
Fall of
Adrianople.
Bulgarian
ingratitude to¬
wards Serbia.


The Balkan Wars (ipi2-ij) 55
'Turkish resistance was Skutari in Northern Albania, which
was surrendered to the Montenegrins on 23rd April.
Throughout the campaign on land invaluable, though less spectacular, services were rendered at sea by the Greek Navy
The services of Admiral Koundouriotis, which absolutely
the Greek Navy. ^^^^roUed the AEgean and prevented any attempt on the part of the Turkish Navy to emerge from the Dardanelles. Its greatest contribution to the Allied
success was that it prevented the dispatch of reinforcements by
sea from Asia Minor and made the Turks entirely dependent
on railway transport, which quickly broke down. The Greek
mercantile marine also performed significant services by
transferring troops and material both for the Serbs and for
The Greek Bulgarians. The Greek Navy was also
«cc^palio« of the “king over from Turkey /Eoean Islands islands of the ^gean, such as Lesbos, Chios, and Samos, which were not only
essentially Greek in population and busy centres of industry,
but also strategically important as dominating the coasts of Asia Minor.
The fall of Skutari brought the First Balkan War to a close.
The result of the resumption of hostiUties after the armistice was
The end of the to strengthen the position of the victorious
First Balkan IVar whose successes had justified their most sanguine expectations and had forced European
opinion to change its conception of the invincible Turk and the
Powers to modify the lofty attitude which they had adopted
only a few months before and accept the new condition of
affairs.
For the moment the Allies still presented an outward appear¬
ance of sohdarity, and negotiations were resumed in London
which terminated on 30th May with the Treaty
of London, whereby the frontier of Turkey
was drawn from Enos on the ^Egean to Midia
on the Black Sea, depriving Turkey of Adrianople ; and all
territory beyond this hne except Albania was
ceded to the Balkan League as a whole. The
suzerainty of Crete was definitely renounced by
Turkey, but the future ownership of the Turkish Islands of the
iEgean was left to the decision of the Powers. The most striking
The Treaty of
London.
Crete ceded to
Greece.


56 The Balkan Wars {1912-13)
effort of the Powers was the erection of an independent Albania, a step which was destined to have far-reaching effects as barring
Serbia from access to the Adriatic. The emancipation of the Christian populations of Turkey in Europe, which was the object of the Balkan League, had been achieved, but the problem stiU remained of dividing the spoils. The Bulgars were not only as obsessed as ever by the idea of the ‘ Great Bulgaria ’ of the San Stefano Treaty, but also reUed on the Treaty with Serbia for the satisfaction of their claims in Northern Macedonia. Serbia, disappointed of her ambition to possess an outlet on the Adriatic and cut off to the north by Austro-Hungary, was forced to look for an exit down the Vardar Valley and was naturally averse to seeing two frontiers erected between herself and the iEgean; at the same time she could claim that the Treaty with Bulgaria was rendered void by the fact that the Bulgarians had not fulfilled their part by sending assistance to the Serbian armies, whereas Serbia had done more than her share by sending troops to Thrace. Greece was firmly established at Salonica and naturally claimed an extension of her frontier in Southern Macedonia. She could urge with justice, if Macedonia was to be partitioned, that, since the whole of the iEgean littoral was inhabited by a pre¬ ponderance of Greeks with a minority of Turks and Bulgaria had no ethnological claims to any portion of it, the western section at least as far as the Struma should be regarded as her legitimate share of the spoils. In return for this, M. Venizelos was prepared to give up all claim to the conquered territory east of the Struma, thus carrying conciliation towards Bul¬ garia to its utmost limit in order to avoid a rupture of the League.
On 18th March King George of Greece, then in the fiftieth year of his reign, was murdered by a half-witted Macedonian
The murder of walking, according to his wont, almost Kina Cearap nf ‘^^^•^^cnded in a Street of Salonica. It was not
Greece ^ services which he rendered to Greece that he refused to leave Salonica as long as his presence could serve to demonstrate to the world in general, and to Bulgaria in particular, that the Greeks were determined to maintain their hold on their legitimate con¬ quests. His martyrdom in the cause of Greek Nationalism


57
The Balkan Wars {1912-13)
could not fail to confirm the determination of his subjects to
assert their rights and seemed likely also to strengthen the posi¬
tion of the Gliicksberg dynasty on the throne of Greece. But
his death also lessened the chance of a peaceful settlement with
Bulgaria by the removal of a sovereign of long experience
and wide knowledge of foreign political relations, whose
personal influence had done much to preserve harmony among
the Balkan Allies. His successor, Constantine, a man of head¬
strong character and little political insight, who was already
beginning to regard himself, in virtue of the successes of
the Greek Army, as a ‘ War-Lord ’ on the model of his Im¬
perial brother-in-law of Germany, soon showed himself
less willing than his father to listen to the advice of his
Prime Minister. Owing to the uncompromising attitude of the Bulgaria
Government the Greeks and Serbians found it advisable, in view of possible eventualities, to enter into a The Greco- secret treaty for mutual defence. Already on Serbian Treaty, Bulgarians had tried to dis¬
lodge the Greeks from their positions at Nigrita on the right
bank of the Struma; but in the interest of harmony the
Greek Government consented to regard this attack as a local
incident’. In May, while the Treaty was under discussion,
the danger from Bulgaria was made much more obvious
by a determined attempt on the part of Bulgarian troops
to expel the Greek forces of occupation from the district
of Mount Pangaeon to the east of the mouth of the Struma ,
hostilities here lasted for several days and resulted in a victory for
the Greeks. The Protocol of the Greco-Serbian Treaty was dated 5 th May
1913, and the final Treaty of Alliance was signed on ist June and ratified on 21st June. This agreement Its provisions. acquired such importance, in view of the
questions which arose regarding it during the European War
of 1914-18, that the more important of its provisions may
be stated here. By Article I of the Treaty each Power under¬
took to come to the assistance of the other if attacked and only
to make peace by common consent, while under Article II
each undertook not to conclude any separate agreement with
Bulgaria. Article III arranged for a common Greco-Serbian


58 The Balkan Wars {igi2-ij)
frontier west of the Vardar, and Article IV fixed the Greco
Bulgarian and Serbo-Bulgarian frontiers ‘ on the principle
of actual occupation and of the equilibrium between the three
States By Article V it was arranged that, if negotiations
with Bulgaria broke down, all differences should be sub¬
mitted to the arbitration of the Sovereigns of the Triple Entente
or other Heads of States. Article VI provided for a military
convention. By Article VII Greece guaranteed commercial
facilities to Serbia along the Vardar railway and at Salonica.
Article VIII arranged for co-operation between the general
staffs of the two countries, while Article IX provided for the
discussion in the future of a Customs Union between Greece
and Serbia. Under Article X the Treaty became operative
immediately after its signature and was to remain in force for ten years.
Under the Military Convention, in case of an attack by
Bulgaria, or another third Power, Greece undertook to provide
a force of 90,000 rifles and to co-operate with
her fleet in the ^Egean, while Serbia agreed to
provide 100,000 rifles. Ifhostilities were declared
by one of the two parties against Bulgaria or
another Power without previous agreement with the other party, the latter was to observe an attitude
of benevolent neutrality and immediately mobilize its army.
The Military
Convention be¬
tween Greece
and Serbia.
The Greco-Serbian Agreement was concluded none too
soon ; for by the date of its final ratification the Bulgarian
armies had already been concentrated against Greece and Serbia.
Towards the end ofJune the position was such that the Rumanian
Government formally declared to Bulgaria that, in event of
hostilities, it could not remain neutral, thereby performing a
notable service to Greece and Serbia by preventing any inter¬
vention in favour of Bulgaria by Austro-Hungary, which would not risk the alienation of Rumania.
At the end of June five Bulgarian armies were ready
The Bulgars attack all along the front from the
attack the Danube to the uEgean. Early on the
Serbians. morning of 30th June, without any declara¬ tion of hostilities, they treacherously attacked
the Serbians with whom they had been fraternizing only


The Balkan IVars 59
a few hours before. They succeeded in advancing at certain points, but the Serbians gradually asserted their superiority and in a little more than a week the invaders were defeated.
Meanwhile, acting in concert with the Northern Bulgarian Army, the Second Bulgarian Army under General Ivanof
T, t attacked the Greeks on a wide front. These
1 he iSuiffars r • 1 • 1 •
attack the operations are or particular interest as having Greeks taken place over ground which became familiar to the Allied Armies in the Macedonian campaign of 1915-18. The very suddenness of the attack gave the Bulgars a temporary success at the two extremities of the front, enabling them to seize Gevgeli and to drive in the Greek outposts near the mouth of the Struma. The plan of attack adopted by the Greek General Staff was to attack the right wing of the Second Bulgarian Army, and, if possible, isolate it from the Fourth Army on its right, and simultaneously to advance on its own right wing and interrupt the Bulgarian rear communications by cutting the Salonica-Constantinople railway beyond Serres. Accord^ I . . , ingly on 2nd July the Greeks attacked
KUkish'^ ^ vigorously on the line Gevgcli-Kilkish-Likovan, recapturing the first of these places and advancing victoriously on a wide front. The action was fought in blazing heat, and the heavy casualties bore witness to the obstinacy of the Bulgarian resistance and the devotion and dash of the Greek infantry, who were ably supported by batteries of mountain guns. Next day the formidable Bulgar positions at Lahana on the Salonica-Serres road, on the crest of the hills just before they begin to slope down to the Struma plain, were captured by bayonet assault, and the Bulgarian Army was definitely defeated. His communications being by this time threatened. General Ivanof could see no alternative to retreat and ordered his troops to retire in two directions, over the western end of the Bclashitsa Range to Strumnitsa and up the Rupel Pass. On 6th July , ^ f the town of Doiran, which had been an important depot of stores, was occupied by the Greeks without a struggle. Serres and Demir-Hissar
were the scenes of unspeakable horrors perpetrated by the


6o The Balkan Wars {igi2-i^)
comitadjis who accompanied the retreating army.^ The pursuing Greek Army followmg the retiring Bulgars up the Struma
The Greeks reach found them on 21st July in a strongly the Kresna Pass position at the narrow Kresna Pass, and the struggle passed from open warfare into a war of positions.
Meanwhile the general situation had been greatly modified
Rumania owing to the fulfilment by Rumania of her
threatens Sofia. to join in the hostilities; and the Rumanian Army had advanced to within fifty miles of Sofia. At the same time the Turks had taken advantage of the
Recapture of denuded condition of the Thracian frontier Adrianople recapture Adrianople, and might have ex¬ tended their operations westwards had not the Greeks taken the precaution of landing troops at Dedeagatch. Bulgaria then found herself surrounded by enemies on all sides and was forced to agree to a cessation of hostihties on
Bulgaria which brought to a close the des
surrenders. struggle which had been waged for more than a week between the Greeks and Bulgars in the upper valley of the Struma. This armistice brought the Second Balkan A^ar to a close after only a month of warfare, with the result that Bulgaria not only lost much of the Turkish spoil which she might have obtained if she had been willing to come to an amicable settlement, but also alienated the sympathy of pubhc
opinion in those countries to which she owed her very existence as a nation. ^
Before closing this chapter wc may revert briefly to the
The Fate of the Bulger garrison, which had been Bulgarforce in behind in Salonica during the First Balkan
Salonica. 1913 the strained relations between the Greeks and Bulgars in Salonica had reached breaking-point. Abandoned by their
* The present writer visited these towns in the winter of 1915-16, when they were still occupied by Greek troops and before the Bulgarian descent into Eastern Macedonia. The Greek ouarter of Serres was a mass of ruins ; at Demir-Hissar he was introduced by the Commander of the garrison to the sole su^ivor of a number of Greek inhabitants who were driven to the edge of a deep pit, bayoneted by Bulgars and hurled, still living, into the


The Balkan Wars {igi2-i3) 6i
officers the men barricaded themselves in a girls’ school near the Church of St. Sophia and for a time maintained a stout resistance. They were eventually forced to surrender by the fire of Greek machine-guns which effectually commanded their place of refuge from the minaret of St. Sophia, where marks of Bulgar bullets are still traceable.


CHAPTER VII
FROM THE TREATY OF BUCHAREST TO THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR OF 1914-18 (1913-14)
THE Treaty of Bucharest, which was ratified on loth August 1913, was an attempt on the part of Greece and Serbia to deal
The Treat of Bulgaria in spite of her record of Bucharest ^ ^ treachery. As has already been shown, the nationalities were so inextricably intermingled in Macedonia that to fix ethnological frontiers was a sheer impossibihty. The Greco-Serbian frontier was drawn in accord¬ ance with the provisions of the Treaty of Alhance. Bulgaria
The Serbian gambled for high stakes and had lost, and ■ ^ so had to pay the penalty. Serbia, therefore, ^ ' annexed certain districts in Northern and Central Macedonia, of which the inhabitants were Bulgarian rather than Serbian in sentiment, but their annexation was a necessity to secure a satisfactory frontier and to prevent the creation of any semblance of a ‘ Great Bulgaria ’ which would have given her enemy a predominant position in the Balkans. There was, no doubt, less justification for the Rumanian annexation of part of the Bulgarian Dobrudja ; but Rumania could legitimately demand some compensation, and was thus placed in possession of territory which she could use as a pledge of Bulgarian good behaviour.
Greece under the Treaty saw her territory almost doubled and a large Greek population ‘ redeemed ’ after centuries of
The new slavery ; but at the same time she acquired an
frontiers of enormous Northern Frontier, which would Greece. ^ require large forces for its protection.^ Her treatment of Bulgaria was eminently fair. We have seen how, after the First Balkan War, Greece, in order to secure harmony in the Balkan League, had been willing to
^ See map on p. 149. 62


From the Treaty of Bucharest to 1914 63
concede to Bulgaria all the ^gean httoral east of the Struma ^ ^ ^ in spite of the predominance of the Greek
Generous treat- ^ ,
. fr, j population in that region. It was characteristic men oj u garia. far-seeing statesmanship of M. Venizelos,
who realized that Greece and Bulgaria must try to live peaceably together, that he decided in favour of granting Bulgaria access to the iCgean by making the River Mesta the frontier and thus giving her the ports of Dedeagatch, Makri, and Porto Lago. The only possible advantage to Greece which can be traced in this concession is that it placed a tract of buffer territory between Greece and Turkey. Had it been possible, M. Venizelos would have gone even further and conceded the Cavalla district, but he realized that such a sacrifice would have only stimulated the voracity of Bulgaria and given her a position of vantage for possible aggression in the future.^ The real test of the fairness with which Greece treated Bulgaria is the fact that the Treaty of Bucharest gave Greece a Bulgarian population smaller than the Greek population which remained under Bulgarian rule. There can be httle doubt that, had not the European War broken out so soon, the question of populations might have been to a large extent solved by the emigration of Greeks from Bulgaria into Greece and of Bulgarians from Greece into Bulgaria ; a beginning had already been made by the exchange of Greeks from the districts of Melenik, Strumnitsa, and Nevrokop with Bulgarians from the Struma Plain. To Turkey the Second Balkan War brought nothing but gain. She recovered almost all that she had lost in Central and , . Eastern Thrace and with oriental fatalism ur ey retains quickly reconciled herself to the loss of the
rianop e. provinces of Macedonia and Albania, which
had long been thorns in her side ; at the same time the successful defence of the Tchataldja lines and the recovery of Adrianople, her European capital before the capture of Constantinople, did
^ Though from a casual glance at the map the inclusion of the CavallaDrama district in Greece seems to be anomalous in view of the fact that the country north of it is Bulgarian, it must be remembered that the mountain ranges absolutely cut off the coastal region from the interior, and that the real exit from Western Macedonia towards the JEgcan is down the Vardar and Struma valleys to Salonica, the only Macedonian harbour on the >€gean which is really worth consideration. Geographically Bulgaria faces the Black Sea and not the j^gean.


64 From the Treaty of Bucharest to
much to rehabilitate her in her own estimation. Incidentally the recapture of Adrianople had far-reaching effects in that it re¬ stored the credit of Enver and the Committee of Union and Progress, and placed tliem in a position to dictate Turkish pohcy in the early part of the European War. Though the Treaty of Bucharest brought only a partial solution of the Greek National problem and large Hellenic
The Greek rob- remained under a foreign
, , yoke, vet so great was the extent of new territory
lent only partly i i r l j
solved successes or her army and navy during the Balkan Wars that Greece required a long period of peace in which to organize and consolidate her gains. In the words of M. Venizelos, ‘ For a whole generation Greece would have to be occupied in the extensive development of her doubled dominion, and during this period of development she must either hope that the Greeks in Turkey would find a tolerable modus vivendi under the existing system, or else be certain that, when the time came for the break-up of the Turkish Empire, a leading place would be taken by a strong Greece, strong enough to solve by her own effort the problems which await a national solution ’. But external events were destined to allow httlc time for internal development, though an excellent start was made in the organization of the new territories. In the year which intervened between the signature of the Treaty of Bucharest and the outbreak of the European War difficulties had already arisen with Turkey on the one hand and Italy on the other.
During the First Balkan War the Greeks had taken advantage of their supremacy at sea to occupy a number of Turkish islands . r inhabited almost exclusively by Greeks. Crete formally united to Greece on the
Islands^ declaration of war and the Porte had definitely resigned its suzerainty over it in the Treaty of London ; the Dodecanese, which we will consider later, was in the occupation of Italy. The fate of the rest of the Turkish islands of the ^Egean was left to the decision of the Powers, who assigned them all to Greece with the exception of Imbros and Tenedos, which command the approach to the Dardanelles. The three most northerly islands, Thasos, Samothrace, and Lemnos, were consequently annexed by Greece ; but the Turks


the Outbreak of the War of igi^-iS {igij-14) 65
refused to agree to the Greek occupation of Lesbos (Mitylene), Chios, and Samos, opposing the surrender of the first two in particular on the ground that they command the approach to Smyrna and lie too close to compact Greek subject populations on the west coast of Asia Minor. The Porte suggested as a compromise that all three islands should be given a form of autonomy such as Samos had long enjoyed under Turkish suzerainty. The question was stiU undecided when the European War broke out, and, with the participation of Turkey in that war, the islands passed automatically into the control of Greece and were conspicuous for their enthusiastic adherence to the National Movement in 1916. The ‘ unredeemed ’ Greeks of Turkish Thrace and the main¬ land of Asia Minor were far less fortunate than their brethren
The unredeemed was aggravated ^ u • T U rather than alleviated by the result or the Balkan ey. While Greece doubled its territory and
population in Europe, nearly two and a half million Greeks found themselves still in the clutches of their tormentors, who were embittered by the defeat which they had received and were still more set than ever on the pohcy of ‘ Ottomanizing ’ those Christians who still remained in their power. The con¬ clusion of the Balkan Wars saw the beginning of a new era of martyrdom for the Greek subjects of the Porte, which lasted for six years. In Thrace, which during the First Balkan War had been the scene of the desperate struggle between Turkey and Bulgaria, the large Greek population had inevitably suffered all the horrors of war. During the Second Balkan War, when the young Turks advanced to the reoccupation of Adrianople, the disorderly hordes of Turkish and Kurdish soldiers were let loose upon the Christian inhabitants. After the pillage and devastation of the armies, the unhappy survivors were left a prey to the Moslem peasants, who seized anything that had been preserved from the general ruin, well knowing that the Turkish courts would grant their victims no redress. A minority of the Greek inhabitants of Thrace managed to escape from the country and found new
homes in Greek Macedonia. In Asia Minor the large Greek population soon found itself
The Greeks in
Thrace.


66
The Greeks in
Asia Minor.
From the Treaty of Bucharest to
the object of systematic persecution by the Young Turks, who adopted this method of avenging the defeat inflicted upon them by the Greeks of Free Hellas. Throughout Asia Minor, wherever the traveller went, he found the learned professions and trade almost entirely in the hands of Greeks, who formed the intellectual elite of the population. Along the south coast of the Sea of Marmora and all the west coast of Asia Minor the Greek element was larger than that of any other nationality, and there was a compact mass of Greek population on the south coast of the Black Sea in the district of Trebizond. If Asia Minor had been par¬ titioned on the basis of nationality, the Greeks would have had a good claim to the vilayets of Aidin and Brousa and the sandjak of Ismid ; while there was ample justification for the desire of the Christian inhabitants of the vilayet of Trebizond to form an independent Greek ‘ Republic of Pontus Upon this Greek population of nearly two milHons the re-established in power after the recovery of Adrianople, began to vent their rage as soon as peace was signed. They found a ready excuse for expropriating Greeks by urging the necessity of providing for the Moslem refugees from the lost provinces. Expulsion was the easiest and least conspicuous means of reducing the Greek population. The pretexts for this were various, the favourite excuse being that Greeks had taken part in anti-Moslem demonstrations during the war. The number of Greeks denounced by professional informers and expelled from Turkey was very large and included some of the most influential members of the Greek communities. Another method adopted for the ruin of the Greeks was a boycott of all Greek commerce. Moslems were forbidden to frequent Greek shops or to have any com¬ mercial transactions with Greeks, while it was solemnly announced in the mosques that the payment of debts due from the Faithful to Christian creditors was an unpardonable sin. The Turks failed to realize that, if the results achieved had come up to their expectations, they would have destroyed any prosperity which the country enjoyed ; but the Greeks, in spite of heavy losses both in numbers and wealth, continued to hold their own with the characteristic vitality of their race. A large number of in
Young Turks,
Persecution of
the Asiatic
Greeks.
The boycott.


the Outbreak of the War of igi4-i8 {igij-14) 67
dividual firms were, however, forced to suspend operations and many of the richer Greeks left the country.
The commercial boycott affected the towns only. In the rural districts robbery and expropriation were still easier. The Christian peasants, being unarmed, were an easy prey to armed bands who instituted a reign of terror. Forbidden to leave their villages in order to till their fields, they were forced to sell all they possessed to save themselves from starvation and left the country in large numbers, thus enabling the Turkish Government to settle Moslems on their property.
This systematic persecution of the Greek element in Turkey could not fail to arouse a strong protest in Greece, and
Venizelos pro- ^^^i^elos found himself obhged to address
tests mawsi ihe f to the Porte, making it clear treatmpnt nf thp persecutions did not cease Greece
Asiatic Greeks. go war. This firm language, which was followed by reprisals on the property of Turkish subjects in Greece, had its effect, and, when the European War broke out, M. Venizelos was actually on his way to meet the Grand Vizier in order to negotiate a better understanding between the two nations.
Two other questions arose during this period in which Greek interests were involved, those of the Dodecanese and of
Tie. esf Northern Epirus. The Dodecanese is a group
2
the west coast of Asia Minor, the most important of which are Rhodes, Cos, Patmos, and Carpathos. These islands were seized by the Itahan fleet during the war with Turkey in Tripoh in 1912-13, and were condemned by the Treaty of Lausanne to remain in Itahan occupation until all the Turkish troops were withdrawn from the TripoUtana. They still remain under the Itahan yoke, which the unfortunate inhabitants, who are almost exclusively Greeks, have found more grievous than that of Turkey, under whose rule they enjoyed virtual independence and self-government in return for the payment of a small tribute. On the arrival of the Italians the islanders welcomed them with enthusiasm as hberators ; but it soon became evident that the Itahans contemplated something more than a temporary occupation. On ist July 1912 a General Assembly drew up a declaration addressed to


68 From the Treaty of Bucharest to
the ‘ Sister-nation Italy expressing the desire of the islanders to be united to Greece but their willingness to form for the moment an independent state to be known as the ‘ i^gean Commonwealth The only result was a more stringent pohcy on the part of the Italians, who not only forbade all pubhc gatherings and the display of the Greek flag, but also did much to ruin the trade of the islands and force the inhabitants to leave their homes. The condition of the unhappy Greeks of the Dodecanese under Italian rule cannot be better illustrated than by the fact that since 1912 the population of some of the islands has fallen by as much as 50 per cent, owing to emigration and
expulsions. In Epirus also Greek interests came into coUision with Itahan imperialistic aims. The capture of Jamiina in the First Balkan , . , War had put Greece in possession of an ancient
E iVmGreek culture, whose schools had done ^ ■ much to keep ahght the flame of Hellenism during the dark centuries of Turkish oppression, and added a large tract of essentially Greek territory to the kingdom of Greece. The justice of the claims of Greece to annex Southern and Central Epirus was so obvious that they could not be dis¬ puted, but in Northern Epirus, or as the ItaHans called the district ‘ Southern Albania ’, Greek claims came into collision with Itahan ambitions which aimed at making ItaHan influence predominant along the coasts of the Adriatic. Northern Epirus may be roughly described as the triangular tract of country of which the base is the stretch of coast between a point a few miles south of Valona and a point on the mainland opposite the town of Corfu, while the apex of the triangle is the southern extremity of Lake Ochrida. It was inhabited by Greeks and Albanians, partly Christians and partly converted Moslems in about equal proportions, the Christians being probably shghtly more numerous ; Northern Epirus, however, must not be considered by itself, but as an integral part of Epirus to which historically it has always belonged. Its Greek character is indicated by the fact that under Ali Pasha of TepeUni, who ruled Epirus early in the nineteenth century and was practically independent of the control of the Sultan, Greek was the official language of the Government; and the district has remained predominantly Greek in spite of the influx of Albanians from


the Outbreak of the War of 1^14-18 {igij-14) 69
the north and the emigration of Greeks to other countries. The intensely national spirit of the Northern Epirotes cannot be better illustrated than by recalling the numerous and costly benefactions made to Greece by natives of this district, such as the brothers Zappa, who built the Exhibition Hall at Athens which bears their name, and Arsakis, who provided the Normal School at Athens. There were, moreover, 238 Greek schools in Northern Epirus besides numerous other public institutions. During the Balkan Wars M. Venizelos, anxious to avoid any friction with Italy, came to a private understanding with
Nor,hern Epiru, ‘1*^ Government that the Greek Army annexed to should not occupy Valona or Berat, the ItaHans Albania ^ return verbally agreeing not to oppose the Greek annexation of Northern Epirus. As a proof of good faith the Greeks evacuated the small but strategic¬ ally important island of Sasseno at the entrance of the Gulf of Valona, which had been ceded by Great Britain to Greece with the Ionian Islands in 1864. At the conclusion of the Balkan Wars the Powers created an independent Albania ; whereupon Italy and Austria demanded the evacuation by Greece of Northern Epirus. The Greek Government naturally appealed to the Powers, urging that the question should be decided on the basis of self-determination by the inhabitants, and won the support of the Triple Entente. The importunities, however, of Italy and Austria led to a compromise by which a commissioner was dispatched to the district to ascertain the language of the inhabitants—^notoriously a false criterion of national sentiment —instead of the more natural course of taking a plebiscite as to whether they wished to belong to Greece or Albania. The result was that in November 1913 the Commission by the Protocol of Florence decided that Northern Epirus should form part of the Albanian State.
The Greek Government acquiesced in this decision and with¬ drew its garrisons from Northern Epirus ; but the inhabitants showed their true inclinations by proclaiming a Provisional Government and flying to arms. Reinforced by volunteers from all parts of Greece they resisted the attacks of the Albanian Moslems from the north, with whom were a
The Powers
recognize the
autonomy of
Northern Epirus.
number of Itahan officers, until the Powers found themselves


70 From the Treaty of Bucharest to
obliged to come to terms with the Provisional Government; and at a conference held at Corfu, Northern Epirus was recognized as autonomous under nominal Albanian suzerainty, a clear recognition of the special interest of Greece in that region. The subsequent story of the question of Northern Epirus belongs to the history of the European War.
Bulgaria, having been forced to sign the Treaty of Bucharest, was soon deep in her old game of intrigue. It was not long
Buharian before she had become reconciled, through the . . . mediation of the German Ambassador at Con¬ stantinople, with her former enemy Turkey, whose recovery of Adrianople she seems dehberately to have forgotten. The sinister influence of the Central Powers was thus exerted to keep ahve for their future advantage the racial antipathies of the Balkan States and to employ their common hatred of Greece and Serbia as a bond of union between Bulgaria and Turkey. While Bulgaria was encouraged to look forward to possessing herself of all Macedonia, Turkey was promised the recovery of the whole of Thrace and the Turkish Islands in the occupation of Greece and was even offered the Cyclades as an additional bait. It was not long before comitadji bands in the pay of the Bulgarian Government were active in Albania and Macedonia, especially on the Greek and Serbian frontiers ad¬ joining the Strumnitsa district, whence they descended upon the railway line leading doAvn the Vardar Valley from Serbia to Salonica. The Bulgarian Government could always plead that the action of the comitadjis was beyond its control, but several ‘ incidents ’ were so serious as almost to lead to a renewal of open hostihties.
The history of the Austro-German intrigues in the Balkans between August 1913 and July 1914 is somewhat obscure ; but it is difficult to reaUze how the diplomatists of the Entente failed to conclude from the behaviour of Bulgaria that she was already a willing tool in the hands of the Central Powers—just as the Mpret^ of the newly-created state of
Albania was their puppet—to thwart the ambitions of Serbia and Greece.
Of their attitude towards Greece during this period, the
^ This title, which is a corruption of imperator, was revived for the Prince of Wied when he was appointed ruler of Albania.


the Outbreak of the War of 1914-18 (1913-14) 71
Central Powers made no secret. In April 1914, when the crisis
The attitude of ^^^^een Greece and Turkey was at its height,
Germany towards accompanied by Bethmann-Hollweg Greece. Paying his annual visit to Corfu, where he had purchased the Achilleion, formerly the estate of the Empress Ehzabeth of Austria. Great Britain having promised her support to enforce the decision of the Conference of London regarding the islands, M. Venizclos took the oppor¬ tunity of asking the German Chancellor to define the attitude of Germany on this question. Bethmann-Hollweg rephed that Greece could not imder any circumstances count on German support against Turkey. The attitude of Germany was formu¬ lated even more positively in a secret communication, which subsequently came to hght, from the Kaiser to King Constantine in reply to a question put to him by the Greek representative who had proceeded to Berlin to announce the succession of Constantine to the throne, as to whether Greece could count on the lasting friendship of Germany. The reply ran as follows:
‘ The Imperial Government finds itself unable to adopt the Greek point ofview. The alliance which unites Germany to Austria-Hungary and Italy prevents her from entering into negotiations on subjects which touch the interests of her Alhes. Germany regards it as her duty to second these interests without any evasion, and tliis duty hinders her from taking any initiative in a question which hes within the sphere of influence of her Alhes. Unfortunately Germany
can do nothing for Greece. All the interests of the Empire push
her towards those states whose views do not accord with those of Hellenism.*
It was thus clear that Greece must look for support solely to her natural protectors, the Guaranteeing Powers ; and it was a serious obligation on the statesmen and diplomatists of the Entente to devise how best they could serve her interests. The drama enacted at Serajevo at the end of June 1914
The murder of motion a train of events destined to involve the Archduke^ Great Powers of Europe in hostilities
Franz Ferdinand. eventually to force the Balkan States to range themselves with one or other group of combatants.


!


PART II
GREECE DURING THE WAR OF 1914-18
CHAPTER VIII
GREECE AT THE OUTBREAK OF THE WAR OF 1914-18
IN July 1914 the Greek nation was united as it never had been before in the course of its history. Victory had recently crowned
The political arms and doubled the territory ofthe kingdom.
unity of Greece problems, internal and external, still to be solved, but the nation was of one mind in the conviction that its destinies were in the hands of a statesman who would find the right solution ; there can hardly be said to have been any real political opposition to the Liberal Party which supported M. Venizelos. The Greek Chamber had become a sedate and businesslike body ; the most flagrant abuses which had characterized the administra¬ tion had been swept away ; the national finances were on a sounder footing tlian they had ever been before ; industry was developing, and the flag of the Greek merchant marine was conspicuous in every part of the world. The reigning dynasty had every outward appearance of stabihty, since the occupant of the throne had but lately led the national arms to victory and was the son of a sovereign who, after fifty years of constitutional rule, had fallen a victim to his devotion to the cause of Greek nationahsm.
In her external relations it seemed obvious that the interests of Greece were bound up with those of the Entente Powers, to
Greece and the owed her existence as an independent
Entente Powers. supported her cause. It at times Greece had been dis¬ appointed by the attitude adopted by the Protecting Powers, she was generous enough to think of the Philhellenism of Byron, Cochrane and Fabrier and the championship of Gladstone and Diike rather than of those occasions when the conflict of interests


74 Greece at the Outbreak
in the Concert of Europe had led to the neglect of what she regarded as her due rights. It was to France and Great Britain that Greece had turned for the reorganization of the army and navy which had won the victories of the Balkan Wars. Owing to her geograploical position, too, Greece, with her large seaboard, would clearly be consulting her interests in siding with the group of Powers whose fleets were predominant in the Mediterranean. At the same time the attitude adopted by the Central Powers during and since the Balkan Wars had made it clear that they would support Bulgaria and Turkey rather than Greece and Serbia. The monarchy in Greece being essentially constitutional, it would have seemed obvious that the Crown could have but httle influence in shaping the pohcy of Greece.
lecZr I had been still Uving in 1914, there can be no doubt that Greece would have devoted herself whole-heartedly from the first to the support of the Entente Powers. Not only the evident interests of the country but also the close family ties of the dynasty under King George I attached Greece to Great Britain ^ and Russia, while his constant visits to France, where he enjoyed great personal popularity, showed his sympathy with the other Entente Power. With the accession of King Constantine a new ^ set of family relationships came into play. Not IP only had Constantme received his military erntany. education at the Kriegsakademie in Berlin, but
also, by his marriage with Princess Sophia of Prussia, he was brother-in-law of Kaiser Wilhelm II, whose personahty appears to have had an overpowering influence over him. There can be httle doubt that the Kaiser dehberately set himself to mould the impressionable Constantine to his own views of the function of a sovereign as the All-Highest and sole controller of the
King Constantine comtitaas a ‘ War- tional ruler and mterpreter or the people s * will. The successes of the Balkan Wars, which were popularly attributed to Constantine’s leadership, convinced lum that he too was a ‘ Supreme WarLord and superior to any democratic form of government.
^ English was the language invariably spoken by the Royal Family in private life.


of the War of 1^14-18 75
When he visited Germany after the Balkan Wars, the flattering reception with which he met and the baton of Field-Marshal conferred upon him by the Kaiser led him into the stupid mistake of publicly attributing to his German mihtary education successes which had been won by the irresistible ^lan of the Greek soldiery trained by a French Military Mission and armed with French guns and rifles. Even before he succeeded to the throne his wife, the favourite sister of the Kaiser, had begun to exercise a powerful influence in favour of Germany not only upon her husband but upon Court and military circles at Athens.^ With the accession of Constantine the Germanophil tendencies of the royal couple were given a larger and freer scope ; it seemed, however, hardly possible that pro-Germanism, either in the Royal Family or elsewhere, could set itself in 1914 against the obvious desire of the people to support the pro-Entente policy of the Prime Minister.
M. Venizelos, like so many others, was, as we have seen, abroad when the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum was presented
Venizelos Serbia on 25th July 1914. He was at Munich
promise! Greek support 10 Serbia. on questions outstanding between Greece and Turkey. It was here that he received a question from the Serbian Premier, M. Pasliitch, as to the attitude which Greece intended to adopt. M. Venizelos without hesitation gave the only possible reply, that, with regard to war with Austria, fuller information would be necessary before the government would reply, but that in case of a Bulgarian attack the place of Greece would be at the side of her Serbian ally. It was an anxious moment for the Greek Premier, who saw that the fruits of two victorious campaigns were endangered, especially in view of a possible understanding between the Bulgarians and Turks, who might take advantage of the European situation to fall upon Greece and partition her rich possessions while her Serbian ally was engaged elsewhere. Not only was the Greek attitude clearly stated to the Serbian Government, but it was also made clear to the German government that in
^ No one, who, like the present writer, attended the Oriental Congress at Athens in 1912, could fail to notice the marked preference shown by the then Crown Prince, who was President of the Congress, for the very numerous German delegates.


76 Greece at the Outbreak
the interests of self-preservation Greece could not tolerate an attack by Bulgaria upon Serbia. On 2nd August it was pointed out to the Serbian government that Greece could best serve the interests both of herself and of Serbia by observmg a benevolent neutrahty and keeping her forces intact in view of possible aggression by Bulgaria, which would only be precipitated by a general mobilization of the Greek Army. Meanwhile Constantine behind the back of his ministers was in communication with the Kaiser. While the Prime Minister, with his sovereign’s knowledge, was promising Serbia the assistance which she owed her under the Treaty of Ahiance, Constantine telegraphed as follows to his brother-in-law : [This telegram ' was found annotated by the Kaiser with the remarks which are placed in brackets.]
Constantine s
communications
with the Kaiser.
‘ Athens, 2nd August 1914.—Sincerest thanks for your telegram. We have never thought of helping the Serbians. But it seems to me impossible to join their enemies and fall upon them, seeing that they were once our aUies.’ [You
ought to march against Russia.] ‘ It seems to me that the interests of Greece require an absolute neutrality and the maintenance of the status quo in the Balkans as established
by the Treaty of Bucharest.’ [Impossible; there can be no
more talk of this. The Balkans are marching.] ‘ If we depart from this standpoint, Bulgaria will be enlarged by the annexation of the part of Macedonia recently conquered by Serbia and will envelope our whole northern frontier and become enormously dangerous to us. I have no guarantee against this. These considerations compel us to observe neutrahty, and for that end to avoid, with Rumania, anything which may give Bulgaria ground for interference.’
[Twaddle. If Greece will not join us, she will lose her position
as a Balkan Power and will be no more supported in her wishes
by us, but will be treated as an enemy.]
This telegram was answered by the Kaiser on 4th August through M. Theotokis, Greek Minister at Berlin and an ardent Germanophil. In this reply the Kaiser informed King Con
^ Published in Die Deutschen Dokumente zum Kriegansbruch (4 vols., Charlottenburg, 1919).


of the War of 1^14-18 77
stanrine that an alliance had been concluded that day between
The Kaiser's Germany and Turkey, and that Bulgaria and reply. Rumania were also ranging themselves on the side of Germany, while German men-of-war were joining the Turkish fleet; thus all the Balkan States were with Germany in its struggle against Slavism. He, therefore, appeals to Constantine ‘ as a comrade, as a German Field-Marshal, of whom the German Army was proud when the title was conferred upon him, and as a brother-in-law, to order the mobihzation of the Greek Army and march hand in hand with the Germans against the common foe. ... If Greece does not side with Germany, a break between the two countries is inevit¬ able. ... In short,’ writes the Minister, ‘ His Majesty says that
he requires you to carry out all that he and Your Majesty have so
often discussed.' (This last phrase seems to show that Constantine had long been in the Kaiser’s confidence.) A further telegram from M. Theotokis of the same date states his behef that it has been arranged between Vienna and Sofia that, if the Central Powers are victorious, Bulgaria will receive compensation in ‘ those territories over which she has historical and, ethnological rights ’ (i.e. Greek and Serbian Macedonia) ; if, on the other hand, Greece listens to the Kaiser’s appeal, she should inquire precisely what Germany will promise her, if the Central Powers are victorious : ‘ I have the impression,’ he adds, ‘ that no objec¬ tion will be made to our aggrandisement at the expense of Serbia ’. On 7th August Constantine rephed that while his personal sympathies and pohtical opinions draw him to the German side, he cannot see how the mobilization of the Greek Army will benefit Germany; the Entente fleet controls the Medi¬ terranean, and Greece might easily be wiped off the map without being able in the least degree to serve German interests. In reply the Greek Minister at Berlin states (9th August 1914) that Herr von Jagow has informed him that he beheves the Kaiser will understand the necessity stated by Constantine of observing
neutrahty for the moment. This exchange of telegrams makes it clear that King Con¬ stantine, though a constitutional monarch, was induced to follow his own personal wishes without any regard to the will of the Greek people, and that, while seeming to accede to the wishes of his brother-in-law, he desired to remain neutral, so as


78 Greece at the Outbreak
Greece declares
her sympathy
with the
Entente.
to avoid any collision with the Alhed Powers. This poUcy of trying to run with the hare and hunt with the hounds could only end in disaster for himself and his people. But in spite of his personal wishes Constantine was unable to influence the course of events, and M. Venizelos, with the
, country behind him, proceeded to protect the
I he nation . c xf-ri
mterests or Greece. His trank statement ot the n/rr • 1 position of Greece and the determination of
M. Venizelos. \ 1111
the government to observe a benevolent neutral¬ ity towards Serbia and to intervene if Bulgaria attacked her, had the effect of keeping Bulgaria for the moment out of the warpossibly because it gave the crafty Ferdinand a plausible excuse for not yet fulfilling his promises to the Central Powers. In the middle of August M. Venizelos took a further step, which may be described in his own words : ‘ I asked for and obtained authorization to declare that Greece, not merely in the consciousness of her indebted¬ ness to the Protecting Powers but from a clear perception of her vital interests as a nation, understood that her place was at the side of the Entente Powers ; and that, whereas in the war that was being waged it was not possible for her to take a mihtary part, since she could not, owing to the danger from Bulgaria, reinforce the Serbians . . . nevertheless, she thought it her duty to declare to the Powers of the Entente that, if Turkey went to war against them, she placed all her mihtary and naval forces at their disposal for war against Turkey, provided that Greece was guaranteed against the Bulgarian danger ’. This declaration was made to the governments of Great Britain, France, and Russia in the Entente’s darkest hour, when the outcome of the Battle of the Marne still hung in the balance.
The result was all that M. Venizelos could desire. The British Government informed the Greek Government that the British
fleet would not allow the Turkish fleet to leave the Dardanelles, even if Turkey proposed to attack Greece only—a promise which reheved Greece from all fear of a sudden naval attack. But tliis was not all : in December the three Protecting Powers and Italy consented to the provisional occupation ofNorthern Epirus on the same conditions
The British
Government
promises Greece
protection against
Turkey.


Suggested Greek
co-operation
against the
Dardanelles.
Vacillation
of King
Constantine.
of the War of 1^14-18 79
as those under which Italy occupied Valona, leaving the question of Epirus and Albania to be settled at the Peace Conference. Beside the official intimation of the British Government that the British fleet would close the exit from the Dardanelles, King George V addressed a personal telegram to Constantine expressing his gratification that Greece had not hesitated to take her stand by the side of Great Britain. Admiral Kerr, chief of the British Naval Mission in Greece, was also instructed to come to an understanding with the Greek General Staff and study the subject of an attack on the Galhpoh Peninsula. In this cormexion a strange incident occurred which illustrates the inconsistencies of Constantine’s attitude. After assenting to the dispatch of the friendly message to the Entente Powers, when he gave an audience to Admiral Kerr, he confronted him with the statement that he had no intention of making war on Turkey, but that, if Turkey declared war on Greece and the Allies wished to help Greece, he would accept their help. He requested Admiral Kerr to communicate this statement to the British Government after consulting M. Venizelos. The latter could not allow the despatch of a communication which con¬ flicted with the pohcy already proposed by the Greek Govern¬ ment to the Entente. Essentially a weak man, Constantine could always be won over by the arguments of his latest visitor, especially if they happened to accord with his ovm wishes. When M. Venizelos was with him, his personal force and the consciousness that he was the mouthpiece of the people’s will prevailed with him ; but then other advisers would be summoned and overpersuade him. Pro-German influence was already making itself felt through highly-placed personages in Greece, particularly General Dousmanis and Dr. Streit, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who found King Constantine a ready listener. M. Venizelos, after informing Admiral Kerr that the King’s new proposal to the British Government could not be sent, . , , , addressed a letter to the King pointing out that, view of the declaration already sent to the to t e mg. Entente Powers, it was impossible now to say
that Greece refused to fight against Turkey so long as Turkey was not the aggressor, since such a policy was manifestly opposed


8o Greece at the Outbreak of the War of 1914-18
to the interests of Greece ; but she could not reject the possibihty ofwaging war on Turkey with the help ofnumerous and powerful Allies. ‘ What confuses the issue wrote M. Venizelos, ‘ and produces in the mind of Your Majesty and M. Streit an opposi¬ tion to the pohcy which I recommend, is a desire not to offend Germany . . . who proposes, if her ascendancy in the war is complete, to create a Greater Bulgaria extending to the Adriatic as a bulwark against Slavism, the Germans having recently discovered that the Bulgars are not Slavs but Tartars. Why should we have so much regard for a Power whose aim is to strengthen by every possible means the two chief foes of Hellenism, Turkey and Bulgaria ? Why should we show ourselves indifferent to the very Powers who revived the Greek State, who have defended Greece in every emergency, and to-day again are prepared, if Turkey falls upon us, to stand at our side ? ’ M. Venizelos concluded his letter by saying that, in the circumstances, he could only resign. His resignation was naturally not accepted ; the telegram to the British Government was never sent; and arrangements were made for Admiral Kerr to confer with the Greek General Staff. The effect of M. Venizelos’ firm attitude was, as we have seen, to prevent Bulgaria for the time being from openly entering the war. Probably the German General Staff was opposed to action in the Balkans in the autumn of 1914, and the second offensive against Serbia was undertaken by Austro-Hungary on her own initiative. Bulgaria, however, carried comitadji warfare into Serbian territory and harassed the Serbian communications. The Austro-Hungarian offensive completely miscarried, and the Serbians, against tremendous odds, fought one of the most successful campaigns in the whole war. They were materially assisted by the benevolent neutrahty of Greece, which enabled them to obtain munitions and supplies of all kinds by way of Salonica and the Vardar railway.
Venizelos’ atti¬
tude secures the
neutrality of
Bulgaria.


CHAPTER IX
POLITICAL EVENTS IN GREECE FROM JANUARY TO OCTOBER 1915
Greece is offered
territory in Asia
Minor ifshe
joins the Entente
Powers.
EARLY in 1915 fresh negotiations were opened between the AlHes and Greece on the understanding that Greece had definitely ranged herself on the side of the Alhes. On 24th January Sir Edward Grey proposed to the Greek Government that Greece should join in concerted action in the Balkans in return for very important concessions in Asia Minor. This was the first official acknowledgement by the Protecting Powers of the claims of Greece to extensive territories in the Turkish Empire inhabited by a large Greek population. The proposal raised a serious problem, with which
M Venizelos' immediately dealt in a memorandum
memorandmn to , ‘ he wrote, the Kino ^ confronted with a crisis in the history of the nation. Hitherto our policy has consisted in the preservation of neutrality, as far as the treaty obligation with Serbia does not oblige us to depart therefrom. We are now called on to participate in the war, no longer only to fulfil moral obligations, but in view of compensations, which, if realized, will create a great and powerful Greece, such as the boldest optimist could not have imagined a few years ago. To obtain these compensations great dangers will have to be faced. . . . Above
co-operation of Rumania
cessions to ' Possible, of Bulgaria. ... In order to Bulgaria about, I think we should make * ■ adequate concessions to Bulgaria. ... I would not hesitate, however painful the severance, to recommend the sacrifice of Cavalla ’ (the port and district in S. Thrace, which would give Bulgaria an exit to the Mediterranean) ‘ in order to save the Greeks in Turkey and create a Great Greece which would include nearly all the provinces where Hellenism flourished


82 Political Events in Greece,
through the long periods of its history.’ In a further memoran¬ dum written when it had become clear that Rumania would not co-operate, M. Venizelos pointed out to the King that the cession of the Cavalla district involved a Greek population of only 30,000, whereas there were 800,000 Greeks in the proposed new territory in Asia Minor. He appealed to Constantine to create by the sword a Greater Hellas and achieve the reunion of the Greek nation, ‘ a task such as few kings had even had the opportunity of undertaking.’
This appeal seems to have been successful, and the proposed concessions to Bulgaria were agreed upon by the Council of
King Cmuantine Ministers. Clearly Comtantine could not yet consents brmg himselt to yield to his personal mclinations and place himself in direct conflict with the will of the nation. The negotiations, however, fell through, and Bulgaria preferred to accept the offer of a large loan from the Central Powers and throw in her lot against the Alhes. The willingness of M. Venizelos to make concessions to Bulgaria, though in doing so he had been supported by the King and the Government, was afterwards used as a basis of attacks on him. In February 1915 the first attack on the Dardanelles was made by the Alhed fleets only, with results which are well
TltP nttnrU ^^^wu and which showed that the Straits could be forced only by a joint naval and
r>ardnnpUpc military attack. M. Venizelos, understanding that the Allies required a landing-force to co¬ operate with the Alhed fleet, proposed to the Crown that this should be supphed by Greece and suggested that an Army Corps
should be mobilized for this purpose. This gave Greece an opportunity of doing a real service to the Alhes, who had no landing-force ready near at hand, and at the same time it pledged Greece to only a limited amount of assistance. The suggestion met with strong opposition from the Greek General Staff, which, under Colonel Metaxas, was already beginning to oppose any action which might offend Germany. They urged that it was inexpedient on mihtary grounds and that the proposed extension of Greek power to Asia Minor would raise international problems of difficulty. The King at first opposed the enterprise, but afterwards
Venizelos sug
gests Greek
co-operation
against the
Dardanelles.


January to October igis 83
Constantine
reluctantly
consents.
the dispatch of
one division.
appeared to be convinced by the arguments of the Prime Minister and gave a reluctant assent. As he left the palace, however, M. Venizelos was confronted by Colonel Metaxas, who handed him an envelope containing a letter of resigna¬ tion. To make tliis step irrevocable he had already sent the news of his resignation to the Press. This action implied rr, j r that, in the opinion of the responsible head of
The attitude of , ^ ^11 1
„ , ■' the mihtary executive, Greece could not send
Col. Metaxas. . 1 1 • 1 1
an Army Corps abroad without endangering her position at home. M. Venizelos, therefore, demanded that the Crown Council should be summoned. At this he obtained
The Crown support for his policy, but, in order to obtain
_ absolute unanimity, he reduced his demand to
Council assents to „ r j- • • 1
an Expeditionary Force or one division only. There was a general impression in the Council that the King could not do otherwise than accept this proposal, and the objection that Russia might look unfavourably upon Greek co-operation against the Dardanelles was effectively answered by the announcement that the French Government had obtained Russia’s unconditional assent. On the following day, however. King Constantine suddenly
. announced his absolute refusal to the enterprise, onstantine ^ Venizelos had no alternative but to c anges is min resignation, which was accepted. and Venizelos resigned under the
resigns. King, as a constitutional monarch,
regarded the matter of such importance that an appeal to the country was necessary, especially as three years had passed since the last election. The King, however, showed that he had no intention of
following this course ; for he summoned M. Gounaris, a personal opponent of M. Venizelos, and asked him to form a Cabinet. If a Greek Army Corps had been landed on GallipoU at that time, it seems likely that it would have found a very small TurHsh force defending the peninsula, which An opportunity pj-^^ti^ally unfortified. It is also clear
that the first naval attack was within an ace of
success and produced a condition bordering on panic in Con¬ stantinople. If it had been followed up immediately by a second
Gounaris became
Prime Minister.


84 Political Events in Greece,
Cabinet admits
the obligations
of Greece to
Serbia.
attack from the sea combined with a landing, the course of the campaign against Turkey might have been very different. As it was, owing to the impossibility ofbringing troops up in time for an immediate landing after the attack by sea, a period was allowed to elapse during which the peninsula was converted into a veritable fortress. Meanwhile the behaviour ofthe Greek General Staff and its fraternization with the German and Bulgarian mihtary attaches at Athens made it clear that the Greek mihtary authorities could not be trusted not to divulge any information which they might receive from the Allies, with the result that, when the joint military and naval attack was made, the Greeks were not invited to co-operate. The Gounaris Government, through M. Zographos, the new Foreign Minister, took an early opportunity of formally acknow
Thp Cnunnric treaty obhgations of Greece toward Serbia. They instructed the Greek representa¬ tives in London, Paris, and Petrograd to inform the Entente Governments that the new Cabinet would pursue the pohey announced at the beginning of the war, which was dictated by the traditional sentiments of the nation and the close bonds which united Greece to the Protecting Powers. There seems no doubt that M. Zographos and certain other members of the Cabinet honestly wished to carry out as far as possible the programme of the Liberal Party. As regards M. Gounaris himself, it is possible that he had not yet allowed himself to become a tool of Germany, and his chief motive in taking office may have been his personal rivalry with M. Venizclos. Meanwhile the diplomatists of the Allied Powers were still obsessed with the idea that Bulgaria could be won over, and wished to have the option still open of offering her the bribe of Eastern Macedonia. Thus a deadlock ensued, which gave the German propaganda an opportunity of which it readily availed itself At the outbreak of the war there seemed little reason to fear that German influence could counteract the general sentiment of Greece in favour of the Entente. A certain number of officers, some of whom had received their training in Germany, realized that a Germanophil attitude was an easy road to royal favour and promotion, while others were genuinely persuaded that the German Army was invincible.
The beginnings
of German
propaganda in
Greece.


January to October igi^ 85
Only one of the many daily journals in Athens was definitely pro-German, the rest openly pro-Entente. But before long an elaborate system of German propaganda had been estabhshed under the direction ofBaron Schenck, nominally the representative of the Wolff Agency. With ample resources at their command, Schenck and his minions began to buy up newspaper-editors, deputies and private persons, and inaugurated the systematic poisoning of public opinion. The pro-German Press propaganda was the first in the field and aimed at creating rather than foUowing public opinion, until by dint of repetition it succeeded in persuading many of its readers that Germany was invincible and King Constantine a heaven-sent pohtical genius. The Protect¬ ing Powers were attacked, and the personal hostility against M. Venizelos of other would-be pohtical leaders, who were jealous of his popularity, was exploited. He was represented as a traitor who wished to abandon national territory to the enemies of Greece, while the King was portrayed as the defender of national rights. So successful was this campaign that M. Venizelos, returning from a well-earned holiday after five years of office, was prevented by a police order from landing at the Peirasus and later besieged in his own house.
On 13 th June the elections, which could no longer be post¬ poned, were held in circumstances very unfavourable to the
Theeleclics Liberal Party. In the new provinces, where r ,1 the elections were bemg held for the first time.
Liberal Part flagrant corruption was practiced and only four out of seventy-three constituencies returned Liberal members. In the old provinces anti-Venizelist agents represented the issue as being one of King Constantine and peace against M. Venizelos and war, but in spite of this the Liberals gained 123 seats out of a total of 184. But, though the Liberal cause had triumphed, the Gounaris Cabinet refused to resign until seventy days had passed, alleging
M Venizelos necessary
# steps towards summoning a new Cabinet. At
ce. 1 ^ 1 A A* TT^ • 1 • 1
last, on loth August, M. Venizelos again took office, but apparently only because the pro-German propaganda had not yet sufficiently prepared public opinion to enable the opposition to act openly. On assuming office M. Venizelos made it clear that Greece
7


86 Political Events in Greece,
must continue to follow the pohcy laid down at the beginning
The attitude of ^ particular, must do everything V r' ^ possible to prevent Bulgaria from crushing mg ons an me. Cabinet, therefore, informed both
the Entente Powers and the Central Governments that this was the pohcy which Greece would follow. It is clear, however, that the King was determined that Greece should follow a different course. Already, on 17th July, the Greek Minister at Bucharest had telegraphed as follows to Athens : ‘ My British colleague informs me that, according to positive information, Germany has given the Sofia Government a formal assurance that the neutrahty of Greece is definitely secured even in the event of a Bulgarian attack on Serbia ’. It appears, therefore, certain that the King had agreed with the Kaiser that in no circumstances would Greece carry out her treaty obligations towards Serbia. The Kaiser had doubtless informed his brotherin-law of the impending attack on Serbia, in which Bulgaria had agreed to join, and was assured of Greece’s neutrahty. The King’s conduct was in this matter unconstitutional and at the same time an act of treachery towards Serbia, since he had allowed the Cabinet to inform Serbia that it could rely on the support of Greece. The desertion of Serbia by her ally made her destruction a matter of certainty, since Germany had decided to crush her in order to open the road to Constantinople.
Meanwhile the AUies were bringing further pressure to bear on M. Venizelos and on M. Pashitch, the Serbian Premier, to offer definite concession to Bulgaria. On 14th September the Serbians unwillingly yielded and were prepared to sacrifice the Monastic district. But it was too late. On 22nd September a general mobilization was proclaimed in Bulgaria. King Ferdinand, like Mussolini in 1940, seems to have decided that the moment for action had come and that he must throw in his lot with the side which he
Bulgaria convinced must win and obtain his share mobilizes. spoils. He saw that the Russian advance had been stopped, that the Alhes were held up at the Dardanelles, and that their diplomacy in the Balkans was meeting with no success; Germany and Austria, on the
The Greek and
Serbian Govern¬
ments consent to
concessions to
Bulgaria.


January to October igis 87
on Greek
mobilization ;
the King resists.
other hand, had at last resolved to concentrate overwhelming forces on the Danube and wipe Serbia off the map of Europe.
M. Venizelos recognized what the Bulgarian mobilization meant. Receiving the news in the early morning he telephoned y. . , , ,, to the King, who was at his country house, asking to be received m order to submit an order for the Greek mobihzation. The King fixed 5 p.m. for the audience, and, while not denying the obvious obhgations of Greece, feebly protested that he did not want to help Serbia, because Germany would certainly win. M. Venizelos replied that his Government, whose policy had been approved at the recent elections, represented the sovereign will of the people and that the King could only refuse to endorse that policy by abrogating the constitution by Royal Decree and assuming full responsibility. In his reply, the King showed himself an apt pupil of his Imperial brother-in-law. While recognizing that he was bound to obey the popular will on questions of internal policy, he claimed that, in questions of foreign affairs and international problems, if he beheved that a thing was right or not right, he must insist on its being done or not being done, because he was responsible before God. This was defying the Constitution and claiming the Divine Right of Kings, and M. Venizelos could only request the King to accept liis resignation. Presented with this ultimatum, Constantine persuaded the Prime Minister to retain office and consented to the Decree of Mobilization ; but the antiVenizelist press, inspired by the General Staff, stated that the , . King and the Prime Minister were in disagree^ ment as to the object of the mobihzation, the
former regarding it as a measure of defence, the latter ofwar ; and the General Staff took no steps to send help to Serbia. They raised the objection that Serbia was not in a position to supply the 150,000 men to fight against Bulgaria, as was stipulated in the treaty. M. Venizelos, therefore, suggested that the British and French Govern, ments should be asked if they were willing to sen troops. upon themselves the obligation of Serbia
and supply this force. This request was made, and within two
Venizelos
threatens
resignation.
Venizelos asks
the Entente to


88 Political Events in GreecCy
The British Govt,
abandons policy
of concessions
to Bulgaria.
days a reply was received that the required force of 150,000 men would be sent by Britain and France. The King raised objections to this course, and at his desire the British and French Ministers were informed that, as long as Bulgaria did not attack Serbia, these troops should not be sent, since their landing on Greek soil would involve a breach of Greek neutrality. But it was too late, and the Greek Government was informed that the troops were already on their way and that the Entente Powers assumed full responsibility for their action. On 28th September in the House of Commons, Sir Edward Grey made it clear that the British Government had at last renounced as hopeless the pohcy of trying to win Bulgaria over and declared—when it was already too late to give any effective help to Serbia—that the Allies were resolved to give every support to their friends in the Balkans without reserve or qualification.
On the next day the Greek Chamber met for the first time since the elections. The Prime Minister painted the situation
The debate on gloomy colours and insisted that, though Bulgaria pretended that she had mobilized only
mohilLlii. neutrality the Greek Government was determined to fulfil her obligations to Serbia should the casus foederis arise. The opposition, under M. Gounaris, maintained that the Greek mobihzation should be utihzed only for the defence of the vital interests of Greece without any regard for the obligations of the Serbian Treaty.
On 2nd October M. Venizelos, yielding to the King’s
Prnff^f nfrrppl insistence, issued a protest against the proposed Entente troops at Salonica, but
was merely formal.
On 3rd October Russia, at last aroused, addressed an ulti¬ matum to the Bulgarian Government, calling upon it openly
Russia at war within twenty-four hours with the
with Bulgaria. the Slav cause. When Bulgaria refused, a state of war between Russia and Bulgaria came into existence.
On 4th October a stormy meeting of the Greek Chamber


January to October igi^ 89
The Chamber
supports
Venizelos.
took place, at which all the forces of the Opposition, under the
The debate of leadership of four ex-Premiers, were arrayed 4th October ^ against the Prime Minister. M. Venizelos declared categorically that he had official assurances from the Entente that all offers to Bulgaria of concessions of Greek and Serbian territory were null and void, and stated his opinion that the Bulgarian mobilization would never have been ordered if Bulgaria had not been misled by the declaration of the late
Government. He concluded by reiterating the determination of the Government to fulfil to the letter the Treaty with Serbia. This policy was approved by 147 votes to no. If we take into account the circumstances under which the elections had been held and the fact that it was notorious that the King was supporting the opposition, it is obvious that public opinion was strongly in favour of the Liberal Party’s policy. Thus a clear breach was at last opened between the Govern¬ ment and the King, who had before him the alternative of either
TL jr- f yielding to the expressed will of the people, or
x ftC T£JtiS€S /^ii* i» 1* i*i* 1
to su art the toUowmg ms own desires and. violating the T j 1- Constitution. He chose the latter course, and t on 5 th October sent for the Prime Minister and informed him that he was in disagreement with his policy.
Venizelos’ thereupon, submitted his resignasecond rather than raise the Constitutional ques¬ tion at such a moment. Four hours later the resignation. detachments of the Allied troops landed at
Karaburun near Salonica.


CHAPTER X
GREECE AND HER OBLIGATIONS TOWARDS SERBIA
M. VENIZELOS resigned because he foresaw that, if he resisted the Crown at so critical a moment, civil war would be the only
. f result. The army being mobilized, a National e motives oj ^ Royahst camp would have been formed,
and, while Greece was torn by internecine resignation. Bulgaria would have occupied Eastern
Macedonia and then turned on Serbia without let or hindrance. M. Venizelos therefore preferred to resign and to bide his time. Another factor in the situation was that M. Venizelos had had no encouragement to suppose that, if he opposed the King, rj., I. f his action would be supported by the Protecting
of the ^Allies^^ Powers. The record of Allied diplomacy in the ■' ' Balkans since the outbreak of war had not been a brilliant one. The obvious course at the beginning of the war would have been to give every possible support to Serbia, already an ally, and Greece, a potential ally ; but, instead of this, attempts were made to win over Turkey—where the task was soon seen to be hopeless—and afterwards Bulgaria, which was to be induced to join the Allies by the promise of receiving as a bribe the spoils so hardly won by Greece and Serbia in the Balkan Wars. By trading on the readiness of M. Venizelos to submit to every possible sacrifice in order to demonstrate the sympathies of Greece, the Entente offered a ready handle to his enemies, who vihfied him as the betrayer of Greek national interests. When in September 1915 the British and French Governments at last recognized the hopelessness of trying to
The failure to Bulgaria, the least they should have support themselves wilhng to give Venizelos their whole-hearted support; and their failure to do so turned the scale against him. At the very moment when they were landing troops in
90


Greece and her Obligations towards Serbia 91
Greece to hasten at last to the succour of Serbia, they witnessed the expulsion from office of the Minister at whose suggestion these troops had been sent. It may be urged in excuse for the earlier mistakes of Entente diplomacy that during the first year of the war the situation in France was so critical that it absorbed all the energies of the Alhed Governments and httle thought could be spared for Balkan affairs; but, when once they bad made up their minds to send troops to Salonica, it was a matter of elementary precaution to take measures to ensure a safe base of operations. This could only have been secured by supporting M. Venizelos and thus obtaining, if not the military aid, at any rate the political sympathy of Greece.
The British public did what it could to make amends to M. Venizelos by giving him on his visit to England in 1917 a
The British welcome such as it has seldom accorded to any public and the foreign ruler or statesman ; but in 1915 pubHc Balkans opinion in this country, always notoriously indifferent to foreign affairs, had not before it the necessary data for forming an impartial opinion on the Balkan situation. Further the sense of fair-play, which is admittedly a British characteristic, unfortunately often errs in the direction of a willingness to Hsten to pleading in favour of the weaker cause, and in this case the Bulgarian point of view had the advantage of being advocated by the leading organ of the British press through its able re¬ presentative at Sofia and the small but active ‘ Balkan Committee ’, which was at pains to represent the Bulgars as nature’s gentlemen, living simple and blameless fives under an ideal democracy.
The excuse, which was urged at the time, that Britain, France, and Russia had no right to interfere in the internal
Tbp dufv nftUp Greece is one which cannot be mainProtectiL ^ tained for a moment. On the contrary, as Powers ^ Protecting Powers, they were bound to uphold the Constitution which they had themselves established and guaranteed, and which Constantine had violated by dismissing a Prime Minister of whose policy the elected representatives of the people had expressly approved.
That Great Britain and France were the Protecting Powers


92 Greece and her Obligations
of Greece was also one of the justifications of die landing of T . r troops at Salonica. It was expressly laid down cl hi the Treaty of 1864 that any one of the three , Powers might send troops to Greek territory with the consent of the other two signatories, that is, that, if the three Powers were agreed, the consent of Greece was not necessary. In this case, however, the Greek Government had invited the dispatch of troops in order to help Serbia in the fulfilment of her treaty obligations to Greece. After the dismissal of M. Venizelos, M. Alexander Zaimis was summoned to form a Cabinet, in which as many as four
M Zaimis other ex-Premiers took office—MM. Theotokis, 1 ' n • Rallis, Dragoumis, and Gounaris. On 8th October M. Zaimis issued a circular telegram to all the Greek Legations in which he stated that his policy would ‘ rest on the same essential bases as that followed by Greece since the beginning of the European War ’. In these conditions M. Venizelos promised his provisional support. On iith October, however, the new Premier found himself directly confronted with the question of the application of the Serbian Treaty. An inquiry was received from the Serbian Government as to whether, in view of the fact that the impending attack by Bulgaria upon Serbia realized the casus foederis provided for by the Treaty, the Greek Government would issue orders to the Greek General Staff to co-operate with the Serbian military authorities in order to settle the details of the joint action of
The Zaimis armies. To this M. Zaimis repHed Government Greek Government regretted its inability repudiates the accede to the request of the Serbian Govem
ohlioations of Treaty had in
Greece to Serbia. Bulgaria alone, and, since Germany and Austro-Hungary were also taking part in the invasion of Serbia, the terms of the Treaty did not come into operation. This inter¬ pretation of the Treaty is one which cannot for a moment be maintained. As we have seen, at the express demand of the Serbian Government the Treaty had been so drafted that its application was not merely Balkanic but had a wider scope.


towards Serbia 93
The responsi¬
bility of M.
Zaimis.
It is difficult to understand the part played by M. Zaimis on this occasion. ‘ Of M. Zaimis,’ said M. Venizelos in his great speech in the Chamber on 13 th August 1917, ‘ I have always spoken with great respect, and even to-day 1 do not wish to depreciate his great gifts and attainments in a country which unfortunately, if I may say so without offence, is suffering from a temporary lack of leading men. But his responsibility, in accepting office at that moment in order to repudiate the Treaty with Serbia, was tremendous. . . . The greatest dishonesty which a State can commit is to repudiate a promise to help another State after using that promise to obtain a corresponding pledge of mutual assistance.’
Meanwhile the Entente Powers seem to have made up their minds to try and win over Constantine, just as they had attempted
TU c f f f ■ Bulgaria, by the offer of concessions. e nen ^ October they offered to cede the island of
^ * Cyprus as the price for ms aid to Serbia. The possession of this island with its population of more than 250,000 Greeks had long been an ideal of Greek Nationalism, and it was expected that its cession to Greece would be welcomed with enthusiasm. The gift, how¬ ever, was refused, and its refusal was tantamount to an admission that Constantine had received promises from the opposite camp of a still more alluring kind in the event of the victory which he was persuaded would crown the German arms. This refusal must certainly be ascribed to the influence of the pro-German group of advisers who were daily exercising more and more pressure on the King, and not to M. Zaimis. The latter’s policy was certainly one of genuine neutrality, and during his term of office he main¬ tained friendly relations with the Entente, who even supphed him with a loan. On 3rd November the Minister for War, General Yannakitsas, insulted the Chamber in so flagrant a manner that M. Venizelos
, . provoked a pohtical debate during which he
The debate in \ j ri- ^ ri l
tf-.li dehvered one of his most powerful speeches m ^ j support of his national policy. The Minister for 5r an 4t ov. having refused to apologize and receiving
the support of the majority of the Cabinet, M. Venizelos gave


supports
Venizetos.
M. Zatmis
resigns.
94 Greece and her Obligations
utterance to an indictment of the unconstitutional nature of the
The Chamber existing regime and challenged a vote of con¬ fidence in the Government. By 147 votes against 114 the Chamber declared its adherence to the pohcy of the Liberal Party and censured the conduct of the Minister for War. Constantine repHed by ap¬ pointing General Yannakitsas his aide-de-camp and, having accepted the resignation ofM. Zaimis, summoned M. Skouloudis to form a new Cabinet (6th November). Here we will leave for the moment the internal affairs of Greece and briefly examine the military situation in the Balkans during the late autumn of 1915. The great Austro-German Army, which had concentrated on the northern frontier of Serbia, crossed the Danube on
rri T • r 7th October and entered Belgrade on the 9th.
The Invasion of ' . 1 r 11 • 1 ° 1 1 •
Serbia Durmg the loilowmg weeks so overwhclmmg an army poured into this country that the un¬ happy Serbians, in spite of a brave resistance, could do nothing to save themselves. Meanwhile the Entente Powers had deter¬ mined to help Serbia—but only when it was too late. We have already seen how, acting on the suggestion of M. Venizelos, they had promised to send troops to replace the 150,000 men whom Serbia was obliged, under the terms of her Treaty with Greece, to supply against Bulgaria. By 9th October there were
The Allies at 15,000 French and 5000 British troops at Salonica near Salonica. On nth October General Sarrail (who as Commander of the French Third Army had materially contributed to General Joffre’s success on the Marne) took over the command of the Allied Armee de I’Orient, which by the end of October numbered rather over 30,000 men, including the Tenth British Division from Gallipoh.
On nth October the Bulgarians, seeing that the position of Serbia was hopeless, crossed the frontier and attacked the Serbian
The Ali'pJ F Army on the flank, in order to cut off the retreat
fails to Lscue^''^ Second Serbian Army down the Vardar Serbia Valley. General Sarrafl attempted to effect a junction with the Serbians by advancing up the Vardar Valley to Demir Kapu,^ but it was too late, and when
^ See map on p. 133.


towards Serbia 95
the Serbians had been driven back and retreated before superior forces towards Prilep, the French retreated down the Vardar Valley, fighting rearguard actions against heavy odds. On pth December they reached the line of the Boyemia River, winch they held for a time to cover the disembarkation of British and French troops who were now reaching Salonica in considerable numbers; but it soon became clear that the small Franco-British force could not remain so far from its base in the depth of winter and without proper communications. Mean¬ while Serbia, which they had come to rescue, had ceased to exist, and a remnant of the Serbian Army was retreating towards Corfu and suffering indescribable hardships in the moimtains of Albania. The French and British, therefore, withdrew to Salonica. M. Skouloudis, who was summoned to form a ministry after the resignation of M. Zaimis, was an octogenarian banker.
The Cabinet of having become a millionaire, aspired to M ^hnuinuAic become Prime Minister—a position which he • would never have achieved even in Greece under normal conditions. He was a man absolutely devoid of any qualifications for such a position, and in fact merely served as a screen for the operations of the * shadow ’ Government which had its headquarters at the Palace and really exercised pohtical power. His Cabinet included such well-known antiVenizelists as Gounaris, Micheladakis, and Yannakitsas. At the same time the Chamber was dissolved—an illegal act, because the object of this second dissolution was to impose the same pohey as had been the motive of the first dissolution, which had failed in its object because the voice of the people condemned that policy. Meanwhile the Entente forces were reaching Salonica in formidable numbers, and it was necessary to throw dust in their
Skouloudis November, therefore, M. Skou¬ loudis addressed to the Greek Legations, for communication to the governments in London, Paris, and Petrograd, a declaration of the ardent affection felt by the Greek Government towards the Entente Powers. * Be good enough ’, he wrote, ‘ to give the most categorical assurance of our fixed determination to maintain our neutrality in the form ofthe most sincere benevolence towards the Powers of the Entente. Kindly add that the new Cabinet adopts the repeated declarations of M. Zaimis as regards
declares his
friendship for
the Allies.


96 Greece and her Obligations
the friendly attitude of the Royal Government towards the Allied forces at Salonica and that it is sufficiently conscious of its true interests and of its debt to the Protecting Powers not to deviate in the sHghtest degree from this line of conduct; and that it hopes that the sentiments of friendship felt by these Powers towards Greece will never for a moment be prejudiced by the mahcious and tendencious reports which are being dehberately circulated in the vain attempt to damage the cordial relations between the Entente and Greece The effect of this declaration was somewhat marred by a threat which he uttered, on the inspiration of the German Minister at Athens, that he would intern the Serbians if they retreated into Greek territory. This utterance, which revealed his real wishes, took a good deal of explaining away. As the Greek Government had allowed the Entente troops to land at Salonica, it was difficult to deny them the right to rp, . . r remain there. On the other hand, the fact that,
theAllks^at owing to the Greek mobilization, large Greek Salonica forces were present in Macedonia provided the elements of an awkward situation if the Central Powers should decide to push on against Salonica. On 23 rd November, therefore, the French and British Governments, showing unusual energy, presented the Skouloudis Government with a note stating that, in view of the attitude of the Greek Government on certain questions affecting the security and freedom of action of the Alhed troops, they considered it necessary to suspend the economic and commercial facilities which Greece had hitherto enjoyed at their hands. About the same time Lord Kitchener and M. Denys Cochin both visited Greece and had audiences of King Constantine, but only obtained vague promises that the Greeks would not attack the Alhed troops. The partial blockade was, therefore, continued until 12th December, when the Greek Government accepted the Entente demands and
The Entente withdrew all its forces from Salonica, except a single division. At the same time the Paris Conference of the British and French Govern¬ ments came to the momentous decision, the wisdom of which was so often questioned by those who failed to reahze the importance of Salonica, that, although the salvation of Serbia, which had been
decides to retain
Salonica as a
base forfuture
operations.


towards Serbia 97
The Germano
Bulgarian threat
to Salonica.
the original object of the landing, had not been achieved, Salonica should nevertheless be held as a base for future
operations. At this time it was still confidently anticipated that the Austro-German and Bulgarian forces would attempt to drive General Sarrail and his army into the sea ; and indeed there is strong evidence that the Bul¬ garian Government and Supreme Command was strongly in favour of an immediate attack. It seems probable that it was the German Higher Command which decided against acceding to this demand. It was perhaps hoped that by energetic propaganda in Greece the position of the Alhed troops at Salonica might be made untenable, or else that pressure elsewhere and, in particular, the attempted invasion of Egypt, might cause their withdrawal. Moreover, if the attack was to be made, it would have necessarily been carried out by Bulgarian troops, who, if successful, would have claimed Salonica as their reward ; and Austria, who had so long had her eyes fixed upon Salonica, would never have been induced to
tolerate this. By the middle of December the Allied Army at Salonica consisted of eight French Divisions and five British (the loth, 22nd, 26th, 27th, and 28th). With these troops at his disposal General Sarrail was faced with the problem of devising the most suitable line of defence. His force was inadequate to hold the great mountain barrier which follows more
or less exactly the Serbo-Greek and Grcco-Bulgarian frontiers, but there was a shorter line, some fifty miles in length, which could easily be made defensible, running from the mouth of the Vardar along the hills north of Salonica to the Gulf of Orphano at Stavros.^ The ground round the mouth of tlie Vardar is marshy and difficult of approach, while farther east the hills which form a chain cutting off Salonica and Chalcidice could easily be turned into a strong line of defence and are partly protected by the lakes of Langaza and Beshik. The nearness of this line to Salonica along several miles of its extent, where it comes within about seven miles from the city, was a possible source of weakness, but the danger could be largely neutraHzed
^ See map on p. 133.
The Allies
construct the
Fortified Camp
of Salonica.


98 Greece and her Obligations towards Serbia
by the guns of a powerful fleet. The western part of the line was entrusted to the French, the eastern to the British ; and within a very few weeks the entrenched camp of Salonica was in a condition to resist any attack that the enemy was likely to be able to attempt.


CHAPTER XI
The Liberal
Party holds aloof.
THE ELECTIONS OF DECEMBER 1915 AND THE BETRAYAL OF THE RUPEE FORT
ON 19th December 1915 elections to the Greek Chamber were held, though there was no real justification for them, since there
'tl cl r was a clear Liberal majority. However, the
1 th Dec 1 1 pro-German chque hoped that, it an election ip ec. 1915. j-qqJj. place while the mobilization was in force,
they might obtain a majority and so avoid applying the Treaty with Serbia and prejudicing the interests which they had pledged themselves to further. In these conditions M. Venizelos decided that the only dignified course to pursue was to advise his supporters to abstain from any participation in the elections. He, therefore, addressed a manifesto to the Liberal Party stating that their abstention would throw upon the Government, which had brought about the situation, fuU and entire responsibihty for the degradation of Greek poHtical hfe and for the disasters which their pohey was bringing upon the nation ; at the same time he hoped that this action would prevent the occurrence of internal strife at a time of external crisis. During the election every device of intimidation and com¬ pulsion was employed. Editors of newspapers were threatened, ... f and the right of assembly was denied in a most ntimi ation oj arbitrary manner ; but the Liberal Party could t e e ectora e. seduced from its loyalty to M. Venizelos
and held aloof. The result was that, whereas in June 750,000 electors went to the poll, in December only 200,000 votedless than one-fifth of the electorate. AU the members of the late Cabinet were re-elected—except M. Skouloudis, who, however, remained in office—and were pledged to support the pro-German chque, who under the leadership of General Dousmanis were working hand in hand with the chiefs of the German propaganda. From this time dates the deliberate 99


lOO The Elections of December igi^
attempt to strangle the soul of the Greek nation by a system of organized terrorism. Athens became the headquarters of an army of spies and informers recruited from the lowest of the people. All freedom of opinion was suppressed, and no one dared to express himself freely on questions of the day for fear of being dragged before the courts. Among the many nefarious methods adopted, none was more reprehensible than the use of the Army as an agency of
The use of the propaganda. Pro-German pamphlets were in. f i-f’ 1 dustriously distributed to all ranks, who were
uf^oses^^^' same time forbidden to read the Liberal purposes. papers. There was no justification for the
prolongation of the mobilization, and indeed during the elections it had been urged that by voting against M. Venizelos, who was the cause of the mobilization, the electors would obtain the release of themselves and their relatives from military service. As the result of the elections had been the triumph of the policy of neutrality, there was no further need for the Army to remain under arms, especially as the finances of the nation were in no condition to bear the enormous expense of maintaining the Army and the injury to the economic life of the country caused by the withdrawal of so many men from agriculture and industry.
Salonica was hkewise a hot-bed of espionnage and intrigue, and every movement of the Allied Armies was reported to the
1 ‘ f enemy. In order to mitigate this evil General
the enetn Sarrail arrested the Consuls of Germany, Austria, Bulgaria, and Turkey, whose consulates
Salonica become the headquarters of such activities, and transported them to France, whence they were returned to their own countries. It was obviously an act of elementary precaution and was fully justified by the evidence provided by their archives; but the Greek Government protested on the ground that the sovereign rights of Greece were violated. On i2th January 1916 General Sarrail took a farther step to
The Struma ^^sure the safety of his army by sending up a
railway bridoe "P blown up ^ Salonica-Constantinople railway over the Struma at the entrance of the Rupel Gorge, near Demir-Hissar. This act caused a great sensation at the time.


lOI
and the Betrayal of the Rupel Fort
The difficulties
of an Allied
advance.
but its wisdom was amply justified by subsequent events. Further,
rr, . f on 28th January a French force took over the
The occupation of r r tr \ 1 • 1 1 • 1
fU f f f tort or Karaburun, which dominates the
„ entrance to the inner Gulf of Salonica, the
Karaburun. 1 ^ 1 1 • • • 1
Greek Commander surrendering it without offering any resistance. Otherwise there was little military incident during the first few months of 1916 beyond skirmishes between the advanced patrols of the opposing forces and a certain amount of aerial activity. The Anglo-French positions round Salonica were too strong to invite an attack, and reinforcements were continually arriving; but an Alhed advance could only be possible after a vast amount of preliminary road-making. It was to this and to training in new methods of fighting that the Alhes devoted dieir energies, while the enemy was busy rendering almost impregnable the positions which he had taken up along the northern Greek frontier. Meanwhile, though the fact did not come to light till a much later date, the Greek General Staff had already come to a definite agreement with the Central Powers, and on 8 th February a secret memorandum was issued to the Corps and Divisional Commanders ordering them to allow the Bulgars to advance into Greek territory without offering any re¬ sistance. This act does away with any possible excuse that the mobihzation was being prolonged in order to protect the neutrality of Greece ; it was obviously being continued simply to serve the interests of the Central Powers. But a clearer proof of the real nature of the ‘ sincerely bene¬ volent neutrahty ’ of the Skouloudis Govern¬ ment was provided by the protest which it issued on loth January against the landing of Allied detachments at Corfu to make preparations to eive the unhappy remnant of the heroic Serbian Army. It was adding insult to injury that those who ^ , had repudiated the Treaty between Greece and e er- should refuse hospitality to the wreck of tan rmy passage ^rmy of their alhes whom they had so basely t roug reece. yj theij hour of need. Moreover, in
April, when the Serbian Army had been re-equipped and
8
The Greek
General Staff
intrigues with the
Central Powers.
Skouloudis pro¬
tests against the
landing of the
Serbians at Corfu.


102 The Elections of December igi3
was ready to join the Allies at Salonica, the Skouloudis Government categorically refused it permission to travel over Greek territory or even through the Corinthian Canal—another proof that the secret government had pledged itself to do nothing which could possibly forward the interests of the enemies of Germany. But these manifestations of ill-will were nothing in com¬ parison with the act of treachery towards Greece and the Alhes rpt . which soon followed. M. Vcnizelos, during etmpor ance negotiations which preceded the Treaty of oj e upe jor. demanded and secured for
Greece the frontier fort of Rupel,^ which commands the exit from the Struma defile into the Struma plain near Demir-Hissar, the possession of which he rightly regarded as absolutely essential to the safety of Eastern Macedonia. Since the Balkan Wars large sums of money had been spent on bringing this fortress up to date, the details of its defences being kept a profound secret from all except those who actually formed part of its garrison.
This key-position the Skouloudis Cabinet, in co-operation with the Secret Government, betrayed to the hereditary enemies
Its bet I b Greece. The fact that the Allies had blown the Greek ^ railway bridge at the entrance of the ^ ^ Struma defile had made it clear that they had no intention or advancing m this direction, and they obviously regarded the presence of two Greek Army Corps in Eastern Macedonia as a guarantee that the Bulgarians would not be allowed to invade Greek territory for which so much blood had been shed in the Second Balkan War. The surrender of Rupel was thus both a direct challenge to the Alhes and a base betrayal of Greek national interests.
On loth May the General commanding the Sixth Division at Serres telephoned to the Greek War Office that one of his officers had been informed by an officer of the Bulgarian frontier guard that, in accordance with an agreement between Marshal Mackensen and the Greek Government, the Germans and Bulgarians had received permission to occupy points within two kilometres of the frontier, and so had occupied the hills overlooking Lehovo. This arrangement was in accordance
^ See map on p. 133.


and the Betrayal of the Rupel Fort 103
with a secret understanding into which the Greek Government had entered in the previous February, M. Skouloudis, to cover his treachery, made a formal protest, which was not taken seriously. In reply he received similar notes from the German and Bulgarian Ministers in Athens, stating that Germany and her Alhes found themselves under the necessity of entering Greek territory to secure the free passage of the Rupel Gorge in view of the offensive measures recently taken by the troops of the Allies, but it was a merely defensive measure and the territorial integrity of Greece would be respected. The Greek Premier rephed by simply acknowledging the note and making no protest whatever. On 23 rd May a large force of Bulgarians, accompanied by German officers, appeared before the Rupel Fort and demanded
J f surrender. The garrison offered resistance
esurren er oj informed the Divisional Commander, who,
the tort to the , , . . , c • ^ ^
j on telegraphing to Athens tor mstructions, ^ ' received orders to put into force secret orders which were in his possession and which, he found, contained instructions that no resistance was to be offered. Orders were, therefore, sent to evacuate the Fort, and the garrison was withdrawn after a resistance of twenty-four hours, during which casualties had been inflicted on the invaders. A large quantity of material fell into the enemies’ hands. The surrender of the Rupel Fort created a painful impression both in Greece and abroad. It was felt that the Greek Govern¬ ment, by its passive attitude in the face of an
^ j invasion which prejudiced the mihtary situation create a roa . Entente, had abandoned its poUcy of
neutrahty, and that the only course open to the Entente was to assume the necessary hberty of action to assure the safety of her
armies in Macedonia. On 5th June, at a meeting of the Chamber, M. Skouloudis
attempted to justify the policy of the Government on the ground that further resistance would have involved Greece in a conflict which would have necessitated the violation of her neutral¬ ity. Such pretexts might suffice for the ser¬
vile majority in the Greek Chamber, but they could satisfy no one who was not infected by the poison of German
Skouloudis
attempts to
justify himself.


104 The Elections of December igis, etc.
propaganda. The duplicity of the Government was proved by the subsequent pubhcation of documents, which showed that the Prime Minister had been, through the Greek Minister in Berlin, in constant communication with the German authorities regarding the measures to be taken by Greece to hamper the movements of the Entente armies in Macedonia.


CHAPTER XII
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT
on
situation.
THE betrayal of Rupel, as no doubt its perpetrators intended, seriously affected the mihtary position of the Allied Armies in
TU ff t ffU Macedonia. Instead of relying on the Greek e ejfec oj e Greek territory of Eastern etraya oJ upe j-j^gy ^ere henceforward obhged to t e mi itary Struma and to detach
for this purpose considerable forces which might have been usefully employed elsewhere. It also showed the necessity of taking measures to assure the security of the base at Salonica and of the area of operations. General Sarrail, there¬ fore, having lately received wider powers of action, on 3rd June 1916, the I^g’s Name-day, proclaimed martial law in Salonica and all the districts occupied by the Allied Armies, and assumed control of the pohce and the postal and telegraphic services. The Greek Government protested against the fait accompli as a violation of Greek sovereignty and used the incident to foment popular feeling against the Allies and M. Venizelos. But not only was Greek sovereignty temporarily revoked in Macedonia, but Greece was also deprived, as a result of the , . - treachery of her Government, of the control of The loss oj Northern Epirus, which had been occupied by Northern Epirus, consent of the Alhed Powers at
the beginning of the war. The Itahans were only too ready to beheve that the Greeks would betray Northern Epirus, just as they had abandoned Eastern Macedonia to the Bulgars. The Itahan Government, therefore, with considerable show of
justice pointed out to the other Powers that it was essential that this region should be taken over by Itahan troops, with the result that the ItaHan occupation, which was based on Valona, was eventually extended until an Albanian front was created which joined hands with the Macedonian front. Thus the distrust of Greece engendered by the Skouloudis Government
105


io6 The Beginnings of the National Movement
gave Italy the opportunity of gaining a hold, which she would not wiUingly let go, upon territory which she had
long coveted. The results of the Skouloudis administration may be summed up as the abohtion of Greek sovereignty in Macedonia, the revocation of the Greek occupation of Northern Epirus, and the suppression throughout Greece of every form of civil hberty and every expression of pohtical opinion except through a corrupt and servile Press in the pay of the Government and of Germany. But the days of his term of office were numbered, and the patience of the Protecting Powers was becoming exhausted. After the surrender of Rupel the Mihtary Party in Athens began to show its hand. Towards the end of May, the Minister
The MTta of War, General Yannakitsas, took it upon him
n ^ ^ self to warn the troops that they mieht be called
Party ttt Greece r ^ i -i ^ i • ^r
1 r .1 T? f upon to right; while Constantme himself,
defies tfte Jctttettte» 11*1*11* *11
addressing ms soldiers on manoeuvres, pointedly insisted on the duty of a soldier to obey whatever orders he might receive and ‘ not to give way to sentiment ’. Such remarks could only be interpreted as preparatory to possible mihtary action against the Allies. On 12th June bands of hired partisans assembled outside the British and French Legations and demonstrated against the Protecting Powers.
The obvious hostihty of the King and Government of Greece could not fail to awaken the Allied Powers to the fact that their
neuUimalum
of 21st T dangerous condition of affairs. They appear ■' to have resolved to take effective measures, and a landing force under General Moreau was organized and transported to Salamis. There is reason to suppose that it had been determined to settle the Greek question by a bold stroke and to re-estabhsh a Constitutional regime. Un¬ happily, at the last moment this intention seems to have been suddenly modified, owing either to some diplomatic interven¬ tion or to a pretended submission on the part of the King ; and
the Allied representatives contented themselves with sending an ultimatum to M. Skouloudis on 21st June. After calling atten¬ tion to the evident collusion of the Cabinet with the enemies of the Entente and the hostile activities of foreigners in Greece,


The Beginnings of the National Movement 107
they demanded without delay the execution of the following measures :
1. The total demobihzation of the Greek Army. 2. The replacement of the Skouloudis Cabinet by a ‘ Service Government without poHtical colour which should guarantee the loyal fulfilment of the benevolent neutrality which Greece had undertaken to observe. 3. The immediate dissolution of the Chamber to be followed by fresh elections.
The King yielded, though many of his advisers urged him to resist. On 23rd June M. Skouloudis resigned, and M. Zaimis
'Tt ■ ij was again summoned to form a Government
j * ■' charged with the duty of carrying out the terms
and summons r 1 ah- 1 1 r
M Zaimis Allied Note. On 29th June a Decree or General Demobilization was issued ; but the Chamber was not dissolved, on the pretext that it was im¬ possible at the moment to fix the date of the new elections. Moreover, as quickly as the troops were dismissed from the
The ‘ Reservists ’ were formed into ‘ Leagues of Reservists ’, pledged to support the King, who openly placed himself at their head and appeared in the political arena as leader of the anti-Venizelist Party. The Liberal Party, however, in spite of actual threats to the life of M. Venizelos,
The a roach f Pursued its campaign and with such
, , . ■' success that it seemed likely to obtain a substantial
the elections. . . , . \ 1 r
majority at the coming elections. i3ut, berore these could take place, the Bulgarian invasion of Eastern Mace¬ donia entirely changed the situation and made it clear that the Liberal Party could no longer co-operate in the Government of the country and that revolution was the only alternative. But we are anticipating events and must return for a moment to the military situation in Macedonia after the betrayal of the Rupel Fort. The Allied Army in the Balkans, already reinforced by the arrival of the Serbians, was strengthened in July by a Russian
, . and in August by an Italian contingent. It was
The Allied Army , • j 1 r .. j
■ -K/t A • ^ determined, therefore, to move up country and m ace occupy a wider front in closer touch with the iJOrwar . linp rnnalilv fnllowprl fbp Grprrt
moves enemy, whose line roughly followed the GrecoSerbian and part of the Greco-Bulgarian frontiers. The sector


io8 The Beginnings of the National Movement
assigned to the British Army extended from a point south-west of Lake Doiran to Lake Butkovo in the Struma Plain and thence to the mouth of the Struma River. The French occupied the centre of the line from Lake Doiran to a point west of the Vardar River
with the Serbians on their left. Meanwhile poUtical events, and in particular the approaching abandonment of her neutrality by Rumania, demanded operations .. on a wider scale, and on loth August an Allied
t Uary opera offensive was opened in the region of Doiran tfons in the t . i -A -d .. a.
f , which met with some success. But on lytn summer oj igi . situation suddenly changed. The
enemy, persuaded that the arrival of Allied reinforcements meant that the Macedonian campaign was beginning in earnest, them¬ selves attacked all along the front. Their object was partly to dissuade Rumania from joining the Entente and partly to induce the Allies to send more troops to the Balkans and so relieve the pressure elsewhere, particularly in view of the offensive on the Somme. The attacks on the Doiran-Vardar line met with little success, the object being to hold the Allied troops rather than attempt to break through. More result was to be hoped for on the flanks of the Allied line, where it adjoined the areas nominally held by the Greeks, who could be counted on to offer no serious resistance. On the west the First Bulgarian Army pressed for¬ ward and occupied Fiorina, a small Greek town some seventeen miles south of Monastir. On the other flank, east of the Struma, units of the Second Bulgarian Army crossed the River Nestos and invaded the extreme corner of Eastern Macedonia, and at the same time poured down the Rupel Pass into the Struma Plain and advanced from Demir-Hissar toward Serrcs. This district being occupied by considerable Greek forces, the French and British forces east of the Struma were withdrawn to the west of that river and the task of defend¬ ing Greek soil was left to the Greeks.
If the Athens Government did not actually invite the heredi¬ tary enemies of Greece to invade Greek Macedonia, their guilty complicity is proved by the fact that, when they surrendered the Rupel Fort, they made no stipulation that Eastern Macedonia should not be invaded. It was only after the invasion had begun and atrocities were being committed against the helpless in
The Bulgarian
Army overruns
Eastern
Macedonia.


The Beginnings of the National Movement 109
habitants that the Government was forced by public opinion to make a protest to Berlin, whence came the assurance—which was promptly proved by events to be worthless—that Serres, Drama, and Cavalla would not be occupied. In their advance through the Struma Plain the Bulgarians met with unexpected resistance from the Greek Sixth Division, f which was temporarily under the command of , Colonel Christodoulou, whose personal bravery
Division ^ made him one of the heroes of the Balkan * * ■ Wars. After inflicting heavy casualties on the enemy, he managed to extricate his force and to reach Salonica, where his men afterwards formed the nucleus of the famous Serres Division of the National Army. On the other hand. Colonel Hadjopoulos, Officer Command¬ ing the Fourth Greek Army Corps, proved himself a willing , tool of the Athens Government by surrendering
• ^ with 8000 men without striking a blow. When C ^ ^ force was sent to Germany and interned in orps. Silesia, the Greek Government acquiesced almost
without protest in this dehberate insult to Greece. The capture of Cavalla involved the loss of a large quantity of military stores as well as of immense quantities of tobacco, which had not been removed in consequence of assurances that the invaders would respect private Greek property. The whole of Eastern Macedonia was abandoned to the invaders, who set up a reign of terror, reducing the inhabitants by systematic starvation, deporting able-bodied citizens to work in Bulgarian mines, and denuding the whole country of agricultural produce and
animals. The sacrifice of a rich province which had been won by the sacrifice of so much Greek blood only three years before pro¬ duced a most painful impression in Athens. On 27th August a mass meeting of Liberals was al marched through the principal streets at Athens. Venizelos’ house. The Liberal leader,
amid demonstrations of enthusiasm and devotion, addressed the people from a balcony. He pointed out the deplorable result of the pro-German pohey and contrasted it with what might have happened if a different course had been taken. Greece, he said,
had fallen from the height to which she had ascended, and,


no The Begifinings of the National Movement
instead of being respected or feared, was pitied by her friends and despised and insulted by her enemies. Addressing the King, he begged him to give up the role of party-leader to which intriguers sought to degrade him and take covmsel how he might revive the temper of the people which had been depressed by the long mobiUzation, by barrack-room election¬ eering, and by the poison of foreign propaganda, so that Greece might again have an army and be in a position to defend her vit^ interests in co-operation with powerful AlHes, who were her traditional defenders and benefactors. * The Liberal Party , he concluded, ‘ is no enemy of the Crown, the Dynasty, or Your Person ; it is the respectful guardian of our free Con¬ stitution ; only those who are exploiting the Crown, and who are, in fact, your worst enemies, can seek to persuade you otherwise.’ A deputation was chosen to wait upon the King, who refused to grant an audience ; moreover, on the plea that he was ill, he delayed the signature of a decree dissolving the Chamber. However, alarmed by the violence of popular feeling, he authorized M. Zaimis to inform M. Venizelos that he had decided to abandon neutraUty and to authorize negotiations with the Entente. Soon afterwards, however, he decided that the popular excitement had evaporated and did nothing, except that, as a sop to the Entente, General Dousmanis was dismissed from his post as Chief of the General Staff. On 28th August Rumania abandoned her neutraHty in favour of the Entente ; but, although it had always been under
„ ... stood that, if Rumania decided to enter the
Rumania lotns ^ 1 1 1 • 1
the Entente would do likewise, the Rumaman declaration made no difference to the attitude of Greece, whose Government had determined not to enter the war against Germany on any terms whatever. During the King’s illness German propaganda became so rampant in Athens and so many hostile acts were committed
Th All' A against the Alhes, that, early in September, a f ft f strong Alhed fleet under Admiral du Foumet a amts. Salamis, and the French and British
Ministers demanded the control of postal and telegraphic commumcations and the expulsion of enemy agents and spies.
Though these concessions were granted, disorders, due chiefly


The Beginnings of the National Movement III
The beginnings
ofthe National
Movement at
Salonica.
to the Reservist Leagues, tended to increase and culminated in hostile demonstrations against the French Legation, for which an apology had to be made. Meanwhile in the freer air of Salonica the patriotic impulse of those who could no longer tolerate the humihating position of Greece led to the somewhat premature formation of a League of National Defence, which by a curious coincidence met in the building which had been the headquarters of the Young Turk Movement some nine years before. On 30th August a proclamation was issued at Salonica calling on the citizens to cease to obey those who had betrayed the national honour. A large proportion of the Greek garrison proceeded to the French G.H.Q. and offered their services to the AUies. Those who refused to join the movement were dispatched to Athens, where they were solemnly received by the King, who compHmented them on their loyalty in fulsome terms. ‘ With such an army,’ he said, ‘ and at the head of men like you, possessing your moral, your sentiments, and your faith, I am ready to face no matter what enemy.’ These words were probably inspired by a telegram which King Constantine is known to have received about this time from his Imperial brother-in-law, assuring him that within a month he would have conquered Rumania and driven General Sarrail’s army
into the sea. Be this as it may, the King’s return to the old poHcy of neutrahty was too much for M. Zaimis, who resigned the premiership on nth September and was sucM. Zatmts ceeded by M. Kalogeropoulos, a prominent resigns the Germanophil, who got together a ministry of Premiership. notorious partisans that the Ministers of
the Entente refused to carry out the usual diplomatic formality
of visiting the new Premier. On 20th September the King, in a speech deUvered at the ceremony of swearing in the new conscripts, insisted on the unquestioning devotion which the Army owed to the will of the King. On 22nd September the Prime Minister declared that the Government intended to institute proceed¬ ings against all officers and men who Joined the revolutionary
movement.


II2 The Beginnings of the National Movement
The position in which M. Venizelos found himself was an exceedingly difficult one. On the one hand, he could argue
The difBcuh done all that was humanly possible -f- f to save the State without violating the law of
M Venizelos other hand, he could not but reahze that, since he had a powerful following in the nation which looked to him for guidance, his acquiescence in a thoroughly unsatisfactory state of affairs might be interpreted as implying that the situation was beyond all remedy. He decided, therefore, that it was his duty again, as in former days in Crete, to become a rebel and, by setting up a rival Govern¬ ment, to try, if it were not too late, to save Greece from the fate which was threatening her,- knowing that in doing so he was interpreting the desires of the soundest elements in the nation. The islands, including his own motherland, Crete, were ready for revolution ; at Salonica, a detachment of the National Army had already left for the front to fieht by the side of the Alhes.
Accordingly early in the morning of 25th September, M. Venizelos embarked at Phaleron for Crete, accompanied by
M. Venizelos -Admiral Koundouriotis, the Commander-infnr Chief of the Greek Navy, and a large following
Crete. ' friends and supporters. Reaching Canea, he was received with every demonstration of devotion and inaugurated the National Movement by a pro¬ clamation calling on the Greek people to return to the policy.
The Revolution national conscience demanded, of proclaimed at co-operation with the Protecting Powers and Canea. Serbia and of fighting to free Greek territory from the invader—a policy which would at the same time help to deliver Europe from German hegemony and
the Balkans from Bulgarian pretensions to supremacy. * Since the Government , said M. Venizelos, ‘ has betrayed its obhgations, it is incumbent on the nation to attempt the task. We iiivoke the support of every Greek citizen who feels that any
further toleration of the disasters and humiUations, which the policy hitherto followed has caused, would be equivalent to the death of the nation.’ The movement met with immediate success, and all the islands through which M. Venizelos made a
triumphal tour adhered to it and deposed the Royalist authorities.


The Beginnings of the National Movement 113
establishing VenizeUsts in their place. On 9th October M,
'rt n. ■ - 1 Venizelos, amid scenes of great enthusiasm,
The Provistonal iji ei- i-li t r
^ . landed at balonica, which became the scat or Provisional Government. A Triumvirate
^Salonica appointed, consisting of M. Venizelos, Admiral Koundouriotis, and General Danglis, with a Cabinet composed of prominent Venizelists of tried administrative or commercial experience, such as M. Nicholas Politis, formerly Director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs at Athens, who became Foreign Secretary, and M. Embeirikos, the well-known shipowner, who received the portfolio of supplies. Adherents to the national cause arrived in increasing numbers from old Greece, including numerous officers and Government functionaries, whose co-operation was invaluable in the organiza¬ tion of the army and civil administration. Thus was launched a movement which was destined to deliver Greece from absolutism and tyranny, to recreate the National Army, and to enable her to range herself by the side of her natural allies and take a glorious part in vindicating the
cause of freedom.


CHAPTER XIII
THE EVENTS OF isx AND 2nd DECEMBER 1916 IN ATHENS
BEFORE continuing the story of political events at Athens, it is necessary briefly to review the mihtary position on the Balkan
The military ^ ^916. The Rumanian situation in the f^^paign having begun, General Sarrail had autumn of igi6. ^^^ore him the double task of keeping the Bulgarians as busy as possible, so that they should not be able to attack Rumania, and of trying himself to achieve some success to justify the presence of the Allied Army in Macedonia. As the ground was not promising for an advance up the Struma or the Vardar Valley, the most desirable cmjective which offered a good prospect of success was Monastir, the capture of which from the Serbians had fulfilled one of the chief objects of Bulgaria s entry into the war, while its recapture would constitute a small instalment of the obhgation which the Alhes owed to Serbia.
While the British were active on the front from the Vardar to the mouth of the Struma, a force consisting of the French, the Serbians, and the Russians began, on 7th September, to attack on the western portion of the front. The Serbians, starting from the line Ostrovo-Vodena, on 20th September, stormed and captured the formidable summit of Mount Kajmakchalan, ten miles north of Ostrovo.i Farther west the French and Russians retook Fiorina and thus held the southern approach to the Ham of Monastir. Crossing the River Tchema on 5th October, the ^rbians gradually forced back the enemy northward through the Tcherna Loop Then, while the French and Russians broke through the Kenah lines and forced the enemy back to their last
The capture of defence within four mUes of Monastir, Monastir. Serbians worked their way round to the 1. ^ north-east of the city and were threatening their hne of retreat on the road from Monastir to Prilep. The Germans
For these operations see map on p. 133.
114


The Events of ist and 2nd December igi6 in Athens 115
and Bulgarians had thus no alternative but to evacuate Monastir, which was entered on 19th November by French cavalry, closely followed by the Serbians, who thus reoccupied the town exactly four years after they captured it from the Turks in the Balkan Wars. This success restored a comer of Serbian territory to the much-tried Serbian Army and proved that it was still capable of maintaining and even enhancing its reputation as a fighting force. Meanwhile the position of M. Venizelos after the establish¬ ment of the Provisional Government at Salonica was still an
r^./r 1 ■. extremely difficult one. He had definitely Difficult postuon Government and
oj . emze os. Alhes; but, while
they tolerated his presence at Salonica, they found themselves unable to define exactly the attitude which they intended to adopt towards him. In proclaiming the National Movement in Crete, M. Venizelos had stated clearly that, if the Crown would subordinate itself to the national will, the Liberal Party was willing to co-operate. When, however, the King showed no disposition to change his attitude, the natural course for M. Venizelos to take would have been to throw off his allegiance and give the revolution a definitely anti-dynastic character . j r which would have greatly strengthened his The attitude oj Allied Powers, however, were un
the Allies. willing to allow this and made it a condition of
any form of recognition of the Provisional Government that it should abstain from any declaration of opposition to the King. Moreover, at the Alhed Conference held at Boulogne on 30th October, it was decided not to recognize the Provisional Government officially and not to accredit to it any diplomatic representatives. France and Great Britain, nevertheless, under¬ took to bear the expense of the Nationahst Army which was being formed and granted a loan. Vt^hile the impetus of the National Movement was undoubtedly lessened by the refusal of recognition, it must be admitted that the Entente Powers were in a difficult position. The acknowledgement of the Pro¬ visional Government as a lawful authority and the severance of relations with Athens might have precipitated civil war in Greece, which would probably have involved the dispatch of Allied troops into Old Greece and so weakened the hand of the


ii6 The Events of ist and 2nd December igi6 in Athens
Allies on the Macedonian front. So the AlUes played the usual game of waiting to see what would happen. It is possible that, if Great Britain and France had been acting alone, events would
Att t A fJtl taken a different turn ; but they had to and Russia co-operate with Italy and Russia. Italy, with her own imperialistic aims in the Balkans and Asia Minor, refused to support M. Venizelos, the success of whose pohcy of a Greater Greece might injure her own pre¬ tensions ; while Russia was naturally opposed to the creation of any anti-monarchial precedents and to the overthrow of a dynasty so closely allied to the House of Romanoff. M. Venizelos, with characteristic patience, accepted the position and worked quietly for the consolidation of his Govern¬ ment and the formation of an army which might in due time give valuable assistance to the Allies. He probably realized that the Athens Government would, sooner or later, proceed to acts which would exhaust the patience even of the AUied Powers. At Athens M. Kalogeropoulos finally abandoned the attempt to obtain the recognition of his Government by the Allied
M. Lamhros he- representatives and resigned, being succeeded romp< Prpmipr October by M. Lambros. A less suitable choice could hardly have been possible. M. Lambros was a university professor who had achieved a high repute as a palaeographer, but he had never been a deputy and had had no experience of pubhc affairs.^ The other portfolios were distributed among a miscellaneous collection of civil servants and professors whose only recommendation for office was their willingness to accept it.
On loth October, in view of the facts that troops and artillery were being sent to Thessaly and new recruits being called to the
The Allied note ^^id that the Greek Navy was being of loth Oct. ‘purged’ of any officers who were suspected ‘ of Venizehst leanings. Admiral du Fournet commanding the Allied fleet off Salamis pre¬ sented a note to the Greek Government demanding the control of the Larissa railway, the surrender of certain vessels of war,
and the disarmament of the land-batteries at Salamis and the
^ remarked that, if he had not been a professor, he would like to have been a monk at Mt. Athos ; he would certainly have been better suited for monastic life than for the post of Prime Minister.


M. Benazet at
Athens.
The Events of ist and 2nd December igi6 in Athens 117
Peiraeus, On 17th October a further demand was made that
The note is civilians should be forbidden to carry arms. . j L ^All these conditions were accepted, but it after
acceptea but the , 1 , , , ^ .
^ wards became known that about this time secret . . . orders were issued to provide the reservists m
earned out. , • 1 ^ 1 1 1
the provmces with arms and that troops and material were being collected in Thessaly and Epirus. More¬ over, King Constantine, addressing the crews of the surrendered vessels, used language which could only be interpreted as threatening the Allies. His defiance was no doubt due to assur¬ ances which he had received from Germany, which seemed to him all the more invincible now that the Central Powers had begun to overrun Rumania. On 21 St October a fresh turn was given to events by the visit to Athens on a special mission of M. Benazet, a French deputy, who obtained an audience of the King. It appears that King Constantine was able to persuade his visitor of his friendly attitude towards the AUies, and that M. Benazet demanded that he should give some soHd proof of his benevolent neutrahty. The
^ . King then himself suggested the surrender of
Kino Constantine , ® • r j ..l
* , a large quantity or guns and other equipment,
simender of only stipulating that the Entente press should . , / not make capital out of his concessions. This materia oj war. reasonable, and M. Benazet left the Royal
presence under the impression that he had arranged for the solution of a difficult situation. A few days later Admiral du Fournet, persuaded that the King genuinely wished to come to a satisfactory arrangement, ordered the withdrawal of two of the French companies which had been stationed at the Zappeion,
near the Royal Palace. Early in November, owing to a slight collision at Ekaterini in Southern Macedonia between Royalist troops and those of ... . , the Provisional Government, the Allied author1 jjjgg established a neutral zone between the the Neutral one. q£ jj^g Athens and the Salonica Govern¬
ments. This was in effect a concession to Athens, since it pre¬ vented the extension of the National Movement to Epirus and Thessaly, where M. Venizelos had many adherents. Further, on 13th November, the Entente allowed without protest the


ii8 The Events of ist and 2nd December igi6 in Athens
summoning of the Chamber on the dissolution of which they had insisted in vain in the previous June. On 17th November the Allied authorities showed further complaisance in a note sent on by the Admiral demanding the
Allied Note of surrender of a smaller quantity of arms than the , , King had suggested, namely, 18 field batteries, 16 mountam batteries, and a number or machineguns and rifles. About the same time the departure of the personnel of the enemy Legations at Athens was demanded and effected without incident. During the last days of November, the effort was redoubled to stir up public opinion against the Allies. Systematic pro
Anti Entente paganda was carried out among the troops, to j whom the demand for the cession of military
propaoanda. . , , . , . ^
material was represented as an insult to the Greek Army. Every reservist was warned to be ready for any emergency which might presently arise. Open threats and even acts of violence were used against the supporters of M. Venizelos. Excitement in Athens was stimulated to fever-heat by fabricated news of outbreaks in the provinces and massacres of Royalists in Southern Macedonia ; the Govern¬ ment actually decreed a solemn memorial service for the supposed victims. The adherents of the Government were worked up to
The Government “dtement that they were refuses to lengths to prevent any consirrender war cessions to the Allies. On the 27th the Governmaterial ment added fuel to the fire by issuing a protest against the Aflied control and blockade and against the expulsion of the enemy diplomats, and by refusing point-blank to surrender any arms.
The French Admiral, however, still believed that an amicable settlement was possible, and on 29th November returned from
Admiral du interview with the King convinced that the
Fournet prepares ^ou\d be surrendered if the Allies made
to land aforce. ^ manifestation of force as would save the King’s face and make it appear that the Government, in giving way, was yielding to force majeure. It is even categorically stated that an assurance was given that the troops who were to land to take over the arms would meet with no opposition. The landing force, which included British


The Events of ist and 2nd December igi6 in Athens 119
as well as French units without artillery, was to set out on 1st December to march to certain fixed points to take over the material, unprepared for resistance which they did not expect and unsuspicious of the trap which was being set for them. They were destined to be speedily disillusioned. On 29th November the Greek Government issued a decree permitting voluntary enhstments, which added many thousands
The Greek garrison of the city, and secret orders Government were given to the troops to take up positions . . in front of the city and offer resistance to any attempt on the part or the Alhes to carry out the purpose for which they were landing. Important buildings were occupied by troops and trenches prepared. The Alhed force of 2000 men disembarked without incident, but came into collision with Greek troops as soon as it advanced
The landin towards the city. Attacks were simultaneously ^ made upon the detachments left behind at the Zappeion and on the headquarters of the Alhed police. As the main Greek position was just in front of the Acropohs, it would have been impossible for the guns of the fleet to support the landingforce, even if any proper liaison between the troops and the navy had been arranged, which apparently had not been done. It is easy to picture the outcry which would have been raised if one stone of the Acropolis had been injured. The landingforce advanced in the face of opposition, with the result that six Alhed officers and 126 men were killed and some 250 wounded ; but, although they were unprepared for hostilities, they inflicted over 200 casualties upon the Greeks. The fighting continued until communication was established with the fleet and some shells were fired which fell not far from the Royal Palace. On orders being given to cease fire, the French Admiral, who was at the Zappeion, had no alternative but to consent to w LJ 1 f opening of negotiations between the Allied
h^AU^d ^ naval and diplomatic authorities and the Greek j ^ Government. Eventually the humiliating cometac ments. promise was arranged that the Greeks should
hand over only six batteries and that the Alhes should make no further demands for material. The survivors of the landing-force accompanied by the Control Officers and the
party is
treacherously
attacked.


120 The Events of ist and 2nd December igi6 in Athens
detachments from Athens were escorted back to the quays by Greek troops, leaving behind their dead unburied and their wounded untended. It is difficult to find any excuse for Admiral du Foumet’s failure to estimate the position of affairs in Athens and make preparations, if he was determined on a display of force, for any emergencies which might conceivably arise. Not only were the AUies grievously humiHated but Athens was immediately deUvered up to a reign of terror. The houses of all those who were known to entertain y . f. . Vemzelist opmions had been marked down
Athens ^ beforehand, and on the 2nd of December there began a systematic hunting down of aU those Venizehsts who had not already fled. The offices of the Liberal papers were wrecked and their machinery destroyed. Many Venizehsts were killed in cold blood and others thrown without trial into prison. The details of these atrocities had obviously been arranged beforehand, and it was annoimced by way of justification that an anti-RoyaUst plot had been discovered. The Royalist press burst into hymns of triumph for the victory of the Greek Army over its oppressors and the delivery of Greece from the yoke of foreign tyranny. The Minister for War, voicing the sentiments of the King, in an order of the day con¬ gratulated the troops on their exemplary conduct and selfsacrifice, which had saved Greece from enemies who hoped to overthrow the dynasty. ‘ Our enemies ’, he added, ‘ must realize that such troops are invincible.’ The Government decreed a solemn Te Deum in honour of the victory of the Greek arms and a service of anathema against M. Venizelos. It is interesting to read Queen Sophia’s account of these
The Oueen< ^ ^ telegram to the Kaiser, afterwards
tekg^m tc the ^ and deciphered : Kaiser. ^ miracle we are safe after a bom¬ bardment of the Palace for three hours by the French fleet, which fired without warning. The shells burst quite near, and we took refuge in the cellars. Violent encounters took place the following day in the streets. The revolutionaries fired from the houses. The army and the people fought magnificently and remained faithful. The tables are now turned. It was a great victory over the four Great Powers, whose troops fled before the Greeks


The Events of 1st and 2nd December igi6 in Athens 121
and afterwards withdrew under the escort of Greek troops. . . . The panic has now subsided. . . . What will be the demands of the Entente ? We are prepared for anything. . . . Please let me know when the Macedonian Army will be sufficiently enforced to begin a definite offensive.’
The effect produced by the events at Athens in the countries of the Entente was one of indignation against the muddling and incapacity which had made such a state of affairs possible, and encouragement was given to the opinion which regarded any form of intervention in the Balkans as a useless dissipa¬ tion of energy, since it had brought no military advantage and was merely lowering the prestige of the Entente in the Near East. At Salonica the events of ist and 2nd December led to a substantial change in the direction of the Revolution. It was no longer possible to recognize a king who had aspired to become a party leader. A definitely anti-dynastic character was therefore given to the Revolu¬ tion by the official declaration of the Provisional Government that every bond with the King of the Hellenes was hence¬ forward severed. Before the end of December the British and French Governments, by the appointments of Lord Granville and M. de Billy as their diplomatic representatives at Salonica, had given a definitely official recognition to the Government of
M. Venizelos.
Effect ofthe
events of 1st to
2nd Dec. in the
Entente countries.
The Revolution
assumes an
anti-dynastic
character.


CHAPTER XIV
GREECE IN DISUNION
IN spite of his ‘ victory ’ over the Entente, the position of King Constantine was a difficult one. He must have been aware that
The position of events of ist and 2nd December would KingCmsMint '”*’8. own retribution and that there was rflcrlheevemsof J “TM“o 'he pauence even of the Alhed Powers. ,.a His sole hope of salvation was to play for time and try to keep his throne until the Central Powers could begin the hoped-for offensive on the Macedonian front which was to drive General Sarrad and his army into the sea.
The compromise between the French Admiral and the Greek Government had been made without consultation with
Want ofaoree- Entente Governments and obviously did ment among the bind them The French Government immediately made a proposal to the other Allies, the nature of which has not been disclosed, but which apparently failed to obtain the consent of all of them. Its suggestions were probably regarded as too radical by Italy and Russia. By 7th December, however.
The blockade of Sufficient agreement had been reached to enable Old Greece. ^ blockade of Old Greece to be declared. Meanwhile the persecution of Venizehsts continued, and the pro-German press did not cease to celebrate the victory of the Greek Government and to vilify Great Britain and France. On 14th December a
Entente Note of delivered to the Athens 14th Dec. Government demanding reparation for the outrages of ist and 2nd December and the transfer of the Greek Army under Allied control to the
Peloponnese. The Government promised to carry out these demands but asked that the decision to blockade Greece should be reconsidered, at the same time assuring the Allies of the sincere
122


Greece in Disunion 123
desire of the Greek Government and people for the restoration of the traditional friendship and good relations between Greece
and the Protecting Powers. As no real attempt was being made to comply with the requirements of the AUies, a further Note was delivered on „ -- ^ 31st December demanding the reduction of the nten^ ote of the bare number necessary for
the maintenance of public order, the transfer of all war-material to the Pelopormese, the prohibition of meetings of ‘ Reservists the re-estabhshment of Alhed controls, the release of poHtical prisoners and the indemnification of the victims of the outrages, the permission for the Allies to use Itea on the Corinthian Gulf as a base and the Larissa-Salonica railway for the conveyance of troops, and, lastly, the holding of a pubhc ceremony at which the Allied flags should be saluted in apology for the incidents of ist and 2nd December. These measures, if they had been carried out in their entirety, would have done much to remedy a difficult situation ; but the Allies at the same time made a concession to the King which encouraged him to believe that they would never take extreme measures against him and his Government. They undertook not to permit the armed forces of the Provisional Government at Salonica to profit by the with¬ drawal of troops from Epirus and Thessaly and cross the Neutral Zone. This showed that they could not make up their mind even yet definitely to throw Constantine over and give M.
Venizelos their whole-hearted support. On 8th January 1917 a Conference of the AUies at Rome discussed the Greek Question and reaffirmed the Note of 31st December, fixing a time hmit of fifteen days Conference at execution. They again spoilt the effect
Rome, 8th pretence of severity by reiterating their Jan. 1917. intention not to aUow any extension of the
sphere of the Provisional Government. On i6th January the Greek Government accepted the conditions of the Note and formaUy apologized for the ‘ regrettable incidents ’ of ist and
2nd December. On 29th January 1917 a solemn parade was held, at which detachments of the Greek Navy and Army, which included Prince Andrew, the King’s brother, saluted the colours of the
Allies.


124 Greece in Disunion
The Athens Government had thus nominally given in to the demands of the Allies ; but actually the position was httle
Evasion of the changed. Some show was made of transferring , /-V troops and material to the Peloponnese, but
terms of the , ^ ^ .t' > Entente Note quantities or arms were bemg secreted instead of transferred, and the soldiers soon began to return from the Peloponnese, either one by one as civilians, or, still in uniform, on die pretence of leave. The movements of the ‘ Reservists ’ were less conspicuous in Athens, but their activities had been merely transferred to the provinces. The anti-Venizehst outrages abated somewhat, chiefly from lack of victims. The Government employed every possible subterfuge to prevent the meeting of the Alixed Tribunal which was to deal with the indemnification of persecuted Venizelists, many of whom remained in prison. The Press continued to use un¬ measured language against the Allies, in particular alleging that the blockade, which was already entailing some hardship, was being continued in spite of the fact that the conditions imposed had been carried out by Greece. Meanwhile the Allied Ministers, who had taken refuge on men-of-war, were still unable to return to the Legations in Athens.
Though the King was loud in his protestations that his sole object was to observe an attitude of strict neutrality, intrigues
Royalist against the Alhes were as active as ever ; in particular, irregular bands were formed in Epirus and Thessaly to harass the rear of the Allied Army in Macedonia. The extent of intrigues with Germany at this period was not fully recognized at the time, but have been made clear by subsequent revelations. W^hether the Kaiser and the German Higher Command ever really intended to make an attempt to effect a junction between the German and Bulgarian forces and the Greek Army is doubt¬ ful ; but it appears certain that the King at one time believed in his brother-in-law s promises. The telegraphic correspondence in code between the Greek Court and Berlin at the end of 1916 and the beginning of 1917 has been published and gives a vivid picture of the hopes and fears and final disillusionment of the King and his Consort.
Meanwhile the patience of the public in the Entente countries was becoming exhausted, and protests against the policy of
intrigues with
Germany.


Greece in Disunion
Growth of the
National
Movement at
Salonica.
125
inactivity in Greece began to find voice in the British and
nff c 1 French press. In March 1917 two events M^ct oj po itca which affected the attitude of the
canges mte Entente towards the Greek problem—the fall ntente countries. Briand cabinet, which had supported King
Constantine, and the Russian Revolution involving the deposition of Nicholas II, who, closely related to the Greek Royal house, had been a powerful prop of the Royahst Party in Greece. The attitude of Italy was also modified after the Conference of St. Jean de Maurienne on 29th April, which gave Italy a wider liberty of action on the Adriatic sea-board and made her more ready to consent to drastic measures in Greece. During the spring of 1917 the National Movement at Salonica, in spite of obstacles placed in the way of its expansion by the Allies, continued to grow, Corfu, Cephalonia, Zante, Cythera, and Sciathos all declaring for M. Venizelos. Further, almost all the diplomatic and consular representatives of Greece in foreign countries proclaimed their
adherence to the Provisional Government. The Hellenic com¬ munities, too, outside Greece had almost without exception supported M. Venizelos from the first, and their representatives, meeting in a Congress at Paris on ist May, officially repudiated their allegiance to King Constantine. The National Army at Salonica was continually strengthened by the arrival of officers and men from the Islands, from Old Greece and from foreign countries, until by the end of May 60,000 men had been en¬ rolled to fight with the Allies in Macedonia. Even in Athens the Liberal Party was beginning to raise its head, and by the end of March two of their daily papers had begun to appear again,
to be followed by two more in April. On 6th May a great demonstration was held at the White Tower in Salonica, at which resolutions were passed repudiating King Constantine and his dynasty and calling on the Allied
Powers to cease to recognize the Athens Government. In the second half of April considerable anxiety began to be displayed in the Royalist press at Athens, especially when it became clear that the result of the Conference of St. Jean de Maurienne would be a severer attitude towards Greece. The Lambros Government had now had three full months to carry


126 Greece in Disunion
out the terms of the Allied Note but had resorted to so many
, evasions that the Entente had been unable to put ^ rowing appre ^ blockade. On 22nd April M.
Lambros resigned, and the King accepted his resignation, hoping by a change of Ministers to
avert or postpone the crisis which was threatening. At the end of April a rumour was spread abroad that King Constantine intended to abdicate in favour of the Crown Prince, but the suggestion recommended itself neither to the Alhed Powers nor
to the Liberal Party. After much hesitation, the inevitable M. Zaimis was induced again to form a Cabinet, the composition ofwhich was announced . , on 3rd May. He himself assumed the portfolio
amts e Affairs. His return to power failed
comes Premier. . , . ■ ^ -n ■ ■ 1
to excite any enthusiasm m Great Britain and France, where the Press continued to attack the regime and demanded that definite measures should be taken. M. Zaimis’ statement on assuming office that he took full hberty of action and responsibility for his policy was widely commented on as a confession that the Lambros Cabinet had not enjoyed freedom of action and was merely a tool in the hands of the pro-German chque. He publicly announced that the task before his Government was to overcome the difficulties existing between Greece and the Entente and that he and his colleagues undertook, as successors to the Lambros Government, to fulfil the obhgations imposed by the Allied Note. The effect of this declaration was somewhat marred by the discovery a few days later of large quantities of hidden arms. However, a decree was published removing from the Army several officers who had made themselves conspicuous for their violent proGerman opinions ; and the new Minister of War issued an order to the troops urging them to devote themselves to their mUitary duties and to leave politics alone. At the same time General Moskopoulos, who had gained credit for his correct attitude towards the Allies as Commander of the Salonica Army Corps in 1915 and who was now Chief of the General Staff, was commissioned to carry out an inquiry into the alleged presence of irregular bands on the Neutral Zone, the Govern¬ ment undertaking to punish severely any persons involved in
Attempts of
M. Zaimis to
improve the
situation.


Greece in Disunion 127
such activities. M. Zaimis, in reply to a protest from the AlHed Ministers, also promised to take stern measures against any newspapers which used insulting language towards the Allies. By the beginning of June, in spite of the assurances of the Press that the position was improving and that the Government
-7 - • . was making every effort to estabhsh better .,1 relations with the Entente, M. Zaimis after a month or office had tailed to brmg about any improvement in the situation. The Entente Powers maintained an attitude of reserve and instructed their representatives at Athens to avoid the discussion of any questions of pohcy with the Government. The position of affairs was not improved by the attempted murder of two British naval officers at Phaleron. The truth seems to be that there were secret forces at work which were too strong for M. Zaimis and which thwarted his attempts to satisfy the AUies. The activities of the pro-German clique were in fact so notorious as to excite the indignation even of a section of the Royahst press, particularly the Athenai, which pubhshed on 2nd June an article accusing M. Gounaris of attempt¬ ing to force a rupture of diplomatic relations between Greece and the Alhes. Meanwhile the Press in the Entente countries continued to urge that strong measures should be taken in Greece and, in particular, that the Thessahan crops should be seized to feed the Alhed Army ; in its desire to concihate the Entente, the Government let it be known that Greece was willing to concede half the crop to the Allies. But by this time decisions had already been taken by the British and French Govern¬ ments which were destined at last to bring about a radical solution of the Greek question.
The Entente
decides to take
action.


CHAPTER XV
THE TRIUMPH OF M. VENIZELOS AND THE ALLIED VICTORY IN MACEDONIA
ON 6th June 1917 it was noticed that a powerful Allied fleet had arrived and was anchored off Keratsini. On board one of
rpt ’If vessels was M, Charles Jonnart, formerly
M ^Jonnart Governor-General of Algeria, who had arrived ' as High Commissioner of the Protecting Powers and who immediately left for Salonica to confer with M.Venizelos and General Sarrail.
On loth June M. Jonnart returned to Athens and, at an interview with M. Zaimis, announced that the Protecting Powers -fu j -f- demanded the abdication of King Constantine,
ofKina^^' on the ground that he had violated his oath to
Constantine ^ constitutional monarch. The King accepted the situation, and on the next day the High Commissioner was informed that, ‘ soheitous as ever of the interests of Greece ’, King Constantine had decided to quit the country, accompanied by the Crown Prince, and had de¬ signated Prince Alexander as his successor. The King then withdrew to his country house at Tatoi. It is noteworthy that he did not officially abdicate, no doubt in the hope that in event of a German victory, for which he still hoped, he would return in triumph to Athens.
Prince Alexander, Constantine’s second son, who thus ascended the throne, was in his twenty-fourth year. He held
The Accession of ^ <^0”'”^ssion as Captain of Artillery, and httle
Kins Alexander. him outside Court and military circles. He immediately took the customary oath in the presence of the Ministers and the members of the Holy Synod. His first pubhc utterance, in which, after expressing his grief at his separation from his beloved father, he stated his determination to ‘ follow the lines of his brilhant reign ’ created a somewhat unfavourable impression, until it was explained that
128


of King
Constantine.
The Allied Victory in Macedonia 129
these words referred to the successes of the Balkan Wars rather than to the recent activities of King Constantine. A few days later the King addressed a letter to M. Zainiis stating that he was watching with interest the steps which were being taken to re-unite Greece, that it was his intention faithfully to observe the Constitution, and that he was persuaded of the benevolent intentions of the Entente. On 13 th June Constantine quitted Greek soil without return¬ ing to Athens, embarking on the Royal Yacht on the east coast
The de a t Attica. He is said to have refused to travel nf vuu, Alhed warship, remarking, ‘ I am not King Otho ’. According to an account in the paper Nea Imera, at the moment of the departure of the yacht an eagle—we are not told whether it was of the Byzantine or Prussian variety—appeared on the horizon and flew towards the vessel, which it accompanied on its journey ! Con¬ voyed by an Allied destroyer the yacht set sail for Italy by way of the Corinth Canal, and Constantine betook himself to Switzerland. On i6th June M. Jonnart issued a proclamation to the Greek people, in which he stated that the Protecting Powers would
„ , . r labour for the independence, the greatness, and
Proclamatton of -i ■ r ^ jc ji
M Jo nart prosperity or Greece and her dehverance ' from her hereditary enemies; they would re-estabhsh Constitutional Government and the vmity of the nation. At the same time an Alhed force crossed the Neutral Zone and occupied Thessaly, thus securing the Thessahan crops and putting an end to the activities of the Royalist comitadjis.^ In Athens, though there were rumours of intended action by the * Reservists ’, there was no serious disturbance of the peace, .If and the general attitude was one of reUef at the , ^ V ending of the blockade. The tame surrender of t e ree peop e. could not but discourage his active
supporters, who realized that their wisest poUcy was to make themselves as inconspicuous as possible. In a very short time hfe at Athens had become norm^, but there remained an under¬ current of discontent—which was destined to break out in the
^ The comment of the German wireless is worth quoting : ‘ For the first time the Entente has carried through with complete success a joint mihtary action. This success has been won at the expense of an army which had previously been disarmed and a people who had been starved.’


130 The Triumph of M. Venizelos
years to come—chiefly among the dispossessed civil servants and cashiered officers of the old regime, who refused to accept the new order of things, and whose sense of grievance was exploited by propaganda from the exile in Switzerland. The Alhes now turned to M. Venizelos as the only man able to deal with the situation. On 19th June a committee was , ... formed, consisting of two members each of the
M Provisional and the Athens Governments to to . emze os. on the measures to be taken to
unite Greece. M. Venizelos made it clear from the first that he would insist on the recall of the Chamber elected in June I9I5> which had been unconstitutionally dissolved, and the recognition as vahd of the Acts of the Provisional Government. On 25th June M. Zaimis resigned, and two days later M. Venizelos reached Athens and became Prime Minister. On 27th June the new ministry, which was substantially the same as the Provisional Government, proceeded to the Palace and were sworn in. On the same day the new Prime Minister was the object of an enthusiastic demonstration by a vast crowd. The next day two Cretan regiments, which had been fighting on the Macedonian front with the Alhes, arrived in Athens and halted in front of M. Venizelos’ hotel and were addressed by him from the balcony. The new Cabinet now set itself to reconstruct completely the pohtical hfe of the country. The chief members of the
, , , r pro-German chque, Dousmanis, Metaxas, Streit,
The task vefore ^ ^ .1
the n w others, were already on their way to exile
^ in Corsica ; the ministers who had been their
Government. , 1 j- j t i_
puppets, such as bkouloudis and Lambros, were placed under supervision. The Ministries of War and the Navy took in hand the reorganization of the army and fleet. The Treasury was found to contain only 300,000 drachmas and funds had to be hurriedly fetched from Salonica to carry on the administration. On 5th July General Sarrail arrived, and the French National Fete was celebrated by a review of detachments by the AUied and National armies. On 4th August the King took the oath before the Chamber. On 8th August the Minister of Finance revealed the
The New
Cabinet.
King Akxander
takes the oath.


and the Allied Victory in Macedonia 131
fact that the previous Cabinets had received loans from Germany amounting to 120,000,000 drachmas and that the second instal¬ ment was paid at the time of the surrender of the Rupel Fort.
Two days later the Chamber met to discuss the reply to the King’s speech, and M. Venizelos uttered an eloquent defence of
M. Venizelos policy from 1912 to 1917 and a vigorous jj .. indictment of his opponents in a speech which
Chamber lasted, with the interval of an hour, from 5.30 p.m. to 3 a.m. on the following day. He said that the worst fears which he felt when he left office in 1915 had been realized ; Greece’s ally Serbia had been overwhelmed, the national economic system of Greece was in ruins, and the army in a state of dissolution, but he was optimistic for the future, since the nation, he was convinced, still possessed sufficient vitality to achieve its own salvation. ‘ In taking part ’, he said, ‘ in the world-wide war at the side of the democratic nations, who have been brought together in a common cause, in a truly Holy Alliance, to combat the claims to the empire of the world made by Germany assisted by our two hereditary enemies, we shall re-estabhsh our honour as a nation. We shall not only effectively defend our national interests at the Peace Conference and secure our national future, but we shall also win a place among the family of free nations which that Congress will organize, and hand down to our children a Greece such as generations past have dreamed of, a Greece such as we ourselves foreshadowed in our recent victories of 1912 and
1913-’
The President of the Chamber then put a resolution which
Vote of con constituted a plenary vote of confidence in the ri . I Government. Out of the 198 deputies present jience in e voted in favour of the resolution, the ten
ministers abstaining from voting. Thus the final seal was set on the reunion of Greece.
In November M. Venizelos visited Paris and London, v/here
he received an enthusiastic welcome and was
M. Venizelos in jiiriix tt 1
Paris and entertained by the Lord Mayor. He secured
_ j the re-provisionment of Greece both in food
Lonaon. rr i ■ 1 • • r
stuns and m equipment and munitions of war for the Greek Army.


132 The Triumph of M. Venizelos
The military
situation in
Macedonia in
1917.
From a military point of view the year 1917 was the least fruitful of the three years during which the Allied Army operated in Macedonia. An offensive in April against formidable enemy positions in the Doiran sector, after meeting with initial success, achieved no result. In June the Allies, as we have already seen, advanced south¬ wards and occupied Thessaly. A move was also made by the j f f . Itahans, who had previously established a
f ^ continuous hne from the left of the French
the independence tt- • 1 ah ■ r-rr 1
f Alh ' Koritza to the Albanian port of Valona on oj ama. Adriatic. On 3rd June Italy proclaimed
the independence of Albania under her protectorate, and advanc¬ ing into Greek Epirus occupied Jannina, on the pretext that the Greeks of that region were hostile to the Entente, and deposed
Tmsion between "“*orities. This action produced Greece a d It I considerable tension between Greece and Italy ; but with the accession of M. Venizelos to power the situation improved, and the Allied Conference held in Paris in July arranged that Italy should evacuate Greek Epirus but continue to occupy Northern Epirus for military reasons. In the autumn of 1918 the long-delayed offensive on the Macedonian Front began under General Franchet d’Esperey,
The Greeks rein- commanded the Armce de T Orient. fnrrp thp A]Up< Critical situation on the Western Front had prevented the dispatch of reinforcements ; in fact, troops had even been withdrawn from Macedonia and sent to France. But Greece was now in a position to supply the necessary effectives. Three divisions, mostly of volunteers, had been formed under the Provisional Government before the reunion of Greece ; by the middle of 1918 ten divisions were ready in Macedonia, amounting to at least 250,000 men with ample reserves.
On 30th May Greek forces had gone into action for the first time and had won a notable success by the capture of Srka di Legen
Greek victory at Vardar, where they took 1500 prisoners. SrkadiLeoen. general offensive the Greek Divisions were posted to various points on the front; one at Fiorina, one on the River Tcherna, five with the British in the Doiran sector, and the rest holding the line of the Struma.


and the Allied Victory in Macedonia 133
The offensive opened on 15th September 1918. The spear¬ head of the attack was formed by the Serbian Army and a
French Division, who assaulted an almost im¬ pregnable position at Dobropolji. The attack met with immediate success and resulted in a complete break-through, and in a few days a lightning advance separated the enemy forces in the Vardar Valley from those in the Monastic area. On
The general
offensive on the
Macedonian
Front.
POSITIONS OF THE GREEK DIVISIONS BEFORE THE FINAL OFFENSIVE ON THE MACEDONIAN FRONT (SEPT. 1918).
18th September the British and Greek divisions began an offensive on the Doiran front and, after stubborn fighting, captured the strongly fortified lines which had defied attack for so long. On 21 St September the French, Greek, and Italian troops in the Monastir region began their advance, and on the following
Allied victor German and Bulgarian Army was in full retreat and continued to retire until, on 26th September, the enemy asked for a suspension of hostihties, which were brought to an end on 30th September after only a fortnight’s fighting.
Thus the first knock-out blow was dehvered against the 10


134 The Triumph of M. Venizelos, etc.
Central Powers, and the much-maligned Salonica Army—it
The Greek even been described as ‘ an Anglo-French
. Internment Camp ’—had at last justified its
contribution to . , j r l l •
the ictor existence and made the iirst breach m the t e victory. encircling ring of enemy fronts. It was the
presence of the Greek Army that made this victory possible, and their feUow-alhes were not slow to acknowledge the help which they had received. General Milne, in an Order of the Day addressed to the Greek Divisions under his command, wrote : ‘ On this the first occasion on which Greek troops have fought by the side of the British, I wish to express to you my admiration for the way in which you have fulfilled the mission entrusted to you. You have attacked with incomparable dash naturally strong positions rendered almost impregnable by a stubborn enemy.’ The French Commander-in-Chief picked out for special praise ‘ the brilliant aptitude displayed by the Greeks for mountain warfare ’. M. Venizelos addressed a message to the Greek Army which contained the followmg words : ‘ The Government desires to congratulate the National Army and to express the gratitude of the nation for the work which it has accompUshed. Reconstituted in the midst of so many difficulties, the National Army both from Old and from New Greece has succeeded, fighting by the side of the Allied Armies, in re-estabhshing not only the miUtary prestige but the honour of the country as well.’ The co-operation of the British and Greeks in Macedonia gave rise to a spirit of comradeship which was destined to be renewed on another battlefield. The military consequences of the victory were decisive. Turkey was cut off from the Central Powers, and the Austro
Militarv conse- threatened with attack from the auenceiofthe south-east, faced Italy with growing apprevictory ^ hension on the Piave. Von Hindenburg ad¬ mitted that the collapse in Macedonia was one of the causes that excluded all hope of forcing the Entente to make
peace. It was not long before an armistice was concluded with Turkey (30th October) and on the Western Front (nth Novem¬ ber). Greek men-of-war and troops took part in the entry of the Allied fleet and army into Constantinople.


PART III
GREECE FROM 1918 TO 1957
CHAPTER XVI
THE PEACE CONFERENCE (1919-21)
IN January 1919 the Peace Conference opened in Paris. The
Greek delegation was headed by M. Vcnizclos, who soon
M Vemzelos became a prominent figure and impressed all
at the Peace whom he met with his statesmanlike Conference qualities and his skill in presenting the case for his country. The claims of Greece were ex¬
tensive, Thrace, Northern Epirus, Smyrna and the adjoining
coast of Asia Minor, and the Dodecanese. But there were
claims prior to those of Greece to be considered, and the future
of Greece remained for the time undecided. Meanwhile
Greek troops had taken part in the ill-starred expedition to
South Russia against the Bolsheviks, where heavy losses were suffered.
In May 1919, however, the Greek Government was granted
permission to occupy Smyrna. Unfortunately disturbances
Creek occupation "°T’
and severe sentences were passed on those who
had been responsible, Greeks as well as Turks
and Armenians. A Greek administration was before long
established under a High Commissioner, and by the end of the year British residents in Smyrna were able to report that the Greek authorities were carrying out their difficult task with strict justice towards the different elements in the population.
Meanwhile divergences had arisen between the British and
French about the policy to be pursued regarding Turkey. The
The T at of cause, hov.^ever, found an ardent supporter
Shres ^ ^ ^loyd George, and at the Conference at Spa (nth May 1920) Greece was granted a
mandate to occupy both Thrace and the north-western area of
135


Hellenism in
Asia Minor.
136 The Peace Conference {i^ig-21)
Asia Minor as well as the Smyrna district. The successful execution of this mandate by the Greeks created so favourable an impression that, by the Treaty of Sevres^ (loth August 1920), the whole of Thrace including Gallipoli, the .^gean Islands already in Greek hands, and the Smyrna district were assigned to Greece. The occupation of Smyrna was, however, limited by the proviso that the sovereignty remained nominally Turkish, but a local assembly was set up, which might apply for the definite incorporation of the district in the Greek kingdom at the end of five years. The Islands of the Dodecanese were assigned to Italy, but a convention, signed at the same time by Italy and Greece, but never put into operation, transferred them to the latter country. In undertaking the occupation of the Smyrna district M. Venizelos was facing a hazardous enterprise, particularly in view of the growing power of the Nationalist Movement in Turkey under Mustapha Kemal Pasha. But the Greek statesman saw that, if he was to rescue the large Greek population in Asia Minor, now or never was the moment to act before Hellenism in the Turkish Empire was extinguished. If the Smyrna district could be secured by Greece, it would constitute a place of refuge where the Asiatic Greeks might find a home. On I2th August 1920, when M. Venizelos was on the point of . I leaving Paris for Greece, an attempt was made . f on his hfe by two Royalist ex-officers of the
assassination of \ ,
T/ • 1 Greek Navy. His wounds were not serious and
iW y €tttZ€lOS ^
he was able shortly to return to Greece. During his absence all had not been going well with the Government. Absorbed in the task of securing the rights of his country, he had been unable to keep a controlling hand on home affairs. His deputy, M. Repoulis, lacked the necessary firmness and decision, and he was unfortunate in some of his subordinates, who used their authority in an arbitrary manner. The discontented elements in the state profited by the absence of the Prime Minister, and Royahst propaganda was active. M. Venizelos on his return brought before the Chamber the Treaties with Bulgaria, Turkey, and Italy, and received the
^ Though this Treaty was signed, it was never ratified by the Allies, and so never became operative.


The Peace Conference {igig-21)
M. Venizelos
returns to Athens.
137
thanks of the House. He had indeed deserved well of his country. By the decisions of the Peace Con¬ ference Greece had obtained territories which she had long coveted. She had become the pre¬ dominant Power in the JEgean, and her domains extended from the Adriatic to the Black Sea. The ideal of a Great Greece seemed at last to have become a reahty. At the same meeting of the Chamber it was announced that a dissolution would take place and elections would be held in the autumn, and that all restrictions on civil hberty would be abohshed.
On 25th October a new factor was introduced into the situation by the death of King Alexander, who died of blood
poisoning as a result of the bite of a pet monkey.
Death of Kino , • r 1 i
j ^ The dinicult question or the succession to the throne was thus raised, and in the mterim Admiral Koundouriotis was chosen to act as Regent. The Crown was offered to Prince Paul, Constantine’s third son, but refused on the ground that his father and eldest brother had never renounced their rights to the throne. It thus became clear that the main issue of the coming elections would be the question of King Constantine’s return—‘ Constantine versus Venizelos ’. The elections took place on 14th November 1920. To the surprise even of the Royahsts, out of 370 members only 120
f Liberals were returned, and, though they still
The Elections of 111 -i i ij
Nov 1 20 constituted the largest smgle party, they had ov. 1920. acknowledge defeat. M. Venizelos resigned
and left the country. It is difficult to account for the rejection of one who had been the saviour of his country and had so greatly enlarged
Defeat of bounds of the kingdom. He had no doubt TT . 1 lost authority by his long absence fighting his enize os. country’s battles at the Conference table. The
compulsory retirement of officers and officials and the suppression of administrative abuses had caused discontent, which was fostered by Royalist propaganda. Perhaps also, as the Greeks of old grew tired of hearing Aristides called ‘ the Just ’, so the ordinary Greek citizen had grown weary of the praises of which M. Venizelos was the continual object in the European press. But the chief cause of his defeat was doubtless the war-weariness


138 The Peace Conference {igig-21)
of the country whose army had been mobUized almost con¬ tinuously since the outbreak of the Balkan Wars ; it was hoped that a change of regime might result in a cessation of hostilities and the return of the soldiers to their homes. An arrangement by which soldiers on active service in Asia Minor and Thrace were enabled to record their votes gave the Army an oppor¬ tunity to express its sentiments and was no doubt prejudicial to
the Venizehst cause. On 5 th December a plebiscite was held, which overwhelmingly decided in favour of the recall of King Constantine. The
Recall of Kin Supreme AlHed Council had, on 2nd December, eca oj mg -yarned Greece in vain of the consequences onstantme. -which the return of King Constantine would
entail and refused him recognition and withdrew the financial assistance which Greece was receiving. On 19th December, however, he returned to Athens and was received with every demonstration of enthusiasm by the fickle populace. A new Cabinet was formed with M. RaUis as Prime Minister. The restoration of King Constantine failed to fulfil the hopes of those who had voted in its favour and bring peace to Greece. The estabHshment of Greek sovereignty in Asia Minor was only possible if Greece had the support of the Entente Powers. The unanimity of these Powers waned when once Treaty had been signed, and their individual interests began to emerge ; and nowhere did they diverge more than on the question of the Near East. Great Britain was averse to giving open support to the Greeks against Turkey, whose ruler was Cahph of Islam, for fear of reactions upon her Musulman subjects in India and elsewhere ; France, in her anxiety about Cihcia, was desirous of keeping on good terms with Turkey ; Italy, who had been promised the reversion of territory in Asia Minor, had always been opposed to the growth of Greek influence in the Levant. Meanwhile the power of Mustapha Kemal was continually increasing and had enabled him to estabhsh a ‘ Nationalist ’ ^ ^ . Parliament at Ankara independent of the Con
of Tu k stantmople Government and to challenge the provisions of the Treaty of Sevres. Greece would obviously need a powerful army to hold the frontier of
The attitude of
the Entente
Powers.
the Versailles


The Peace Conference {igig-21) 139
the territory allotted to her in Asia Minor ; on the other hand, to withdraw was difficult and would expose the large Greek population in Asia Minor to the vengeance of the Turks, besides involving the abandonment of the idea of a ‘ Greater Greece.’ In February 1921 a Conference was held in London, which was attended by a delegation from Greece, headed by M. Kalo
The Co fere ce had recently succeeded M. Ralhs
f xf r- . as Premier, and two Turkish delegations, one
on the Near East c ^ • 1 1 r ° a 1
. j , from Constantinople and one from Ankara. in on on. recognition of Mustapha Kemal’s Govern¬
ment added enormously to his prestige, especially as the Con¬ stantinople delegates left the presentation of the Turkish case entirely in his hands. The French and Italian representatives made no secret of their pro-Turkish leanings. A proposal to send out an Inter-Allied Commission to examine the problems of Thrace and Smyrna on the spot was rejected by the Greeks ; and an elaborate compromise, by which Turkey was to retain the sovereignty over the Vilayet of Smyrna, while the city was to be garrisoned by Greek troops and a Christian Governor was to be appointed by the League of Nations, failed to recom¬ mend itself to either of the rival claimants. The representative, however, of the Greek General Staff expressed the opinion that the Greeks would be able to establish themselves in Asia Minor within three months and persuaded Mr. Lloyd George as well as the Greek delegation to take his view. But the encouragement of the British Prime Minister was not destined to be implemented in the form of active assistance, and the Greeks were unwise in taking it to mean more than it was ever
meant to imply. The new Chamber, which held its first meetings in February 1921, consisted chiefly of members of various parties who were . , , united only in their hatred for M. Venizelos.
b r declared itself a National Constitutional
21 Assembly and spent its time discussing a variety e . 1921. q^g5^.jQJ^5 connected with changes in the
administration and in passing measures for the indemnification of those who claimed to have suffered for their pohtical views under the Venizelist regime. They voted large increases in the King’s Civil List and passed a measure substituting the ‘ popular ’ language in the schools for the more ‘ classical ’ form of Greek


140 The Peace Conference {igig-21)
which had been favoured by M. Venizelos. The Greek Treasury was in no condition to support the expense of a war, and the depreciation of the drachma and the consequent rise in the cost of living was beginning to cause distress and discontent. How- ever, the celebration of the Centenary of the
of Greek Declaration of Greek Independence on 7th April j , , reminded the Greeks of their success against the n epen ettce. Turks a hundred years before, and no doubt
had a cheering effect. More men were continually called up until there were over 300,000 men serving under the colours.


CHAPTER XVII
THE GREEK CAMPAIGN IN ASIA MINOR AND ITS CONSEQUENCES (1921-2)
OPERATIONS in Asia Minor began at the end of March 1921. The Greek General Staff (who seem to have had no idea of the rr, . r growing strength of the Turkish National Move, ment and the support which it was receivmg
. . from other countries) were convinced that
Asia Minor. . • 1 1 ^ 11
victory was certain and that Greece would receive a vast extension of territory. The dream of Constanti¬ nople again in Greek hands was at last to come true, and Con¬ stantine was hailed in the Royahst press as destined to be crowned Emperor in Santa Sophia. But the enterprise was doomed from the first. The army was ill-equipped^ and lacking in munitions, and there were no
_ ... y , funds in the Treasury to remedy diese defici
Condition of the . rni r nr ^
Greek Arm encies. The Corps or officers was rent by political differences ; many of those who had led the Greek divisions to victory on the Macedonian front had been superseded by the appointment of Royalist sympathizers, who had taken no part in the operations of 1918 and had had no training in the latest developments of warfare. So many adherents of the Government in power had received promotion that there were more generals and colonels than posts for them to fill. In these conditions the Army required an experienced Commander-in-Chief who could enforce an iron discipline and stand up against the pressure exerted by the politicians. General Papoulas, who received the appointment, was singularly lacking in these qualifications, his chief claim to command being that he had suffered for his loyalty to King Constantine in his exile. He proved incompetent and was continually at loggerheads with
the General Staff.
^ For example, the Twelfth Division, commanded by Prince Andrew of Greece, possessed no engineering material, no wireless outfit, and only two
batteries of 6'S guns. 141


142 The Greek Campaign in Asia Minor
At first the Greek Army made appreciable progress in its advance into Asia Minor. There was as yet no considerable
j . , Turkish force to oppose it but merely bands of
The advance mto . , , , -n r •
Asia Minor irregulars who carried on guerrilla warfare, m which every httle success gained by the Greeks was hailed as a briUiant victory. The important railway-junc¬ tions, however, of Afium Karahissar and Eski Shehr were captured, but the Greeks sustained a serious reverse to the north¬ west of the latter town on 2nd April and were compelled to retreat. On nth June King Constantine left Athens for Smyrna with M. Gounaris, who had become Prime Minister in April, M.
p . Theotokis, Minister of War, and General
leaves foTthe Dousmanis representing the General Staff. The , / last-named urged that the King should assume the supreme command of the Army, but this was opposed by the politicians, with the result that the King held aloof from the direction of affairs.
In June the Greek Army was concentrated in two groups, a smaller body at Brousa and the main body near Ushak. Not
Attitude of the groups widely separated Entente Powers. pother but the main body was served by a single railway-line from Smyrna which passed through enemy country and required a large detachment of troops to guard it. During the same month the British, French, and Italian Governments, who in May had proclaimed a state of neutrality towards both the Greeks and the Turks in the zone which they occupied in the area adjoining the Dardanelles and the Sea of Marmara, volunteered their services to negotiate peace between the belligerents, but the Greeks rejected their offer. A fresh offensive opened on 15 th June and resulted in the recapture of Afium Karahissar and Eski Shehr and an advance
The offensive of to Sivri Hissar, which
June 1921. Ankara, the seat of the Turkish NationaHst Government. The Greek G.H.Q. seems to have thought that the Turkish with¬ drawal was a rout, but, in fact, the retirement had been made in
perfect order. The Greek Commander-in-Chief is said to have wished to halt at the point which he had reached and avoid further risk, but the Prime Minister and Minister for War urged that Ankara must be captured and the enemy defeated.


and its Consequences (1^21-2) 143
The country over which the Greeks had now to advance was a more or less desert and waterless land mostly devoid of inhabitants—a formidable obstacle to an army almost entirely lacking in the means of com¬ munication and transport. It involved inde¬ scribable hardships and privations for the Greek Army. On the plateau of Central Asia Minor the rainy season sets in early
Difficulties of
the ground.
in the autumn and the roads, which are mere cart-tracks, soon become morasses almost impassable to heavy wheeled traffic. The enemy allowed the Greeks to advance until they reached a battle-ground of Mustapha Kemal’s own choosing—the line of the Sakharia River, where the heights on the farther bank formed an ideal position for an effective defence. On 7th August the Greek Commander-in-Chief issued orders,
in which he said : ‘ The whole army will attack so as to annihilate the principal enemy force, will pursue them until they are dis¬ persed, and will then advance to Ankara and destroy the enemy’s
stores there and the railway line ’. But fate had decided otherwise. The Greek Army was


144 The Greek Campaign in Asia Minor
exhausted by its long march through the desert; it was short
Dpfe t ftU every kind of food, except meat, which could
rL t 1 cooked for lack of fuel; petrol had run
Sakharia River. through lack of barley and forage ; the ammumtion was almost at an end and could not be replaced. The Turkish Army, on the other hand, was entrenched in a strong position not far from its base, was fighting in defence of its newly-chosen capital and was inspired with enthusiasm for the Nationahst Movement; above all its leader, Mustapha Kemal, was a bom military genius. The result was a foregone conclusiona disastrous defeat, though the Greek soldiery fought with characteristic stubbornness. The casualties were enormous, and would have been even greater if the enemy had done more to press home their advantage.
September was occupied with the retreat to the hne Eski Shehr—Afium Karahissar, and at the end of the month King
Retreat of the Constantine returned to Athens broken in Greeks. health. It remained for Greece to find a solu¬ tion for an impossible situation, the gravity of which was hidden as far as possible from the Greeks at home. The only possible course seemed to be to appeal to the Powers
Greece appeals Greece out of the impasse, and the Prime to the Powers. ^j*^|ster accompanied by M. Baltatzis, his Minister for Foreign Affairs, set out for the European capitals. In Paris there was nothing to be done, since the French had been supporting the Turks, with whom on
20th October they concluded the so-called ‘ Franklin-Bouillon Agreement ’, under which Mustapha Kemal received an ample supply of arms, munitions, and equipment. Italy was, as usual, unfriendly, and all the hopes of the Greek envoys centred on Great Britain, whose Prime Minister had given a formal blessing to their war effort. In an interview at the Foreign Office the situation was laid before Lord Curzon, and the Greek Ministers agreed to place the interests of their country in the hands of the Powers. They were told that, until a new Conference could be held, they must hold on in their present position, although winter was approaching. As the British Government could only act in concert with France, further delays ensued and new negotiations had to be begun when M. Poincare succeeded


M. Gotmaris
resigns.
and its Consequences {igzi-z) 145
M. Briand as Premier. In March 1922 the Paris Conference proposed an armistice, which Greece accepted, but Turkey insisted that this should be preceded by the evacuation of Asia Minor, and to this the Powers refused their assent. On 12th May M. Gounaris resigned and, after M. Stratos had failed to form a government, a Coalition Cabinet was arranged, which included these two ministers, under the premiership of M. Protopapadakis, who as Minister of Finance had raised a forced loan by cutting all the banknotes in half. The first act of this government was to dismiss General Papoulas and appoint in his place the perhaps even more incompetent General Hadjanestis. In July the Greek High Commissioner in Smyrna proclaimed the independence of the Smyrna Vilayet, a move which had no effect on the situation. At the end of August 1922 the Turks at last attacked and quickly occupied Afium Karahissar and, breaking through the hne of defence, drove the Greeks before them and reached Smyrna on 9th September. Amid scenes of indescribable horror the greater part of the town was sacked and burnt. Only a poor •remnant of the Greek population managed to escape. It was a sorry end to an adventure which should never have been undertaken and which Great Britain should either have discouraged or else supported with adequate aid. The Greek Government, after decreeing the demobilization of the routed Greek Army, resigned on 8 th September. Meanwhile a large body of officers, headed by Colonel Plastiras, had taken refuge in the Island of Chios off the coast of . Asia Minor, where they collected a considerable . number of men and some units of the navy. Having matured their plans, they sent aero¬ planes over to Athens, where they dropped copies of a pro¬ clamation demanding the abdication of King Constantine in favour of the Crown Prince and threatening to come to Athens
aia- ■ j with an army of 15,000 men. Though there d were troops still loyal to the Crown and ready ea oj ing fight. King Constantine, realizing that it was onstantine. moment for a fratricidal struggle when
Greece was defeated and humiliated, took what was no doubt
Defeat of the
Greeks and
destruction of
Smyrna.


146 The Greek Campaign in Asia Minor
the only possible course in the interests of the country and abdicated, leaving Greece from the same little port of Oropos as on his previous departure. He settled at Palermo in Sicily, where he died in the following January, and the Crown Prince ascended the throne as King George II. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that on this occasion King Constantine, who had had no part in the decision to make war on Turkey or in its mihtary direction, was made a scapegoat for disasters for which he was in no degree responsible. One of the first acts of the Revolutionary Committee was to invite M. Venizelos to return to Athens, but on ist November
M Venizelos declared that he had definitely retired from
, . public life, a decision which was confirmed by
decides to remain ^ , r i. 1 11 i
abroad ^ letter or 19th November ; but he consented to remain at Lausanne and plead the cause of Greece at the negotiations which were in progress there to settle the differences between Greece and Turkey. Meanwhile the Revolutionary Committee had appointed a Commission of Inquiry which was to fix the blame for the
Trial of the disasters in Asia Minor. The Commission j,.. decided that three ex-Premiers, two ex-Ministers, ex misters. Commander-in-Chief (MM.
Gounaris, Protopapadakis, Stratos, Baltatzis, Theotokis, and General Hadjanestis) should be brought to trial before a military Court Martial. On 29th October the British and Italian Ministers at Athens issued a warning that to try pohticians for their acts while in office would produce a painful impression abroad. On i2th November the Revolutionary leaders called on M. Zaimis and invited him to assume office, but he refused to do so unless the Revolutionary Committee was first dissolved. There¬ upon the Committee formed a Cabinet from among their own adherents. On 23 rd November the British Minister at Athens informed M. Politis, the Foreign Minister, that, unless the Govern¬ ment gave a favourable reply to the British representations, he had orders to break off diplomatic relations. Meanwhile at Lausanne Lord Curzon begged M. Venizelos to use his influence to stop the proceedings of the Court Martial and dispatched Commander Talbot, formerly naval attache at Athens, to inter¬ cede with the Government.
The trial, which had dragged on for a fortnight, was brought


and its Consequences {1^21-2) 147
to an end on 28 th November, when all the accused were sentenced
Verdict and immediate execution. M. Gounaris, who was seriously iU and had never appeared in court to
px-mnUtPr^ dragged from his bed, and all the unfortunate victims were taken in lorries outside the city and shot. They refused to have their eyes bandaged and remained cool and collected to the end. When Commander Talbot arrived in Athens, aU was over ; but he was able to save Prince Andrew of Greece, who was to have been brought to trial on the charge of disobeying orders while in command of the right wing of the army in Asia Minor, and was allowed to escort him out of the country. The awful tragedy of the executions caused a painful im¬ pression throughout the civilized world, and Great Britain
F/f ftU broke off diplomatic relations with Greece. jjec oj e There was a general feeling that, if the battle execu ions on Sakharia River had resulted in a Greek joreign opinion. murdered Ministers and the Com¬
mander-in-chief would have been hailed as national heroes. It has been urged by his critics that M. Venizelqs might have exerted his influence to prevent the executions. He certainly refused to take any steps while the trial was in progress, but on 28th November, when the verdict was made public, he telegraphed from Lausanne laying stress on the fatal effect which execution of the sentences would have in Government circles in England and on public opinion everywhere. He stated that, though he was averse to interfering in home affairs, he felt it his duty to point out that the executions would render his position as spokesman of Greece at the Lausanne negotiations extremely difficult. If M. Vcnizelos had felt in a position to make an earlier and a more vigorous protest, he might perhaps have prevented a pitiful tragedy.^
^ It may be pointed out that of the members of the Court Martial only two out of nine belonged to the VenizeUst party.
Attitude of
M. Venizelos
towards the trial.
the


CHAPTER XVIII
THE TREATY OF LAUSANNE ; AND THE FOUNDATION
OF THE REPUBLIC (1923-5)
THE Lausanne Conference dragged on until February 1923, when the Turkish delegation presented fresh demands, upon which Lord Curzon decided to return to Eng¬ land. The Greeks profited by this lull in the
The Lausanne
Conference. negotiations to send a well-organized force to Thrace under General Pangalos, which threatened Turkey on the European side of her territory and placed a valuable counter for bargaining in the hands of the Greek representatives when the negotiations were resumed on 23 rd April. The agreement was at last signed on 24th July 1923. Under the Treaty of Lausanne Greece renounced all claims to territory in Asia Minor, and the River Maritza was fixed as f , the boundary between Greece and Turkey in
Tr^t ^ Thrace instead of the Tchataldja Line, which had been laid down in the abortive Treaty of Sevres. Thus Adrianople and the Gallipoli peninsula remained in Turkish hands and the Sea of Marmara again became a Turkish lake. Turkey, therefore, thanks to her revival under Mustapha Kemal, managed to save the greater part of her European territory, although she had been on the losing side in the war, while the Greeks added the small area round Xanthe and Dedeagatch to the territory which they had gained after the Balkan Wars. The Dodecanese, which, under an agreement made between Greece and Italy at the time of the Treaty of Sevres, was to pass to Greece, was retained by Italy owing to the non-ratification of that Treaty and was soon converted into a powerful outpost of Italian influence in the Levant.
A pressing problem which faced the Government was the settlement of Greek refugees who had poured into the country from Asia Minor. It was rendered more difficult by the fact that most of those who had come were women and children or
148


II 149
THE GROWTH OF THE GREEK KINGDOM TO 1922.


150 The Treaty of Lausanne and
men above military age, the younger men having been detained
The ef Turks. At first the task of finding homes for these victims of the war was undertaken by ^ ‘ the Greek Government with the generous aid of American charity, and considerable progress was made ; later the work was, on the initiative of Dr. Nansen, taken over by a Commission appointed by the League of Nations. The principle of the emigration of minorities had already been established by a Turco-Bulgarian Agreement in 1913 and a Greco-Bulgarian Agreement in 1919. In January 1923 a Convention for the Exchange of Minorities was signed by Greece and Turkey. The resulting process of migration, which provided a noteworthy solution of an acute problem, encountered many difficulties and extended over a considerable period, being only finally con¬ cluded in 1930.
Amongst other measures passed in Greece in 1923 was a Decree of Amnesty for aU pohtical offences (22nd January) and the reform of the Calendar by the adoption (ist March) of the system of Western Europe in place of ffie old style of the Orthodox Church, which was fourteen days in arrears. This change had the effect of putting an end to a method of reckoning time which was a fruitful cause of incon¬ venience, particularly in the business world. On loth May the first agreement was signed for the concession by Greece of a Free Zone for Jugoslavia at Salonica.
On 27th August 1923, while an International Commission was engaged in dehmiting the frontier between Greece and
The Italians Albania, the Chief Itahan Delegate, General hnmhntA Bellini, was murdered with four members of ^ ' his staff just inside Greek territory. The Greek Government took the matter up, but, before it had had time to report, Italy presented an ultimatum, the terms of which were such as could not be accepted without discussion by a Sovereign State. But Italy refused to grant any extension of time and on 31st August an Itahan fleet appeared before Corfu and bombarded the town without warning, causing a small number of casualties, most of them in an orphanage, and Itahan troops occupied the island and other neighbouring Greek islands. It was explained that it was not an act of war but a temporary and peaceful
Decree of
Amnesty and
reform ofthe
Calendar.


Settlement of the
incident by the
League of
Nations.
the Foundation of the Republic 151
measure ! Italy, as we have seen, had always taken every opportunity to oppose the interests of Greece, but this was her first act of aggression—and was not destined to be the last. The Greek Government took the correct course of an appeal to the League of Nations, wliich was fortunately at that moment in session and thus gave an opportunity for the expression of European opinion. The protests raised were so vehement that Italy was obliged to give way, and Corfu was evacuated on 27th September. A Conference of Ambassadors, however, which met in Paris, awarded an indemnity to Italy on the ground that there had been negligence on the part of the Greek authorities. The peaceful settlement of a difficult inter¬ national incident was a distinct feather in the cap of the League of Nations which has not acquired many such ornaments, and Greece won credit for her moderate and concffiatory attitude. During the course of the year 1923 it grew more and more obvious that there was an imperative necessity for the re, . establishment of a constitutional regime in place
• ^ 7 of the rule of the nominees of the Revolutiona Question, Committee.^ An attempt was made in
September again to persuade M. Zaimis to form a Government wluch should include both Royalists and Venizelists, and, though he found himself unable to accede to this, there was a prospect that some arrangement of this kind might be achieved. Unfor¬ tunately, however, the leader* of the ultra-Royalists, General Metaxas, determined to make profit out of the prevaihng dis¬ content by organizing a counter-revolution. He was unsuc¬ cessful, but the suppression of this movement had the effect of strengthening the hands of the party which favoured the estab¬
lishment of a Republic as a cure for internal strife. On 16th December fresh elections were held, at which, though the Venizehsts obtained two hundred seats and the
• r ^ 1 Republicans only a hundred and twenty, it was ^ectwns of i6t ^rmy headed by General
Dec. 1923. Pangalos and the navy headed by Captain
Hadjikyriakos were in favour of a republican regime and that disorders were likely to occur. Colonel Gonatas, therefore,
^ The principal of these were Colonels Gonatas and Plastiras, with M. Alexandris as Minister of Foreign Affairs.


M. Venizelos
returns and be¬
comes Premier.
152 The Treaty of Lausanne and
representing the Government, sought an audience of the King and suggested that, in order that the people might be free to _ decide their future form of government, he
kaves Greece should quit Greece for three months while the question was submitted to the National Assembly. On i8th December, therefore, the King and the Queen, who was a daughter of King Ferdinand of Rumania, left Athens for Bucharest. Admiral Koundouriotis was appointed Regent. The result of the elections had been the clear call for the return to Greece of M. Venizelos, who in his absence had been nominated and returned for a number of con¬ stituencies. On an invitation supported by all parties, he consented to return temporarily and attempt to reunite the nation, and arrived in Athens on 4th January 1934. Assuming the office of Premier he proposed that after two months a plebiscite should be held to decide the question of Repubhc or Monarchy, and that after this elections should again be held. The discussion of these measures gave rise to long and heated debates in the Chamber, where the Prime Minister had to face a powerful opposition led by M. Papanastasiou, an extreme Republican, who favoured the immediate deposition of the dynasty by a vote of the Chamber
M Venizelos establishment of a Republic. On 4th resigns February after a violent altercation on the floor of the House, M. Venizelos, weary of strife, resigned, and was succeeded as Premier by M. Kaphantaris, who supported the policy of setting up a Republican regime if it were approved by a plebiscite.
M. Kaphantaris remained in office for httle more than a month, and was succeeded as Premier by M. Papanastasiou, who
Establishment of P^'^PO^cd to abolish the monarchy by a rcsoluZ Zpublk. ^ the House, to be ratified afterwards by a plebiscite. His proposal was carried, and on 25th March 1924 the Republic was proclaimed, the Regent, Admiral Koundouriotis, becoming President. In the following month the plebiscite was held, at which more than two-thirds of the votes were cast in favour of the Republic. All the members of the Royal Family were deprived of their Greek nationaUty and their property in Greece confiscated. The British Govern


the Foundation of the Republic 153
ment, which had resumed diplomatic relations in January, recog¬ nized the Greek Republic and was officially represented at the Centenary of the death of Lord Byron, which was held on 19th April,
There was httle continuity in the government of Greece during the remainder of 1924. The Cabinet of M. Papanastasiou, in which General Pangalos, the future dictator, was Minister of War, resigned in July and a Government was formed by M. Sophouhs, a Venizehst deputy, who was himself succeeded as Premier in September by M. Michalakopoulos. The constant change of government was not conducive to the settlement of the question of a new constitution, especially as several problems of external relations arose, the solution of which occupied the attention of the Government. We have seen that in 1923 a Convention was signed for the exchange of Greek and Turkish minorities. By October 1924
Greece and 370,000 Moslems had left Greek territory, while ^ I practically all the Asiatic Greeks had been transferred to Greece. Under the Convention the Greek inhabitants of Constantinople who had been ‘ established ’ before 30th October 1918 were exempted, but considerable difficulty arose about the meaning of the term ‘ estabUshed ’. The Greeks maintained that it meant merely resident, the Turks that it implied the fulfilment of certain legal formaHties. On 9th May 1924 the Mixed Commission appointed to carry out the exchange of population decided that certain categories of Greeks were to leave Constantinople on loth October, and passports were issued to them. When the time came, however, many of them remained, and on i8th October the Turkish police began to round them up, and 3500 of them were placed in a concentration camp in the prison of the Severn Towers. The Greeks appealed to the League of Nations, which decided that the interpretation of the term ‘ established ’ should be settled by the Mixed Commission, who were recommended to apply to the Permanent Court at the Hague for its opinion. This Court decided in favour of the Greek point of view. At the meeting of the Council of the League of Nations in October 1924, M. Pohtis, the Greek representative, brought forward the case of the Greeks who had been expelled from Constantinople and not allowed to return and the question of the Greek banks


154 Treaty of Lausanne and
in that city, while the Turkish delegate pointed out that 50,000 Turks in Western Thrace were without means of subsistence because the Greeks had confiscated their lands. Finally, however, by direct negotiation an agreement was reached, which was signed in June 1925, and normal diplomatic relations were
resumed between Greece and Turkey. Another and kindred cause of controversy between Greece and Turkey was the question of the Patriarchate. Under the
rr.1 ^ . r Turkish rule the Patriarch of Constantinople le Question of have already seen, not only the t e atriarc ate. head of the Greek Orthodox Church
but also exercised civil functions in connexion with marriage, wardship, and inheritance ; but, when the Christian peoples gained their independence, the ofSce became more and more an anachronism and was an object of suspicion in the eyes of the Turks as a focus for pohtical agitation. At the Lausanne Conference the Turks had demanded its aboHtion, but a com¬ promise was reached by which the Patriarchate was to continue, but to concern itself entirely with religious matters. In 1921 Mgr. Meletios, Venizelist Metropolitan of Athens, but at the time an exile in America, was appointed Patriarch.
Meletios IV After taking up office he concerned himself with politics and, becoming the object of hostile demonstrations, fled to Salonica and afterwards abdicated and retired to Mt. Athos. His successor. Mgr. Gregorios VII, was enthroned in December 1923. He was violently attacked, in particular by Papa Eftim, „ . . .. head of the so-called Turkish Orthodox Church regortos . Anatolia (a sect which held the curious
view that the Greeks of Asia Minor were Christianized Turks), who succeeded in seizing the Phanar, the official residence of the Patriarch, and called upon Mgr. Gregorios to resign; but the Turkish Government adopted a correct attitude and drove Papa Eftim out. He was subsequently unfrocked by the Holy Synod. Since, however, Turkey was at the time taking steps to abolish the Cahph, the head of their ovm rehgion, there was a demand that a similar measure should be adopted for the abolition of the Patriarchate. Mgr. Gregorios, nevertheless, succeeded in re¬ maining in office and died a natural death in the Phanar—a feat rarely achieved by any of his predecessors.


155
the Foundation of the Republic {ig2j-^)
The election of his successor, Mgr. Constantine VI, in December 1924 raised the question of the status of the new . . . Patriarch, who, according to the Turks, was not onstantme . ^ < estabhshed ’ resident in Constantinople and
therefore ‘ exchangeable On 30th January 1925 he was ex¬ pelled by the Turkish poHce and fled to Salonica. The incident caused a very painful impression not only in Greece and the other Orthodox countries but also among members of the Anglican High Church, which has always felt a close sympathy with the Orthodox community. The Turkish Government urged that the easiest solution was to appoint a Patriarch who was not ‘ exchangeable ’; but here again a difficulty arose, since most of the eligible candidates were equally ‘ exchangeable There followed a brisk interchange of notes and appeals to other Governments and to the League of Nations. Fortunately, in the course of a short time the excitement died down, and, after Mgr. Constantine VI had announced his abdication and the Holy Synod had elected Mgr. Basil Georgiadis, Metropolitan of Nicaea, a scholar rather than a politician, peace was at last restored. The question of the exchange of minorities also led to diffi¬ culties between Greece and Bulgaria. The Bulgarians in Greek territory showed more eagerness to leave Greece than did the Greeks in Bulgaria to migrate into Greece. In March 1923 the
Greece and
Bulgaria.
Bulgarian Government appealed to the League of Nations against the treatment of their nationals in Western Thrace, while difficulties arose between Greeks and Bulgarians in Mace¬ donia. Many Greek refugees from Asia Minor were transferred to Thrace and Macedonia, whence the Bulgarians who were due for deportation fled, without waiting for the liquidation of their property, into Bulgaria and remained in a state of destitu¬ tion near the frontier, where many of the population were Greeks. This led to unfortunate incidents. The most serious of these occurred in July 1924 at Tarlis on the GrecoThe incident Bulgarian frontier near Petrie, where an officer at Tarhs. ^ command of a Greek detachment arrested
about sixty Bulgarian inhabitants on the ground that they had co-operated with Bulgarian comitadjis. While they were being conveyed to a neighbouring village, thirteen of them were
shot, it being alleged that Aey had attempted to escape. A


156 The Treaty of Lausanne and
Commission of Inquiry exonerated the Greek Government, but censured the local authorities. As a result relations between Greece and Bulgaria were severely strained. However, at the Assembly of the Council of the League of Nations, on the initiative of Professor Gilbert Murray, the Greek and Bulgarian
.r 1 representatives, MM. PoUtis and Kalkoff, came
The unratified ^ c ^ ^
Protocol to an agreement as to ruture procedure, and a Protocol was signed under which two members of the Mixed Commission—an Englishman and a Dutchmanwere appointed to assist the Greeks and Bulgarians in the execu¬ tion of the Minorities Treaty. This arrangement was welcomed at Sofia, but was less favourably received in Athens. The reason of this was that the Jugoslav Government, who denied that any of the Slavs in Jugoslavian Macedonia could possibly be Bul¬ garians, read into the Protocol an admission that the Slav minority in Greek Macedonia was Bulgarian, and therefore brought pressure on the Greek Government to reject the Protocol. The denunciation by Jugoslavia of the Treaty of Alliance concluded with Greece in 1913, which was announced on 15 th November 1924, finally decided the Greek Government, which was anxious to preserve good relations, to refuse to ratify the Protocol, but its rejection was mitigated by an assurance that Greece was deter¬ mined to carry out all her obhgations under the Minorities Treaty.
Troubles, however, continued on the Macedonian frontier, which culminated in a serious affray and almost led to war
'tl T3 1 • between Greece and Bulgaria. On 19th October
r,o«tie, Incident, shots were exchanged between Greek and Bulgarian frontier-guards at Deimr Kapu, north of Salonica, and a Greek soldier was killed. The Greek officer in command of the post arrived on the scene some hours later and gave orders to his men to cease fire ; he then advanced under a white flag and was promptly killed by a bullet. More soldiers and armed civilians came up and fighting continued on the 20th and 21st, but apparently the shooting was not very good and the casualties were not heavy. When the news reached Athens, orders were sent to the Third Army Corps at Salonica to advance into Bulgaria. The Bulgarian troops offered only slight resistance, and the Greeks occupied a con¬ siderable area of Bulgarian territory. The Bulgarian Govern


the Foundation of the Republic {ig2j-3) 157
ment then appealed to the League of Nations, and the Council of the League ordered both belligerents to withdraw behind their respective frontiers. The effect of this was to stop a general offensive, for which the Greek Government had given orders and which the Bulgarians were preparing to resist. The Council then appointed a Commission under the Chairmanship of Sir Horace Rumbold, British Ambassador at Madrid, which decided that, though there was no premeditation on either side, the Bulgarians were entitled to an indemnity of ^45,000 for the violation of their territory, while the Bulgarian Government was ordered to pay damages for the shooting of the Greek officer. The Commission also made recommendations, which the Council accepted, for the better organization of the frontierguards and their supervision by two neutral officers (who were provided by the Swedish Government), one to be attached to the Greek, the other to the Bulgarian frontier-force. The Greek Government protested against the amount of the indemnity, but eventually accepted the decision of the Council. The new arrangement was tested by an incident which occurred in the following May and was satisfactorily settled. As we have aheady seen, on 27th November 1924, Jugo¬ slavia, which still felt resentment on the ground that Greece had failed to help her in 1915 and whose prestige and mihtary and economic resources were now superior to those of Greece, denounced the Treaty of Alliance, the period of which had elapsed in May 1923, though it was renewable for a further year. Jugoslavia had more to offer than Greece and was thus in a position to
demand concessions in the economic field. Salonica had already been recognized in principle as the natural outlet to the Mediterranean of the trade of Southern Jugoslavia by the concession of a Free Zone for Jugoslavia at that port. But the Jugoslav Government was apprehensive that the facihties
_ , . already offered there might prove inadequate, Gevgeh-Salomca question of the access to Salonica over Railway. Qj.ggj^ railway also gave rise to a
difficult problem. In January 1925 *^1^^ Greek Government showed a conciliatory spirit by reducing freight-charges on the railway as well as by its refusal to ratify the Bulgarian Minorities
Greece and
Jugoslavia.
The question of
the Port of
Salonica and the


158 The Treaty of Lausanne, etc.
Protocol, to which Jugoslavia had objected. In May, however, demands were made not only for the enlargement of the Free Zone but also for its definite cession, so that it would become practically Jugoslav territory, and for the handing over of the administration of the railway to Jugoslavia. These suggestions
Abortive were regarded in Greece as inconsistent with Greek sovereign rights, and on ist June 1925 negotta ions. Greek and Jugoslav delegates, who were in
conference at Belgrade, decided, in view of their complete divergence of opinion, to adjourn the negotiations sine die. It was not until 1929 that a satisfactory settlement of these questions was eventually reached.


CHAPTER XIX
THE DICTATORSHIP OF GENERAL PANGALOS AND
THE RETURN OF M. VENIZELOS (1925-8)
WHILE the Government was thus principally engaged in the attempted solution of foreign questions, the internal situation
^ „ , remained unsatisfactory and the National General anga os ^ot come to any decision about as Premier. Constitution. The inefficiency and
corruption of the administration showed no improvement, and discontent was rife. At the end of June 1925 the Government of M. Mikalapokoulos resigned after a minor coup d’etat had been carried out by General Pangalos and Admiral Hadjikyriakos, who seized the National Bank and the General Post Office. General Pangalos then formed a government, in which Admiral Hadjikyriakos was included, wHch proceeded to dissolve the National Assembly and on 30th September published by poclamation the terms of the new Constitution. The provisions included a President, who was to be elected for a term of five years, and a Chamber and an Upper House under the title of Senate, consisting of 150 members, of whom 100 were to be elected by parhamentary vote, 30 by various professional cor¬ porations and guilds, and 20 by the Senate itself and the Chamber. Elections were to be held early in the coming year, and the new Constitution was then to be brought up for ratification. In November MM. Rouphos and Sechiotis, both members of
the Royalist Party, joined the Government, the former as Minister for Foreign Affairs, in which capacity General Pangalos proved his abihty ; and the elections becomes Dictator. Senate were fixed for loth January 1926.
But on 3rd January General Pangalos suddenly announced that the Government had changed its plans, that the elections for the Senate and Chamber were adjourned sine die, and that it had been decided that all administrative and executive power was to be transferred to the General himself j in fact, he assumed a
»S9


i6o The Dictatorship of General Pangalos, and
dictatorship with the avowed object ofrestoring internal harmony
and national economy. As a dictator General Pangalos was a curious phenomenon ; a mihtary dictator, he had seized power to deal with a pohtical situation. He had no new political doctrine to impose ; he had no desire to abohsh democracy, but he wished to put an end to the pernicious activity of pohtical partisanship which was rending the Greek nation and preventing any real national progress. He recognized that what Greece required was a settled and stable administration which would give the country peace and enable it to gain the respect of other nations. But he lacked the qualities of a genuine leader and his authority was based on force, though his violence was tempered by a certain benevolence, and his intentions were better than his performance. He was emphatically not the man whom the crisis demanded. General Pangalos did httle to improve the economic situation, though his Finance Minister resorted to the now familiar device
Internal ^ forced loan by the clipping of banknotes. measures chief expedient for curbing party passion was a campaign against the Press, which was subjected to such a rigorous censorship that the expression of public opinion was almost entirely suppressed. He went as far as to forbid the pubheation in the Press of manifestoes by the chief pohtical leaders and exiled the most active of these, MM. Kaphantaris and Papanastasiou, as well as General Kondylis, to the T^gean island of Santorin. A measure which insisted that ladies’ skirts must not be more than fourteen inches from the ground aroused more interest in the European press than any of the dictator’s other legislative efforts.
In the sphere of Foreign Affairs negotiations were carried on during the dictatorship with Italy and Jugoslavia. Relations
Fcreicn Rtlatiom. Gree« and Italy had been strained ever smee the Corfu incident of 1923. But in March 1926 M. Rouphos visited Rome and had an interview with Signor Mussolini. These conversations resulted in a new Commercial Treaty which was signed in November. One of the questions raised by Signor Mussolini concerned the British Naval Mission, to which he objected on the ground that it would promote British naval supremacy in the Eastern Mediterranean. It was announced that the Greek Government


the Return of M. Venizelos (1^23-8) 161
had decided to denounce their contracts both with the French
Military Mission and with the British Naval Mission, but neither
of these decisions was actually put into effect.
Though relations with Jugoslavia were officially friendly,
the Press of both countries indulged in mutual recriminations.
Jugoslavia found fresh reason for complaint in Jugos avta. formation of a Greek Free Zone at Salonica,
which was deemed likely to hamper the operation of the Jugoslav
Free Zone. The question of the Gevgeli-Salonica Railway was
also still unsettled. In January 1926, however, the Jugoslav
Minister at Athens informed the Greek Government that his
Government was disposed to consider the conclusion of a Balkan
Pact, on the lines of the Locarno Pact, if outstanding problems
could be solved. General Pangalos expressed himself as ready
to make sacrifices in order to place the relations between the
two countries on a better basis, with the result that on 17th
August, after prolonged negotiations, a Treaty of Friendship
was signed and satisfactory arrangements were made for the
joint exploitation of the railway, which was to remain in Greek
hands, and for the transport of goods to and from Salonica, and
for the extension of the Jugoslav Free Zone. But before General
Pangalos could carry out his intention of ratifying this Treaty by
legislative decree, his Dictatorship had come to an end, and the
Treaty was never ratified. On 16th March 1926 General Pangalos announced that the
new Constitution would be ready by the end of April and that
^ „ , it was intended that the Powers of the President enera attga os greatly extended on the model of
those of the President of the U.S.A. ; also I resident. candidates must be between forty-five and sixty
years of age, and all members of the Royal Family, and also
M. Venizelos, were specially excluded from standing for election.
The General said that he was uncertain whether he would himself
be a candidate. All this was too much for Admiral Koundouriotis
whose habitual calnmcss had become more and more perturbed
by the General’s pohtical antics, and he resigned the Presidency
on 19th March. Meanwhile the leaders of the various poHtical
parties made up their minds for once to lay aside their feuds and
co-operated in nominating M. Demertzis, a moderate Royahst
and an ex-minister, as their Joint candidate. This alarmed the


162 The Dictatorship of General Pangalos, and
General, who proposed to suspend the age-hmit in favour of
M. Zaimis, whose candidature, he hoped, would split the vote,
but who promptly refused to lend himself to this manoeuvre.
Thereupon General Pangalos had no expedient but to armounce
his own candidature and issue an election address. Just before
the date of the election he declared that, owing to the fact that
arrangements in twenty-three out of the thirty-three electoral
divisions were incomplete, voting could only take place in the
remaining ten ; whereupon the party leaders acted as apparently
the General intended them to do and withdrew the candidature
of M. Demertzis. Thus General Pangalos was left as the only
candidate, and, as no votes were given for any one else, all the
votes recorded were in his favour. He chose to regard the result
of the election as a vote 'of confidence and took the oath as
President on i8th April.
The problem which now faced the Dictator-President was
to find some one who would undertake the Premiership. It was
obvious that the Prime Minister would be a mere puppet, and
the office was hawked about for some weeks. At last M. Eutaxias,
a gentleman of advanced years who had first attained ministerial
rank under M. Delyiannis in the previous century, consented to
officiate, but by this time the sands were running out.
In August there were disturbances in various parts of the
, /■;/ f country, including Euboea and Crete, and on
General ^ August M. Kaphantaris, who had twice . been arrested and exiled and then allowed to
^ ' return during the dictatorship, was again arrested
together with other pohtical leaders, including General Metaxas.
On 22nd August General Kondylis, assisted by the garrison
of the capital, carried out a bloodless coup d’etat after seizing
public buildings and releasing political prisoners. The Dictator
was away on a summer holiday at Spetsai when the news reached
him. He boarded a destroyer and attempted to escape, but off
Cape Matapan he was captured by another destroyer and brought
to Athens, whence he was finally transferred to a fortress in Crete.
General Pangalos failed as a dictator because he proved quite
unable to deal successfully with the internal troubles of the
country and had performed no services which could win the
gratitude or the admiration or even the confidence of the
nation. Unlike Mustapha Kemal, the saviour of Turkey, he


the Return of M. Venizelos (1925-8) 163
had not preserved Greece in the past from national peril. Her
The causes of ®^lkan neighbours had their own problems to deal
his fall. with, and there were no outstanding questions
of international relations which could not be solved by peaceful means; Turkey, Greece’s most recent enemy,
was busy consohdating and organizing a new State in Asia
Minor and introducing W^estern civihzation, and was anxious to
live at peace with her neighbours. A dictator may often prolong
his rule by military successes which flatter the amour propre of
his people ; but the situation offered no scope for achievements
of this kind, and the disaster in Asia Minor had cured the Greeks
of any desire for mihtary adventure. Further, there is in Greece
no tradition of discipline and blind obedience, and there was no
external threat to induce the people to subject themselves to the
will of an irresponsible ruler, whose efforts were directed to
putting an end to their chief amusement in life, the game of party pohtics.
Though the Republican Guard under Colonel Zervas had
taken part in the overthrow of General Pangalos, they had
Riotina in apparently expected to transfer their allegiance
Athens another mihtary dictator, and, when General Kondylis ordered their disbandment, they broke into open mutiny and were only overpowered by the railing
out of other troops. There was rioting and street-fighting in
which the populace took the opportunity to join. Though a
good deal of blood was shed, the situation was soon in hand,
and the leaders of the Repubhcan Guard were court-martiaUed
and sentenced to imprisonment for hfe.
On 22nd August Admiral Koundouriotis accepted the invita¬
tion of General Kondyhs to resume the office of President of the
General Kondylis General Kondyhs, who had assumed
retires from Premiership, announced on 23 rd September
public life would retain that office until after an election had been held, when he would retire
from pubhc life and disband his party, the National Repubhcans.
There were protests, especially from the Royalist leaders,
against the decision that votes should be counted on the system of
proportional representation ; but the election was carried through
without disturbance and resulted in a Repubhcan majority of
thirty-four members—too few to justify the formation of a


164 The Dictatorship of General Pangalos, and
Republican Cabinet. General Kondylis was as good as his r, . . r promise and resigned, and a Coahtion Government was formed. Fortunately for Greece, the a Coalition veteran statesman and patriot M. Alexander Government. Zaimis, who had always held aloof from party
politics, stepped into the breach, as he had done more than once before, and consented to become Prime Minister. Among the other members of the Cabinet were the Royalists, M. Tsaldaris and General Metaxas, and the Republicans, MM. Kaphantaris,
Michalakopoulos, and Papanastasiou. On 25th September the memorial to the British soldiers who had fallen on the Macedonian front in the War of 1914-18 was consecrated at Doiran, and the British representatives took the opportunity of again acknowledging the deep debt of gratitude which the Allies owed to the gallantry of the Greek forces who had helped them to deal the first fatal blow to the Central Powers. The first pre-occupation of the new Government was the clearing up of the financial muddle caused by the incompetence of the late Dictatorship. A committee of experts was appointed to review the transac¬ tions sanctioned during the Dictatorship, and
its recommendation was accepted that all contracts which had been entered upon which were not either irregular or illegal
should be ratified. On 28th February 1927 a Commercial Agreement with Bulgaria was signed, and similar Conventions were signed with Rumania on 28th March and with Italy on ist June. On 25th August the Treaty of Alhance with Jugoslavia and the Conventions regarding the Salonica Free Zone and the GevgehSalonica Railway, signed on 17th August 1926, were brought before the Chamber and rejected. On 2nd November a Com¬ mercial Agreement with Jugoslavia was signed at Athens. During this year also the Greek Government, through its capable Finance Minister, M. Kaphantaris, took steps to deal , . with the outstanding problem of War Debts. e sett ement Agreement for the settlement of the British
War Debts Debt was signed on 7th April, by which Greece undertook to pay nearly ^21,500,000
in sixty-two annual instalments of f200,000, rising to ^(^400,000 in 1936. On 5th December a similar Agreement was made
Financial
measures.


the Return of M. Venizelos [igz^-S) 165
with the U.S.A, Government, which also granted a loan of 500,000 for refugee settlement. On 14th June the Greek Government applied to the Council of the League of Nations for assistance in obtaining jCg,ooo,ooo for the stabilization of the currency, for refugee setdement and for the liquidation of the deficit, which was sanctioned in principle on 17th June. In September the Council approved a Protocol embodying the conditions under which the loan was to be issued and a scheme of financial reform. Meanwhile some impatience was being manifested at the delay of the Coalition Government in settling the constitutional
., r 1 question. In April the President threatened
Adoption of the ^ ^ • j j
•! . resignation it postponement continued, and G,J Kondyfc returned to public life and
resuscitated his Republican Party in order to put pressure on the Government to bring the Republican Constitution before the House and also to deal with General Pangalos, on whom no sentence had yet been passed. In May there was unrest in the army, but the danger of military intervention was prevented by the action of Generals Plastiras and Othonaios,, who secretly communicated with M. Venizelos, who was now in Crete, and induced him to write and warn the Government of the danger of too passive an attitude towards the threat of force. On 2nd June 1927 the Chamber passed the new Constitution, which embodied provisions for the Presidency and Senate. On 20th October the official celebration took place of the centenary of the Battle of Navarino and gave an opportunity „ ^ for a demonstration of Anglo-Hellenic friendentenary oj Lieut.-General Sir A. Codrington, grand
avanno. Admiral who commanded the Alhed
fleet at the battle, was sent on a battleship to represent the British Government, and a commemorative dinner was held in London, The year 1928 found Greece in a more satisfactory financial position than for many years past, but the Cabinet of M. Zaimis,
. . which had already been reconstituted on
Dissensions in 1 a 1 x -t u •
M Zaimis' August 1927, when M. Tsaldaris, the Cabinet Royahst leader, resigned over the question of the gold reserve of the National Bank, was again
reorganized on 3rd February 1928, when M. Papanastasiou
12


166 The Dictatorship of General Pangalos, and
resigned owing to a disagreement about the acceptance of a tender for a scheme of road-construction. But Cabinet dissen
Return of sions continued, particularly after the return of rr ■ 1 Venizelos to Athens on 24th March. On
to Greece^ Kaphantaris resigned his leader¬ ship of the Progressive Liberal Party and his portfoho in the Cabinet, and his action decided M. Venizelos to resume the leadership of the Party as the only organization strong enough to frustrate the threats of those who sought to profit by the present pohtical anarchy. Called into consultation by the President, he expressed his willingness to form a Govern¬ ment ifno satisfactory alternative could be found. On 28th May, however, M. Zaimis succeeded in again reconstructing his Cabinet with the support of the Progressive Liberals and the moderate Royahsts led by General Metaxas. It was thus a Government of the Centre, since the extreme Royahsts and the left-wing Repubhcans held aloof. But Cabinet disagreements continued, and it had become obvious that the time had come to put an end to the Coahtion Government and to restore
M Venizelos Venizelos was the only leader f ’ n • strong enough to form a united Cabinet. M. Venizelos himselt recognized that it was his duty to return to active pohtical hfe and assumed the office of Prime Minister on 3rd July 1928.
On 9th July M. Venizelos dissolved the Chamber and fixed 19th August as the date of the new elections. Meanwhile he persuaded the President to take the unusual step of issuing a Decree modifying the electoral law by the abolition of pro¬ portional representation, which, in his opinion, had tended to produce numerous small parties rather than decisive majorities. The election resulted in a victory for the Government, which could count on the support of two-thirds of the deputies. On nth July the question of General Pangalos’ fate was decided by releasing him from prison.
The Prime Minister recognized the expediency of continuing the task of improving the relations of Greece and her Balkan
ReW<.»s.
Italy predecessor. By the middle of September an agreement had been reached on the terms of a Treaty of Friendship and Concihation with Italy, which was


the Return of M. Venizelos (igz^-S) 167
signed on 23 rd September by Signor Mussolini and M, Venizelos, who travelled to Rome for the purpose. Jugoslavia, always inclined to look at any rapprochement with Italy as a threat to her own security, was reassured of the friendly feelings of Greece by a personal visit of M. Venizelos to Belgrade in October, . . . where he received a warm welcome and signed * ‘ a Protocol laying down the procedure for settling all outstanding questions regarding Salonica. There followed a prolonged period of negotiation, during which the Jugoslav Government, in view of their strained relations with Italy, showed themselves anxious to secure the goodwill of Greece and willing to forgo some of the advantages which would have accrued to them if the Agreement of 1923 had been ratified. The conversations were interrupted by the coup d'etat of 6th January 1929 in Belgrade, which led to the establishment of a virtual dictatorship, but were soon renewed and carried to a successful conclusion on 17th March, when Protocols were signed at Geneva, which were followed on 27th March by the signature of a Pact of Friendship, ConcUiation, and Judicial Settlement. The terms of the Protocols conceded most of the conditions desired by Greece : the Jugoslav Free Zone at Salonica remained under Greek sovereignty and administration, and its limits were not extended as provided for in the unratified Agree¬ ment of 1926, and the Gevgeh-Salonica Railway, the control of which had been acquired by a Jugoslav company, was ceded to the Greek Government. The satisfactory settlement of their long-outstanding difficulties by the Greek and Jugoslav Govern¬ ments was no doubt due partly to the prestige which M. Venizelos
still enjoyed as the creator of the Balkan Alliance of I9i3» ^tid partly to the desire of the Belgrade Government to secure the friendship of her Balkan neighbours in view of the ‘ forward
poHcy ’ of Italy in South-Eastern Europe. On ist September 1928 the Albanian National Assembly passed a resolution proclaiming Ahmed Bey Zogu King of the „ . Albanians, under the title of King Zog. The new regime was recognized by Greece on 4th September, and on loth November a Commercial Treaty and Neutrality Convention were ratified between Greece and
Albania. Between Greece and Turkey there were still questions


i68 The Dictatorship of General Pangalos, etc.
outstanding which had been raised by the exchange of popula, tions, especially in connexion with the liquidation of the property of exchanged Greeks and
Turks. M. Venizelos, on assuming office, was desirous of resuming the negotiations which had been suspended in June, and suggested the arrangement of a personal meeting with the Turkish Premier, Ismet Pasha, but this proved impossible and negotiations through diplomatic channels were resumed.


CHAPTER XX
M. VENIZELOS IN POWER AGAIN (1928-32)
THE new Constitution of 1927 had provided for the establish¬ ment of a Second Chamber, an institution which Greece had r r not possessed since the year 1864, but it had
^ „ ■' not yet been brought into existence. On ,he Creek Senate, October 1928. a BiU was introduced to
establish a Senate and was passed in December after prolonged discussion. The Senate consisted of 120 members, 92 of whom were elected by the constituencies, 18 chosen by professional corporations, and 10 by the Chamber and Senate, The first election took place on 21st April 1929, and M. Zaimis was made President, an obviously suitable choice. M. Venizelos on assuming the Premiership could hold out no promise of any relief of taxation, but undertook to take steps
, to secure a fairer incidence of the burden. He
tmance ana • 1 1 1 • 1 r
, recognized that Greece was sorely m need 01 pu fc wor s. capital for works of development and public
utihty, in order to bring the country up to the level of a modern State. Pohtical conditions since the war of 1914-18 had been unfavourable to such projects, but something had already been done. For example, in 1926 an American company had con¬ tracted to provide a proper water-supply for Athens, which had till then been dependent on an aqueduct built by the Emperor Hadrian and entirely inadequate to modern needs both for drinking purposes and sanitation and also to cope with the dust which is one of the plagues of the city. Now that Greece possessed a Government which commanded confidence abroad, it was possible to raise foreign capital, and in December 1928 a loan for pubHc works was obtained from a banking group in London, and in January 1929 another loan for roads and drainage
was raised in the U.S.A. Vigorous steps were also taken by the Government to put down brigandage, which had become a serious menace to public
169


Breakdown of
negotiations with
Turkey.
170 M. Venizelos in Power again (1^28-32)
security. On one occasion two notorious highwaymen had attacked and murdered the escort of specie belonging to the National Bank ; they were captured and condemned to death. Little progress was made with the negotiations with Turkey in 1929. On 17th May the neutral members of the Mixed Commission for the exchange of populations made proposals which Greece accepted, but negotiations broke down over the question of the return to Constantinople of Greeks in
possession of Turkish passports. In August Greece proposed that all pending questions should be referred to arbitration, but Turkey refused the suggestion, and on 19th October the work of the Mixed Commission was suspended. On 25th June 1929 a Treaty of Commerce and Navigation signed with Russia came into force. On 25th May the Greek Government paid the first instalment due to Bulgaria in respect of the properties of exchanged nationals under the Agreement of December 1927* On 9th December 1929 Admiral Koundouriotis, who, except
for a short period during the dictatorship of General Pangalos, had been President of the Repubhc since its inception, was obliged by advancing years to retire. He had filled this high office with great distinction, and though originally a prominent adherent of M. Venizelos (whom he had accom¬
panied to Salonica, where he was one of the Triumvirate who established the Provisional Government), he had made himself acceptable to all parties by his tact and self-effacement. A worthy substitute was found in M. Zaimis, who, in spite of his seventyfour years was ready as ever to serve his country. He was elected almost unanimously, his opponent, M. Kaphantaris, receiving only 22 out of 279 votes. General Paraskevopoulos, formerly Commander-in-Chief in Asia Minor, succeeded him
as President of the Senate. Cabinet dissensions continued throughout the year, changes in the personnel of the Cabinet taking place on 7th June and ,, 5th July and again in December, when the portfolios of War, Health, and Aviation, which tssenswns. Premier had hitherto himself held, were
transferred to three under-secretaries, who were included in the Cabinet. M. Venizelos found it difficult to conciliate the
M. Zaimis
succeeds Admiral
Koundouriotis as
President.


M. Venizelos in Power again (1928-32) 171
Royalist Party, led by M. Tsaldaris, though he went so far as to offer that a plebiscite, to be conducted by M. Tsaldaris himself as Minister of Home Affairs, should be held to test the opinion of the people on the question of Monarchy or Republic. On 25th March 1930 celebrations were begun, which lasted for some five weeks, to mark the Centenary of the Declaration of Greek Independence. The Turkish Government was officially re¬ presented.
The year 1930 witnessed considerable progress in the regulation of the relations of Greece with her neighbours, and gave M. Venizelos further opportunities of showing his statesmanlike qualities. The deadlock between Greece and Turkey which had arisen over the exchange of population was aggravated when in 1929 rj, , 1 the Turkish Government reconditioned the r dreadnought Goeben, which had played such a j . •' sensational part m the war of 1914-18 by ^ escaping into Turkish waters. This gave Turkey an advantage over Greece, whose only capital ship was the battle cruiser Averof, presented by the cotton-milhonaire, whose name it bore, which had done good service in the Balkan War by the blockade of the Dardanelles. It was suggested that Greece should steal a march on Turkey by obtaining delivery of another pre¬ war capital ship which had been ordered in Germany and never completed. M. Venizelos, in a speech in the Chamber on loth February 1930, spoke against this policy and advocated the spending of the money on light naval units and aircraft, which would be more useful for defence than defiance. He declared himself convinced that Turkey had become peacefully minded and had no designs on Greek territory, and he pointed out that the League of Nations existed to settle differences if they should arise ; a much better policy, he urged, would be to resume negotiations on outstanding questions. This policy was adopted, and the first result was the signature, on loth June 1930, of a Convention which solved the following
„ . questions on common-sense lines : firstly, the
Convention r 1 • 1 r 1 1 • j 1 •
, , J value of the properties left behind by emigrants stgne , 10 June Greece and Turkey ; secondly, the disposal
of properties left behind by ‘ non-exchangeable ’ nationals who had nevertheless emigrated ; thirdly, the position


M. Venizelos
visits Ankara.
172 M. Venizelos in Power again {1928-^2)
of Greeks in Constantinople and Moslems in Thrace who were legally ‘ established ’ and, therefore ‘ non-exchangeable The Convention was ratified by the Turkish and Greek Chambers
by large majorities. On the day on which the Convention was signed, Ismet Pasha, the TurHsh Premier, invited M. Venizelos to visit Ankara and discuss measures for establishing a good understanding between the two peoples. The invitation was accepted for a date in October. An incident connected with the arrangements for the visit threw an interesting light on the improved relations between the two countries. The Turks suggested that the Greek delegation should land at Haidar Pasha, the Asiatic suburb of Constanti¬ nople, but M. Venizelos expressed a preference for Ismid on the Sea of Marmara, explaining that, if he visited Constantinople, he must of necessity call on the Patriarch, and this might make a bad impression in Turkey, whereas, if he passed through with¬ out visiting the Phanar, Greek opinion would be offended. He was assured that a visit to the Patriarch would create no mis¬ understanding, and he accordingly passed through Haidar Pasha and visited the Patriarch on his return, receiving an enthusiastic welcome both from the Turks and from the Greeks in Con¬ stantinople. The Greek delegation spent five days in Ankara, and great cordiahty was displayed on both sides. The result was the
Treat tvith signature of three diplomatic instruments : a „ y Treaty of Neutrality, Conciliation, and Arbitration, a Protocol for the Limitation of Naval Armaments, and a Commercial Convention. At a banquet given in his honour M. Venizelos declared that his presence in Ankara signified the end of a conflict between Greece and Turkey which had lasted for ten centuries, and he is said to have remarked to the Turkish President : ‘We have agreed on the future of the Near East ’. It is a curious fact that M. Venizelos had been born an Ottoman subject in Crete, which then belonged to Turkey, while Kemal was born in Salonica, which in 1930 was the second largest city of Greece.
The year 1930 also saw the end of the labours of the Refugee Settlement Commission, which concluded a Convention with the Greek Government, to whom the administration was handed


M. Venizelos in Power again {ig28-j2) 173
over. The Convention was approved by the Financial Com
Endofthe rnittee of the League of Nations in February. Refiioee Nearly a milhon refugees had been established
ciJmission. “ , \ Venizelos reckoned at nearly 80,000,000. The success¬ ful termination of this vast migration was a notable achievement and gave Greece a practically homogeneous population ; in particular, Greek Macedonia, which had contained a hotch¬ potch of conflicting nationahties, was now inhabited by a population of which 90 per cent, were Greek by race and sentiment.
Another notable event of 1930 was the first Balkan Con¬ ference held in Athens in October. It was an unofficial meeting
The Balkan representatives of Greece, Jugoslavia, Bulgaria, ^ r r Albania, Rumania, and Turkey, promoted by M. Fapanastasiou, an ex-prermer, who presided, and was inspired by the example of the con¬ clusion of the Locarno Pact. The delegates received an enthusi¬ astic welcome in the Greek capital. Committees were formed to deal with pohtical questions, economic problems, intellectual co-operation, communications, and social questions. The pohtical committee adopted a resolution that the Foreign Ministers of the Balkan States should meet yearly and exchange views, and that a pact should be discussed, under which war should be outlawed, disputes should be settled peaceably, and mutual assistance should be promised. The chief importance of the Conference was that it brought together representatives of the six States in a friendly atmosphere and showed them that there were many matters in which fruitful co-operation was
possible. M. Venizelos attended the Hague Conference on Reparations early in 1930, as representative of Greece, with satisfactory results. After the settlement of War Debts due from Greece, a balance was allocated to the Greek Treasury payable in sums of ^[^706,000 for fourteen years and for a further twenty-two years. In March the Government was authorized to negotiate a loan of j(^8,ooo,ooo for road construction and drainage, and in April a contract was signed with the British firm of Messrs. Henry Boot and Son for land-reclamation and irrigation at the cost of
500,000.


174 Venizelos in Power again {igzS-^z)
In April 1930 General Pangalos, the former dictator, was brought to trial for a breach of trust while a Minister of State
Trial ofGeneral ^ connexion with the grant of a concession for Pangalos ^ casino at Eleusis, and was sentenced to two years’ imprisonment and five years’ loss of civil rights. At the end of October some of his supporters planned an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the Government during the absence of M. Venizelos in Turkey. The conspirators to the number of twenty-seven were arrested and brought to trial. There was also a threat of disturbance by Communists, whose headquarters in Athens were raided on 14th February.
During 1931 M. Venizelos maintained his authority as Premier in spite of opposition from those who criticized his
M. Venizelos "methods as savouring of autocracy. He repHed
justifies hispolicy. ^ Athens in March, when he denied that he had ever acted unconstitutionally and maintained that he was carrying out a mandate entrusted to him by the electorate when he used his powers to enforce disciphne. In reply to a Royalist challenge in the Chamber he stated his intention to remain in office until the legal termination of the existing Chamber in the autumn of 1932. The only open act of hostility was a rising planned by Major Katzaros and other followers of General Pangalos, who were easily arrested and brought to trial.
The finances of Greece at the beginning of the year showed a healthy condition, the budget of 1931 yielding a small surplus.
Finance and ^ further loan of ^4,600,000 was raised for public works. public works, which included road-construction draining operations in the Vardar and ^ruma Valleys. On 3rd April an agreement was signed with the British Government which granted Imperial Airways racihties in Greece in return for permission to Greek aviation to use air-ports m Malta and Cyprus ; as a result Athens became a
aircraft on the way to and from the East. When Great Britain went off the gold standard, the Greek Government was placed in a difficult position, since Greek curr^cy was linked with sterhng and about one quarter of her Central Bank reserve was deposited in London. In order to avoid any threat to the stabifity of the drachma, the Stock
Exchange in Athens was closed for five days and restrictions


M. Venizelos in Power again {ig28-j2) 175
were placed on the export of capital, but the bank rate rose from 9 to 12 per cent. Greece did not finally abandon the gold standard until April 1932, when she adopted the dollar as the basis of exchange. Three occasions occurred during 1931 for demonstrations of Anglo-Greek friendship. On 5th April a statue of Rupert A j r u Brooke, who had died during the war of 1914-18
Ceremonies Greek soil, was unveiled on the island of Skyros in the presence of M. Venizelos. A statue of George Canning, in whose premiership the British Govern¬ ment recognized the Greeks as beUigerents in 1823, presented by Mr. and Mrs. Charles Boot, was vinveiled in Athens on 6th April. On i6th July M. Venizelos took part in the ceremony of handing over the deed of gift which conveyed Newstead Abbey, the home of Lord Byron, to the Corporation of the neighbouring
city of Nottingham. While M. Venizelos was in England he conferred with the British Government and afterwards, on his return journey, . , with the French Government, in order to discuss reece an t e effect on Greek finances of the adoption of
oot^er Hoover Moratorium for war debts. A oratorium. threatened annual loss of ,{^500,000, including
^266,000 due each year from Bulgaria, was a serious matter for Greece. The Greek Government suggested that this loss could be to some extent compensated if Bulgaria consented to forgo payments due under the agreement of 1927 for the compensation ofexchanged populations. Eventually Greece agreed to pay half the sum due under this agreement on condition that Bulgaria
paid an equal sum on account of reparations. Greek relations with Turkey were still further strengthened when Ismet Pasha, the Turkish Premier, with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, arrived in Athens on 3rd October The Turkish return M. Venizelos’ visit to Ankara. It was Premier visits ^ occasion for the display of cordial friendship,
and the enthusiasm of the Greek populace made
it clear that the two countries were determined henceforward to hve at peace with one another and to co-operate for their mutual advantage. Agreements were ratified which included a Treaty of Friendship, a Commercial Convention, and a
Protocol for hmiting naval armaments.


176 M. Venizelos in Power again (igzS-jz)
The Second Balkan Conference was held in Constantinople in October 1931 in a more definitely official atmosphere than
The Second Athens Conference of the previous year. It Balkan attended by two hundred delegates from the , six states. The Greek representatives submitted onjerence. draft of a Balkan Pact, to which was annexed
a proposal that provision should be made for the establishment of an Inter-Balkan Commission on Minorities. The proposal was referred to the Political Committee of the Conference, but little progress was made with its discussion. On the whole the Conference had little result to show for its activities, but the meeting of representatives of the different states in friendly discussion was all to the good. In the autumn of 1931 a difficult situation arose, which in¬ directly concerned the Greek Government, when the national movement in Cyprus came to a head. The
C ^rus^^ ^ island, four-fifths of the inhabitants of which ' are Greeks, had been under British administration since the time of the Berlin Conference in 1878. On the outbreak of the war of 1914-18 it had been annexed by Britain by an Order in Council. As we have seen, in 1915 its cession had been offered to Greece if she gave her ally, Serbia, ‘ immediate and complete support ’, which, however, had not been forthcoming. The British sovereignty of the island had been recognized by the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923, and its administration had been assumed by the Colonial Office. Since the vast majority of the ‘ unredeemed ’ Greeks had been gradually ‘ redeemed ’ either by the acquisition of the territory in which they lived or else by migration, a strong national movement for union with Greece had for some time been gaining force among the 250,000 Cypriot Greeks and was fostered by the Church and in the schools and in athletic and social clubs all over the island. It is true that
Cyprus had been admirably administered and its resources developed and exploited under the British authorities, but not unnaturally the inhabitants, though technically citizens of the British Empire, had not ceased to be Greeks in sentiment, and the desire for hberty far outweighed any gratitude for the material advantages which they had gained.
In November 1929 a Cypriot delegation had visited London and presented a petition praying that the island should be ceded


M. Vetiizelos in Pouter again (igzS-jz) 177
to Greece. The Colonfal Secretary replied that his Majesty's Government could not accede to this request Cypriot delega- was definitely closed tiott in London further discussion would be unprofit
able. The outbreak of October 1931 was due to the defeat of the Greek members of the Legislative Council on two measures, the Elementary Education Bill of 1929 ^^id the Rising in Budget of 1931. The former took away the Cyprus, Oct. Control of Education from the local committees
^931- of management and aimed at preventing the use
of the schools for Nationalist propaganda. The Budget of ipSL which imposed additional taxation, was passed by the combined vote of the British official members of the Council and the
Turkish members. _ , ^ On 9th September the members of the Cypriot National Movement resolved that a declaration should e addressed to the Cypriot people calling on them to refuse to pay taxes and to boycott British goods. On 18th October the Metropolitan of Kition, Mgr. Mylonas, who had placed himself
at the head of the agitators, precipitated matters by publishing a manifesto setting forth the wrongs under which the Greeks were suffering and calling on them to resist the authonties and proclaim the union of Cyprus with her Mother-<ountry Greece. On 21st October a public meeting was heU in Nicosia, the capital, from which the demonstrators, singing the Greek National Anthem and shouting for union with Greece, rnarched against Government House, where the Governor, Sir Ronald Storrs
was at dinner. The house was attacked and set on fire and burnt with all its contents. The rising spread rapidly over the island and it was found necessary to summon help from abroad. On 23 rd October two cruisers and two destroyers arrived from Crete and seven R.A.F. troop-carriers with 150 men from Egypt. The rising was quickly put down with few casualties. The ringleaders were deported, and the municipality of Nicosia
was fined £20,000 to pay for the damage done. On 12^ Novem¬ ber it wawnnounced in the House of Commons that Letters Patent had been approved abolishing the legislative Counci and empowering the Governor to make laws ; the future
constitution of the island was to be considered in the near future.


178 M. Venizelos in Power again {1^28-32)
The news of the rising caused great excitement and aroused deep sympathy in Greece, which was voiced in the Press and
z-' j L pubhc demonstrations, which had to be rcece ^ ^ checked by the pohce and even by the mihtary. ypnot tsmg, ^ requiem for the Greeks who had fallen in the
riots was not allowed to be held in Athens but took place outside the city, and there were further demonstrations on Armistice Day. M. Venizelos took up a strong and statesmanlike attitude and declared that there was no Cypriot question between the Greek and British Governments, but only between the British Government and their Cypriot subjects ; agitation in the Press and elsewhere could serve no useful purpose and would have no influence on the British Government; whatever sympathy the Greeks might feel for the aspirations of the Cypriots—and, by impHcation, for those of the Dodecanesans—if the Powers held that their interests demanded the continued occupation of the islands, nothing could alter their determination ; moreover, it was essential that nothing should be done to alienate the friendship of Great Britain. He concluded, however, by con¬ fessing that he himself hoped that the idea of the cession of Cyprus to Greece need not be abandoned for all time. The statesman-like attitude of M. Venizelos in thus boldly advocating a pohcy which was direcdy opposed to Greek national sentiment recalled the similar occasion in 1912 when he had checked the agitation for the union with Greece of his native island of Crete, which had in due time been gathered into the national fold.
The year 1932 was a troublous time for Greece both in the poHtical and in the financial sphere. The economic bHzzard of
Economic ^ serious effect in Greece as in many other countries, and in view of the lessened
in 1032 demand tor her products m the world markets, she foimd difliciilty in meeting the service of her external loans, which had been contracted mainly for pubhc works which were still unproductive.
Early in the year various palliative measures were introduced. The movement of capital was restricted, heavy duties were imposed on imports, exports were encouraged, and a system of barter with other countries was attempted.
In January M. Venizelos visited the European capitals in


M. Venizelos in Power again {1928-32) 179
order to try and obtain a loan which would enable Greece
Financial budget, pay interest on her j. external loans and avoid inflation. As a result tjpcu ties. Otto Niemeyer was sent by the League of
Nations to report on the financial position of Greece. On 5 th March the Prime Minister stated that the Government could carry on if a loan of j(j2,500,000 was obtained and would resign rather than repudiate its pubhc debts. The League Financial Committee recommended that Greece should meet her foreign payments due on ist May and suspend the sinking funds, and that she should be granted a loan of ^2,000,000. This did not meet the Government’s minimum requirements, and M. Venizelos offered to resign in favour of a Coahtion Government, but the leader of the Opposition, M. Tsaldaris, refused to co-operate, and the Government remained in office. In April M. Venizelos visited Geneva to plead before the Council of the League of Nations but failed to obtain better terms, and therefore instructed the Greek Ministers in the European capitals to approach the foreign bondholders, asking them to agree to the postponement of interest due on ist May and the suspension of the sinking funds. The Budget introduced on 20th May made no provision for sinking funds but set aside a sum of over a milhon pounds for interest on loans, which, however, was to be retained for the moment in Greece. On 30th July a decree was issued under wliich all foreign currency deposited in the banks was converted into drachmas at the rate of 100 for the dollar and 385 for the pound. After prolonged discussion an agreement was reached with the foreign bondholders that during 1932-3 payment should be made of 30 per cent, of the amount due as interest on
loans. In the political sphere two measures proposed by the Govern¬ ment in May 1932 aroused bitter controversy. One was a Bill for the adoption of proportional representation, M. Venizelos eventually passed. The other was resigns and then ^ j^g^sure for the restriction of the Press, which resumes ojfice. considered necessary by the Government
owing to the violent tone of the RoyaHst papers. It met with such determined opposition that on 21st May M. Venizelos resigned. The Repubfican leader, M. Papanastasiou, then formed a Cabinet of his own supporters after failing to enhst the support


i8o M. Venizelos in Power again {1928-32)
of the Populist Party under M. Tsaldaris, but resigned on his first appearance before the Chamber, and on 5 th June M. Venizelos again assumed office. At this juncture the army intervened, and a MiHtary League was formed to support the RepubHc. It was alleged by his
Til M'Vf opponents that M. Venizelos was responsible for Lea ue *this move, and he replied by challenging the ^ ' leaders of the various opposition parties to give a pledge not to raise the question of the regime during the coming ten years, and by asserting that, if they did so, the Mihtary League would disband itself. The pledge was refused, and the Chamber was dissolved on i8th August after a speech from the Prime Minister in which he reviewed the achievements of his four years of office and justified his foreign and domestic policy.
Polling for the new Chamber took place on 25th September. It produced a situation of stalemate, the Liberals obtaining
Elections of seats, the Populist Party 96, the Progressive Sept 1932 Republicans 15, and the other various groups 40. An attempt was, therefore, made to form a Coahtion Government of all the parties except the Com¬ munists, but it proved impossible. Eventually, on 4th November, M. Tsaldaris succeeded in forming a Cabinet by a Coalition from the various anti-Venizehst parties, MM. Venizelos, Kaphantaris, and Papanastasiou undertaking not to outvote the Government during the coming eight months. M. Tsaldaris’ position, however, was difficult, since he could only muster III supporters against an opposition of 129 members.
On 26th September Macedonia, especially Chalcidice, and Thessaly were visited by a severe earthquake, which caused heavy casualties. The British Mediterranean fleet arrived early on the scenes with rehef


CHAPTER XXI
THE REACTION TOWARDS MONARCHISM AND THE B^STORATION OF KING GEORGE II (1933-5)
THE beginning of the year 1933 found the minority Govern¬ ment of M. Tsaldaris in a precarious position. During January r his Finance Minister, M. Angelopoulos, resigned
M Tsaldaris' because he disagreed with the policy of including in the Budget the funds necessary for paying 30 per cent, or the amount due to loreign bond¬ holders. The general financial poHcy of the Government was attacked by M. Venizelos ; and when M. Tsaldaris asked for a vote of confidence and failed to obtain it, he resigned on 13 th January and M. Venizelos formed another Cabinet, which was destined to be short-hved. The Chamber was then dissolved, and new elections were held with the result that iii Liberals, 131 members of the Populist Party, and 6 Independents were returned. On the evening of the Election Day, 5 th March, General Plastiras, who, it will be recalled, had been at the head of the , revolution of 1923, was at M. Venizelos’ house
d'dM^of listening to the results of the poll. When it March 1 became clear that the Populist Party was going ^933- obtain a majority, he went out and seized the
Ministry of War and dispatched troops and armoured cars to patrol the streets. The next day no newspapers were allowed to appear, and at midday a manifesto was issued stating that, since Parhamentary rule had broken down and a civil war was imminent, the General and his supporters had taken charge of affairs pending the appointment of a government strong enough to deal with the crisis. The coup d’etat failed owing to lack of support from the soldiers and populace, and was put down after desultory street fighting, in which the casualties were insignificant. General Plastiras escaped and succeeded in reaching Rhodes. After discussions had taken place between President Zaimis,
13


182 The Reaction towards Monarchism and
Attempted
assassination of
M. Venizelos.
M. Venizelos, M. Tsaldaris, and General Othonaios, the last
M Tsaldari- was commissioned by the President to
a' P ni r restore order and hand over the administration again reniter. party which had obtained the majority
at the election. On loth March, therefore, M. Tsaldaris again became Prime Minister. On 6th June in the evening M. and Mme. Venizelos were motoring back to the capital from Kephissia followed by a second car containing members of M. Venizelos’ bodyguard. About six miles outside the city they were joined by another car, the occupants of which began to fire upon them. The tyres of the second 'car were punctured and one of its passengers killed. M. Venizelos’ car drove on, followed by the strange car, from which some fifty shots were fired at it, but the shooting was poor and M. Venizelos was unharmed, though Mme Venizelos was injured by broken glass and the chauffeur was wounded. The would-be assassins were not arrested, and connivance on the part ofhigh officials of the police was suspected. Much time was spent in the Chamber during the rest of the year arguing questions which arose out of the coup d'etat. The Government proposed that senior officers who had supported General Plastiras should be retired from the army, and a Bill to this effect was passed by the Chamber and, though at first rejected by the Senate, eventually became law. Next, General Metaxas insisted on the impeachment of M. Venizelos for complicity in the coup d'etat. M. Venizelos, in defending himself, spoke in praise of General Plastiras and roused an uproar in the House ; whereupon the Liberal deputies left the Chamber and threatened to stay away unless the Government could guarantee the protec¬ tion of members and the right of free speech. The Prime Minister refused to allow the discussion of the motion for impeachment in the absence of M. Venizelos and the Liberals, and when General Metaxas insisted on his motion, he put an end to the dispute by proclaiming an amnesty for all those who had been concerned in the coup d'etat. M. Tsaldaris, who genuinely wished to bring about political appeasement and showed tact and patience in the methods which he employed, did his best to establish a modus viuendi with the Liberal Party, but found M. Venizelos quite unwilling to compromise.


the Restoration of King George II [1933-f) 183
In Foreign Affairs there was some activity during the year, but no complications arose which threatened the relations of P . .rr- Greece with other states. The Turkish Foreign f^inister visited Athens in July. In September ^933- ^ Tsaldaris and M. Maximos, his Foreign
Minister, visited Ankara and signed a Greco-Turkish Treaty which amplified the scope of the Treaty of 1930. Negotiations with Bulgaria were begun in November to settle outstanding economic questions but made little progress. In December M. Maximos visited Zagreb, where he met King Alexander and members of the Jugoslav Cabinet, and then proceeded to Paris, Rome, and London in order to establish relations between the Greek Government and the Cabinets of those Powers, who had long been accustomed to regard M. Venizelos as the sole fountain¬ head of Greek policy. Trade Agreements were signed during the year with Albania and Soviet Russia. The Fourth Balkan Conference met at Salonica in November. „ r R y; Amongst other business it repeated the resolu
Conference passed at the Third Conference held in the ■ previous year in favour of a multi-lateral pact between the Balkan States. The tenth anniversary of the foundation of the Republic was feted during Marcli 1934. Though Greece was at the
The Tenth under a government of monarchist conf victions, the Prime Minister on assuming office nnwersary oj undertaken not to raise the question of t e epu ic. regime, and so found himself unable to
object to the celebrations, but the advantage was naturally taken of the occasion by the Republicans. The pohtical situation in 1934 was still dominated by the deadlock between the Government and the Opposition, the , .... former having a majority in the Chamber, e po itica vvliile the Liberals had the upper hand in the
impasse. Senate and so were able to block any measure
passed in the Lower House. There were several bones of con¬ tention between the Government and its opponents, of which the most serious were the question of the reform of the electoral system and the approaching election to the Presidency of the Republic. At the last general election the votes had been counted on the system of proportional representation, and


184 The Reaction towards Monarchism and
the Government now wished to revert to the majority system. M. Zaimis’ five years’ tenure of the office of President was due to expire at the end of the year and the Government was anxious to see him re-elected, though he was now nearly eighty years of age, but his re-election could only be secured by the co-operation of the Liberal majority in the Senate. M. Venizelos seized the opportunity to attempt a bargain with M. Tsaldaris and offered the support of his party for the election of M. Zaimis, if the Government would yield to his views about the electoral system and also with regard to changes in the method of superannuation in the army ; if the Government refused to compromise, he threatened to stand for the Presidency himself. M. Tsaldaris would only go as far as to declare his readiness to facilitate an agreement between the Government and the Opposition for a new electoral law, if M. Zaimis’ candidature received the general support of all parties. Party dissensions, therefore, continued and culminated in a violent scene in the Chamber in June, when, during a passage of arms between General Kondylis, the Minister
• qP War, and M. Papanastasiou, leader of the m t e am er. ^ chair was hurled and struck
the latter statesman. This precipitated a general mele'e, after which the opposition parties withdrew from the Chamber and refused to return. Finding that all attempts at compromise were useless, the Government introduced its own Electoral Bill, which was promptly thrown out by the Senate. A further dispute then arose over the article of the Constitution which provided for a joint sitting of both Houses when a Bill passed by the Chamber was rejected by the Senate, the Opposition maintaining that this procedure was obligatory, the Government that it was permissive. The political deadlock now appeared to be complete, and, as the date of the Presidential election approached, it seemed P . , f that the only possible solution was to dissolve .5 ^ the Chamber and hold fresh elections. At the
M. Zaimis as t -i i
President however, seventeen Liberal Senators approached the Prime Minister with an offer to support the candidature of M. Zaimis if M. Tsaldaris would undertake to repeal the electoral law. A joint sitting of both Houses was accordingly held on 19th October and M. Zaimis was re-elected President.


the Restoration of King George II {1933-5) 185
Meanwhile those who had been guilty of the attempt on the
life of M. Venizelos on 6th June 1933 were still at large. But
M Venizelos October M. Venizelos’ private police ^ ^ , arrested a notorious brigand, Karathanasis by
name, who was under suspicion of having taken
part in the outrage. This arrest by unofficial police after the
failure of the official agents still further embittered the relations
between the Venizelists and the Government. The Minister
for Home Affairs at once resigned, and the Chiefs of the Athens
Police and of the Gendarmerie were replaced ; but the trial of
the accused was further postponed. M. Tsaldaris again attempted
to bring about a reconciliation with M. Venizelos, but he refused
to return to his duties as a deputy and retired to Crete.
The most important event affecting Greece during 1934 in
the sphere of external relations was the signature of the Balkan
The Balkan P^ct. We have seen how, at the successive
Pact of 1 Balkan Conferences, progress had been made ^ ' in securing co-operation in the economic and
cultural fields, and how tentative suggestions had been made for
joint political action. The time now seemed ripe when the
Balkan States could follow the example of the Little Entente and
the Baltic States by combining to safeguard the status quo against
Treaty revision and form a block which would be able to hold
its own amongst the Powers and secure its members from the
interference and patronage of more powerful neighbours.
The signatories to the Pact, which was signed on 9th February
1934, were Greece, Turkey, Rumania, and Jugoslavia. Every
. 1 r attempt had been made to induce Bulgaria to
The attitude of .. K
. . join, but, though the Bulgarian Government
* ' expressed its willingness to co-operate in a Pact
of Non-aggression, it refused to commit the country to any
perpetuation of the existing order, that is to say, to a renunciation
of claims to treaty revision.
The Pact declared that the signatory Powers wished to
consolidate peace in the Balkans and were ‘ firmly resolved to
, . . guarantee respect for existing contractual agree
ofthe^Pact'^'^^ ments and the maintenance of the established ^ ‘ territorial order ’. They, therefore, mutually
guaranteed the ‘ security of all the Balkan frontiers ’ and under¬
took to ‘ consult one another on measures to be taken, if their


i86 The Reaction towards Monarchism and
The Greek
Language Ques¬
tion in Albania.
interests were affected, and not to embark on political action or
assume political obligations in respect of any Balkan State which
was not a signatory without mutual discussion The adherence
of the other Balkan States (Bulgaria and Albania) would be ‘ an
object of favourable examination ’ by the signatory Powers.
The signature of the Pact was unfavourably received in
Bulgaria, where the assurances that it was not in any way directed
against Bulgaria’s interests were regarded with suspicion. Nor
was there great enthusiasm for it in Greece, where the Opposition
criticized it as unwise and unnecessary, and extracted an assur¬
ance from the Government that Greece would not be involved
in war if any of the signatory Powers was attacked by a non
Balkan State.
A disagreement with Albania on the language question in
the autumn of 1934 aroused considerable excitement in Athens.
The action of the Albanian Government in
forbidding instruction in secular schools in any
language except Albanian was really inspired by
a desire to discourage Italian propagandism, but
it indirectly affected Greece and gave rise to protests. The
Albanian Government, however, waived its insistence on the
use of Albanian as the medium of instruction in Greek schools,
but required that teachers in these schools should be drawn
from the Greek minority in Albania and not appointed from
Greece.
The economic improvement which had begun in 1933 con¬
tinued in 1934. Both the revenue and the trade figures showed
. a marked increase, and the restriction of imports
. and the control or the exportation or toreisn
currency maintained the drachma at a steady
level. The cover of gold and foreign exchange reached 4000
million drachma in June 1934 as compared with 1600 million at the end of 1932.
The year 1935 opened with a promise of more harmonious
relations between the political parties in the Greek Chamber.
The political joint action of the Government and the Opposition in the re-election of M. Zaimis as
Jan ipj^ President or the Republic had proved that co¬ operation was not impossible, and before the
end of 1934 the opposition members had returned to their duties


the Restoration of King George II {ig33-3) 187
in the Chamber, Perhaps the continued absence in Crete of
M. Venizelos, who refused to return to Athens until steps had
been taken to bring to trial those who had been arrested on
suspicion of having been implicated in the attempt on his life,
contributed to a more peaceful political atmosphere. On i6th
January 1935 a combined meeting of the party leaders took place
at which agreement was reached on a programme of develop¬
ment during the coming six years, which included plans for the
reorganization of the defences of the country and the construc¬
tion of a large cruiser and a number of destroyers and submarines.
On 1st March, however, a military rising, which had been
The attem ted some months in secret preparation, suddenly P 1 ■ r threw the country into a turmoil. In spite of
March^i*^^ ^ assurances by M. Tsaldaris that he had no designs against the Republican regime, the
extreme Republicans seem to have decided that a movement in
favour of the Monarchy was making headway in the country
Its causes have resented that a Government of Royalist sympathies should continue to direct
the policy of the Republic. In particular, the more ardent
Republicans among the officers of the Fleet and Army feared
that, if a restoration of the Monarchy took place, they would
inevitably lose their commands, and they, therefore, determined
to forestall such a possibility by forcibly ejecting the existing
Failure of the Government. The insurgents, therefore, led by , / a group of retired officers seized the Military euo utton oti College and the barracks of the Evzoncs in
t e main an . Athens and the arsenal at Salamis. The flag-ship
Averof and several smaller naval units put to sea and summoned
the garrisons of the provinces by a wireless proclamation to join
the movement to overthrow the Government. The only re¬
sponse from mainland Greece came from Macedonia, where
General Kamenos proclaimed the Revolution and rallied a force
round him. At Salonica the timely action of the Corps Com¬
mander in arresting officers suspected of complicity prevented
any rising, but the rebels seized Serres, Demir-Hissar, Drama, and
Cavalla ; but, when General Kondyhs, the Minister of War,
arrived in Macedonia and took the field against the rebels, the
insurrection quickly collapsed. General Kamenos and some of
the other officers who had joined him fled across the frontier


i88 The Reaction towards Monarchism and
and surrendered to the Bulgarian authorities. In Athens the
movement faded to enhst the support either of the majority of
the troops or of the general pubhc, and the insurgents were soon
isolated in two main groups and overpowered.
Meanwhde the Averof and the accompanying destroyers
had made their way to Suda Bay in Crete, where M. Venizelos
The ebel Heet himself at the head of the movement. . , „ After establishing their own nominee as tn t e gean. Governor-General of Crete and deposing the
loyal authorities the insurgents left for Samos, Chios, and
Mitylene, harassed by the Greek Air Force, which had remained
^ r.f loyal. But the fadure of the movement in the
Collapse of the ■ i i i i i • i i
n I . capital and on the mainland m general made
Revolution. c ^ ^ ^ ° i i i i
further operations at sea useless, and the rebel
officers decided that they had better escape whde there was yet
time. They, therefore, left the fleet to make its submission to
the Government and fled to Italian territory in Rhodes, where
M. Venizelos also arrived on 13 th March. The movement
coUapsed because it was badly organized and led, and because
pubhc opinion was against it. M. Venizelos retired to France.
His participation in the attempted revolution was almost the
last and certainly the least creditable act of one who had gained
a high reputation as a statesman and to whom Greece owed much in the past.
On the suppression of the rising the Government was faced
with the problem of punishing the ringleaders. The Prime
The punishment immediately declared that exemplary
ofthe insutgenis. P'‘“*men' would be ^cted on ie guUty and that the Army and Navy would be purged
of officers, and the civil service of officials, who had f^ed in
their duty to the State. A court martial at Salonica condemned
one officer to death and passed severe sentences on a number
of others. General Kamenos and nine other officers who had
escaped into Bulgaria and eight others who had fled to Turkey
were sentenced to death. On 22nd April General Papoulas,
President of the Republican Defence League, was condemned
to death and immediately executed. M. Venizelos was con¬
demned to death in his absence, together with General Plastiras,
who had been chosen leader of the rising but had taken no
active part. M. Venizelos’ son Kyriakos received a sentence of


the Restoration of King George II {1933-3) 189
ten years’ and General Gonatas of five years* imprisonment.
A large number of civil servants, university professors, and
schoolmasters were dismissed, and, beside those officers who had
been court-martialled, some nine hundred were cashiered, sus¬
pended or placed on the retired hst. These drastic measures
caused some consternation not only among the pubhc in Greece
but also in foreign covmtries, and the British, French, and
American Ministers in Athens were instructed by their Govern¬
ments to recommend the Greek Government to mitigate their severity towards the rebels.
General KondyHs, whose prompt action had put down the
rising, was made Deputy Premier in March. On ist April the
Chamber, which had already approved the steps taken by the
Government to suppress the movement, passed measures abohsh
ing the Senate, suspending the permanency of the judiciary
and of the Civil Service, and dissolving the House. 9th June
was fixed as the date of a general election, and the members then
elected were to meet as a National Assembly.
Another effect of the failure of the rising was to raise in an
acute form the question of the possible restoration of the mon
. r archy. A declaration was made at the end of
,her!ZZ«if ‘’y
the 1^0 clfch Govcriimcnt, tn.3.t) 3J.tiiou.^ri ill tiic politicil parties had recognized the Repubhc, the govern¬
ment would submit the question of the future regime to the nation
if there was sufficient evidence for the demand for such action.
The General Election, in which the Repubhean Parties took
no part, was held on 9th June 193 5 and resulted in the return of
243 members of M. Tsaldaris’ Populist Party, 37 followers of
General KondyHs, 7 followers of General Metaxas, and 6
Independents,
The first meeting of the National Assembly was held on
1st July ; it voted in favour of a plebiscite, leaving the fixing of
. r the date to the Government. Some members
f ^ of the Cabinet led by General KondyHs, in view
the plebtscUe. r 1 1 ^ ^
^ of reports that the Government meant to postpone
the plebiscite, pressed M. Tsaldaris to declare his personal attitude
on the question of the future regime. When he refused to do
so. General KondyHs resigned, but was included in a new Cabinet
immediately formed by M. Tsaldaris, in which five of the


190 The Reaction towards Monarchism and
former members were not included. After further controversy
and more threats of resignation from General Kondyhs, the
Government issued a proclamation urging the nation to vote
for the restoration of the monarchy at the plebiscite, which was
fixed for 3rd November. On loth October, however, under
pressure from the extreme Royahsts, M. Tsaldaris again resigned
and was succeeded as Premier by General Kondylis, who formed
a Cabinet in which M. Theotokis was Foreign Minister. The
Government then obtained from the National Assembly a vote
in favour of proclaiming Greece to be a Monarchical State, but
on the understanding that the return of the King should not
take place until after the plebiscite. General Kondylis was
meanwhile appointed Regent, and M. Zaimis functions as
President of the Republic automatically came to an end.
King George II of Greece, who, as we have seen, had occupied
the throne from 28th September 1922 to 19th December 1923,
- was now forty-five years of age. On leaving The remn oj Greece he had made his headquarters in London King George II. ^ well-known figure in Enghsh society.
It had been obvious ever since the victory of the Royalists in
the election of 9th June 1934 that sooner or later he would be
called upon to return to Greece. From the first he made it
clear that he would not re-ascend the throne at the invitation
of a single party but only if an overwhelming majority as
expressed by a plebiscite demanded his return. The plebiscite of 3rd November 1935, which is generally
believed to have been stage-managed by the army, resulted,
according to the official returns, in a vote of 97 per cent, in favour
of the Restoration. Thereupon the Regent and the Cabinet
took the oath of allegiance to King George II, and a delegation
was sent to London to invite him to return and resume the
Royal functions. He left London on 14th November and, after
visits to Paris and Rome en route, reached Athens on 25th Novem¬
ber and was received with general rejoicings.
On the King’s arrival General Kondylis submitted to him
. . . the resignation of the Government and was
Ge^mal^^^ requested to carry on the administration. But oti a enera difficulties soon arose between the King and
his Ministers. King George, who was anxious
to pursue a pohey of political appeasement, insisted on the


the Restoration of King George II {1933-5) 191
granting of an amnesty to all political offenders, while General
Kondylis felt himself unable to accept an amnesty of so general
and unconditional a kind. The Cabinet, therefore, resigned
and was replaced by a non-Party Ministry in which M. Demertzis
was Prime Minister. The General Amnesty was then proclaimed,
and the King dissolved the National Assembly, and 26th January
1936 was fixed as the date of the General Election. M. Venizelos,
who, on the insistence of the King, was included in the General
Amnesty, recommended the Liberal Party not to oppose the
new regime and expressed a hope that the King, by continuing
to follow the wise path upon which he had already entered,
would consolidate his position on the throne and bring unity
to the nation.
In the sphere of international affairs the unprovoked invasion
of Abyssinia by Italy in the summer of 1935 made it clear to
^ . Greece that for the moment Italian Imperialism
was not going to launch its thunders against the
sanctions against i- 1 ®/-i
j . ^ Balkans, and on this account there was a reeling
of relief. But Greece and the other countries
of the Balkan Entente, as members of the League of Nations,
could not remain mere onlookers. They had soon to make up
their minds whether or not to take part in the application of
economic sanctions against Italy under Article 16 of the Covenant.
Greece, together with the other members of the Entente and also
Bulgaria, decided to join in the League Sanctions in spite of the
serious loss of trade which was involved. In informing the
Italian Government of their action the Greek Government took
the opportunity of pointing out that their Treaty of Friendship
with Italy contained a clause reserving to Greece the right to
fulfil any undertakings which arose under the Covenant of the
League. In December Greece, together with Jugoslavia and
Turkey, took up a still more definite position when the British
Government asked whether their support would be forth¬
coming against Italy if she took military action in retaliation for
sanctions. They all replied in the affirmative. The idea that
Great Britain was taking the lead in resisting Italian aggression
produced a profound impression in die Near East, and a corre¬
sponding disillusionment ensued when Great Britain, having
induced the smaller states to take a firm Hne, herself began to
weaken in her opposition to Italy.


192 Restoration of King George II (ipjjs)
On 22nd August 1935 Admiral Paul Koundouriotis,
^ the first President of the Greek Repubhc
f and the Grand Old Man of the Greek
mtra political world, died at the age of eighty Koundouriotis. ^years.


CHAPTER XXII
GENERAL METAXAS BECOMES DICTATOR (1936-9)
THE General Election held on 26th January 1936 only resulted
in a further political deadlock. The Liberals under M. Sophoulis,
The General succeeded M. Venizelos as leader of
EUclioZfhn. 77 *eats and had the support , or the Agrarian and Repubhean Parties, which
' gave them a total of 142 votes; the Populist
Party of M. Tsaldaris secured 69 seats and received the support
of the 63 members of the Popular-Radical Party led by General
Kondylis and M. Theotokis, 7 members of General Metaxas’
party and 4 members of the Macedonian group, giving them
a total strength of 143 members. The result was that the Com¬
munists with 15 members, like the Irish Nationahst members
in the British Parliament of 1910, held the balance between the
two groups.
On 31st January General Kondylis died suddenly of heart
failure at the age of fifty-seven after a romantic career during
1 1 which he rose from a private in the Greek Armv Deaths ofGeneral . King-maker ’
. . or 1935, and starting asasupporter or M. Venizelos emer zts. ^jccame leader of the ultra-Royalists. On
7th March M. Sophoulis, who had been elected President of
the Chamber, attempted to form a Cabinet but failed to secure
the co-operation of M. Tsaldaris. He offered, however, to
support M. Demertzis, who on 15th March formed a Cabinet
in which General Metaxas was Deputy-Premier and Minister
of War. But before he met the Chamber, M. Demertzis in
„ his turn suddenly died on 13th April and was
General Metaxas , , n ■ xa- • ^ i xm
, succeeded as Prime Mmister by General Metaxas.
Minister Chamber met at the end of April and passed a vote of confidence in the Government.
It was then prorogued for five months after empowering the
Government to govern by decrees subject to the approval of a
193


Death of
M. Venizelos.
194 General Metaxas becomes Dictator {igj6-g)
Committee of forty members which included all the Party
leaders. Death was busy amongst Greek political leaders in the year
1936, On i8th March M. Venizelos died in Paris at the age of
seventy-two. Eight times Prime Minister of
Greece, he was undoubtedly the greatest states¬
man that Modern Greece has produced and one
of the few Greeks who have become prominent figures in
European politics. His chief services to Greece, which were
performed in the sphere of international rather than home
affairs, were his championship of the Greek cause in Crete ; his
part in the formation of the Balkan Alliance, which brought
Greece a great extension of territory as the result of the Balkan
Wars; the measures which he took to enable Greece to secure
her interests by fighting on the side of the Alhes in the war of
1914-18 ; his representation of Greece at the Peace Conference
and at the Conference of Lausanne ; his settlement of the
differences between Greece and Jugoslavia ; and his measures for
the reconcihation of Greece and Turkey. Against these services
must be set his advocacy of the unfortunate war against Turkey
in Asia Minor and his participation in the abortive revolution
of 1935 ; M. Venizelos was something of a political gambler,
and these were ventures that failed. His methods may have
sometimes been open to criticism, and he was often unhappy
in his choice of lieutenants, but he was a true patriot, and, but
for him, Greece to-day would bulk much less prominently
on the map of Europe and the ‘ Great Idea ’ of the consolidation
of the Greek people would never have been carried into effect.
King George II wisely showed his appreciation of M. Venizelos,
when, in spite of his former opposition to King Constantine, he
insisted that his name should be included in the amnesty of 1935 ;
but even after his death, party feeling still ran so high that the
suggestion that M. Venizelos should lie in state in Athens on his
way to burial in his native island had to be cancelled for fear of
disturbances, and his body was conveyed direct to Crete for burial.
On 16th May M. Tsaldaris, leader of the Populist Party and
Death of ex-Prime Minister, died suddenly. By the
MTU' deaths of General Kondylis, M. Demertzis, and
M. Tsaldaris within a period of three months,
three important parties were deprived of their chiefs.


General Metaxas becomes Dictator {ig36-gi) 195
The most striking event in international politics in 1936 was
the Balkan Conference held at Belgrade from 4th to 6th May.
- , Greece was represented by General Metaxas,
General Metaxas , . , ^ ^ ,
, „ ,, who with some support rrom the Turkish
at the Balkan ^ ^ ■ j 1 • ir 1
_ ^ r delegation exerted himseli to reduce to a
^ ■' minimum the obligations assumed by Greece
' under the Balkan Pact. Greece made it clear
that she had no intention of taking up arms if the opposing side
included Italy as well as Bulgaria and Hungary.
In June Dr. Schacht, the astute German Minister ofEconomics,
visited Athens and made an agreement for balancing the trading
Financial a ree between Greece and Germany, which, tnancta agree owing to purchases of tobacco and metals, ment with u ji ■ c c u
^ showed a large sum in favour of Greece, by
extensive purchases from Germany, mainly of
military material. M. Tsouderos at a meeting of the shareholders
of the Bank of Greece, of which he was governor, issued a timely
warning of the danger of upsetting the economic balance of the
country by abandoning the cultivation of cereals in favour of
luxury products, such as tobacco, which might at the moment
command attractive prices abroad, but of which there might
easily be a dangerous over-production.
The second half of 1936 failed to show any progress towards
the unity of Greece for which King George II had hoped when
The failure of re-ascended the throne. The constant strife „ . . j between the pohtical parties, which had little
Monarch regard for the interests of the country and played each for its own hand, was carried on in the
Parliamentary Committee, as before in the Chamber, and led
to constant obstruction, which prevented any useful legislation.
Further, the almost simultaneous death of the chief party leaders
made discipline stiU more difficult to enforce. By the proroga¬
tion of the Chamber for five months the Communists had been
deprived of their controlling vote, but they were active in
promoting disorders and agitation all over the country ; at
Salonica, for example, a strike was fomented which was only
put down after considerable bloodshed. The Cabinet realized
the necessity of taking steps to deal with the situation and pre¬
pared a decree fixing minimum wages, but at the same time they
exasperated the trades-unionists by advocating compulsory


196 General Metaxas becomes Dictator {igjd-gi)
arbitration in labour disputes and Government control of trades
union funds. The union leaders, therefore, replied by fixing
5th August 1936 for a general strike.
In the face of this threat General Metaxas reahzed that any
step that had to be taken must be taken quickly. He knew that,
„ » , T . if the Chamber were summoned to debate what
General Metaxas 11111 1 • • 11
, measures snould be adopted, precious time would
hprotfl^S ^ Dictator wasted in fruitless discussion and nothing would be done to save Greece from the possible
danger of following the example of Spain and plunging into
civil war. On 4th August, therefore, at the eleventh hour, he
obtained King George’s signature to decrees proclaiming martial
law, suspending articles of the Constitution which affected the
personal hberty of the subject, and dissolving the Chamber.
Henceforward he ruled without a Parhament and established a
Dictatorship which was to last until his death. He himself,
besides being Premier, held the portfolios of Foreign Affairs,
War, the Marine, and the Air ; the rest of his Cabinet consisted
partly of specialists and partly of retired naval and military
officers of tried experience and character.
There is little doubt that the coup d’etat was the result of a
sudden decision imposed by the critical position of affairs, but
His social policy. General Metaxas soon showed that he meant ^ to use his autocratic powers for the benefit of
the community. He drew up a programme which included
sweeping social reforms, and measures for the development
of industry and for the reorganization of the armed forces.
Greece had become more and moro the prey of social unrest
and agitation. To cure these evils, General Metaxas, by a series
of decrees, introduced compulsory arbitration on labour dis¬
putes and collective contracts, an eight-hour day in all industries,
a minimum wage for all workers, a system of health insurance
and health services, holidays with pay and a Sunday rest. He
made a beginning of improved housing conditions, and he
remitted about one-third of the debts of the Greek peasants,
chiefly refugees from Asia Minor and Bulgaria, who had been
hard hit by the fall of agricultural prices and were unable to
meet their obligations to the Government, which had settled them
on the land. The administration of Athens, its suburbs, and the
Peiraeus was placed under the control of a Governor with


General Metaxas becomes Dictator {igj6-^) 197
Cabinet rank assisted by a Prefect in charge of the municipal
and poHce authorities. For the country at large he instituted
a ten years programme of development of road construction
^d public works. He devoted specif attention to the strengthen¬
ing of the army and navy and fortifying the frontiers, and he
took stern measures to ban pohtics from the barrack-room. He
inaugurated a youth movement and a Greek version of the German ‘ Strength through Joy ’ movement.
Like other dictators, Gener^ Metaxas found that in order to
secure his position he had to resort to drastic censorship of the
Measures of insisted on the use of the blue repression. pencil upon the Greek classics, refusing to allow a pubhc performance of the Antigone of Sophocles without severe ‘ cuts ’ of passages which savoured too much of
criticism of authority, and forbidding the reading in schools of
the Funeral Oration of Pericles because of its encomium on
democracy. Local government, when it showed too much
independence, was suspended in several towns, and the Chair
of Constitutional Law in the University of Athens was abolished.
On entering upon his dictatorship General Metaxas stated
that he had assumed the minimum of power necessary to face
General Metaxas danger of Communism and would not
steles hh posilicn. « until the social order had been completely stabilized ; the nation must submit to discipline, and party adherents must renounce and forget their
parties which no longer existed ; no new elections would be
held, since the old parhamentary system was ended ; the new
Government was permanent and would apply the newly estab
hshed system until it had achieved the regeneration of Greek society.
In foreign affairs he announced that there would be no
change in the policy of Greece, which would continue to be
based on a close understanding with Turkey and the maintenance of the Balkan Entente.
The result of General Metaxas’ measures was that, outwardly
at least, a tranquilhty, to which Greece had long been a stranger,
reigned throughout the country. The only challenge to his
rule was revealed by the discovery on ist December 1936 of a
plot against the Government, which involved the arrest and


198 General Metaxas becomes Dictator {ig36-g)
trial of nine persons, who were condemned to periods of im¬
prisonment of from six months to two years. On 15th September 1936 M. Alexander Zaimis, ex-President
of the Republic, who had been ten times Prime Minister
, . several times taking office at a crisis in the history
country—for five years High Comattnts. missioner of Crete, and Governor of the Bank
of Greece, passed away at the age of eighty-one years. The
descendant of a family which had taken a prominent part in the
War of Indepenence, he had performed inestimable services to
his country. A strong, silent man—a combination of quahties
rare among Greek pohticians—he enjoyed the confidence of the
country throughout a long career. It is said that in his will
King George I advised his successor. King Constantine, always
to remember that he was a constitutional monarch and to
consult M. Zaimis if ever he found himself in difficulties.
On 17th November the mortal remains of King Constantine
and his wife Queen Sophia and of Queen Olga, wife of King
George I, were brought back to Greece and interred at Tatoi,
the royal estate m Attica.
In February 1937 the annual Balkan Conference was held at
Athens and revealed the usual harmony among its members,
Aff ■ expressed their approval of the Treaty oretgn ^airs Friendship concluded between Jugoslavia and
Bulgaria. During May Ismet Inonii,^ the
Turkish Premier, visited Athens bearing cordial greetings from
Kemal Ataturk, but it was understood he had the further mission
of warning General Metaxas that his pro-Nazi and pro-Fascist
leanings were causing some alarm among his Turkish alhes.
The visit was returned in the autumn by General Metaxas.
King George visited London, Paris, and Rome and doubtless
conveyed to the three Governments the resolve of Greece to
keep on good terms with the Mediterranean Powers without
identifying his country with any one of them to the exclusion
of the other two. About the same time Baron von Neurath,
the German Foreign Secretary, visited Athens, and Dr. Schacht
also came for a second time to make arrangement for economic
^ He had assumed the name of Inonii, just as Kemal adopted that of Ataturk, when a decree was issued in Turkey compelling all Turkish citizens to add surnames to their names.


General Metaxas becomes Dictator (ipj6-p) igg
exchanges between the two countries. An agreement was
Finance and concluded with the German Government for
economic affairs. ^ 350,000,000 drachmae at 3 per cent. interest repayable in six yearly instalments,
which was used to meet the armament requirements of Greece
and the early completion of her defence programme.
In April the Greek Government concluded another agreement
with the British firm of Messrs. Henry Boot and Son involving
a sum of more than ^2,000,000 to be spent on drainage and
irrigation in Thessaly and land-reclamation and flood-protection in Epirus and other work in Crete.
The question of interest on foreign loans, for which a temporary
arrangement had been made in 1936, was again discussed in July
and August 1937. Greece refused to pay more than 40 per cent,
on the coupons due in the year ending March 1938, an offer
which was refused as inadequate by the Council of Foreign
Bondholders and the Loans Committee of the League of Nations.
The wheat harvest of 1936 had been a disastrous failure ; it
was, therefore, necessary to import large quantities of foreign
grain, which was a strain on the exchange resources of the
country. On the other hand the crops of 1937 and 1938 were
much above the average. Industrial activity had been on the
increase for some years, and, as a result, unemployment had fallen
considerably, while the standard of living had risen, though at
the same time the cost of living increased. Additional taxation
proved necessary to meet the increased expenditure on the
public services and on re-armament, and severe measures were taken to prevent tax-evasion.
During the year 1938 the Government maintained a firm
grip upon the country in spite of symptoms of unrest and
. „ .1 although General Metaxas showed no signs of
T): f , L- re-establishmg the constitutional regime for
which he professed to be preparing the country
by the stern discipline to which he was subjecting it. On
28th January it was announced that a plot against the life of the
Dictator had been brought to light. Twelve party leaders,
including four ex-Ministers, were arrested and sent into exile in
the iEgean, and a number of Communists were seized on the
charge of agitating in favour of a Popular Front. In May seventy
more Communists were arrested, including four members of


200 General Metaxas becomes Dictator {ig36-g)
the dissolved Chamber. A more spectacular rising occurred in
Crete, where in July M. Mitsokaitis, a former Minister and
nephew of M. Venizelos, at the head of 500 armed men occupied
Canea, the capital of the island, and imprisoned the Governor.
The Government immediately proclaimed martial law, estab¬
lished the capital at Candia, and, sending units of the fleet and
air force and transports with troops, quickly suppressed the
rising. The ringleaders were arrested and put on trial, four of
them being condemned to death, while about a hundred others
were sentenced to various periods of imprisonment. The second
anniversary of the establishment of the dictatorship was celebrated
on 2nd August by a national fete. At the meeting of the Council of the Balkan Entente held at
Ankara in February and attended by General Metaxas as Greek
„ . .rr . delegate, it was decided that the Italian sovereignty Jjatrs Abyssinia, which had already been re
* ■ cognized by Rumania and Jugoslavia, should
be recognized by the Entente as a whole, and Greece and Turkey
followed the example of the other two member states. On
27th April the Turkish Premier and Foreign Minister visited
Athens for the signature of a Greco-Turkish Agreement of
Friendship and Neutrality, and their visit was returned by
General Metaxas in November. Conferences between the
Naval Staffs of Greece, Turkey, Rumania, and Jugoslavia were
held inJuly, and between the Military General Staffs in November.
On 31st July 1938 a Treaty of Friendship and Non-aggression
was signed at Salonica between the States of the Balkan Entente
and Bulgaria. This agreement recognized the
right of Bulgaria to re-arm and abrogated the
limitation of armaments clause in the Treaty of
Neuilly. Bulgaria was not required to guarantee
the existing frontiers but undertook not to
modify them by force of arms and to submit any disputes with
her neighbours to arbitration or judicial settlement. Further,
the clauses of the Treaty of Lausanne which provided for the
demilitarization of the frontiers between Bulgaria, Greece and
Turkey in Eastern Thrace were to be allowed to lapse. It looked
as if Balkan unity had at last become a reality and as if the ques¬
tion of Bulgarian access to the iEgean either at Salonica or
Dedeagatch might be amicably arranged. Unfortunately, how
Treaty between
the Balkan
Entente and
Bulgaria.


Italy seizes
Albania.
General Metaxas becomes Dictator {ig^6-g) 201
ever, when the testing moment came, the hopes of joint Balkan
action faded into thin air.
On 8th February Prince Nicholas of Greece, the third son
of King George I and uncle of King George II, died at the age
Death of Prince sixty-six years. He had left Greece in 1917,
Nicholas of when his brother King Constantine was deposed
Greece ^ time, and remained abroad until the restoration of King George II in 1935.
During his exile he successfully developed his talent for landscape
painting. His third daughter. Princess Marina, had married the
Duke of Kent in 1934, and their union was hailed in Greece as
another bond between the Greek and British nations.
On Good Friday, 7th April 1939, the Italians suddenly
landed troops at the Albanian ports and marched on Tirana.
They met with little opposition at Durazzo and
none elsewhere, and next day reached the
capital, where an Italian Government was
immediately set up. King Zog with Queen Geraldine, who
had just given birth to an heir to the vanishing throne, fled and
eventually reached Greece. The whole country was soon
overrun and annexed to Italy.
This act of wanton aggression forced the Balkan States to
decide what their future action would be if the Italian operations
were farther extended. In Greece there were rumours that an
attack on Corfu was imminent, and the Greek Government
hastened to communicate their apprehensions to the British
Government, with whom the Italian Government had concluded
an agreement which contained an undertaking that nothing
would be done to modify the status quo in the Mediterranean.
They were informed that the British Government had warned
the Italian Government that they would take a serious view if
any aggressive action was undertaken against Greece and had
received assurances that Italy had no such intentions. On
loth April the Italian Minister in Athens visited the Greek
^ . Prime Minister and assured him that the terri
Great Britain . , . 1 i- • 1 • 1 j r
tonal integrity and political independence or giv^ a guarantee would be absolutely respected. On 13 th
to reece an April Mr. Neville Chamberlain informed the
umania. House of Commons that the British Govern¬
ment, while it did not feel that there was sufficient ground for


202 General Metaxas becomes Dictator {1936-g)
bringing the Anglo-Italian Agreement to an end, attached the
greatest importance to the avoidance of any disturbance of
peace in the Balkan Peninsula and had, therefore, decided that,
if any action were taken which so threatened the independence
of Greece or Rumania as to compel the Greek or the Rumanian
Government to take mihtary measures, the British Govern¬
ment would feel obliged to lend them all the support in
their power. A similar declaration was made at the same time
by the French Government. These unqualified and unilateral
guarantees did much to calm public opinion in Greece, where it
was felt that the two Western European Democracies had
abandoned their policy of diplomatic retreat and intended in
future to take a firm stand against aggression. Meanwhile
General Metaxas took every possible mihtary precaution short
of actual mobilization and did what he could to hasten the
process of re-armament; and, when strong Itahan forces made
their appearance on the Greco-Albanian frontier, the Greek
Government replied by strengthening its own forces in that
region.
In view of possible eventuaUties attempts were made by the
Greek Government during the year 1939 to bring about a better
. . f understanding with Bulgaria, and Greece re
tonewed her offer of port facihties in a Bulgarian
Zone to be estabhshed at Salonica. But a an ntente. refused to join the Balkan Entente
as long as her territorial claims were unsatisfied, in particular
demanding the return of the Dobrudja and the provision of an
iEgean port complete with a land-corridor of approach. In
fact, Bulgaria had become more rather than less insistent upon
what she regarded as her legitimate aspirations, though she
promised to exert herself to maintain neutrality. In March
General Metaxas paid a visit to Belgrade, and in June M. Gafencu,
the Rumanian Foreign Minister, visited Athens.
On I2th July 1939 an Agreement was signed in London
under which Great Britain gave Greece credits for the purchase
... of goods to the value of more than ^2,000,000 ; mancia gree deadlock between the Greek Govern
, , ment and the Council of Foreign Bondholders
Great Britain. . . ^ 1 ^ r ■
on the question or the payment or interest on
Greek External Loans continued, though it was arranged that


General Metaxas becomes Dictator {ig^S-g) 203
a Greek economic mission should visit London early in 1940,
when the question would be discussed.
On 4th August the third anniversary of the entry into office
of General Metaxas was pubhcly celebrated. The absence in
1939 of any open opposition to the regime, such
as had occurred in 1938, might be attributed
either to the thoroughness of the totalitarian
system as now estabhshed, or else to a recogni¬
tion of the advantages of a dictatorship in the face of external
dangers. But it is to be noted that, on hearing of the Italian
invasion of Albania, the Greek political exiles in Paris, headed
by General Plastiras, announced that, in view of the perils that
threatened Greece, they withdrew their opposition to General
Metaxas.
Third Anniver¬
sary of the
Dictatorship.


CHAPTER XXIII
THE OUTBREAK OF WAR IN 1939 AND THE ITALIAN
ATTACK UPON GREECE
AS the danger of an outbreak of war between the Western
Democracies and Germany grew more imminent, Greece and
The Balkan neighbours became more and more „ , , apprehensive of what the future might have in fl e5 <in e g^ore for them. It seemed hkely that if Germany
t Tea oj war. attacked Poland, Italy might also join in and
seize the opportunity for making a descent on the Balkans.
At the time of its creation and as long as no external danger
threatened, the Balkan Entente seemed to give promise of co¬
operation by the States forming it as a sohd bloc which would
offer a common front against any aggressor. But, with Bulgaria
holding aloof, it had tended to become a league against Bulgaria’s
claim for the revision of her frontiers rather than a basis for
Balkan collaboration. As danger from without increased, each
Balkan State feared that it might be the first victim of aggression,
and the nearer it lay to the territory of a possible aggressor the
more careful it must be to give no cause of offence.
Greece had long looked to Great Britain as the most rehable
protector of the smaller nations, but, when she saw that the
^ j dismemberment of Czecho-slavakia had failed
Greece and 1 • • 1 1
^ . D • to rouse the British hon to more than an angry
lashmg or its tail, her hopes of effective aid
from that quarter were somewhat dashed. But the spontaneous
offer to Greece of a guarantee after the Itahan seizure of Albania
had shown that, though Great Britain could give nothing
beyond moral support to a Central European country in its hour
of need, she was ready to take a more practical interest in the
fate of Greece.
Moreover, Great Britain, being essentially a Naval Power,
was in a position to give effective help to a maritime country like
Greece, while Greece on her part had much to offer Great
204


Outbreak of War and Italian attack upon Greece 205
Britain in the way of harbours and sea- and air-bases, if the struggle extended to the Mediterranean. The lesson of the war of 1914-18 had not been forgotten by the Greeks. In that war small coimtries, such as Serbia and Rumania, had been overrun and conquered, but in the end sea-power had been the deciding factor, as it had been in the Napoleonic wars, and these countries had been restored and had received great accessions of territory, while the AUies of the Central Powers, such as Turkey and Bulgaria, who had thought themselves on the winning side, had finally been among the conquered. In any case Germany had no navy in the Mediterranean and the British Navy was hkely to be more than a match for the ItaHan ; and on the land side there were buffer-states between Germany and Greece. Again, her extensive sea-board and the fact that communica¬ tion between Greece and the rest of Europe is by sea rather than by land, makes Greece more susceptible to Western influence than are her Balkan neighbours. Moreover, Greece has had a historic sympathy with Great Britain ever since the days of Byron and Cochrane, and this had been re-invigorated on the battle¬ fields of Macedonia, where the Greek troops were in closer contact with the British Army than with the forces of the other AUies. But, whatever her sympathies might be, it behoved Greece to walk warily and to avoid provoking either Germany or Italy , by identifying herself too closely with their oreece an potential enemies. Moreover, she was stiU Lxermany. economicaUy dependent on Germany, whose
policy it had long been to involve the smaUer states in such a mesh of trading and barter agreements that they would naturaUy hesitate to adopt an openly hostile attitude towards her. Germany had become the best customer of Greece, who supplied her with tobacco and metals in return for armaments and material for rail¬ ways and pubhc works, with the result that many Greeks had become dependent for their Hvelihood on friendly relations
with Germany. When the crisis over Danzig ended in the declaration of war on Germany by Great Britain and France in September ^939' Italy, contrary to the general expectation. The outbreak aloof, and Greece, to her surprise, found oj war. being was she left in
peace but that Italy, so far from showing any incUnation to


206 The Outbreak of the War in ig3g
an Alliance
iuith Turkey
attack her across the Albanian frontier, was actually proposing j T j to withdraw the troops already there. Italy reece an ta y. farther and suggested a Treaty of Non¬
aggression, which Greece managed to refuse without causing any serious offence. This was followed by an exchange of notes which expressed the hope that the two Governments would be able to put their relations on a more definite footing than the Pact of Friendship concluded in October 1929, but it remained only a pious hope ; for the moment, however, Greece and Italy were on far better terms than had seemed possible a few months before when Italy had seized Albania. On 19th October 1939 a Tripartite Treaty of Alhance between Great Britain, France, and the Repubhc of Turkey was _ , . signed in Ankara and was naturally welcomed real ntam Greece. It contained the following clause :
Ctld FfCltiCC tftdkc < . 1 1 ^ • L c J
As long as the guarantees given by France and the United Kingdom to Greece and Rumania by their respective declarations of 13 th April 1939 remain in force, Turkey will co-operate effectively with France and the United Kingdom and will lend them all aid and assistance in its power in the event of France and the United Kingdom being engaged in hostihties in virtue of either of the said guarantees ’. At the beginning of 1940 Great Britain and Greece signed
jir n- j A a War Trade Agreement which to a large extent enabled Greece to shake off the grip which
Great Britain Germany had fastened upon her economic hfe J „ by substituting Great Britain for Germany as and Greece. products.
On 2nd-4th February a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the four States which had signed the Balkan Pact was held at
The Balkan Belgrade. The joint communique which was
- •. issued announced the extension of the Balkan
Forewn Ministers „ r r 1 ■ 1 r
Entente tor a further period of seven years from 9th February 1941, and recommended the maintenance of close contact between the four Ministers for Foreign Affairs until the next meeting of the Permanent Council in February 1941 ; pronouncements were also made in favour of strengthening the poHtical and economic bonds between the signatory Powers and the adoption of a joint attitude in face of


and the Italian attack upon Greece 207
the European War. These resolutions, though, at the time they were made, they may have had a reassuring effect, proved of Uttle real value. The Russian annexation of Bessarabia found the Balkan States quite incapable of presenting a united front and naturally encouraged Bulgaria also to hope for the fulfil¬ ment of her demands for frontier revision at the expense of Rumania. Greece, however, could draw comfort from two circum¬ stances—the firm attitude of Turkey and the presence of powerful Allied armies in Syria, Palestine, and Egypt. These armies, with the help of the British Mediterranean fleet, might prove a very present help in trouble and were not hampered by the difficulties of transport and communications which prevented any real help being given to Poland and Fin¬ land. Further, Greece, geographically and strategically, was in a much safer position than any other Balkan State. She had no land frontier with Germany or Russia, and it seemed unlikely that Italy, if she joined in the war, would attempt an attack from Albania on Northern Epirus, where the physical conditions were such as to discourage an invader. Lastly, for the moment the pohey of the Axis seemed to be to avoid any outbreak of hostihties in the Balkans, which would reduce the supplies which were being derived from that area and might increase the danger of a clash of interests between Germany and Soviet Russia. The Nazi conquest of Norway, Denmark, Holland, and Belgium followed by the capitulation of France in June 1940
'Ti (T f u c^tised grief and consternation in the Balkans M ^ and at the same time increased the conviction
D 71. essential to avoid any cause of friction t e a an tales, Powers. The result was that the
States which felt themselves most threatened pursued whatever pohey they thought most Hkely to enable them to save their own skins, and any thought of their common interests was abandoned ; they were united only in a strong desire not to share the fate of the smaller countries of Northern Europe. The peninsula was overrun by hordes of Germans in the guise of tourists ’ and business men and persons vaguely attached to the diplomatic staffs, who carried on barefaced propaganda. Rumania, Bulgaria, and Jugoslavia seemed to be undecided
Relations of
Greece with
Great Britain
and Turkey.


208 The Outbreak of the War in ig3g
which way to turn, Rumania rejecting the British guarantee and tending rather towards Germany, while Bulgaria and Jugo¬ slavia angled for possible support from Russia. Greece and Turkey observed a strict neutrahty and trusted to the guarantee of Great Britain, now that the Bsdkan Entente was in a state of
manifest dissolution. On 20th June 1940 Italy declared war on Great Britain. The Duce thought that he saw in the fall of France and the difficulties
Ital declares Great Britain, thus left to carry the whole
' „ . . burden of the war, a grand opportunity to share
war on Brttam. , c • 1 • l • j
the spoils or a victory, which he was convmced was now assured for Germany, without having to fight for them. It was a predatory attack on a State against which Italy had no real grievance and with which she had signed a Treaty which had settled all Mediterranean questions of any importance. In his speech announcing the Itahan declaration of war Mussolini took the opportunity to emphasize his peaceful .... intentions towards the Balkan peoples. ‘I ussomt e solemnly declare ’, he said, ‘ that Italy does not
. , , ■' j mtend to drag other peoples who are our
intentions towards . , , . ® , n- t r- • 11
Greece neighbours into the conflict. Let Switzerland, Jugoslavia, Turkey, Egypt, and Greece take note of these words of mine.’
But Greece, in spite of this assurance and of the Pact of Friendship concluded with Italy in October 1929, could not forget the Corfu incident, the annexation of Albania and the sufferings of the Greeks in the Dodecanese. Her distrust of her Western neighbour was increased by reports during the summer that 125,000 Italian troops were being concentrated in Albania, where the normal Itahan garrison had been 70,000 men, and by the sinking without warning of the Greek steamer Loula by an Itahan submarine on her way from Istanbul to Port Said.
In July rumours were abroad that the Soviet Government had sent an ultimatum to Turkey which demanded territorial
Turkey applies fo^^essions; they were officiaUy denied both in Turkey and in Russia, but considerable un¬ certainty remained as to what Russia might be planning, and in the circumstances the Turkish
Government deemed it the safest course to put immediately into operation the Protocol of the Anglo-Franco
the Protocol of
the Treaty of 1939.


and the Italian attack upon Greece 209
Turkish Treaty of Alliance which provided that ‘ the obligations undertaken by Turkey . . . cannot compel that country to take action having as its effect, or involving as its consequence, entry into armed conflict with the U.S.S.R.’. This action had the important result that Turkey still remained neutral when Greece was attacked by Italy and Article 3 of the Treaty remained inoperative.
On 4th August the fourth anniversary of the establishment of the Dictatorship of General Metaxas was celebrated. Though
The Fourth would be too much to say that his regime was
Amwers^ry of 8“”"% VenizeUst and other critics
the Dictatorship. refrained from expressmg their sentiments, since no one else would have been inclined to assume the responsibilities which rested on his shoulders and it was generally admitted that he had done much for Greece, especially in the sphere of internal reform. Further, experience had shown that any one who voiced his criticism was liable to be relegated to exile on some ^^gean island far from the cafes of the Place de la Constitution at Athens. General Metaxas had hitherto managed to steer the country along the smooth waters of neutrality without any sacrifice of national dignity or political independence, while at the same time he had refused to follow the example of Hitler and Mussolini and establish a single-party Government or poison the minds of the youth of Greece by means of a totahtarian form of education.
But action was soon to be taken by Italy which brought the crisis nearer. On 15th August the Greek cruiser Helle
The Italians (^^^5 tons), the vessel on which King George II , _ , had returned to Greece, was torpedoed by an
auiser ^ Italian submarine while at anchor off the mole at Tenos in the Cyclades, one of the crew being killed and twenty-six wounded, while casualties were also inflicted upon civilians on the quay. The Helle was on an essentially peaceful mission, being present officially in accordance with a Greek custom, decorated with bunting, in honour of the Feast of the Assumption, which is the occasion of an important pilgrimage to the island. The choice of a religious date recalled that Albania had been invaded on Good Friday. Italy’s action was generally interpreted as an attempt to intimidate Greece


210 The Outbreak of the War in igjg
preparatory to a demand for the cession of Corfu to Italy. On the following day two Greek destroyers on their way to Tenos were unsuccessfully bombed by Itahan aeroplanes. During the previous week the Itahan press had been fulminating against Greece, alleging that an Albanian, Daut Hoggia, had been murdered by the Greeks. The Itahans described this man as a ‘ patriot ’, while the Greeks asserted that he was a brigand and that he had been murdered by two other Albanians who had fled to Greece for sanctuary. A Note was sent to Athens by the Italian Government demanding the extradition of the murderers
and the payment of an indemnity. In the middle of October, while Germany was strengthening her hold on Rumania, the Itahan press campaign broke out
It lian ress ^ more violent form, demanding a tan press cession to Albania of the Jannina district and
^Greece^ coast of Epirus as far as Preveza. It also clamoured for the exclusion of British news¬ papers from Greece and the suppression of comment on the war in the Athens press. Germany at the same time demanded the revaluation of the drachma in her own favour and the granting of unlimited visas to German ‘ tourists ’. General Metaxas took up a firm position and the nation supported him. Reservists were called up for practice in the new weapons and machines recently acquired by Greece, and, in view of the dis¬ appointing harvest, arrangements were made for the importa¬ tion of cereals from Russia, while stocks of sugar were ordered from America. On 27th October the Italian wireless reported clashes on the Albanian frontier and an explosion at Santi Quaranta, an Albanian port near the Greek boundary, for which ‘ Greek or British agents ’ were said to be responsible. Such accusations formed part of the usual technique and foreshadowed an immediate crisis, which came even more quickly than was anticipated—the very next morning. At 3 a.m., 28th October 1940, the Italian Minister at Athens , . delivered to the Greek Government an ultima
Italian ultima- , . , . ^ , ,
^ „ turn, which was to expire at 6 a.m., demand
turn to Greece, . r t » .
2S,hOa.i,40. ‘"S “““Ps 'O
Strategic points , which were not specified, and promising ‘ full respect of Greek sovereignty ’. Greece was


2II
and the Italian attack upon Greece
accused of having violated her neutrality by granting naval and air bases in Thessaly to the British. Even before the ultimatum had expired, the Italians at 5.30 a.m. crossed the frontier from Albania into Greece. General Metaxas met the Itahan demands with a contemptu¬ ous refusal, exclaiming, ‘ This is tantamount to a declaration of war ’. He knew that he had the backing of the whole nation, and within a few hours the enge. Army, already partially mobihzed, was
on its way to the front. Greece had accepted the Itahan challenge. The only possible explanation of Mussolini’s action—and the initiative vmdoubtedly came from him and not from the Italian General Staff—is that he expected that Greece
Why did would submit without a struggle, a supposition
Mussoltm attack r .. u
Greece ? absolutely no warrant. He evidently hoped by a quick and cheaply-won victory to restore his own prestige and that of the Fascist party ; for dictators must be always producing results, and the prospects in North Africa were not too rosy. It seems unlikely that he acted without securing the blessing of Hitler,^ but he had prob¬ ably reahzed that the penalty of dependence on Germany might be the exclusion of Italy from the Balkans, and that he would get nothing but what he himself might win ; if he could seize Greece, he would at least secure the command of the Adriatic, and the conquest of Greece could be represented as a valuable contribution to the Axis drive towards Syria and Egypt. He can hardly have imagined that the British Govern¬ ment would fail to carry out its guarantee and come to the help of Greece. Greece was, fortunately, in a much healthier moral condition to resist an attempted invasion than the countries of Northern Europe which Germany had so easily overrun. Greek morale. Greeks are intensely patriotic, and a crisis
has the immediate effect of inducing national unity. It was also clear to the Greeks what subjection to the Axis had involved elsewhere, and they realized that any and every sacrifice was worth while to avoid a similar fate. Again, there was no ‘ fifth
^ Editor’s Note.—Cf. Ciano's Diary, 1939-1940 (Ed. M. Muggeridge, I947).
p. 297.


212 The Outbreak of the War in igjg
column ’ in Greece to welcome the invaders and cause confusion in the country ; not only was there no German or Italian minority but the relations of Greece with the Axis Powers had been those of commerce only, and they had established no stranglehold on Greek industry which might have brought a swarm of ‘ techni¬ cians ’ into the country to form a nucleus of pro-Axis influence. Indeed, the Greeks have always discouraged the settlement of foreign industries in their country, and such foreign capital as is invested there is mainly British. That Greece was under the dictatorship of General Metaxas in the hour of danger had several beneficial results. Firstly,
rr.1 . since Parhamentary Government had long been
i he Dictatorship • i ■ r •
and the crisis abeyance, there was no question of summoning the chamber to debate what policy the country should adopt, which in Greece would certainly have led to interminable discussions; the Government could on its own responsibihty decide immediately what action must be taken and give immediate orders for carrying it out, and, in a crisis, prompt action is of supreme importance. Secondly, being free of parliamentary control and Minister for War as well as Premier, General Metaxas had been able to build up, out of the admirable material ready to his hand, a strong and united national army without the interference of party influences; and, himself a profound student of war and strategy—he had been known as ‘ the Little Moltke ’ when he was a student of the Kriegsakademie in Berlin and had been Assistant-Chief-of-Staff in the Balkan Wars—he was able on his own authority to choose those who should lead the army, and his choice was soon amply justified. Lastly, the strict censorship which the Government exercised over the Press made it impossible for foreign influences to secure the control of newspapers and use them for purposes of propaganda in order to confuse or poison pubhc opinion.


CHAPTER XXIV
THE GERMAN INVASION : THE OCCUPATION OF
GREECE BY THE AXIS (1941-5)
THE months which followed the Italian invasion from Albania
in October 1940 brought imperishable glory to the Greek arms.
Despite their superiority in everything except courage, the
Italians were quickly driven back across the frontier and’sub¬
jected to relentless pressure. Some help was provided by the
R.A.F., but no Allied land-troops were sent, or indeed asked for,
since the Greeks were fully capable of dealing with the invaders
and the terrain demanded dogged infantry work supported by
mountain-batteries and supplied by pack or human transport
a type of warfare in which the Greeks excel. The unusual severity
of the winter caused unspeakable suffering, which the hardy
Greeks supported far better than the Italians. By the beginning
of 1941 the Greeks had occupied nearly one-third of Albania
and were still advancing, and by the end of February the Italian
losses were estimated at 100,000 and the prisoners at 23,000.
Thus far all had gone well with the Greeks, who had proved
themselves the only small Power able successfully to resist the
Axis, and the collapse of Italy in Albania seemed imminent j
but with the German occupation, first of Roumania and then of
Bulgaria, which joined the Axis pact on ist March, it became
more and more likely that Hitler would take a hand in Greece
and come to the rescue of Mussolini’s craven hosts. Meanwhile
the British Foreign Secretary and the G.I.G.S. had visited Athens
and arranged that the help promised by Great Britain should be
sent. British and Imperial troops began to arrive early in March
and eventually numbered about 58,000, of whom 35,000 were
combatants. An attempt by the Italian fleet to interfere with
our convoys resulted in the great British victory off Matapan on 27th March 1941.
15 ^'3


214 ' The German Invasion
Then the blow fell. At 6.30 a.m. on 6th April the German Minister at Athens informed the Greek Premier that Germany was about to invade Greece on the ground that British troops had been landed there. On that very day the Germans crossed the frontiers of both Greece and Jugo-Slavia with overwhelming
mechanized forces. Tliis is no place to dwell in detail on the military operations which led to the fall of Greece. For the Anglo-Greek forces they consisted in a series of rearguard actions before the superior German armament, upon which, however, heavy casualties were inflicted. The Greeks began by holding the ‘ Metaxas Line ’ along the River Mesta and the Rupel Fort on the River Struma, until these were turned by armoured divisions which descended the valleys of these rivers. Next an attempt by the Anglo-Greek forces to hold a line running north-west from Salonica was thwarted by a powerful drive across Southern Jugo-Slavia and down the Vardar Valley and the Monastir Gap, while the Adolf Hitler S.S. Armoured Division descended on the right flank of the Greek army in Albania, forcing it to capitulate on 20tli April. The rest of the Anglo-Greek forces fought further rearguard actions in Thessaly and in the historic Pass of Thermopyhe. But on 21st April the Greek Government in¬ formed the British Commander that the Greeks could resist no longer and urged the withdrawal of the Expeditionary Force, the overwhelming superiority of the Germans in tanks and aircraft making further resistance profitless. The evacuation was effected from numerous small ports and beaches in Attica and the Peloponnese. General Metaxas, who, whatever opinion may be held of his earlier career, had deserved well of his country in accepting the Italian challenge and forming a rallying point for the nation, had died on 29th January and was succeeded as Prime Minister by M. Korizis, who died by his own hand on i8th April. M. Tsouderos, a former follower of Venizelos and a well-known banker, became Premier on 20th April and accompanied King George when he transferred his Government first to Crete and then to Egypt, whither he again returned after a sojourn in London.
It was a foregone conclusion that the Germans, after over¬ running the Greek mainland and many of the islands, would


The German Invasion 215
attempt to seize the key-island of Crete. General Wavell decided that every effort should be made to hold it. At the end of April, besides eleven Greek battalions, there were some 27,000 Allied troops in the island, but many were either noncombatants or had escaped from Greece where their guns, transport, and other equipment had been lost. The civilian population put itself at the disposal of the military authorities and displayed the utmost courage. The Allies possessed three aerodromes in Crete, but these obviously would not serve to support an air force adequate to deal with an enemy who had air-bases so near at hand on the mainland and in the Dodecanese. In the middle of May aerial bombardment of the Allied positions began, followed on 20th May by the landing of parachute troops, who were soon disposed of; but they were followed by swarms of troop-carrying planes, and the defenders, who performed miracles of bravery, mainly with the bayonet, could not deal fast enough with the invaders. The struggle, however, was kept up for some twelve days before it was decided to evacuate the island. It has been generally recognized that the resistance offered by the Greeks and their allies in Greece and Crete, though involving a tactical defeat, made a valuable contribution to the Allied cause. It not improbably diverted the Germans from making an attempt to break through Turkey to the Caucasus; it delayed the offensive against Russia for some vital weeks; it destroyed air-borne troops which might have been used with effect elsewhere in the Middle East; and it prevented Germany from sending help to the rebels in Iraq and the Vichy French in Syria. But defeat meant the crucifixion of the noble nation which had sacrificed everything in the cause of freedom. The Germans entered Athens on 27th April, and a period of stark privation and relentless oppression began for the Greeks. On 30th April a puppet government was set up under the rene¬ gade Tsolakoglou, who tried unsuccessfully to follow the example of the Vichy French Government and persuade the Greeks that they had been dragged into the war by the British and then abandoned. The Germans themselves occupied keypoints in Greece, such as Salonica, Crete, and Mitylenc, and retained control of communications. Thessaly, Epirus, and Central and Southern Greece went to Italy, which also added


2i6 The Occupation of Greece by the Axis {ig4i-5)
most of the JEgean Islands to its command at Rhodes. The Bulgars received as their reward Greek Thrace and Eastern Macedonia, where they imposed a policy of expulsion and extermination upon the Greeks and colonization by their own
nationals. The Italians continually intrigued to oust Tsolakoglou in favour of their own nominee Kotsomanes, for whom they at one time obtained five portfolios in the Cabinet, but his shameless exploitation of the resources of the country led in 1942 to a successful general strike by the Greeks and the fall of the Cabinet, and Logothetopoulos, an ex-Professor of Obstetrics and a sub¬ missive tool of the Axis, became Premier. On 7th April 1943 the growing power of the Allies and the fear of invasion led the Germans to enlist the services ofJohn Rallis as Premier, a betterknown politician with a black record. But after the fall of Italy the Germans practically assumed the whole administration and the puppet government was powerless. Agriculturally, Greece is a poor land, not producing enough cereals to satisfy an already low standard of living ; it, therefore, has to obtain imported foodstuffs in exchange for its own pro¬ ducts, such as tobacco and currants. Owing to the Albanian war the seed for the 1941 crop remained unsown for lack of men and transport. The rich fields of Thessaly had been laid waste, and Macedonia and Thrace, which produced more than they consumed, had passed to Bulgaria. Industries were sup¬ pressed or working for the Axis, the roads and railways were partially destroyed, and the Greek merchant-fleet was sunk or chartered by the Allies. Moreover, a preposterous charge was levied to pay for the cost of the occupation. Thus taxation, the reckless issue of paper money, the rise of prices and the fall of production, accompanied by confiscation and looting, soon caused hopeless chaos, economic, financial and social, which resulted in a state of general starvation with its accompanying epidemics. Mortality, especially among the children, reached an appalling figure. Something was done to improve the position by imports from Turkey, which enabled the establish¬ ment of soup-kitchens, and the Wedish-Swiss Commission did splendid work, but famine and disease together wrought terrible ravages, from which the country will take many years to recover. But their sufferings did not prevent the Greeks from keeping


The Occupation of Greece by the Axis {1941-5) 217
up a gallant and effective fight against their oppressors, through strikes and sabotage by the civilian population and armed resistance by guerilla forces, who were joined by stragglers left behind when the British withdrew. For example, a general strike induced the Germans to suspend a decree for the conscrip¬ tion of Greeks for labour in Germany, while destruction of administrative buildings and supply-dumps was frequent. A flourishing underground press helped to keep up the spirits of the people, guerilla forces of Greek patriots were active, especi¬ ally in Crete, Thessaly, Epirus, and Western Macedonia. Many trains were wrecked, communications cut, and isolated enemy units exterminated, with the result of weakening enemy morale and obliging the Axis to keep a large army of occupation. But resistance brought a heavy penalty upon the population in the murder of countless hostages and the destruction of villages and crops.
Unfortunately, as in the War of Independence, differences arose between the various guerilla bands and became acute in the spring of 1943. One of the chief causes of friction was the question of the future regime. The largest partisan force was the E.L.A.S. (National Popular Army of Liberation), directed by a political organization, the E.A.M. (National Liberation Front),^ which owed its origin to resistance against the Metaxist dictator¬ ship and contained a strong Communist element. The chief rival force was the E.D.E.S. (Greek Republican Liberation League) led by General Zervas, who claimed to be republican and a follower of the exiled General Plastiras, the leader of the military revolt in 1922. Allied liaison officers had by this time been attached to the guerillas and did their best to compose their differences, and later in the year six of the guerilla leaders were sent on a mission to Egypt, where the Greek Government was now established, to discuss military co-operation with the Allies. They took the opportunity to air their political views and, in particular, it was urged that King George II, since he had allowed the suspension of parliamentary government and the four years of the Metaxist dictatorship, should not return to Greece before the people had been given the opportunity of deciding what
* In the following account the E.A.M. will usually be mentioned when pohtical action is referred to, the E.L.A.S. when military operations are in question.


2i8 The Occupation of Greece by the Axis [1^41-5)
regime they preferred. The raising of this question was the occasion of misleading rumours, emanating from unfriendly sources, that the British Government would insist on the return
of King George. After the collapse of Italy fresh quarrels broke out between the E.L.A.S. and the E.D.E.S. over the partition of the material of war which the Italians had handed over to the guerillas rather than to the Germans. These disputes again took a political turn, the E.L.A.S. accusing the E.D.E.S. of Fascist leanings and a desire to re-establish privilege and eveii dictatorship in Greece, while the E.D.E.S. charged their opponents with terrorization. All this provided excellent material for German propaganda. The elimination of Italy from the war aroused in Greece the hope of an early liberation, the delay of which caused a national disappointment; also the feeling arose that the Government in Cairo had been too complaisant in accepting the idea of Italian co-belligerency. The loss of the islands of Leros, Cos, and Samos, which had been seized by the British, was a further cause of disillusionment. On 21st December the Greek Premier in a broadcast from Cairo appealed to the guerillas to reconcile their difierences and combine against the common foe, or else to lay down their arms, since their quarrels were only benefiting the enemy. Early in 1944 the factions, especially the E.A.M., intensified their political activities and demanded representation in the Greek Cabinet at Cairo. The Government replied that they should first lay aside their quarrels, but promised that their claim should be considered. Finding that they were not to receive immediate satisfaction, the E.A.M. set up a political committee at the E.L.A.S. headquarters in ostensible rivalry with the Cairo Govern¬ ment. This step awakened the sympathy of many of the Greeks who were serving in the Allied forces, and mutinies broke out on several Greek warships in the Middle East and in the ist Greek Brigade, which was under orders to proceed to Italy. Discipline was soon restored by the British Authorities.
Meanwhile M. Tsouderos had resigned the premiership, and the King had invited Colonel Venizelos, son of the famous statesman, to form a cabinet. When he failed, his place was taken on 26th April by M. Papandreou, leader of the Social Democratic Party, who had recently escaped from Greece. He


The Occupation of Greece by the Axis {1941-3) 219
declared that his mission was the creation of a government of National Unity, in which all parties should share. He received a message of encouragement from Mr. Churchill, who promised British support and suggested that his three objectives should be the union of all against the common foe, the cleansing of Greece from foreign occupation, and the free choice by the Greeks of the regime under which they wished to live. In May the new Prime Minister summoned a conference of representatives of all the political parties to meet in the Lebanon, at which the following programme was adopted : (1) The re-organization of the Greek armed forces in the Middle East under the Greek flag, (2) the unification of the resistance forces under the orders of the Government, (3) the suppression of terrorism and the guarantee of political liberty when Greece was freed, (4) the provision of food and medicines, (5) the guarantee of order and personal security after the liberation, so that the people might be free to express their will about the future regime, (6) the punishment of those who had betrayed their country and exploited its miseries, and (7) the satisfaction of the national claims of Greece. On 22nd May M. Papandreou formed his Government of National Unity and sent a message to Mr. Churchill that the delegates at the Conference had decided to forget their differences and to work together for the liberation of Greece. The new Government made clear its view that until the liberation of Greece the King remained the Chief of the Greek State and was responsible, in collaboration with the Allies, for securing its interests, but that, when freedom came, the people would be given an opportunity of expressing its will about its
future government. In spite of the apparent unity which had been secured, diffi¬ culties soon arose. The E.A.M., who had been invited to par¬ ticipate in the Government, failed to arrange for their repre¬ sentation, and, while discussions were still proceeding, it was
reported that hostilities had again broken out between the E.L.A.S. and the E.D.E.S. The Premier stated that the E.A.M. were demanding seven places in the cabinet of fifteen and that
the E.L.A.S. refused to submit to the control of the Government. Speaking in the House of Commons on 27th July, Mr. Eden stated that the British Government was giving M. Papandreou full support in his efforts to carry out the Lebanon Agreement,


220 The Occupation of Greece by the Axis {ig4i-f)
which had the approval of the great majority of the Greeks, and that the E.A.M. were making demands which were not justified by their numerical strength. In August, however, the E.A.M. decided to send representatives to Cairo and agreed to join the Government on condition that five portfolios were allotted to them. The Cabinet was then reconstituted and, in view of the expected liberation of Greece, the Government was transferred in September from Cairo to Naples. By the begimiing of October 1944 it was becoming obvious that events elsewhere in Europe would soon oblige the Germans to withdraw their forces from Greece. The action to be taken by the Allies in these circumstances had been discussed by Mr. Churchill and President Roosevelt at the Quebec Conference, and they were agreed that it might be necessary to send troops to Athens to save the country from starvation and anarchy. As a result the British and U.S. Chiefs of Staff arranged for the despatch, ifcircumstances demanded it, ofa British Expeditionary Force.
Editor s Notes.
(1) It has never been satisfactorily explained why E.A.M. agreed to attend the Lebanon Conference. This party had certainly not renounced its policy of gaining control of Greece. It is possible that it foresaw the Allies would free Greece and that it calculated that it would be to the party’s ultimate advantage to have some place in the Government. Later, E.A.M. agreed to join the Government and at the Caserta Conference Sarafis (E.A.M.-E.L.A.S.) and Zervas (E.D.E.S.) agreed to piace their forces under the control of the Government, which in turn placed them under the Allied Commander (Major-General Scobie). (2) It is often said that the Greek resistance movement was a negligible contribution to the war efforts of the Allies. But although the results were hmited, the movement itself had some importance and would have been of great importance if, as they contemplated, the Allies had made an attack on Europe through the Balkans. In any case the Greek andartes, besides destroying an amount of enemy manpower and materials, threatened the German line of communications and tied down two German divisions, which, if used in Italy, might have had serious consequences for the British.


CHAPTER XXV
THE LIBERATION OF GREECE : THE CIVIL WAR
OF 1944-5
ON i2th October Athens and Peiraeus were reported to have been liberated by the Greeks themselves, and on the 14th, British troops landed under Major-General Scobie, who assumed the command of the Allied Forces in Greece. Later in the month Mr. Eden, Lord Moyne, Resident Minister in the Near East, General Maitland Wilson, and Admiral Cunningham arrived in Athens, and steps were begun to deal with the food supply and the currency question. M. Papandreou, the Greek Premier, who reached Athens on 18th October, issued an urgent appeal to the people to abstain from political strife and return to their ordinary avocations and work for the restoration of their country. But his words fell for the most part on deaf ears and clashes frequently occurred between bodies of guerillas. The E.L.A.S. in particular showed a disposition to use their arms against their political opponents rather than against the remnants of the Germans who were still retiring from Greece. The most pressing problem, therefore, was to induce the various guerilla organizations to disarm. Negotiations for disbanding both the E.L.A.S.and the E.D.E.S. were progressing favourably, until on 9th November the Greek Mountain Brigade arrived from Italy and were given a great reception in Athens. Thereupon the Left extremists demanded that both this force and the Sacred Battalion, which was fighting in Crete, should also be disbanded, on the ground that they were also volunteers and tainted with royalist sentiments. To deal with this situation General Scobie announced that both the E.L.A.S. and the E.D.E.S. were to give up their arms by loth December. When the Decree embodying this order, which also included a provision that Greek military formations on service abroad should be demobilized on their return to Greece, came up for signature by the Cabinet, the E.A.M. representatives
refused to consent and resigned in protest.


222 The Civil War of 1944~5
Meanwhile more and more E.A.M. supporters were reaching Athens, and on 3rd December an organized demonstration occurred which was fired upon by the police, who inflicted and sustained casualties. Other armed partisans who reached Athens next day were disarmed by the British. Clashes also took place between the E.L.A.S. and the E.D.E.S. in other parts of Greece. It is generally agreed that it was the intention of the E.A.M. to seize the capital and establish themselves in power by force of arms. By 4th December the E.L.A.S. forces were in strength within a mile of the Government headquarters and the British Embassy and had occupied nearly all the police buildings and killed most of the police. Orders were therefore sent by the British Government to General Scobie to assume control of Athens and the immediate neighbourhood, and he proceeded to take steps to restore order in the city. This soon led to clashes between the British troops and the E.L.A.S., and there were losses on both sides. The disturbances inevitably led to the suspension of measures of relief, and the bakeries were unable to issue the bread ration. On 8th December General Scobie reported that the rebels were still flocking into Athens and keeping up a fierce resistance, and the following day 10,000 E.L.A.S. troops were in the neighbourhood of Athens where they were attacked by the R.A.F. On 20th December the E.L.A.S. achieved a success in the capture of the R.A.F. Headquarters at Kephissia near Athens.
On 13th December General Plastiras, the former Liberal Prime Minister, who had gone into exile when General Metaxas became Dictator, returned to Athens at the request of M. Papandreou. He appealed to the insurgents to lay aside civil strife and devote themselves to restoring order and reorganizing the army to take its part in the last and hardest phase of the war against the common enemy. As the month went on the British forces gradually gained ground, expelling the E.L.A.S. troops from their positions south of Athens and recapturing the Peirseus station. On 21st December M. Papandreou expressed the grati¬ tude of the Greek people for the service rendered by British arms in protecting the defenceless Government from an armed minority which sought to impose a political tyranny. He pro¬ tested that events at Athens were being misrepresented by certain sections of the British and U.S.A. press ; in particular, he denied


The Civil War of 1944-5 223
that any Right Wing Party existed which was trying to impose its pohey against the will of the people.
On 25th December, to the surprise of the whole world, Mr. Churchill and Mr. Eden suddenly arrived in Greece. They immediately reached an agreement with the Greek Premier that a meeting should be called of delegates of the various parties to suggest steps for putting an end to civil strife and make it possible for Greece to play her part worthily among the United Nations. This meeting was held under the presidency of Archbishop Damaskinos of Athens and was addressed by Mr. Churchill, who stated that the Greek Premier had accepted his suggestion of an all-party conference. He stated that the British troops had come to Greece with the approval of President Roosevelt and Marshal Stalin, and had become involved in the troubles through doing what they regarded as their duty—a duty which they would continue to discharge. In a statement to the Press he expressed his conviction that, if the British had not intervened, there would have been a very serious massacre in Athens, and he denied that there was any foundation whatever for rumours that the British wished to impose any particular regime upon Greece. ‘ We need nothing,’ he said, ‘ from Greece but her friendship.’ The Conference met and agreed on the necessity of appointing a Regent. To this the King was persuaded by Mr. Churchill to consent, and he declared at the same time that he was resolved not to return to Greece unless summoned by the free and fair expression of the national will. Archbishop Damaskinos was appointed Regent. By the end of the year the British, using tanks and aeroplanes, had cleared the greater part of Athens and the Peiraeus, but organized resistance lasted for some little time afterwards. Mean¬ while the E.L.A.S. had seized a large number of hostages and carried them away to the mountains.
On 31st December M. Papandreou resigned the Premiership, and the Regent invited General Plastiras to take his place. Having formed his Cabinet the new Premier announced that his policy would be to restore order, to punish those who had collaborated with the enemy, to satisfy the urgent needs of the people and to stabilize the currency. He appealed to those who had been misled to return to their duty. On nth January General Scobie entered into fresh com


224 The Civil War of 1944-5
munications with emissaries of the E.L.A.S. with a view to a truce. They expressed their willingness to withdraw from Athens, Patras, Salonica, and other areas to be agreed upon and to exchange prisoners of war, but refused to release the hostages whom they had seized. However, an agreement was reached providing for a cessation of hostilities in order that discussions might be held for the settlement of outstanding questions, and after further negotiations the E.L.A.S. agreed to release all hostages except those guilty of criminal acts and those who had collaborated with the enemy. A large demonstration was held in Athens and was addressed by General Scobie, who declared that the British intended to protect the liberties of the people from whatever quarter they were attacked ; he hoped that the demonstration would have an effect on public opinion, which had been grossly misinformed about Greek affairs. On 22nd January a British T.U.C. delegation, under tlic leadership of Sir Walter Citrine, reached Athens to report on the situation. They talked with members of the Government, labour leaders, and British soldiers, and were shown evidence of the atrocities committed by the E.L.A.S. on civilian hostages. They found a very different state of affairs from that presented by some organs of the British Press. Amongst other statements Sir Walter Citrine said: ‘One thing is apparent beyond any shadow of doubt : in this country there has been deliberate, cold-blooded, organized, systematic murder. ... I am quite certain that it is utterly impossible for the British Government to discontinue its responsibility in this country until conditions of normality have been brought about. I have no doubt that this is the wish of the Greek people themselves.’ An official state¬ ment of the Ministry of Justice announced that the bodies of 1218 persons put to death by the E.A.M. and E.L.A.S. had been exhumed in Athens during December 1944 and January 1945, of whom four-fifths were civilians, including 168 women.
In the early part of February negotiations were in progress between the Government and the E.A.M. to decide what form of amnesty should be granted as a necessary preliminary to negotiations for a political peace. The Government agreed that the act of bearing arms against the State should not be regarded as a crime, and that only those guilty of violations of criminal and military law should be liable to punishment. The Con


The Civil War of 1944-5 225
ference met on 6th February and was attended by Mr. Harold Macmillan, Resident Minister in the Near East, the British Ambassador, three members of the Government, and three members of the E.A.M. The agreement which was reached was published on 13th February. The following were the main points : (i) the democratic liberties of the people were to be restored, (2) martial law was to be gradually relaxed, (3) there was to be an amnesty for political crimes committed since 3rd December, but those who did not lay down their arms by loth March and those guilty of crimes against common law were excluded, (4) all hostages were to be released by the E.L.A.S., (5) a national army was to be formed, (6) all E.L.A.S. forces were to be disbanded within fourteen days, (7) civil administra¬ tion was to be re-established, (8) there was to be a ‘ probe ’ into civil servants of three categories, those who held office under Metaxas, those who functioned during the occupation, and those who took part in the revolt on the side of the E.A.M., (9) a plebiscite was to be held to decide on the future regime and a general election during the present year, and Allied observers were to be invited to attend on both these occasions. The agree¬ ment was generally welcomed in Greece and met with approval elsewhere. On 14th February Mr. Churchill and Mr. Eden again made a surprise landing in Athens on their way back from the Crimea Conference and received a tumultuous welcome. On his return to England, Mr. Churchill, speaking of the British intervention in Greece, said ; ‘ I am sure that we rescued Athens from a horrible fate. I believe that the Greek people will long acclaim our action, both military and political. Peace without vengeance has been achieved.’ He added that a great deal remained to be done which must be the task of the Greeks themselves. During March, British troops progressively occupied more and more areas of the country hitherto controlled by the E.L.A.S. and collected the surrendered arms and, under an agreement between the Government and U.N.R.R.A., arrangements were made for the delivery of food and clothing to every part of Greece. Thus, thanks to outside intervention, what had practically amounted to civil war was brought to an end, but it left very bitter feelings behind it, and those who know the Greeks cannot help regarding the present condition of affairs as a truce rather than


226 The Civil War of 1944-5
as a final reconciliation. The Agreement^ of 13th February 1945 was in a sense a victory of the Right over the Left and led to a reaction further towards the Right, which brought about the fall of the Plastiras Cabinet early in April after three months of office.
Editor s Note.
The real issue of the civil war of 1944-5 was not one between Monarchy and Republicanism as it appeared at the time to many in England and America. The real issue was whether Greece should or should not become a communist-dominated state. It is true that only a small proportion of E.L.A.S. was communist, but E.L.A.S. was directed by E.A.M., which in turn was domin¬ ated by K.K.E. (Greek Communist Party). Those who question this view, however, pertinently ask why E.A.M. did not seize power, as they could easily have done, before the British arrived in Greece. The probable explanation is that at this stage the Russians, having no wish to antagonise the British, did not instruct K.K.E. to seize the government; and that K.K.E. itself, in the erroneous belief that strong British combat forces would be sent to Greece, did not think it would be possible to seize and hold Athens. When, however, K.K.E., which greatly resented the arrival of the royalist Greek mountain brigac^, saw that the British troops were hardly a combat force, it was both incited and encouraged to attempt to seize power in Greece. That K.K.E. had such an aim seems to be evident from the story of its next attempt to seize power during the civil war of 1946-9.
* The Varkiza agreement.


CHAPTER XXVI
THE RECONSTRUCTION OF GREECE DURING THE
POST-WAR YEARS : GREECE AND EUROPE, 1945-56
THAT the Varkiza agreement of 13th February 1945 was merely a truce, and not a final reconciliation, was made evident in the years that followed. Although great numbers of Greeks wel¬ comed the opportunity to dissociate themselves from E.A.M., the hard core of the movement, K.K.E., still existed and was to make yet another attempt to seize the government. Three conditions favoured its efforts : the instability of Greek political life ; the appalling social and economic chaos that reigned in Greece ; and the assistance and encouragement that the Greek communists received from the Soviet Satellites, Bulgaria, Jugoslavia and Albania. Had the Greeks been left to them¬ selves, they could hardly have warded off the threat. Happily for them, first the British and then the Americans came to their assistance ; and, if they did not achieve all that they wished to, they at least saved the inhabitants from ruin and starvation. The Paris Reparations Conference estimated the war devasta¬ tion in Greece at S8,500m. Two thousand villages and onequarter of all buildings had been destroyed ; three-quarters of the Greek Mercantile Marine, two-thirds of the motor vehicles and nine-tenths of the locomotives had disappeared ; the larger road bridges had been demolished ; the Corinth canal had been blocked ; the telegraphs and ports had been badly damaged ; vast areas of olive groves, vineyards and forests had been laid waste ; and the number of cattle and sheep had been greatly diminished. Throughout the war people had existed on a semistarvation diet ; thousands died ; and many more thousands would have perished but for the food sent by friends of Greece through the International Red Cross. When Greece was liberated, immediate relief was carried out by B.M.L. (British Military Liaison) in readiness for U.N.R.R.A. to take over. Altogether U.N.R.R.A. imported 2,667,500 tons of foods into
Greece up to 30th June 1947- This reUef probably delayed
iJ7


American Aid
to Greece.
228 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
somewhat the production programme and certainly gave rise to a black market ; but it saved Greece from collapse and set going a partial recovery. It soon became clear, however, that Greece needed assistance on a very large scale to enable her to become a viable State. The sums of money needed were far beyond the resources of Britain, who informed the U.S.A. that her economic commitments in Greece must end on 31st March 1947. Fortunately for the Greeks, the American State Department, which had hitherto regarded Greece as the special concern of Britain, decided to act ; and on i2th March 1947 President Truman sent to Congress a special message asking for a grant of $400m. to provide assistance to Greece and Turkey. Three-quarters of this sum went to Greece. Half of the $300m. was devoted to military purposes and the other half to economic aid. Later the economic commitments were handed over, under the Marshall Plan, to E.C.A.^ Between 1944 and June 1953, Greece received military and economic aid to the extent of S743m. and $ 1,829m. respectively. Of the total of S2,572m., approximately S344m. came from British sources. American military aid amounted to about $529m. ; U.N.R.R.A.’s contribution was $4i6m. and American econ¬ omic aid after 1947 came to nearly $ 1,200m. Wisely the Americans realised that it was not sufficient merely to restore the Greek pre-war economy with its serious limitations. Hence they planned five major power plants, a factory for making diesel engines, a small steel industry (for making steel from scrap), extension of the cement industry and an increased output of bauxite. They also planned much roadbuilding and the accumulation of rolling stock with a view to attracting tourists. Again, they hoped to increase agricultural production by im¬ porting tractors and other types of machinery, by increasing storage facilities for fruit and grain, by extending the use of fertilisers, and by providing instruction in husbandry for the agrarian population. Finally they drew up a housing programme and planned an improvement of the countrv’s medical arrange¬ ments.
Unfortunately it was not possible to carry out all this pro¬ gramme. First of all the civil war of 1946-49 delayed the
^ Economic Co-operation Administration.


Years: Greece and Europe, ig4^-$6 229
recovery. Next, the Americans reduced considerably their assistance. By 1950 they were committed to the great expense of the war in Korea : they were moreover somewhat exasperated by the instabihty of Greek governments and by a considerable degree of Greek administrative inefficiency, above all by the failure to prevent tax evasion. In 1951 they decided not to fmance any project not already started. Marshall aid was reduced in 1950-51 from $277.5m. to $2o6.8m., to $i82m. in 1951-2, and to $8om. in 1952-3. Nevertheless the achieve¬ ment was considerable. The production of grain, tobacco and cotton was by 1953 well above the pre-war level, as was also the output of textiles, chemicals and other industries. The olive groves and vineyards had been restored, and the increase in the numbers of hvestock, which, however, remained below the 1939 figure, was most encouraging. During this time the numbers of Greeks employed in agri¬ culture fell considerably, the displaced persons being absorbed by industry, by the army and by the growing administration. But among the industrial and blackcoated workers there was much unemployment. In the overcrowded professions there was much under-employment, which was again to be found among the agricultural workers, whose average holding is very small. Both unemployment and under-employment have no doubt contributed to the pohtical instabihty of Greece, as has also the lag in wages behind prices. The peasants and industrial workers, and those with fixed incomes have found it increasingly hard to live in post-war Greece ; and these classes stand out in sharp contrast to those who live easily, spending on luxuries what they ought to be paying in taxes. The political instabihty arising from these economic condi¬ tions was much increased by the Greek multi-party system which gives rise to short-lived governments consisting of unstable coahtions. For the first seven post-war years Greece witnessed frequent changes of government, and first the British and then the Americans had to face the difficulty of dealing with a constantly changing personnel in charge of the various ministries and departments. Such a situation was all the more unfortunate because on most major issues the Greeks were fundamentally united. The vast majority of Greeks were opposed to K.K.E., whose numerical strength was never very great. They were 16


230 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
also generally agreed on foreign policy—alliance with the Western powers and the reahsation of national aims. There was, moreover, a substantial majority in favour of the monarchy, the future of which had at one time seemed in doubt. Whether the king should, or should not, return was, according to the Varkiza agreement, a question to be decided by a plebiscite
r under Allied scrutiny. This plebiscite was to
The question of , i i• t ■ c
, ^ precede a general election. In view, however,
the monarchy. r i i
^ or the chaotic state or Greece m 1945 it was obviously unwise to hold either the plebiscite or the elections until some degree of stability had been attained. On the other hand, the delay meant a series of governments which had no constitutional sanction and which the British had the unpopular task of supporting. After the fall of the Plastiras Government in April 1945, Admiral Voulgaris formed a “ service ” ministry which included the economic expert. Professor Varvaressos. But this administration was attacked by almost all parties, in particular by K.K.E., which organised strikes, and even by monarchists working through an organisation known as “ X ” {Chi). In August Voulgaris resigned, and, imtil Mr. Kanellopoulos was able at length to form a government, the Regent, Archbishop Damaskinos, assumed the functions of Prime Minister. In view of this unsatisfactory situation, which was likely to recur at any moment, the British, French and American governments agreed that a general election should precede the plebiscite and should take place in January 1946. This decision annoyed both the monarchist Populist party and the Liberals, who threatened to abstain from taking part. As a result, however, of Mr. Hector McNeil’s^ visit to Athens in November 1945 it was agreed that a coahtion government should be formed by the elder statesman SophouHs and should hold elections before 1st March. The elections finally took place on 31st March. E.A.M./K.K.E., which had already withdrawn support from the Government, refused to take part, for to have done so would have displayed the numerical weakness of the Left. Sophouhs proceeded without the Left Wing parties. Out of 354 seats Popuhsts and other Royahsts obtained 231. The centre parties of Papandreou, Venizelos and Kanellopoulos (they were prepared to accept monarchy if the majority desired it)
^ British Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.


Years- Greece and Europe, ig45-56 231
obtained 67; and the uncompromising Republicans obtained only 51, Of the electorate only 49% voted. K.K.E., which had earlier declared that the voting registers were entirely false, naively claimed the 51% which had abstained from voting. The new government, which was formed by Constantine Tsaldaris, was, as would be expected, anxious to hold the plebiscite as soon as possible and obtained the agreement of the British that it should take place on ist September. As far as one can judge (Allied observers supervised the formation of the registers but not the voting) this plebiscite was properly con¬ ducted. Of those entitled to vote, 80% registered, and 1,700,000 votes approximately were recorded. Of these 69% were cast for the mcnarchy and 31% against. Many former republicans seem to have voted for the King, who returned to Greece on 27th September. Attempts to form a coalition Government failed and Tsaldaris again took office. By this time rebel bands of K.K.E. under the leadership of Markos Vafiades had become active in Northern Greece and , . .. even in the Peloponnese, where supplies from e cwt uar the Iron Curtain were dropped by air
^94 -9- craft. On 3rd October 1946 Greece complained
to the Security Council that the rebels were being trained on foreign soil and that fugitives were allowed to cross the frontiers into Albania, Bulgaria and Jugoslavia. In the debate that followed Soviet Russia, who had already demanded that the British should withdraw from Greece, argued that the satellites were hardly intervening in Greece as much as the Western powers. The argument was typical and thoroughly cynical. The British were intervening to uphold a lawful government and to set a stricken country on its feet. The powers behind the Iron Curtain were endeavouring to retard the recovery of Greece and were supporting a rebel minority, which had already attempted to seize power by force. In spite of Russia’s attitude, the United Nations appointed a Commission of Investigation, which, in its report of May 1947, stated that it had found evidence of the subversive activities of Greece s northern neighbours. In the debate that followed there arose a deadlock in the Security Council, which referred the matter to the General Assembly of the United Nations. The Assembly appointed yet another Committee of Investigation (U.N.S.C.O.B.), which arrived in


232 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
Greece in November. Its report confirmed the findings of the earlier Committee of Investigation. This report, however, was rejected completely by the Soviet representative, Vishinsky, who went on to denounce Greece as having become an American colony.
The developing threat from K.K.E. had enabled the King to obtain, early in January 1947, a coalition government under Maximos. This government, which included Papandreou, Venizelos, Kanellopoulos and Zervas, was still in being when the Americans, in fulfilment of the Truman doctrine, took over from the British the task of saving Greece from economic collapse and civil war. To defeat the rebels, who had a 600-mile frontier over which they could retreat, the Greek Government had to employ large forces ; and by the winter of 1948-9 there were five divisions in the field. Although the rebels were probably never much greater than 25,000 in effectives, they were well armed and well trained in guerrilla tactics. They could choose their time and place of operations, strike quickly and disappear, only to strike again in some other quarter. They were not easily defeated. Indeed, had they been content to pursue these tactics only, they could probably have gone on indefinitely. But their political aims required that they should seize a town and set up a rival government. This was a much more difficult undertaking. Between May 1947 srid February 1949 they failed twice at Fiorina, twice at Konitsa and once at both Grevena and Karpenisi. In these encounters they suffered heavy losses.
Three other developments contributed to their final defeat. When in the summer of 1948 Jugoslavia left the Cominform, the rebels operating from Albania were isolated from those operating from Bulgaria. Then again, when the Cominform announced in February 1949 its intention to create an independent Macedonia, which would have included a large and productive area of Greece, many of the rebels, who were nationalists before communists, withdrew their support from K.K.E. General Markos himself gave up the leadership, his place being taken by Zachariades.^ Finally, there was the appointment by the Greek Government of General Papagos as commander-in-chief in place of a war council which had hitherto directed military
^ The Secretary of K.K.E.


Years: Greece and Europe, ig43-36 233
operations. General Papagos was very popular with the troops, whose morale improved. He was, moreover, highly acceptable to the Americans, who were now able, through the creation of a joint Greek-American general staff, to impart a greater efficiency to the military operations. In the final offensive against the rebels in the Mount Grammos area in the summer and early autumn of 1949, the Greek Army carried all before it and captured the headquarters of Zachariades. Already, before this final operation took place, the Russians, realising the rebels were facing defeat, proposed for Greece free elections.in which the rebels should play a part, the supervision of the elections by the powers (which in 1946 Russia had denounced as interference) and the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Greece. This proposal, which had already been rejected by Great Britain and the U.S.A., received from the United Nations the contempt it
deserved. The civil war of 1946-9 was very costly and could not have been fought without American financial aid. As already men¬ tioned, this civil war retarded the economic recovery of Greece ; and it also brought further devastation to a country that had suffered so much. Many towns and villages were' destroyed or damaged ; 700,000 persons (a tenth of the population) were displaced and some 25,000 children were abducted by Greece’s northern neighbours. It says much, however, for the Greek Government and for Greek society in general that, in the midst of all this turmoil, civil liberty and democratic principles were maintained. Not until 1947 were the communist newspapers suppressed and K.K.E. itself was not outlawed until the end of that same year. Altogether the Greek Government executed just over 1,000 subversive persons, some of them for crimes committed during the German occupation. The less malignant persons—those who were misled—were treated with clemency. After a period of detention and instruction, they were released and many of them served in the army against the rebels. The retention of civil and political liberty meant that Greek party politics ran their usual course. On 24th August the Maximos coalition broke up and, much to the The Greek Rally, ^j^^oyance of the Americans, Tsaldaris formed
a Populist ministry, which was likely to put its party interest before the national interest. American pressure, however.


234 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
caused this government to be reconstructed under the aged Sophoulis who included in it a few Liberals. In January 1949 Sophoulis, faced with much internal dissension in his government, tendered his resignation. At this point King Paul (who had in April 1947 succeeded to the throne on the death of his brother, George II) intervened and threatened “ a different solution ” if the parties would not sink their differences. Sophoulis again took office. Represented in the new government was the new party of Markezinis, a young and forceful politician who seemed at that time to have a future before him. It was he who persuaded Papagos to accept appointment as commander-in-chief. In June 1949 Sophoulis died. Tsaldaris failed to form a ministry but agreed to serve in a coalition as deputy of Diomedes. But with the end of the civil war in sight, Greek politicians had no wish to continue coalitions of this kind : rather there was a general feeling that new elections should be held. Markezinis, now outside the government, canvassed the idea of a provisional government under Papagos, but the Commander-in-chief (now a Field-Marshal) made it quite clear that he had no wish to take part in politics. In January 1950 Diomedes resigned ; Theotokis formed a caretaker government; and a general election, under the system of proportional representation employed in 1946, was held in March.
Out of250 seats (a new electoral law had reduced the number) 62 went to the Populists ; 56 to the Liberals ; 45 to a coalition party, E.P.E.K. (National Progressive Union of the Centre), under Plastiras ; 35 to Papandreou’s Democratic SociaHsts ; and 18 to the Democratic Front (the Left). Zervas’s National Party had only 7 seats and the new Markezinis Party only one. This election showed a very decisive swing from the Right to the Centre, but it created a situation in which no government could command support in Parhament. After some four unstable governments it was decided to hold further elections in September 1951 under a new system of proportional representa¬ tion designed to reduce the lesser parties. However, five weeks before polling began Papagos assumed the mantle of General de Gaulle, entered the arena with a new party, the Greek Rally, and, strongly supported by the Athenian Press, attacked the old regime of parties. Joined by followers of Kanellopoulos and Markezinis, at the polls he captured the votes of the Populists,


Years : Greece and Europe, 1945-56 235
who were now reduced to two parliamentary members. Out
of 258 seats the Greek Rally obtained 114, E.P.E.K., 74, and the
Liberals, 57. Papagos refused to enter any coalition. Hence
Plastiras formed a government, which lasted till October 1952.
At new elections held in November under a straight ballot
system the Greek Rally obtained 239 seats and E.P.E.K. 61.
The Liberals and the parties to the Left had no candidates returned.
In the new Papagos ministry Markezinis became Minister of
Economic Co-ordination and in December announced a realistic
economic programme rather on the lines of that earlier proposed
by Professor Varvaressos. Administrative costs and welfare
services were to be reduced, and foreign capital was to be
encouraged to replace the diminishing American aid. Much
progress was made, but in August 1953 the catastrophic earth¬
quake in the Ionian Islands placed a great strain on Greek
resources. Further affliction came in like manner to Thessaly in
April 1954 and to Volos in April 1955. Fortunately 21 coimtries
subscribed generously towards the relief of the victims and
U.S.A. came forward with a special grant of over $i9m.
Although the Greek Rally provided a government with a
stable parliamentary position, there were signs of dissension
within the ministry and a decline of its popularity in the country.
Markezinis withdrew in April 1954 and his friends, Kapsahs and
Papayanis, in the following November. In February 1955
Markezinis announced that he had founded a new party of
progressives whose parliamentary members numbered twenty
two. In October 1955 Field Marshal Papagos died. Karamanlis
formed a new cabinet which was designed to preserve the unity
of the Greek Rally, but, owing to differences within the party
and to attacks from outside, the new Prime Minister agreed to
hold a general election before April. Prior to the election he
formed a new party, the National Radical Union of which just
over half the parliamentary candidates belonged to the Greek
Rally. This party was joined by certain Liberals. Other
Liberals under Papandreou and Venizelos, the Populists under
Tsaldaris and E.P.E.K. formed a coalition, the Democratic
Union, with the extreme leftist party (itself a coalition), E.D.A.^
The main purpose however of this “ unholy alhance ” of the
centre parties with the extreme Left was not to produce a
^ United Democratic Left,


236 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
coalition government but to defeat the Radical Union, to repeal
the existing electoral law (a curious mixture of different systems
for different areas) and to hold yet further elections under a
system of proportional representation. Also in the field were
the party of Markezinis and a new Popular Social Party led by
the former deputy Prime Minister of the Greek Rally,
Stephanopoulos.
The elections were held on 19th February 1956. Out of 300
seats, the National Radical Union obtained 165, though the
Democratic Union had a slightly greater number of votes. This
result certainly followed the aim of the electoral law to provide a
government with a majority and a strong opposition. It also
answered the gloomy forecasts by foreigners that Greece was
about to swing decisively to the Left.
On forming his new government on 29th February, Kara
manlis announced that his economic pohcy would be to raise
the standard of Hving, to encourage foreign investments and,
by a high rate of interest, to promote saving. There are signs
that this pohcy is having some effect. By August 1956 foreign
investments amounted to $5om., unemployment was diminishing
and various new industrial developments were in progress.
Private deposits in the banks had increased, thus enabling credit
facilities to be extended. Greek shipping (over 12m. tons under
15 different flags at the end of 1955) continued to flourish.
As the internal affairs of Greece became more settled, questions
of foreign policy began to occupy more attention. At the end
i- t. ivT ; of the civil war of 1946-9 there was a wide
Greek National , 11^ 111 11
Claims demand that Greece should occupy what the Greeks call Northern Epirus (Southern Albania).
The claim to that territory had already been unsuccessfully made
by Tsaldaris at the Paris Peace Conference in 1946. At that
same conference Greece also (unsuccessfully) made claim to a
more northerly frontier in Western Thrace—a frontier including
the passes of Kovelik-Balkan and Kr^sna instead of following the
more southerly slopes of the Rhodope mountains. Had Greece
obtained this frontier rectification she would have found it
easier to deal with the rebels who between 1946-9 operated
from Bulgarian bases. The failure to improve her northern
frontiers was a great disappointment to Greece. On the other
hand, at the Treaty of Paris of 15 th February 1947, she obtained


Years : Greece and Europe, 7945-5^ 237
the Dodecanese from Italy, who also agreed to pay Greece
$i05m. as reparations.
Of all the problems of Greek foreign policy the most difficult
is that of Cyprus. This problem has not only threatened the
, sohdarity of the Balkan Pact (which Greece had recce an concluded with Jugoslavia and Turkey and
which in 1954 was converted into a military
alliance) but it has led to a deterioration in Greek relations with
her old and faithful ally, Great Britain. There has even arisen in
Greece a demand that Greece should withdraw from N.A.T.O.
which she had joined in the autumn of 1951. Finally, in its
handling of the Cyprus question, first the government of
Papagos and later the government of Karamanlis came in for
fierce and somewhat irresponsible criticism from the opposition
parties. Cyprus has a population of just over 360,000 Greeks and
just over 80,000 Turks. Passing under British control in 1878
and formally annexed by Great Britain in 1914, in 1925 Cyprus
became a Crown Colony. As we have seen, in 1915 Britain
offered Cyprus to Greece in an attempt to win over the Greeks
to the Allied cause.^ At aU other times Britain has opposed the
enosis (union) of Cyprus with Greece—a demand revived shortly
after the British occupation. The Greek claim, and the demand
of the Cypriots too, are based on the religious, linguistic, racial
and cultural affinity between Cyprus and Greece. Both Greeks
and Greek Cypriots argue that just as the Ionian Islands, Crete,
Thrace and the Dodecanese have rightly become parts of Greece,
so too should Cyprus which is culturally similar to these other
territories. They add, quite rightly, that the argument that
Cyprus has never been part of Modern Greece is quite irrelevant.
Although British rule in Cyprus is open to criticism, it has
been much better than Britain’s enemies and misinformed friends
would have us believe ; and its material benefits (which have
been all too few) have nevertheless been such that many Cypriots
(like many of the lonians in 1864) would lose considerably
through enosis with Greece. But the feeling of brotherhood
among Greeks (despite their fratricidal struggles) is a strong
one ; and the right to self-determination and national unity is a
principle which elsewhere Britain has generally upheld. She
1 See above, pp. 176-8, in which is described the Cyprus problem in 1931.


238 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
has by patient and liberal administration brought many peoples
to a condition which fitted them for self-government and
independence. The Cypriots, moreover, are not an immature
people ; great numbers of them (thanks to British administration)
are more sophisticated and better citizens than many of die
mainland Greeks. They are certainly capable of self-government
and of deciding whether or not they wish for enosis with Greece.
Unfortunately for Greece and the Cypriots, the problem of
Cyprus is not a simple one. The world to-day is very different
from that of 1864 when Britain belatedly but graciously handed
over to Greece the Ionian Islands. These islands were of limited
strategic importance. But Cyprus, especially after the British
withdrawal from Egypt, has become a military base which is
vital to British interests. What is more, British policy in the
Middle East is based on friendship with Turkey who prefers
that the Turkish Cypriots should remain under British rule.
The Greeks argue that the Turkish minority in Cyprus would
have nothing to fear if the island became part of Greece, and
they can proudly and justifiably call attention to Thrace where
the Moslem minority enjoys religious liberty and shares in the
political life of Greece. The Greek reply to British strategic
demands is also very plausible. The Greeks point out that
Cyprus can remain a British mihtary base, which would be ail
the more valuable if the civil population were friendly and that
Greece is prepared, and has indeed offered, to provide further
bases on the soil of Greece. But the British, bearing in mind
what has happened elsewhere, have firmly contended that they
cannot fulfil their international obligations and safeguard their
own essential interests unless they can have complete and un¬
disputed control of Cyprus. They are prepared to give the
island a constitution but arc determined, so long as the inter¬
national situation requires it, to retain the legal and effective control of Cyprus.
The offer of a constitution unaccompanied by a promise of
a plebiscite at a definite date seems not to have much attraction
for the Cypriots. When in October 1946 the British Colonial
Office invited various bodies in Cyprus to form a consultative
assembly to advise the British Government on a constitution,
many of these bodies refused to co-operate ; and A.K.E.L. (the
Communist Party of Cyprus) seized the occasion to demand


Years : Greece and Europe, 1945-56 239
self-government. Subsequently this party changed its policy and demanded enosis with Greece—a demand also supported by the Orthodox Church under the leadership of Archbishop Makarios, In January 1950 the Church in Cyprus held an unofficial plebiscite, it being claimed that 215,108 out of 224,757 entitled to vote had declared for enosis. But this manoeuvre had no effect whatever on the British Government, which was prepared to go no further than to grant a constitution. To the Greeks the British attitude seemed most unreasonable and they have placed their governments under constant pressure on the Cyprus issue. No Greek government, even ifit wanted to, can ignore the demand for enosis. To come out openly, however, in favour of enosis renders the Greek Government vulnerable to the British accusation of seeking territorial gain regardless of the defences of the Middle East. Hence official Greek policy has been to express sympathy with the desire for enosis but, in pressing for a solution, to demand only the human rights of the United Nations’ Charter, including the right to self-determination. As late as March 1954 Field-Marshal Papagos could say that the Greek Government’s Cyprus pohcy was one of firmness and compromise best calculated to serve Eastern Mediterranean security and Anglo-Greek ties. But before long he was obhged to state that if Britain failed to find a solution the only recourse
was an appeal to the United Nations. Events in Cyprus from this time onwards aggravated the situation. In July 1954 Archbishop Makarios urged the Cypriots to reject the British offer of a constitution and to form a national assembly. The next month he led his congregation in a demon¬ stration demanding enosis. From December 1954 onwards there were many demonstrations in Cyprus and in April 1955 there began a series of bomb outrages organised by E.O.K.A. (National Organisation of Cypriot Fighters). The British took stem measures and, when terrorist activities showed no signs of diminishing, in September 1955 proscribed E.O.K.A. and sent
military reinforcements to the island. Already, as early as April 1954, there had been demonstrations m Greece in favour of enosis and it was these together with pres¬ sure from certain members of the Greek Rally which forced Papagos to take a firmer line on Cyprus. That same month the Greek Foreign Office stated that if by 22nd August Britain had


240 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
not agreed to hold bi-lateral talks on Cyprus (talks excluding
Turkey) or if such talks failed, Greece would bring the Cyprus
question before the General Assembly of the United Nations.
As the British proved unbending, on 20th August 1954 Papagos
requested that Cyprus should be placed on the General Assembly’s
agenda. Despite British protests, the Assembly’s steering
committee decided 9 to 3 in favour of Greece. Greece then
demanded a plebiscite for Cyprus under the auspices of U.N.O.
But that was as far as the matter went, for in December a New
Zealand resolution not to consider further, for the time being,
the Greek request was carried 50 to nil (8 abstaining). This
decision (which ought to have been anticipated) caused the
Greeks much disappointment and there followed in Greece
angry demonstrations against both Britain and America. King
Paul, in a broadcast, appealed to his people to remain faithful to
their old friends, America and Britain ; to remember that with¬
out their aid Greece and Cyprus might no longer have existed ;
and not to let disappointment obscure the larger problems.
In June 1955 Britain invited both Greece and Turkey to
talks in London on Mediterranean defence, including Cyprus.
This move was denounced by Makarios who in July visited
Athens and requested the Greek Government to send a further
appeal to the United Nations in case the tripartite talks should
fail. The Foreign Minister, Stephanopoulos, refused to do this,
saying that such a measure would prejudice the talks which were
planned for August. In a Press Conference the Archbishop
stated he disapproved of the Greek Government’s tactics and he
himself sent a telegram to U.N.O. protesting against British
security measures in Cyprus. This combined with internal
pressure caused the Greek Government to act : on 21st July
Stephanopoulos announced that Greece had asked that Cyprus
should be placed on the Agenda of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
The tripartite talks began in London on 29th August. Mr.
Macmillan’s offer of a constitution to Cyprus was refused.
While the talks were in progress Greek-Turkish relations
deteriorated. Greek attacks on the Turkish consulate of Salonica
were followed by anti-Greek riots in Istanbul and Smyrna. The
Greek Government cancelled Greek participation in N.A.T.O.’s
military exercises and even hinted that Greece might withdraw


241
Years : Greece and Europe, 1945-36
from the Atlantic Treaty. Opposition parties in Greece attacked the government, complaining of its servile and undignified attitude to Turkish provocations, and called for an emergency session of Parliament to debate the possible re-alignment of Greek Foreign policy. But the Greek Government stood firm and continued negotiations with Great Britain. This was indeed the only way open to it, for the second Greek appeal to U.N.O. had, like the first, met with no success. On 22nd September 1955 Makarios announced that, in view of the situation, he would summon the Cypriots to enter a new stage of passive resistance. He later explained that he envisaged the withdrawal of Cypriots from the municipal and village bodies in Cyprus. He did not, it would seem, envisage a cessation of terrorism, for, as far as is known, he did not use his influence to put an end to E.O.K.A.’s outrages. In point of fact, E.O.K.A. increased its subversive actions. Such was the situation when, on 3rd October 1955, the new Governor, Field-Marshal Sir John Harding arrived in Cyprus. Shortly after his arrival he had several talks with Makarios who later informed the Press that he had offered to co-operate with the new Governor on the basis ofa plan which admitted self-determination for the Cypriots. When offered the Macmillan proposals, the Archbishop replied that they had been rejected by the Government of Greece and
were therefore unacceptable. Meanwhile, despite anti-British demonstrations in Greece and inflammatory broadcasts to Cyprus from Athens against which the British protested, the Anglo-Greck negotiations continued. On 5th December 1955 Mr. Macmillan stated that the gap to be bridged was narrow and he hinted that a compromise might be found. He explained however that sinister forces were at work and as much as said that Makarios was one of the chief obstacles to a settlement. In February 1956, however, Makarios is said to have accepted in principle the British offer of a constitution as an interim solution. With Mr. F. Noel-Baker, M.P., acting as mediator, negotiations continued into early March, but these broke down on the refusal of the British to agree to a Greekelected majority in the proposed legislature. Following this breakdown in negotiations, the British Government removed Makarios from Cyprus, having come to doubt his sincerity and having become convinced that he was encouraging the terrorism


242 The Reconstruction of Greece During the Post-War
of E.O.K.A. This measure caused a great outcry, not only in Cyprus but also in Greece. The Greek Government not only withdrew its Ambassador from London but, under popular pressure, lodged yet another appeal to the United Nations. It stated that it would resume negotiations on the four following conditions : (i) the return of Makarios to Cyprus ; (2) the recognition of the Cypriot people’s right to self-determination ; (3) the establishment of self-government based on full constitu¬ tional guarantees; (4) a general amnesty to detained Cypriot patriots. It would seem that the Greek Government had in mind a definite period of between five and ten years for the phase of self-government and that the date fixed for the recogni¬ tion of self-determination should not be made dependent on British strategic requirements.
In August 1956 E.O.K.A. declared a truce. The Cyprus Government, however, took the occasion not to speed up negotiations but to make to E.O.K.A. the offer of an un¬ conditional surrender. Needless to say, E.O.K.A. renewed the struggle, which continued with increasing bitterness to the end of the year. In October the Greek Government succeeded in placing the Cyprus question on the agenda of the General Assembly of the United Nations. But though the Greeks received some sympathy they obtained no tangible result. Meanwhile the British Government had sent Lord Radchffe to Cyprus to study the problem and to draft a constitution to be offered to the Cypriots. Lord Radcliffe’s proposals were published as a White Paper on 19th December 1956. They provide for a dyarchy in Cyprus ; the British Governor is to be vested with the legislative and executive power in his reserved fields of external affairs, defence and internal security : the Local Legislature with Ministers responsible to it is to have the control of its own field, the Governor however being the final judge as to the exact limits of that field. The Legislature is to consist of 36 members—24 elected Greek Cypriots, 6 elected Turkish Cypriots, and 6 nominated members. The proposals go on to provide ingenious and elaborate methods of safe¬ guarding minority rights. All this may be admirable, but the
Greeks are bitterly disappointed with the basic structure of the proposed constitution, as also with the suggestion of partition as a possible ultimate solution.


243
Years: Greece and Europe, 1945-36
At the end of March 1957, the British Government, following a marked decline in the activities of E.O.K.A. and following the United Nations’ resolution of the 22nd February that negotiations should be continued to find a just settlement, released Archbishop Makarios from detention. This act, although marred by the continuation of the Archbishop’s exile (he was not allowed to return to Cyprus), gave much satisfaction to the Greeks and also to their friends in Britain. But an immediate settlement was not forthcoming. The Archbishop had already made it clear upon his release that he would not negotiate unless he were allowed to return to Cyprus. He rejected outright the plan of partition, denied the right of the Turks to have a part in negotiations, and defined the just settlement as the application of the principle of self determination. In making these pronouncements he has the support of the Greeks and it is difficult to see how a Greek Government can possibly negotiate on different principles. Such was the position in May 1956 : it can only be hoped that a reasonable solution can soon be found and complete Anglo
Greek friendship restored.


CHAPTER XXVII
THE GREEKS OF TO-DAY ^
THE question is often asked : How far can the modern Greeks be regarded as the descendants of the ancient inhabitants of ^ ^ their land ? Now that the British and Greeks
and modern. side, we, as well as they, like to recall the military glories of ancient Greece, the victories of Marathon, Salamis, and Plataea, and to claim that our allies are the representatives of the nation which invented the arts of peace and war and laid the founda¬ tions of modern literature and science. But the claim of the modern Greeks to Hellenic descent has often been contested. For example, Fallmerayer, the German historian of medieval Greece, writing in 1830, when the Greeks had lately vindicated their freedom in the War of Independence, affirmed that the modern Greeks were an almost purely Slavonic race. This judgement seemed to the Greeks of that day, and to the foreign Philhellcnes who had aided them, to be rank heresy, and they would have none of such theories ; and indeed a study of the history, language, customs, and characteristics of the Greeks tends to confirm the belief that their claim to Hellenic descent has at least a considerable basis of truth.
Down to the middle of the sixth century a.d., in spite of the inroads of northern barbarians, the population of Greece
Slavonic element T”'
in Greece. classical period ; but m a.d. 577 there was a formidable Slav invasion, which, however, mainly affected Northern Greece. In the eighth century, after the terrible plague of a.d. 746—7, much of the open country was colonized by Slavs, who acquired a firm footing in the Peloponnese. But the fact remains that the Slavonic element was
See Editor s Preface to the Third Edition. For a recent account of economic conditions, see Sweet-Escott’s excellent study, Greece. A Political and Economic Survey, 1939-53 (1954). 244


The Greeks of To-day 245
absorbed and has left practically no trace in the language and very httle in the place-names of the country. One sometimes, however, comes across individuals, particularly in the Peloponnese, who have the round face and flat features which are characteristic of the Slav. Another non-Greek element are the Albanians, probably sprung from the ancient Illyrians, who began to descend into
'Ti Atu • Greece in the fourteenth century, but, like the e amans. were Hellenized and, unlike many of
their brethren in Albania proper, who became Moslems, they remained true to the Christian faith after the Turkish conquest. A further Albanian element was added, when Albanian troops were employed by the Turks to suppress the abortive rising of 1770. Many of them settled in the country, especially in Attica and the Argohd islands, and were assimilated, and, when Greece rose against her oppressors, they provided some of the most brilhant chiefs and the toughest soldiers and fuUy earned their right to share in the dearly-won hberty of Greece. Some of Greece’s most prominent leaders, for example. Admiral Koundouriotis and M. Zaimis, the two Presidents of the RepubUc, have belonged to famflies of Albanian extraction. The picturesque Albanian dress with its pleated fustanella has been adopted as the Greek national costume and is worn by the Evzones of the Greek Army. Under King Otho prominent statesmen wore the fustanella, and M. Gennadius, for so long the Greek Minister at the Court of St. James, maintained that it was the proper dress of a Greek diplomatist abroad ; as late as 1900 the Deputy for TripoUtsa appeared in the Chamber in the national garb. Other elements in the population ofGreece are the Wallachians or Vlachs, the Turks, and the Jews, but they have never been numerous enough to have any ethnological significance and have never intermingled with the Greeks. The Wallachians are a curious nomadic race, whose language belongs to the Latin family and is akin to Rumanian. They . , are a pastoral people settled in Northern Greece, e a ac tans, spend the summer in the mountains and
the winter in the plains. Their summer encampments consist of beehive-like huts, which are placed, if possible, in woods or in depressions on the mountains—a practice originally adopted to escape the attentions of Turkish tax-collectors. They are a


246 The Greeks of To-day
thrifty but generous race. One ofthe richest modem milhonaires, M. Averof, who presented Greece with her only battle-cruiser, which bears his name, and who reseated the Stadium at Athens in marble, belonged to this race. Owing to the exchange of populations the Turks have practically disappeared from Greece. Formerly they were to be found in small numbers in Northern Greece and even returned a few Turkish Deputies, who, it was noted, characteristically followed the line of least resistance and always voted with the party in power. The Jews are rare in Old Greece, since a Greek is quite a match for the Jew in business acumen, but they form a large element in the population of Salonica where ■ they were given a home by the Turks when they were driven out of Spain by Ferdinand and Isabella. The most highly educated Jews are said to speak CastiUan but the lower classes speak a language which bears the same relation to Spanish as Yiddish bears to German with the admixture of some Turkish words. They not only carry on businesses of every kind but also form the lowest class of casual labourers. The Chief Rabbi of Salonica is one of the great personages of the Jewish world owing to the size and wealth of the Jewish community. An amusing incident was the acceptance by the then holder of the office of the Greek Order of the Saviour for services rendered in the war of 1914-18.
The enormous influx of refugees into Greece has probably introduced a new element of purer Hellenic stock than many of
Refu ees older inhabitants, since the Greek communities ^ ' outside Greece, especially in Asia Minor, being surrounded by men of non-European race and of a different religion, to a great extent escaped admixture of blood.
Language is no infalhble criterion of race ; but the fact that one of the oldest of languages, that of Homer, Sophocles, Plato,
The Greek New Testament, is still a living speech language. surely one of the most remarbable phenomena in the history of philology. It has naturally undergone changes, but it is no exaggeration to say that the difference between Homeric and modern Greek is no greater than that between Middle English and the English of to-day. The spoken language has of course changed more than the


The Greeks of To-day 247
written, which is much nearer to ancient Greek ; in fact, any one acquainted with classical Greek can read a leading article in the Greek press. There is a much more striking difference between the popular and the official language than in most countries, and the rivalry between the ‘ demotic ’, which contains a good many Turkish and Itahan words, and the ‘ purified ’ language has often become a serious pohtical question. In literature also two opposing forces are at work, one of which has led to an ex¬ aggerated rusticity, the other to an unnatural reaction in the direction of ancient Greek. It often amuses the foreigner to hear Greek children caUing one another by the names of great men and women of antiquity, such as Sophocles, Themistocles, Plato, Antigone, and Aspasia, In his strong sense of nationahty the modem Greek resembles the ancient, who divided the world into Greeks and barbarians. ^ » XT . 1 Wherever the Greek is, he always remains a
ist feelin Greek. There are Greeks to be met with scattered all over the globe ; for example, there are flourishing Greek communities at Manchester, Alexandria, and Marseilles and in India, and, until immigration was restricted, countless Greeks migrated to the U.S.A., where they sold fruit and confectionery in the larger cities, working and saving money in order to return to Greece and hve the rest of their lives in idleness. Many of the restaurants in Canada are kept by Greeks, who are also to be found in large numbers in the Transvaal and at Melbourne. Many of the finest houses in Athens belong to Greeks who have made fortunes abroad in shipping or Egyptian cotton ; and immense sums have been lavished by Greeks who made their money abroad on the foimdation of schools, hospitals, and hbraries in their native places. The strong bond ofnationality was never better shovv^ than in the splendid spirit of brother¬ hood and self-sacrifice in which the Greeks dealt with the difficult problem of settling the hundreds of thousands of refugees who poured into Greece in the years following the war of 1914-18, as a result of the exchange of population with Turkey and Bulgaria. Pohtically, too, there are striking points of resemblance between the modem and the ancient Greeks.
Strong interest are the primary interest of the modem m po itics. Greek. Before the establishment of the
dictatorship, if he was not discussing some real or imaginary


248 The Greeks of To-day
business transaction in the street or a cafe, the Greek was sure to be talking pohtics. There are innumerable daily papers in Athens, and pohtical questions were formerly apt to spht the nation into two parts, just as in antiquity they divided the Greek city-states into two irreconcilable factions, but talking and writing on political topics became dangerous under the restrictions of the dictatorship. The modem Greeks, too, have shown all the pohtical instabihty of the ancients. The changes backwards and forwards from Monarchy to Republicanism in the last twenty-five years are a striking example of this. The average Greek of to-day is at heart a democrat and an individuahst, and it is difficult not to beheve that, hke the ancient
^ , Greek, he is also by nature a repubhcan. The
Democracy and 1 • c v t RepubUcInism. ^ ^^em to contradict this, but it must be remembered that Greece was under the tutelage of the Powers and King George, as brother-in-law of King Edward VII and uncle of the Czar Nicholas, was an invaluable asset in international pohtics. Also his ultra-constitutional attitude on all occasions enabled him to weather the storm, though more than once the Greek Royal Family had their baggage ready packed to leave Greece on a British man-of-war. There has seldom been a more democratic king than George I. He strolled about unattended and engaged in conversation with people whom he met. In his reign court balls were extremely democratic functions ; it used to be said that if you wanted to hire a carriage to take you to the Palace, you must order it early, as the proprietor might wish to return and dress in order to be present himself. IGng George I was never really appreciated until his subjects realized their loss when he was assassinated in Salonica whither he had gone after its capture in the First Balkan War to assert the claim of Greece to the newly-conquered Macedonia.
There is no titled aristocracy in Greece. Many Greeks of the old Phanariot families who ruled the Christian provinces
Social Classes Turks were granted the hereditary title of Prince, but they are not allowed to use such titles in Greece and can only assume them when they go abroad. The Venetian rule in the Ionian Islands resulted in the bestowal of titles on numerous Greek famihes, who made it a


The Greeks of To-day 249
condition of their adherence to the Greek kingdom that they might retain their titles, but they arc not allowed to use them except in their own islands, where these Italian noblemen are as common as blackberries. It is of course unavoidable that Athenian society should have its social distinctions, but one of the chief claims is descent from the heroes of the War of In¬ dependence.
The democratic character of the Greek State has led, as often, to an extreme form of bureaucracy, a large fraction of the popula
employment at however, have greatly improved in recent years. In former days one encountered inefficiency everywhere. For example, one would find that the General Post Office at Athens had run out of the most common denominations of postage-stamps. Formerly, too, the ‘ spoils system ’ existed, under which each new Government installed its own nominees in every kind of official position. The present writer remembers congratulating the nephew of a newlyappointed Prime Minister on his uncle’s accession to power ; he replied that it made no difference to him, as he already had a good post in a bank.^ A striking and most agreeable quality which the modern Greek shares with the ancient is hospitality. Travelling about in the country districts, especially if one speaks the language and does not take a dragoman, one is welcomed wherever one goes. If there is no inn, the most substantial villager entertains the traveller. To take the stranger in—in the best sense of the phrase—is a sacred duty. When the traveller arrives in the village the mayor, or perhaps the schoolmaster, installs him in his best room, a sanctuary only entered on special occasions, and kills a lamb and gets out his best wines. He will accept no payment, though you can ‘ tip ’ his servant, if he has one. The arrival of a stranger in a remote Greek village is quite an event and leads to a great assemblage of the notables of the place—including
^ On another occasion the present writer, visiting Athens after an absence of some years, inquired after a lady who had given him lessons in Modern Greek. He found that, though she had no special qualifications, she had been appointed headmistress of a large girls’ secondary school. Her cousin had become Minister of Education.
Greek
hospitality
Bureaucracy. tion being in Government
miserable salaries. Things.


250 The Greeks of To-day
often a returned emigrant from America, who seizes the oppor¬ tunity to air liis efficiency, or inefficiency, in speaking Englishand a great consumption of liquid refreshment. Occasions of this kind give the modern Greek an opportunity of displaying another characteristic, which he shares with the ancient Greek. Like the Homeric hero he wants to know all about you and does not scruple to ask questions ; ‘ What is your name and age ? ’ ‘ Why have you come to Greece ? ’ ‘ What is your income ’ ? They also expect you to know personally any friend of theirs who is or has been in England : ‘ Do you ever go to London ? If so, you must have met my second cousin, Anastasios Papadopoulos who is a waiter in Soho.’ If you are unmarried, they will ask you what dowry you will expect with the lady you marry. Another common type of question concerns the wages and salaries of persons of every class in England from agricultural labourers to Prime Ministers and even the Sovereign. A story is told of a villager who inquired the annual revenue enjoyed by the King of England and, on being given a somewhat vague answer in millions of drachmas, remarked : ‘ I suppose he could afford to cat tinned meat’ (which is regarded as a first-class luxury) ‘ twice a day if he wanted to ’. An even¬ ing spent in a Greek country cafe is a somewhat exhausting experience.
The mention of cafes, where one seldom meets any one but men, leads on to another point of resemblance between modern
and ancient Greeks, the position of women. Naturally in the upper strata of society in Athens and the larger cities, the position of women is the same as in other European cities. Elsewhere, however, the place of woman is in the home—and nowhere else. The lack of influ¬ ence of women in affairs outside the home is, however, amply
compensated by the respect and consideration which their hus¬ bands and children show to them as wives and mothers. The women do their full share of work in the field and make all the family clothing, including the spinning and weaving of the materials. Marriages arc a matter of arrangement and the bride must bring a dowry suitable to her position in life and an ample supply of family linen as well as her trousseau. The position of women is also reflected in the attitude towards children. The boys arc the favourites and girls arc little accounted and only
Position of
women.


The Greeks of To-day 251
tolerated. When the present writer was once travelling in Laconia, his host in one village gave him an introduction to a relative in a village some miles away but solemnly warned him not to ask his cousin how many children he had, since he was in the horrible pre¬ dicament of possessing eleven daughters ‘ and nothing male at all.’ The main occupations of the modem Greeks are the same as those of the ancients—agriculture, seafaring, and fishing. In . . , many parts of Greece the methods of agriculture
Agriculture. .f, ... , , , ® , .
* are still primitive, though modem machmery has been introduced in the great plains of Thessaly and scientific farming has been introduced in Boeotia by the British Lake Copais Co. Ploughing is usually carried on with a wooden plough drawn by oxen. Olives, figs, oranges, almonds, wine, and the small grape which is grown chiefly on the south coast of the Corinthian Gulf and derives its name of currant from the city of Corinth, are important products; but the chief crop now is that of tobacco, on the successful harvesting and disposal of which the economic life of Greece may almost be said to depend. The sea carrying trade of Greece is one of the most . important industries. Developed originally in ippiiig. islands, it has become one of the greatest
sources of profit to Greece. During the war of 1914-18 large fortunes were made by Greeks who sold their vessels to the Allies when the submarine menace was making havoc of shipping. In 1834 the site of the Peiraeus, the port of Athens, was marked by a single building, the remains of the Turkish custom-house ; now it is the third largest port in the Mediterranean and the place of call of the greater part of about five million tons of shipping, which enter and leave the harbours of Greece. Its population in 1938 numbered 198,771. Fishing is also extensively carried on, by methods which have made little progress since antiquity. The catching of tunny is still practised on the principles described by Strabo, small platforms being erected out at sea, where the fishermen look out for shoals and warn their companions when a shoal is in sight. The drag-net is also a popular method of fishing ; and spearing of fish from a boat with a flare at night is also practised. Sponge-fishing by divers is a profitable industry
in some of the islands. Hitherto we have spoken mainly about the country Greeks, who form the bulk of the population and show the character


252 ^The Greeks of To-day
istics of the race in the most marked degree, since the urban
^ t . population is much the same in all countries.
Growth ofmtes. i • i
The present century has wimessed an immense development of Athens and the Peiraeus, which with Salonica are the only really large towns in Greece. In 1900 there was still a stretch of several miles of agricultural land between Athens and its port, but this is now covered with factories and works ; in fact, the industrial revolution has at last reached Greece. Athens is now the largest city in South-east Europe, having even outstripped Constantinople, and the AcropoHs towers over a great modern town which, with its suburbs and the Peiraeus, contains a population of little less than one milhon souls. One looks back with regret to the time within recent memory when the city was about the size of an average Enghsh county town with scarcely any industry and with a commerce almost entirely limited to importations.
The modem, hke the ancient, Greeks are great behevers in education, which is entirely free. Secondary schools have been
Education estabhshed in all the large centres, and the pupils of these ‘ gymnasia ’ are a familiar sight with their blue uniforms and peaked caps. The University of Athens was founded in the earhest days of the Greek kingdom and celebrated its centenary four years ago, and a second university was established at Salonica in 1927. Women were first admitted to the University in 1890. The thirst for education is apt to lead to the training for the learned professions of more men than can find reasonably good employment. There are thus superfluous professionally qualified men, who join the ranks of the unemployed and tend to become pohtical agitators and hangers-on of the chiefs of the political factions. In 1927 a public school on English lines was founded at Spetsai on the initiative of M. Venizelos, in the hope that, adorned with the old school tie, the ex-pupils would turn out to be reliable public servants and administrators.
A remarkable feature of the streets of Athens is the so-called Loustros or shoe-blacks. The Greek considers weU-pohshed footgear to be the hall-mark of a civihzed gentleman and has a mania for having his shoes pohshed at any odd moment of the day. Even so, the boot-blacking industry seems to be rather overstaffed. The reason is that it is the ambition of every Greek


The Greeks of To-day 253
boy of intelligence to migrate to Athens, where he blacks boots in the day and attends night schools and is housed in hostels provided for him by the charitable. Many of these boys have reached positions of eminence in after life ; there are said to have been instances of their becoming Cabinet Ministers, but this is easier in Greece than in most countries, since Ministries are continually changing. Meanwhile they are employed not only as boot-blacks but also as messengers and errand-boys and, in emergencies, as domestic helps. They are trustworthy and intelligent and form an attractive feature of the street-life of Athens. Until recent years athletics did not play such an important part in modern Greek life as they played in antiquity. The revival of the Olympic Games was largely due to Greek initiative, but the movement was originally inspired more by a desire on the part of the Greeks to parade their Hellenic descent than from a love of athletics. At the First Olympic Games the Greeks, through lack of foreign competitors, won most of the prizes. In particular, the race from Marathon to Athens was won by a native, who at the time was suspected by his rivals of cheating. However, so the story goes, he proved himself so admirable a long-distance runner when he led the van of the retreating Greek Army after its defeat in Thessaly in the campaign against Turkey in 1897 that he completely cleared his character.^ Of late years, however, particularly under the recent dictatorship, there has been a marked development of sport, especially football, and University students are said to have turned their attention from politics to the safer pursuit of athletics. One respect in which the modem Greeks fall short of the Greeks of the classical age is in their achievement in art and architecture. Like the Itahans they rely on the ancients to provide artistic attractions for visitors. They have produced no great painter and only mediocre sculptors,* and the architecture of modern
Art and
architecture.
^ Some thirty years ago the present writer attended the Panhellenic Games at Athens, which were confined to Greek athletes. In the walking race the man who came in last was declared winner by the English umpire ; he was the only competitor who did not run. * Michael Tombros, the sculptor of the memorial to Rupert Brooke set up on the island of Skyros, is perhaps an exception.
17


254 The Greeks of To-day
Athens presents few features of interest. In the early days of the kingdom the inspiration, such as it was, came with King Otho from Bavaria and produced the vast, barrack-like old Royal Palace and pseudo-classical buildings like the University and the National Library. Modern ecclesiastical architecture is feeble and uninteresting. The Cathedral at Athens is devoid of architectural merit; yet, to provide the material for it, a number of Byzantine buildings of real artistic beauty were destroyed. Of recent years, however, a movement for the preservation and study of popular art has grown up, and an increasing interest in painting, sculpture, and architecture has led to the production of some good work on modern lines, and art exhibitions in Athens attract numerous exhibitors and are well patronized by the public.
The modern Greeks have shown little capacity for engineer¬ ing. Their railways are slow and cover only a small area of the P . . country, and the tracks are so badly laid that ^ they are often damaged by storm or flood. There has been a great improvement, however, in the roads of the country since the introduction of mechanical transport, and travelling has thus been rendered much easier. There is at least one modern achievement in engineering which the ancients had projected but never carried out, the canal through the Isthmus of Corinth ; but it is too small for large vessels, and the dues charged to foreign ships passing through are almost prohibitive, so that the canal is little used except by small Greek steamers. For the extensive public works carried out in Greece in recent years the help of foreign engineers and contractors has usually been called in ; they have found valuable co-operation in the Greek labourer, who is an industrious and intelligent worker. The Greeks are essentially a young nation and are still at an earlier stage of development than many of the peoples of Europe ; but no one who has visited Greece can fail to have been struck by the life and energy displayed in all the departments of their national life, in spite of the fact that circumstances in recent years have not been very favourable. The years of war from 1913 to 1922, followed by a period of intense political dissension and the strain of assimilating the hundreds of thousands of refugees who flocked into the country, did not exhaust the forces of this energetic and quick-witted people. In face of the Italian attack


The Greeks of To-Day 255
of 1940 and the German invasion of 1941 they showed to the world that courage and tenacity can make up for the lack of material advantages and that brave men fighting for their national independence can hold at bay treacherous invaders who attacked without provocation or warning with all the resources of mechanical warfare launched from behind a screen of hypoc¬ risy and misrepresentation. Their courage during the dark years of 1940-44 was astounding and their reconstruction of their country on democratic principles in the years that followed was an achievement of the highest order and worthy of the traditions of their country.
ZHTn H E'AAAS.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABBOTT, G. F. Greece and the Allies (1914-22). London 1922, ABOUT, E. La Grhe contemporaine. Paris 1855. ANDREADES, A. Les Effets ecotwmiques et sociales de la guerre en Grhe. Paris 1929. ANDREW, PRINCE, OF GREECE. Towards Disaster. London 1930. ANON. The Greek Army and the Recent Offensive. London 1919. BiCKFORD-SMiTH, R. A. H. Greece under King George. London 1893. BiRTLES, B. Exiles in the jEgean. London 1938. BOWER, L., and BOLITHO, G. Otho I, King of Greece. London 1939. BRAiLSFORD, H. N. Macedonia : its Races and its Future. London 1906. BROWN, ASHLEY. Greece, Old and New. London 1927. BUCKLEY, c. Greece and Crete, 1941. London 1952. COSMETATOS, s. p. p. The Tragedy of Greece. London 1928. CRAWLEY, c. w. The Question of Greek Independence (1821-33). Cambridge 1930. CHRISTMAS, w. The Life of King George of Greece. London 1914. DAKIN, D. British and American Philhellenes during the war of Greek Independence, 1821-1833. Thessaloniki 1955. DRAKOULis, p. E. Neo-Hellenic Literature and Language. Oxford 1897. ELIOT, SIR c. Turkey in Europe. London 1908. ELLiADi, M. N. Crete, Past and Present. London 1933. EPSTEIN, E. (Editor). The Annual Register. London (Annual Pub¬ lication). FALLS, CAPTAIN c. Military Operations in Macedonia. Loiidon 1933, 1935. FINLAY, G. History of Greece. Vols. vi and vn. Oxford 1877. HAMSON, D. We fell among Greeks. London J946 FORBES, N., and others. The Balkans. Oxford 1915. HASLUCK, F. w. Christianity and Islam under the Sultans. Oxford 1929. HOLLAND, T. E. The European Concert and the Eastern Question. Oxford 1885. HUDSON, G. F. Turkey, Greece, and the Eastern Mediterranean. Oxford
1939GAUVIN, A. The Greek Question. New York 1918. GORDON, T. History of the Greek Revolution. Edinburgh 1832. JEBB, SIR R. Modern Greece. London 1880. KEROHLAS, c. Ekftherios Venizelos. London 1915. LADAS, s. p. The Exchange of Minorities of Bulgaria, Greece, and Turkey. New York 1932. LAWSON, j. c. Tales of jEgean Intrigue. London 1920. LEEPER, SIR R. When Greek Meets Greek. London 1950.
256


257
Bibliography
MACKENZIE, COMPTON. First Athenian Memories. London 1931. Greek Memories. London 1939. j^gean Memories. London 1940. Wind of Freedom. London 1943. MCNEIL, w. H. The Greek Dilemma. London 1947. MARRiOT, j. A. R. The Eastern Question. Oxford 1917. MAVROGORDATO, J. Modem Greece, iSoo-ig^i. London 1931. MILLER, WILLIAM. Greek Life in Town and Country. London 1905. The Latins in the Levant. London 1908. The Balkans. London 1922. A History of the Greek People, 1821-31. New York 1922. Greece. London 1928. The Ottoman Empire and its Successors. Cam¬ bridge 1928. NEWBIGGIN, MARION L. Geographical Aspects of Balkan Problems. London 1915.
NICHOLAS, PRINCE, OF GREECE. My Fifty Years. London 1926. Political Memoirs. London (1928). NOEL-BAKER, F. Greece : the whole story. London 1946. OWEN, H. COLLINSON. Salonica and After. London 1919. PALLis, A. A. Greece's Anatolian Venture—and after. London 1937. PHILLIPS, w. ALISON. The War of Greek Independence., London 1897. PLATYKAS, R. D. La Grece pendant la guerre de 1914-18. Berne 1918. ‘ POLYBIUS ’. Greece before the Conference. London (no date). PROTONOTARIOS,E. B. The Macedonian Tragedy (inGreek). Salonica 1916. RANKIN, SIR R., BART. The Inner History ofthe Balkan War. London 1914. SARRAiL, GENERAL p. Mon Commandement en Orient. Paris 1820. SERGEANT, LEWIS. Greece in the Nineteenth Century. London 1878. SETON-WATSON, R. w. The Rise ofNationality in the Balkans. London
1917SPENCER, FLOYD A. War and Post-War Greece: an Analysis based on Greek Writings. Washington 1952. SPENCER, T. B. Fair Greece Sad Relic. London 1954. STAVRiANOS, L. G. Greece: American Dilemma and Opportunity. Chicago 1952. STEEVENS, G. w. With the Conquering Turk. London 1897. STRATFORD DE REDCLIFFE, LORD. The Eastern Question. London 1881. SWEET-ESCOTT, B. Greece. A Political and Economic Survey, 1939-1953. London and New York 1954. THOMSON, SIR BASIL. The Allied Secret Service in Greece. London 1931. TOYNBEE, A. J. Greek Policy since 1882. Oxford 1914. The Western Question in Greece and Turkey. Oxford 1922. TSOUDEROS, E. J. Le Relevement e'conomique de la Grhe. Paris 1919.


258 V Bibliography
VAKA, DEMETRA (Mrs. Kenneth Brown). Les Intrigues Germaniques en Grhe. Paris 1918. VENiZELOS, E. The Vindication of Greek National Policy. London 1918. viLLARi, L. The Macedonian Campaign. London 1922. wiLLMORE, j. s. The Story of King Constantine. London 1919. WILSON, FIELD MARSHAL LORD. Eight Years Overseas. London 1949WOODHOUSE, c. M. Apple of Discord. London 1948. The Greek War of Independence. London 1952.
Greek ‘ White Book ’. Athens 1917. League of Nations, Greek Refugee Settlement. Geneva 1926. Pubhcations of the Institute of International Affairs.


INDEX
Abdul Hamid, 39fF. Abyssinia, 191, 200 Adrianople, 23, 50, 52 f., 55, 63, 148 ; Peace of, 12 ; siege and fall of, 54 ; recaptured, 60 Afium Karahissar, 142, 144 f. Agriculture in Greece, 216, 228 ff., 250 Aidin, 66 Aivali, 7 A.K.E.L., 238 Albania, Albanians, 7, 21, 25 f, 42, 47 f, 52, 55 f-, 63, 68 ff., 79, 105, 132, 150, 167, 173, 183, 186, 201, 210, 213, 214, 227 ff Alexander, King of Greece, 128, 130,
137 Alexander, King ofJugoslavia, 183 Ali Pasha, 68 Amalia, Queen, 15 Ambelaki, 6 America, 226, 240 ; Aid to Greece after 1945, 227 ff Ambracian Gulf, 28 Andrew, Prince of Greece, 127, 147 Angelopoulos, M., 181 Ankara, 139, 142 f, 172, 200 Architecture and Art in Greece, 252 Arkadion, 22 Army, Greek, 44, 46, 132, 134, 140, 144, 212 Arta, 12, 28, 32 Asia Minor, Greeks in, 64 ff ; territory in, offered to Greeks by the Entente, 81 ; Greek claims in, 135 f‘. 139 ; Greek campaign in, 141 ff ; refugees from, 148, 153,
155, 170 Athens, becomes capital, 14 ; growth of, 47, 251 ; water-supply in, 169 ; architecture of, 253 ; Ger¬ mans enter, 215 ; liberation of, 221 ; disturbances in (Dec. 1944), 222 ff ^ 259
Athletics in Greece, 252 Austria, 39, 41 ; invades Serbia, 80,
91 Averof, M., 171 244 Averof, the, 171, 187 f.
Balkan League (1912), 47 ff ; Con¬ ference, 173, 176, 183, 195, 200, 206 ; Pact, 176, 185 f, 195 Balkan Military Alliance (1954),
237 Balkan War, First, 50 ff. ; Second, 58 ff. Baltatzis, M., 144, 146 Banitsa, 53 Bavarian influence under Kine Otho,
13 f-, 253 Belashitsa Mountains, 59 Belgrade, 94, 158, 167, 195, 206 Benazet, M., 117 Berchtold, Count, 48 Berlin, Congress and Treaty of, 26, 28 ff., 48 Bessarabia, 207 Bethmann-Hollweg, 71 Billy, M. de, 121 Bismarck, 26 Boot, Messrs. Henry, & Son, 173, 199 Boot, Mr. and Mrs. Charles, 175 Bosnia, 41 Botzaris, Marco, 10 Boulgaris, M., 22 Boulogne, Conference at, 115 Boyemia River, 95 Briand, Aristide, 125, 145 brigandage in Greece, 13, 15 f, 169 Britain, Great, relations with Greece, 9, II, 15, 17, 22, 24 ff, 27, 31, 74, 78, 138, 144, 148, 178, 191, 201, 204 f, 207, 237 ff. ; relations with Turkey, 39, 138, 191, 207, 238 ff ; naval mission in Greece, 46, 160 ; gives guarantee to Greece and


A Short History of Modern Greece i82i-ig^6
260
Rumania, 201 ; financial agree¬ ment with Greece ; Alliance with Turkey, 206 ; War-Trade Agree¬ ment with Greece, ib ; sends help to Greece, 213 ff, 227 ff. ; with¬ draws troops from Greece, 214 ; sends troops to Greece, 221, 226 British Military Liaison, 227 ; aid to Greece in 1945 and after, 228 ff. Brooke, Rupert, 175 Brousa, 66, 142 Bucharest, Treaty of, 62 f. Bui air, 54 Bulgaria, Bulgarians, 40, 175, 213 ; rise of, 21, 24 ; Exarchate created, 23 ; and Treaty of San Stefano, 25 ; and Treaty of Berlin, 26 ; united with East Rumelia, 30 ; and Macedonian question, 36 ff, 42 ; joins Balkan League, 47, 48 ; in First Balkan War, 50 ff ; in Second Balkan War, 57 ff ; and Treaty Bucharest, 62 ; intrigues with, of Central Powers, 70 ; harasses Serbian communications, 80 ; mobilizes, 86 f. ; operations on Macedonian Front, 107 ff ; Treaty with Greece, 136 ; and minorities question, 155 f. ; frontier incident, 156 f; commercial agreement with Greece, 164 ; and Balkan Conference, 173 ; and Balkan Pact, 185 f, 202 ; Treaty with Balkan Entente, 200 ; attitude after fall of France, 207 ; occupy Greek Thrace and Macedonia, 216 ; after the Second World War, 227 ff Byron, Lord, ii, 153, 175
Calendar, adoption of Western, 150 Candia, 33, 200 Canea, 31, 43, 112, 200 Canning, George, 175 Capodistrias, Count}., ti, 13 Carlowitz, Peace of, 3 Carpathos, 67 Caserta, Conference of, 220 Cavalla, 63, 81, 109, 187 Cephalonia, 125
Chalcidice, 25, 36, 180 Chamberlain, Neville, 201 Chios, 4, 7, 55, 65, 145, 188 Christodoulou, Colonel, 109 Church, Greek, 3, 19, 154 Churchill, Winston, 219 f. ; visits Greece, 223, 225 Cilicia, 138 Citrine, Sir W., 224 Cochin, Denys, 96 Codrington, Admiral, ii, 165 ; General Sir A., 165 Cominform, 232 communism in Greece, 174, 195, 199, 226 ff. Constantine, King, 15, 71, 74 f, 106, iiof, 117, 123, 198 ; C.-in-C. in Greco-Turkish War, 32 f. ; de¬ posed from command, 44 ; made Inspector-General of the Army, 46 ; C.-in-C. in Balkan Wars, 52 ff ; succeeds to the throne, 57 ; attitude on August 1914, 76 ff. ; disagreements with Venizelos, 83, 86 f, 89 ; refuses entente offer of Cyprus, 93 ; and surrender of Greek war material, 117 ; intrigues with Germany, 124 ; deposed, 128 f. ; leaves Greece, 129 ; re¬ called to the throne, 138 ; with army in Asia Minor, 142 ; returns to Athens, 144 ; abdicates, 145 ; death of, 146 Constantine VI, Patriarch, 155 Constantinople, i, 10, 24 f, 28, 30, 134, 140, 153, 170, 172, 176, 240 Constitution, Greek (1844), 15 ; (1864), 18 f; (1911), 46; (1927), 165
Coraes, Adamantinos, 8 Corfu, 68, 71, 95, 125, 150, 201 Corinth, 227, 250, 253 Cos, 67, 218
Crete, 12, 14, 24 f, 25 f, 28 f, 112, 162, 188, 199 f, 217 ; risings in, 21 f, 31 ; under control of the Powers, 33 f ; proclaims inde¬ pendence, 43 ff. ; elects deputies, 46 ; ceded to Greece, 55, 64, 237 ;


26i
Index
Greek Government transferred to, 214 ; invasion of, by Germans, 215 Crimean War, 15 Curzon, First Marquis, 144, 146 Cyprus, 174 ; occupied by Great Britain, 27 ; offered to Greece by Entente, 93 ; British administra¬ tion of, 176 ; rising in, 177 f. ; question of, 237 ff. Cythera, 125
Damaskinos, Archbishop, 223, 230 Danglis, General, 113 Dardanelles, 55, 79, 82 f., 142 Dedeagatch, 53, 63, 148, 200 Delyiannis, Theodoros, 30 f., 162 Demertzis, Constantine, 161, 191,
193 Demirhissar, 59, 100, 102, 108, 187 Demir Kapu, 94 Demotica, 54, 156 dictatorship of General Pangalos, 159 ff. ; of General Metaxas, 196 ff. Dimitrief, General, 50 Diomedes, Prime Minister, 234 Dobropolji, 133 Dobrudja, the, 62 Dodecanese, 64, 67 f., 135 f-i 148, 178, 236 f. Doiran, 58, 108, 132 f., 164 Domoko, 33 Dospat, 37 Dousmanis, General, 79, 99, no, 130, 142 Dragoumis, Stephanos, 45 Drama, 39, 109, 187 Dunmehs, the, 40 Durrazzo, 200
E.A.M., 217 ff. E.C.A., 228 E.D.A., 235 Eden, Anthony, 219 ; in Athens, 221 f, 223, 225 E.D.E.S., 217 ff. Edham Pasha, 32 Edinburgh, Prince Alfred, Duke of.
education in Greece, 251 f. Egypt, 238 ; Greek Government transferred to, 214, 217 Eftim, Papa, 154 Ekaterini, 117 E.L.A.S., 217 ff. Ellasona, 32, 52 Embeiricos, M., 113 engineering in Greece, 253 Enos, 55 Entente Powers, relations with Greece in War of 1914-18, 73, 78, 81, 87 f., 90 f., 106, ii6ff, 123 ff ; and National Movement, 115 f, 121, 123 ; operations in Macedonia, 80 f, 94, 96 f, 100 f, 107 f, 114, 132 f; landing-force attacked at Athens, 119 Enver Bey, 40, 64 E.O.K.A., 239 ff E.P.E.K., 234 f Epirus, 15, 24, 26, 28, 32, 52, 68, 117, 123, 132, 215 ; question of Northern E., 78, 105, 132, 217, 236 Eski Shehr, 142, 144 Eutaxias, M., 162 Exarchate, Bulgarian, 23, 36
Fallmerayer, J. P., 243 Ferdinand, King (afterwards Tzar of Bulgaria), 41, 78, 86 Florence, Protocol of, 69 Fiorina, 53, 108, 132, 232 Foumet, Admiral Dartige du, no, 116 ff. France, relations of Greece with, ii, 15 f, 22, 28, 31, 78, 138 f, 142, 144, 230 ; with Turkey, 139, 144, 206 ; sends military mission, 160 ; joint guarantee to Greece and Rumania, 202, 204 ; fall of, effect in Greece, 207 Franchet d’Esp^rey, General, 132,
134 Frankish occupation of Greece, i Franklin-Bouillon Agreement, 144 Franz Ferdinand, Archduke, 71


262 A short History of Modern Greece 1821-1936
frontiers of Greece, 12, 18, 26 ff., 62 f, 137, 148, 236 fustanella, 215
Gallipoli, 54, 79, 136, 148 Gennadios, J., 244 George, D. Lloyd, 139 George V, King of Great Britain, 79 George I, King of the Hellenes, 21, 32 f., 74, 218 ; chosen King, 17 ; accession, 18 ; murder of, 56 George II, King of the Hellenes, leaves Greece with King Con¬ stantine, 128 ; becomes King, 146 ; leaves Greece, 152 ; re¬ ascends the throne, 190 ; insists on amnesty, ib. ; assents to dictator¬ ship, 196 ; accompanies Govern¬ ment to Crete, 214 ; returns (1946) to Greece, 231 ; death, 234 George, Prince, of Greece, 34 ff. Georgiadis, Basil, Patriarch, 155 Germanos, Archbishop of Patras, 10 Germany, relations of, with Greece, 13, 71, 74, 195, 205 f. ; with Turkey, 32, 39, 41 ; intrigues in the Balkans, 70 ; propaganda in Greece, 84 f. ; penetration of the Balkans by, 207, 210 ; invades Greece and Jugoslavia, 214 ; occu¬ pation of Greece by, 215 ff. ; evacuates Greece, 221 Gevgeli, 59, 157, 161, 164, 167 Gladstone, W. E., 18, 27 Goebett, the, 171 Gonatas, Colonel (afterwards Gen¬ eral), 151, 189 Goschen, First Viscount, 28 Gounaris, D., 83 f., 95, 143, 145 ff. Grammos, Mt., 233 Granville, Earl, 121 Greek Rally, The, 233 ff., 239 Gregory V, Patriarch, 10 Gregory VII, Patriarch, 154 Grevena, 232 Grey, Sir E. (afterwards First Vis¬ count), 82, 88
Hadjanestis, General, 145 f.
Hadjikyriakos, Captain (afterwards Admiral), 151, 158 Hadjopoulos, Colonel, 109 Hadrian’s aq^ueduct, 169 Hague Conference, 173 Haidar Pasha, 172 Halepa Pact, 28 Harding, Field-Marshal Sir John, 241 ff Hassim Tahsim Pasha, 52 Helle, the, 209 Herzogovina, 24, 41 Hetairia, National, 8 Flilmi Pasha, 38 Hitler, Adolf, 209, 211, 213 Hoggia, Daut, 210 Hoover Plan, 175 Hydra, 6, 10
Ibrahim Pasha, 11 f. Imbros, 64 Imperial Airways, 174 Independence, Greek War of, 10 ff, 140, 171 Ionian Islands, 9, 12, 17, 21, 27, 235, 237 f. ; see also Corfu Ismet Pasha (Inonii), 168, 198 Ismid, 66, 172 Istanbul, see Constantirtople Italy, and question of the Dodecanese, 64, 67, 136, 148 ; and question of Epirus, 68 f, 104, 132; and question of Albania, 132, 201 ; attitude to National Movement, 116 ; treaties with Greece, 136, 160, 164, 166 ; claims in Asia Minor, 138 ; bombards Corfu, 150 ; sanctions against, 191 ; sove¬ reignty in Abyssinia recognized, 200 ; undertakes to respect Greek territory, 201 ; on outbreak of war (1939), 205 f ; declares war on Great Britain, 208 ; sinks Helle, 209; press campaign against Greece, 210 ; ultimatum to Greece, ib. ; invasion of Greece, 211 ; Greek successes against, 212, 213 ; defeat of, by Alhes, 218 ; cedes


Index
Dodecanese to Greece, 236 Ivanof, General, 59
Jannina, 27, 53 f., 68 Jannissaries, 2 Jews in Greece, 5, 41, 245 Jonnart, M., 128 f. Jugoslavia denounces Greco-Serbian Treaty, 156 ; Pacts and Treaties with Greece, 161, 164, 167 ; and question of Free Zone at Salonica, 157, 161, 164, 167 ; coup d’etat at Belgrade, ib. ; at Balkan Confer¬ ence, 173, 200 ; signs Balkan Pact, 185 ; attitude after fall of France, 207 ; invaded by Ger¬ mans, 214 ; attitude to Greece in and after 1945, 227 ff., 237 ; see also Serbia
Kajmakchalan, 114 Kalamas River, 27 Kalavryta, 10 Kalogeropoulos, M., 116, 139 Kamenos, General, 187 f. Kanaris, Admiral Constantine, 10, 24 Kanellopoulos, Panagiotis, 230, 232 Kaphandaris, Georgios, 152, 160, 162, 164 f, 170, 180 Kapsalis, 235 Karaburun, 89, loi Karamanlis, M., Prime Minister, 235 ff. Karathanasis, 185 Karpenist, 232 Katahia, 142 Katzaros, Major, 174 Kemal, Mustapha (Ataturk), 136,
138 f, 143 f-. 148, 172, 175 Kerr, Rear-Admiral Mark, 79 f. Kilkish, Battle of, 59 Kitchener, Earl, 96 K.K.E., 226 ff. Klephts, 7 Kondylis, General Georgios, t6o, 162 f., 165, 187, 189 f, 193 Konitsa, 232 Koritza, 132 Korea, 229
263
Korizis, M., Prime Minister, 214 Kossovo, 23 Kotsomanes, 216 Koumoundouros, M., 24 Koundouriotis, Admiral Paul, 244 ; commands Greek fleet in Balkan Wars, 55 ; joins National Move¬ ment, 112 ; becomes Regent, 152 ; becomes President of the Republic, ib. ; resigns Presidency, 161 ; re¬ appointed, 163 ; retires, 170 ; death of, 192 Koutzo-Vlachs, see Wallachians Kovelik-Balkan Pass, 236 Kresna Pass, 60, 236 Kumanovo, 50 Kyopriilii, Achmet, 4
Lahana, 59 Lambros, Spiridion, 116, 126, 130 language. Modem Greek, 139, 245 Larissa, 32 Lausanne, Conference and Treaty of, 146 flf., 154, 176, 200 League of Nations, 139, 150 f., 153, 155 ff., 165, 171, 179, 191 Lebanon Conference, 219 f. Lemnos, 64 Leopold I, King of the Belgians, 12 Leros, 218 Lesbos, see Mitylene Likovan, 59 Livadia, 12 loans raised by Greek Government,
15, 165, 173. 179. 199. 202 Locarno Pact, 161, 173 Logothetopoulos, 216 London, Protocol of, 12 ; Confer¬ ence of (1912), 53 ; (1921), 139; Treaty of, 55 ; Tripartite talks
(1955). 240 ff. Louis I, King of Bavaria, 13 ‘ loustros,’ 251 Lulc Burgas, 50
Macedonia, i, 10, 15, 23, 26 f, 32, 35 f., 40, 42, 48, 51 f-. 56, 62 f, 108, 155, 173. 187, 232 Mackensen, Marshal, 102


A Short History ofModern Greece i82i-ig$6
264
Macmillan, Harold, 225, 240 f. Mahmoud II, ii Mahmoud V, 41 Maison, General, 12 Makarios, Archbishop, 239 fF. Malta, 174 Maritza River, 148 Markezinis, Spyro, 234 if. Marmara, Sea of, 66, 142, 148 Marshall Plan, 228 ff. Matapan, Batde of, 213 Mavrocordatos, Alexander, 4 Mavromichahs family, 13 Mavromichahs, K., 44 Maximos, M., 183, 232 f. McNeil, Hector, 230 Mehemet, Ali, ii Melas, Paul, 38 Melenik, 63 Meletios IV, Patriarch, 154 Meloima Pass, 32 Mesolongi, ii Mesta, River, 63, 214 Metaxas, Colonel (afterwards General) J., 162, 166, 182, 189, 202 f., 210 ; opposes co-operation against Dar¬ danelles, 82 ; exiled to Corsica, 130 ; heads unsuccessful counter¬ revolution, 151 ; becomes Premier, 193 ; at Balkan Conference, 195, 200 ; becomes dictator, 196 ff. ; plots against, ; at outbreak of war, 212 ; rejects German ulti¬ matum, 214 ; death of, ib. Michalakopoulos, Andreas, 153, 159, 164 Micheladakis, M., 95 Midia, 55
Military League (1909), 44 f- ; (1932), 180 Milne, General (afterwards F.-M. Lord), 134 minorities, exchange of, 150, 153, 155 f., 168, 170 f., 172 f., 176 Mitsokaitis, M., 200 Mitylene (Lesbos), 39, 55, 65, 188, 215 Mohammed II, 2 f. Moldavia, 4, 10
Monastir, 23, 39, 52 f., Ii4f., 133, 214 Montenegro, 26, 55 Moskopoulos, General, 126 Moyne, Lord, 221 Murray, Professor Gilbert, 156 Miirzsteg Programme, 39 Mussolini, Benito, 160,167, 209,213 ; declares his peaceful intentions towards Greece, 208 ; motives for his attack on Greece, 211 Mustapha Pasha, 50 Mylonas, Mgr., 177
Nansen, Dr. F., 150 N^les, Greek Government trans¬ ferred to, 220 National Movement, in f., 115, 125 ; army, 125, 132, 134 National Radical Union, 235 ff. N.A.T.O., 237 ff. Naupha, 13 f. Navarino, Battle of, 12, 165 Navy, Greek, 46, 160, 171, 187 Nestos, River, 108 Neuilly, Treaty of, 200 Neurath, Baron von, 198 Nevrokop, 63 Newstead Abbey, 175 Nicholas I, Czar, ii Nicholas II, Czar, 125 Nicholas, Prince of Greece, 201 Nicosia, 177 Niemeyer, Sir Otto, 179 Nigrita, 57 Noel-Baker, Mr. Francis, 241
Ochrida, 25, 38, 68 Odysseus, the Klepht, 10 Olga, Queen, wife of George I, 17, 198 Olympic Games, 252 Olympus, Mount, 27 f. Organic Statute of 1868, 22, 26, 28 Orloff, Gregory, 7 Ostrovo, 53, 114 Otho, King of Greece, ascends throne, 13 ; comes of age, 14 ;


265
Index
grants a constitution, 15 ; and Crimean War, ih. ; abdicates, 16 Othonaios, General, 165, 182
Pacifico, Don, 15 Panagiotakis, 4 Pangaeon, Mount, 57 Pangalos, General Theodoros, 151, 165 f. ; commands in Thrace, 148 ; Minister of War, 153 ; carries out coup d'etat and becomes Premier, 159; becomes dictator, 159 f; becomes President, 161 ; end of dictatorship, 162 f ; trial and sentence of, 174 Papagos, Field-Marshal Alexander, 232, 234 ff., 239 f Papanastasiou, Alexandros, 152 f., 160, 164 f., 173, 179 f. Papandreou, M., Prime Minister, 218 ff., 230, 234 f. Papayanis, 235 Papoulas, General, 141, 145, 188 Pareskevopoulos, General, 170 Paris, Conference at (1922), 145 ; (1946), 236 ; Treaty of (1947), 236 Pashitch, M., 75 Patmos, 67 Patras, 14, 35, 224 Patriarchate, the, 3, 10, 154 f., 172 Paul, King of Greece, 137, 234, 240, 247 Peace Conference, 135 Pente Pigadia, 32 Phanar, the, see Patriarchate Phanariot Greeks, 4 f., 247 Pharsala, 32 Photiadis Pasha, 28 Piraeus, 14 f., 35, 250 f. Plastiras, Colonel Georgios, 145, 165 181 f., 188, 203, 217, 222, 226, 230, 234 f. Poincar^, Raymond, 144 Politis, Nicholaos, 113, 146, 153, 156 Popular Socialist Party, 236 Popuhst Party, 230, 233 ff. Porto Lago, 63 Prespa, 25 Preveza, 28, 53
Prilep, p, 95, 114 proportional representation, 163, 166, 234, 236 Protopapadakis, M., 145 f. Psara, 6
RadcUflfe, Lord, 242 Rallis, Demetrios, 43 f., 138 Rallis, John, 229 refugee settlement, 150, 153, 155, 168, 172 f., 176, 245 f. Repoulis, Emanuel, 136 revolution of March 1935, 187 f. Rhigas, Constantinos, 8 Rhodes, 67, 180, 188, 216 Rhodope Mountains, 236 Rome, Conference of (1917), 123 Roosevelt, President, 220, 223 Rouphos, L., 159 f. Rumania, Rumanians, 10, 26, 200, 207 ; and Macedonian Question, 37 ; in Second Balkan War, 60 ; and Treaty of Bucharest, 62 ; joins Entente, no ; operations against, 114 ; and Balkan Conference, 173, 200 ; signs Balkan Pact, 185 ; given guarantee by Great Britain and France, 201 ; attitude after fall of France, 207 ; occupation of, by Germans, 213 Rumbold, Sir Horace, 157 Rumelia, Eastern, 25 f., 30, 37 Rupel, Pass and Fort, 59, 100, 102 f., 108, 214 Russell, First Earl, 16 Russia, relations of Greece with, 6 f., II, 15 ff., 22 f, 25, 32, 78, 170, 183, 226 flf*; Russo-Turkish War, 24 ; declares war on Bulgaria, 88 ; attitude towards National Move¬ ment, 116 ; relations with Turkey, 208
St. Jean de Maurienne, Conference of, 125 Sakharia River, 143 Salamis, no, 187 Salisbury, Third Marqui s of, 26


266 A Short History ofModern Greece iSzi-ig^C
Salonica, 5, 23, 25, 32, 37, 39 ff., 56, 60, 100, 125, 172, 187 f., 195, 200, 214, 215, 224, 240 ; captured by the Greeks in First Balkan War, 52 f. ; Allied landing at, 88 f., 94 ; retained as Allied base, 96 ; fortified camp of, 97 ; National Movement at, 113 ; Free Zone for Jugoslavia at, 157, p6i, 164, 167 Samos, 12, 55, 65, 218 Samothrace, 64, 188 San Stefano, Treaty of, 25, 56 Santi Quaranta, 210 Santorin, 160 Sarafis, Colonel Stefanos, 220 Sarrail, General Paul, 94, 100, 105, 114 Sasseno, 69 Schacht, Dr., 195, 198 Schenck, Baron, 85 Sciathos, 125 Scobie, Major-Gen., 220 ff. Sechiotis, M., 159 Senate, Greek, 15, 18, 159, 165, 169, 189 Serajevo, 71 Serbia, and Congress of Berlin, 26 ; and Macedonian question, 36 f. ; joins Balkan League (1911), 47 f ; in First Balkan War, 50 ff. ; Treaty with Greece (1913), 57 ; in Second Balkan War, 50 ff. ; and Treaty of Bucharest, 60 ; obligations of Greece to, 84 ; and concessions to Bulgaria, 86 ; invaded by Central Powers, 94 ; army transferred to Macedonia, loi f. ; in operations on Macedonian front, Ii4f., 133 ; see also Jugoslauia Serres, 39, 102, 108 f, 187 Servidje, 52 Sivres, Treaty of, 136, 138, 148 Sivri Hissar, 142 Skouloudis, M., 94 f, 99, loi ff, 130 Skutari, 55 Skyros, 175 Slav element in Greece, 243 Smolenski, Colonel, 32
Smyrna, 135 f, 139, 145, 240 Sophia, Queen, wife of King Con¬ stantine, 33, 120, 198 Sophoulis, Themistocles, 153, 193, 230 ff. Sorovits, 53 Spa, Conference at, 134 Spetsai, 6, 10, 162, 251 Sphakia, 22 Srka di Legen, 132 Stalin, Marshal, 223 Stavros, 97 Stephanopoulos, M., 236, 240 Storrs, Sir Ronald, 177 Stratos, M., 145 f. Streit, Dr., 79, 130 Struma River, 56, 60, 63, 100, 174, 214 Strumnitsa, 59, 63 Suda Bay, 188 Suleiman I., 2 Syra, 14
Talbot, Commander Sir Gerald, 146 f. Tarlis, 155 Tchataldja, 50, 63, 148 Tchema River, 114, 132 Tellini, General, 150 Tempe, Vale of, 28 Tenedos, 64 Tenos, 209 Thebes, 12 Theotokis, Georgios, 35, 43 Theotokis, Nicholaos, 142, 146 Therissos, 35 Thermopylae, 214 Thessaly, i, 12, 15, 20, 24 f, 25, 28,
32 f., 35, 52. 123, 127, 129, 132, 199, 214, 217, 235, 250 Thrace, 10, 26, 42, 135 f, 139, 148, 172, 200, 236 ff. Tirana, 200 Todorof, General, 52 trade, Greek, 5 f, 14, 195, 205, 250 Trebizond, 66 Trikoupis Charilaos, 24, 27, 30 f. Truman, President, 228, 232 Tsaldaris, Constantine, 231 ff., 236


267
Index
Tsaldaris, Panagioris, 164 f., 171, 179 fT, 182 f., 185, 187, 189, 193 f. Tsolakoglou, 215 f. Tsouderos, M., 195 ; Prime Minister, 214 ; resigns, 218 Turk, Young, Movement, 40 fF. Turkey, Turkish, conquest of Greece, I ; Greece under, i ff. ; decline of power, 3 f. ; and Crimean War, 15 ; and Cretan question, 21 f., 43 f. ; creates Bulgarian Exarchate, 23 ; war with Russia, 24 ff. ; war with Greece, 32 ; Macedonian poUcy, 36 ff. ; war with Italy, 47 ; Balkan League against, 48 ; in Balkan Wars, 50 ff. ; and Treaty of Bucharest, 63 ff. ; treatment of Asiatic Greeks, 65 f. ; Armistice (1918), 134 ; National Movement in, 136, 138, 144 ; Treaty with Greece, 136 ; at Conference of London (1921), 139 ; victory over Greece in Asia Minor, 144 ; recapture of Smyrna, 145 ; and Treaty of Lausanne, 148 ; and question of minorities, 153, 170 ; and question of Patri¬ archate, 155 : and question of naval parity, 171 ; agreements and treaties with Greece, 172, 175, 183, 200 ; at Balkan Conference, 173 ; joins Balkan Pact, 185 ; alhance with Great Britain and France, 206 ; applies protocol of treaty, 208 f. ; element in Greece, 245 ; attitude to Cyprus question,
237 ff
United Nations Organization, 231 f,
239 ff University of Athens, 14, 197, 251 U.N.R.R.A., 227 ff Ushak, 142 Uskub, 38 f, 47, 50
Vafiades, Markos, 231 Valona, 68, 79 Vardar River, 52, 94, 97, 108, 114, 132, 174, 227
Varkiza Agreement, 226 f, 230 Varvaressos, Prof. Kyriakos, 230, 235 Vassos, Colonel, 31 Veles, 38 Velestino, 32 Venice, Venetians, 2 f, 5, 21 Venizelos, Eleutherios, 20, 67, 71, 73. 79. 109. 120, 161, 165, 168, 170, 174, 185, 222 ; as Cretan states¬ man, 34 f, 43 ; summoned to Greece and becomes Premier, 45 ; restores constitutional government, 46 ; organizes Balkan League, 48 ; at London Conference, 53 ; and Treaty of Bucharest, 61, 64; promises Greek support to Serbia, 75 ; declares Greek sympathy with Entente, 78 ; letter to King Constantine, 79 f ; resignation re¬ fused, 80; urges concessions to Bulgaria, 81 ; suggests co-opera¬ tion against Dardanelles, 82 f. ; resigns, 83 ; again Premier, 85 ; second resignation, 89 f. ; takes no part in election of December 1915. 99 ; heads National Move¬ ment, 112, 115, 121 ; Premier of united Greece, 130 ; speech in the Chamber, 131 ; in Paris and London, ib. ; at Peace Conference, 135 ; attempted assassination of, 136, 182 ; defeated at elections and leaves Greece, 137 ; at Lau¬ sanne, 146 ; and trial of ministers, 147 ; becomes Premier for one month, 152 ; again Premier, 166 ; at Rome and Belgrade, 167 ; negotiates with Turkey, 171 ; at Ankara, 172, 175 ; at Hague Con¬ ference, 173 ; and rising in Cyprus, 178 ; at League of Nations, 179 ; resigns premiership, ib. ; and military league, 180 ; again Premier and resigns, 181 ; joins revolution of 1935, 188 ; escapes to Rhodes, ib. ; included in amnesty, 191 ; death of, 194 Venizelos, Kyriakos, 108, 218, 230, 232, 235


268 A Short History of Modern Greece 1821-1^36
Verria, 52 Vlachs, see Wallachia Vodena, 114 Volo, 12, 35, 235 Voulgaris, Admiral, Prime Minister, 230
Wallachia, Wallachians, 4, 10, 37, 244 War debts, 164, 173 Wavell, General, 215 Wilhelm II, Kaiser, 33, 39, 71, 74, 75 fF., 120
Xanthe, 148 “ X ” (Chi), 230
Yannakitsas, General, 93 ff., 106 Yenidje Vardar, 52 Young Turk Movement, 40 fF.
Ypsilanti, Alexander, 10 ; Demetrios, 12
Zachariades, Nicholas, 232 F. Zagreb, 183 Zaimis, Alexander, no, 129, 151, 162, 165 F., 180, 185, 190, 215 ; High Commissioner in Crete, 35, 43 ; becomes Premier, 92, 107, 126, 164 ; President oF Senate, 168 ; President of Republic, 170 ; re-elected, 184 ; death of, 199 Zante, 125 Zappeion, 117, 119 Zekki Pasha, 53 Zervas, Colonel, 163, 217, 220, 232,
234 Zog, King of Albania, 167, 200 Zographos, M., 84 Zorbas, Colonel, 44


GREECE
English Miles 0 10 20 40 60 80 100
Railways
SphinsrA
^Carpathos
MEDITERRANEA N


Yf- »■ '• Iiii<>>wn^jait!• 'V'' : C^
1 S. I
.■r'^'"^;’Y<i^ry■' ^
^ Mi.- %.,. J ‘ i ^-''' '• i ^ M.
’tipisilv
^!
■/vr^
!► A < ^
c!!^ ^ 'C-«- '-i- . *A? .
\ 4jUfciw^-|\:-i-i'. ' : [■
■■ "l*^
-A
■ * ku**.-*^
.'.I : *,’ V ^•a- •. sS 7r 
f V ; /> *
7*
wt 4^'"■♦os^y■' ■ 
^ --■'yT.' "'
•<S. • *
•'A. »«.
SN % fs SI V
■^y
f •*^>•<’.^* . 3 '3
Wf-^- £
■\ ' A
'V
«r4i^>?A-v 
■
S
I'Vi ,
»^
"■ .1
w*
&
.-^V
r
i "-Si
’. #C' "*''
I ■^w3
Mi ':
4 r ' *' '■ \-u
■•»_
1 i“ r®
’ i' fN i i
f
.St* *■ ■ ■ V* i
ijtAf ,—■• ‘f - 






CONNETQUOT PUBLIC LIBRARY
062 00 41 807 3
179299
9^9.506
iFORSTER.
.A short history of modern Greece,
Connetquot Public Library
760 Ocean Avenue
Bohemia, New York 11716