The Oxford Handbook of Historical Political Economy
Je ery A. Jenkins (ed.), Jared Rubin (ed.)
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780197618608.001.0001
Published: 2022 Online ISBN: 9780197618639 Print ISBN: 9780197618608
Search in this book
CHAPTER
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780197618608.013.11 Pages 209–236
Published: 26 January 2023
Abstract
Keywords: state building, centralization, state capacity, taxation, historical political economy
Subject: Political Economy, Political Institutions, Politics
Series: Oxford Handbooks
Collection: Oxford Handbooks Online
11 State-Building in Historical Political Economy 
Francisco Garfias, Emily A. Sellars
Under what conditions do strong states under a centralized political authority emerge? This chapter
presents a theoretical framework that summarizes and synthesizes insights from recent research in
historical political economy on state building. The chapter examines the decision of a central authority
who weighs the costs and bene ts of state building by taxing the population to defend against a threat.
The analysis illustrates prominent arguments in the literature, including the role of external con ict,
military technology, nontax revenue, societal wealth, the technology of taxation, and scal legibility in
state building. The chapter then considers how powerful local elites, whose interests may not align
with the central authority, can shift a ruler’s willingness and ability to centralize power, drawing a
connection with the literatures on intra-elite con ict and limited government. Finally, the chapter
expands the framework to incorporate non-elite citizens, who can pressure elites and central
authorities through the threat of rebellion from below, to discuss the role of elite-mass relations in
state building.
The consolidation of power under a strong central authority has important long-term economic and
political consequences (see, e.g., Boone 1994; Mamdani 1996; Lange 2004; Gennaioli and Rainer 2007; Iyer
2010; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou 2013; Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson 2013; Dell, Lane, and Querubin
2018; Lee 2019; Paik and Vechbanyongratana 2019; Ahmed and Stasavage 2020; Stasavage 2020). However,
strong states and centralized forms of political authority have historically been the exception rather than
the rule. When, why, and how does state-building occur?
*
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


In this chapter, we provide a framework for thinking about these questions, drawing on recent research in
historical political economy (HPE). This work has accumulated important theoretical insights about state
building and a growing number of empirical ndings from diverse contexts. This chapter synthesizes some
of these disparate sets of mechanisms and empirical results in a common framework. In doing so, we
highlight important themes that have emerged in this work, illustrate the connections between some of the
subliteratures that have developed in parallel with one another, and suggest new directions for future
research.1
Our framework focuses on the choice of a central authority—for example, a monarch, dictator, or uni ed
ruling coalition—to extract resources from society to bolster the strength of the central government,
potentially at the expense of others in the polity. We conceive of this central authority as a coherent,
rational, and self-interested actor who is motivated primarily by the desire to remain in power. This
conceptualization builds on Levi’s (1988) insight that the interests and actions of a central ruler—and not
of state institutions in general—represent a useful starting place for a theory of state policy; “rulers
rule,” as she famously argues (p. 2). All rulers, however, are constrained in their ability to wield power and
often face threats from external sources and from within. Revenue can be used to defend against these
threats, but increased extraction comes with its own political and economic costs.
p. 210
We build our theory from a decision-theoretic model in which a ruler or central authority weighs the costs
and bene ts of taxing the population to defend against a threat. This simple model captures important
arguments in the state-building literature related to the technology of taxation, the availability of nontax
revenues, and wealth in society. Most directly, the model highlights the importance of external con ict, the
central factor in the bellicist theory of state emergence.
We then introduce local elites—the subjects of state taxation and an important political constituency—as
strategic actors who can either back the state or work to undermine it from within. This second model
illustrates a potential tension between the central authority’s need for revenue and the risk of alienating
elites through excessive extraction, especially in situations where elite and ruler preferences are not aligned
and where elites hold signi cant independent power. This second model also highlights some of the
competing pressures facing elites, who may want to limit state extraction but who also rely on tax-funded
public goods, such as military defense against external enemies.
Our nal model introduces non-elite citizens who can pressure elites and the central authority from below
through the threat of rebellion. These non-elite actors may have little direct stake in national political
battles between elites and the ruler, but their actions in uence elite behavior and thus the incentives of the
government to centralize power through extraction. This formulation illustrates several additional
complexities in the relationship between domestic political con ict and state-building, highlighting in
particular how divisions between di erent domestic actors can in uence state-building, how even highly
localized political con icts can take on national signi cance in the process of state centralization, and how
seemingly unrelated political shocks can cause state-building e orts to back re.
As we develop this framework, we incorporate insights from di erent strands of the HPE literature on
state-building and discuss how these insights interact. Though we adopt a formal-theoretic approach, we
provide intuition for the main arguments qualitatively in each section. We conclude the chapter with some
re ections on potential future directions for research in this eld, building on our analysis.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


The State and State-Building
We begin by outlining the conceptual de nitions that underlie the framework in this chapter. Following
Ho man (2015), we adopt a broad de nition of the “state” as a community that can use force and has the
capacity to impose and collect taxes on a substantial and permanent basis. This de nition omits or
abstracts away from some factors that contribute to state structure or that di erentiate ancient from
modern states, such as well-de ned territorial boundaries, the rule of law, political legitimacy, or national
identity. It is also considerably less restrictive than Weber’s requirement that a state can claim a monopoly
over the legitimate use of violence within a territory (Weber 1999). We use this expansive yet parsimonious
de nition to highlight the roles of coercion and taxation in state-building, both of which are central to the
HPE literature on this topic.
p. 211
We further clarify our de nition of “state-building.” Our focus is on the consolidation of power and revenue
under the control of a central authority in an existing state, as opposed to the emergence of new states (see,
e.g., Olson 1993; Boix 2015; Scott 2017; Allen, Bertazzini, and Heldring 2020; Dal Bo, Hernandez, and
Mazzuca 2022; Mayshar, Moav, and Pascali 2022) or the political incorporation of new regions (see, e.g.,
Spruyt 1996; Pierskalla, De Juan, and Montgomery 2017; Acharya and Lee 2018). As Mazzuca (2021) argues,
the processes of state formation and state building are conceptually distinct, may be motivated by di erent
factors, and may not work in tandem. State-building under our de nition encompasses political
centralization and an increase in the resources and strength of the central government.
A Simple Theory of State-Building
The classic account of the formation of modern territorial states centers on early-modern Europe. This was
a period of intense warfare during which the nature of military con ict was changing. The introduction of
gunpowder, the increasing use of siege warfare and artillery weapons, and an increasing reliance on a
trained and disciplined infantry in combat, among other factors, substantially raised the monetary costs of
war. To nance expensive con icts, states began to increase resource extraction from the citizenry and
underwent important organizational transformations in the process. France is an illustrative example. One
of the rst states to establish a standing army, the French state began to fund its military through domestic
debt secured against future tax revenue, encouraging a steady increase in taxation starting in the sixteenth
century. This shift was enabled by a rising tax base and the presence of domestic creditors in wealthy cities
like Paris, Toulouse, and Montpellier (Tilly 1990, 47–49, 74). Over time, this process led to important
changes in the structure of the French state, including a transition from tax farming to direct taxation and
investment in scal legibility (Tilly 1990, 107–10; Johnson and Koyama 2014). By the end of the eighteenth
century, France had not only survived as a political entity after centuries of external threat, it had also
developed a strong state with a centralized bureaucracy and high levels of taxation.
Inspired by the Western European example, we begin our theoretical discussion of state-building by
focusing on the decision of a central authority to extract revenue from society to strengthen the state
against a threat. We develop a simple decision-theoretic model in which a ruler, who cares only about
surviving in power, weighs the cost of taxation against the bene t that tax revenue provides in bolstering
state strength against this threat. Because taxation is costly, the ruler’s choice of how much to extract
depends on the extent of expected threat, the technologies of taxation and defense, and the size of the
resource base. As we discuss, this model both captures several well-known theories about how each of these
factors shapes state-building in isolation and illustrates some interesting connections between them. We
develop the model in the following subsection and then qualitatively discuss its implications for
understanding the HPE literature on this topic.
p. 212
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


A Basic State-Building Model
Discussion
A central authority A rules over a society of wealth ω > 0. The authority chooses to extract some amount T of
this wealth to invest in bolstering state strength. The cost of extracting revenue is given by cT, where c > 0.
This cost (c) might capture the immediate cost of extracting wealth from private holders, the cost of tax
enforcement or processing, or an investment in scal capacity or paci cation that is required to enable
taxation.
The strength of the state (S) depends on tax revenue (T) and any exogenous nontax revenue (ρ). Nontax
revenue might include resource rents, external nancing, or other endowments that the authority can
appropriate without taxation. Speci cally, let represent state strength, where the function f(∙)
captures how easy or hard it is for the authority to convert revenue into strength. We assume that f is
increasing and concave in total revenue, so that revenue improves defensive capability but with decreasing
marginal bene ts.
S = f(T + ρ)
The state faces an exogenous threat—for example, a foreign invasion or domestic challenge—the severity
of which is stochastic, given by S ∼ Unif [σ - δ, σ + δ]. The parameter σ can be interpreted as the expected level
of threat, which might capture factors like the proximity of foreign rivals or any natural defensive
advantages of the state’s geographic position. The parameter δ captures uncertainty about the severity of
threat, which might depend on unknown factors like the intentions of political rivals or the risk of natural
disasters. The realized severity of the threat (S) is revealed after the ruler has made his extraction choice. We
assume that the state survives only if strength S > S. If the state survives, the central authority receives
as the value of maintaining power. If the state falls, the authority loses power and receives a
payo of 0 (α can thus be thought of as the relative utility of maintaining to losing power).
uA = α > 0
What determines how much a ruler decides to (and is able to) extract? As we show in the Appendix to this
chapter, the authority’s preferred level of taxation in the model depends on the extent of external con ict,
the availability of nontax revenue, the amount of appropriable wealth, and features about the
technologies of extraction and defense (Appendix Section A.1). The central tension of this rst model
surrounds a direct cost-bene t analysis of taxation for the ruler. Because taxation is costly, the ruler does
not always bene t from increasing extraction, even when doing so increases his probability of survival.
Whether the costs of taxation are worth paying depends on how high these costs are, whether alternative
sources of revenue are available, and the degree to which any increased revenue pays o in raising the
likelihood that the state will survive.
p. 213
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


External Conflict
Table 11.1. Baseline ruler model: Summary of predictions
Theme in literature Parameter in model Predicted change in centralization/taxation
External conflict Expected threat severity (σ) Increases taxation window, unless threat is overwhelming
Uncertainty about threat (δ) Ambiguous (see conclusion)
Military technology
Nontax revenue
Importance of revenue in military power
Nontax revenue (ρ)
Increases
Decreases
Societal wealth/capital
Total wealth (ω) Increases taxation window
Taxation technology
and legibility
Cost of taxation (c) Decreases
(f ′(⋅))
We summarize the key predictions in Table 11.1. We provide some intuition for these results and discuss our
analysis in light of several key literatures in HPE in the next section.
We begin by revisiting the classic relationship between state-building and external con ict, most famously
associated with the works of Otto Hintze and Charles Tilly. These theories, initially formulated in the
context of early-modern Europe, propose that interstate war gave rise to the territorial state. One of the
mechanisms proposed for this relationship is that the presence of external threats push states to develop
capacity to mobilize resources for the war e ort. As in the bellicist framework, an exogenous threat, such as
that posed by external con ict, is what drives extraction in our model. Because taxation is costly and
revenue is exclusively used for defense (an assumption we revisit below in a model extension), there is no
incentive to tax without a threat, and the maximum level of extraction is increasing in the expected level of
this threat.
The relationship between external con ict and state-building is one of the most well-documented
empirical ndings in this literature, beginning with the case studies and small-n comparisons of early
modern Europe that inspired the bellicist conjecture (Schumpeter 1954; Ardant 1975; Hintze 1975; Tilly
1975; 1990; Levi 1988; Brewer 1990; Ertman 1997). More recently, cross-national associations between
historic warfare and present-day scal outcomes (Besley and Persson 2009; 2014; Dincecco, Fenske, and
Onorato 2019) and panel evidence on Europe in the early-modern period (Dincecco 2009; 2011; Dincecco,
Federico, and Vindigni 2011; Karaman and Pamuk 2013), the early twentieth century (Scheve and Stasavage
2010), and even the late Middle Ages (Blaydes and Paik 2016) have provided additional empirical support for
this argument. Related work has examined how the emergence of a new military threat, such as the rise of
the Ottoman Empire in early-modern Europe (Cantoni, Mohr, and Weigand 2021), can encourage
investment in scal capacity. Regional di erences in state development are also generally consistent with
the bellicist argument. Strong centralized states arose in Western Europe, an area of intense territorial
con ict, and not in regions like Latin America or sub-Saharan Africa, which had distinctive political
histories (see, e.g., Herbst 2000; Centeno 1997; 2002).
p. 214
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Military Technology
Nontax Revenue
Societal Wealth
Our model highlights an important mediating factor in the relationship between external con ict and state
building: military/defense technology. When a slight increase in revenue has little impact on the defensive
capability of the state (i.e., is small), the ruler has little reason to extract wealth. As military technology
becomes more e cient, the bene t of raising taxes to defend against external threat increases.
f ′(⋅)
This result is consistent with existing scholarly work in HPE. Gennaioli and Voth (2015), for instance, focus
on how the relationship between external warfare and state emergence shifted with the military revolution
in Europe that began with the introduction of gunpowder. Revenue, they argue, only a ected coercive power
following the dramatic increase in the monetary costs of war following this military revolution. This
explains the timing of the rise of the European territorial state speci cally during the early-modern period
(see also Ho man [2012]). The puzzling absence of a connection between warfare and state-building in
other contexts—such as Latin America (see, e.g., Soifer 2015) or during the nineteenth century (see, e.g.,
Goenaga, Sabate, and Teorell 2018)—may similarly be explained by the weak connection between revenue
and military power in those settings.
Nontax revenue (ρ) is a perfect substitute in our model for revenue extracted through taxation. A ruler who
can count on a large resource windfall may not need to incur the costs of taxation to ensure state survival. As
nontax revenue increases, the window where taxation is attractive for the ruler therefore shrinks.
This is consistent with a prominent literature on how the availability of nontax revenue, such as natural
resource rents, shapes state-building. Nontax revenue is often modeled as an attractive substitute to costly
taxation (see, e.g., Besley and Persson 2009; 2014). Several empirical studies have found a negative
relationship between the availability of nontax resources and measures of scal capacity. For example,
Cassidy (2019) shows that present-day tax revenue is lower in areas that are geologically conducive to oil
extraction (see also Dunning 2008). A complementary literature on the availability of international nance
has similarly found that states’ ability to borrow from abroad weakened the relationship between war
and domestic extraction in nineteenth-century Latin America (Centeno 1997; 2002; Soifer 2015). Though
international nance is distinctive from resource rents in that it typically entails a promise of future
payment, Queralt (2019; 2022) shows that debt- nanced war during the nineteenth century did not lead to a
long- or even short-term increases in extractive capacity, given the continual possibility of debt relief and
re nancing.
p. 215
Extraction in our model is bounded above by the amount of available wealth (ω). A ruler cannot tax beyond
ω, even if he faces strong incentives to do so. In a society with a very small resource base, there may simply
not be enough wealth for the state to survive a major threat.
This simple argument has roots in classic literature. For example, Tilly describes how the accumulation of
capital in European cities during the early-modern period allowed rulers to better fund war e orts through
increased access to domestic loans, revenue-producing state enterprises, and a larger tax base (Tilly 1990).
More recently, Abramson (2017) presents evidence consistent with the idea that an increase in wealth
enabled the survival of small urban states against encroachment by larger (but more rural) neighbors
during this period. A related set of arguments highlights the role of economic productivity in state
formation and state-building alongside defensive concerns due to resource constraints and other factors
(see, e.g., Acharya and Lee 2018; Fernandez-Villaverdé et al. 2020; Dal Bo, Hernandez, and Mazzuca 2022).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Taxation Technology and Legibility
When the cost of taxation (c) is very high, the authority has little incentive or ability to extract resources to
bolster state strength. Conversely, if the cost is low, taxation remains attractive even when the marginal
defensive bene t of additional revenue is small.
The cost of taxation may be determined by many factors, including geography. It may be costly, for
example, to extend political control over a large territory relative to a smaller one, especially when threats
emerge from multiple directions (Stasavage 2011; Ko, Koyama, and Sng 2018; Koyama, Moriguchi, and Sng
2018; Mazzuca 2021). Terrain ruggedness can inhibit a state’s ability to tax by increasing transportation
costs or providing citizens with an opportunity to escape the reach of the state in mountains or jungles (see,
e.g., Fearon and Laitin 2003; Scott 2009; Fernandez-Villaverdé et al. 2020). Population density can shape
both the ability and the incentive of central rulers to tax the population, as the literature on sub-Saharan
Africa in particular has emphasized (Herbst 2000; Boone 2003).
The cost of taxation is also determined by scal legibility, a ruler’s ability to monitor the economy or
population (Scott 1998; Brambor et al. 2020). Features of agricultural production, such as crop
characteristics or irrigation methods, can make it easier or more di cult for the central authority to
observe economic activity, which in turn shapes incentives for state-building (Mayshar, Moav, and Neeman
2017; Scott 2017). Technology also plays a role. Stasavage (2020), drawing on evidence from ancient states,
describes how innovations like writing, geometry, and land surveying techniques facilitated the
emergence of early bureaucracies. Gar as and Sellars (2022a) show how a technological innovation in silver
mining facilitated state centralization in colonial Mexico by making it easier for o cials to monitor
production and tax the population. Rulers can also invest in improving legibility through the creation of tax
o ces, censuses, and land registers to lower the future costs of taxation. The positive feedback between
political centralization and scal capacity can lead to divergent paths of state development, as Gar as and
Sellars (2022a) show in colonial Mexico and Johnson and Koyama (2014) in early-modern France and
England.
p. 216
2
Because taxation entails the extraction of resources from the citizenry, there are also political costs to
consider. Next we consider these costs in greater detail, expanding our framework to examine the strategic
interaction between the central ruler and economic elites who hold wealth and may stand to lose from
state-building projects.
State-Building and Elites
Societal wealth is typically held by domestic actors—elites and other taxpayers—whose interests may not
align with those of the central authority. For this reason, the internal politics of state building are often
contentious rather than cooperative. There are countless historical and contemporary examples of powerful
elites deterring or sabotaging state-building e orts when threatened by centralization. This is why political
centralization often, but not always, occurs during times of elite weakness. In ancient China, for example,
the Qin state that emerged from a period of intense interstate con ict—the Warring States era (475–221
BCE)—was able to centralize power in an unprecedented way because it faced a severely weakened
aristocracy (Kiser and Cai 2003). Key reforms, such as the abolition of feudal titles and the establishment of
a centrally controlled bureaucracy, would have been di cult to implement had the aristocracy been strong
enough to mount an e ective resistance to these policies, which they perceived as threatening (Hui 2015).
Though domestic political con ict is often thought to inhibit state-building, there are also conditions under
which it may encourage rather than discourage taxation. The spectacular expansion of the British state
following the Glorious Revolution, for example, was made possible because the Crown faced a powerful
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


State-Building Model with Elites
Discussion
taxpaying elite that was able to force its policy preferences on the government (North and Weingast 1989;
Stasavage 2003). To develop these and other related ideas, we extend our model to consider the strategic
interaction between the central authority and domestic elites.
We model the central authority’s (A) choice of how much tax revenue (T) to extract from domestic elites (E),
modeled as a uni ed strategic actor. Elites are endowed with wealth (ω), which they either own or control
indirectly. The central authority is again assumed to be o ce-motivated, receiving α if the state survives
and 0 if the state falls. Rather than assuming that taxation carries a xed cost, we directly model the
political cost of alienating elite wealth holders through overzealous taxation.
p. 217
After the authority determines how much wealth to extract, elites decide whether to back the central ruler in
a crisis (e = 1) or to defect (e = 0). Elite defection weakens the central government by, for example, overtly
supporting an internal or external political rival against the ruler, shirking on internal defense by depriving
the ruler of logistical assistance during war, or refusing to cooperate with state o cials. Compliance with
the central authority is assumed to be costly for elites, with the compliance cost given by μ.
The strength of the central government (S) is now modeled as a function of both state revenue and elite
backing or defection. As earlier, the base strength of the government is S = f(T), where the function f is
increasing and concave. If elites defect, state strength is lowered by ζ, which represents elite coercive power
(i.e., their in uence in state strength). Also as earlier, the state survives a threat only if strength S > S,
where S ∼ Unif [σ - δ,σ + δ]. To highlight the role of elite politics, we focus on interior cases where the state
cannot fully ensure its survival against external threat and where elite actions meaningfully in uence but
do not fully determine the probability of survival (i.e., where f(ω) < σ + δ and f(0) − ζ > σ − δ).
3
We normalize the payo s of state collapse to 0 for both the central authority and the elite. If the state
survives, the ruler receives rents from o ce α > 0 and elites receive their posttax wealth (ω − T) and λ, which
represents the utility of state survival relative to a postcollapse alternative. If elites fear state breakdown or
have an a nity for the central ruler, λ would be very high. If elites would prefer to see the state fall—for
example, if they have an acrimonious relationship with the central authority, support internal political
rivals, or have attractive outside options—λ might be negative.
If the state survives despite elite defection, defecting elites pay a punishment cost of π > 0. The severity of
this cost could vary from a small ne to violent retribution depending on the context and form of elite
defection.
The extended model illustrates how domestic political bargaining structures state-building. A central
authority’s ability and willingness to strengthen the state is driven not only by perceived threat but also by
the anticipated resistance from elites. As we discuss in this section and show in Appendix Section A.2, the
model highlights two paths of state-building, one cooperative and one coercive. In the cooperative path, the
ruler limits his extraction to a level acceptable to elites in exchange for their support. In the coercive path,
the ruler extracts all of the elite’s wealth to counter their anticipated defection.
The optimal path for the ruler depends on elites’ willingness to accept taxation (T), which is determined by
the parameters summarized in Table 11.2. An increase in taxation a ects elite preferences through two
mechanisms. Higher taxation reduces the bene t of state survival for elites, but it also increases state
strength and thus the likelihood that elite defection will be punished. As elites are more aligned with the
center for material (ω) or political/social (λ) reasons and as the threat of punishment (π) increases, elites
p. 218
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


become more willing to back the government at high tax levels, and the cooperative approach becomes less
costly for the ruler.
Table 11.2. Elite model: Summary of additional predictions
Theme in literature
Parameter in model Predicted change in eliteʼs willingness to accept taxation
Preference alignment
Survival payo (λ) Increases
Economic benefits
Center coercive threat
Residual wealth (ω − T)
Punishment cost (π)
Increases
Increases
Elite coercive power
Elite power (ζ) Depends on balance between benefits of state survival (λ) and cost of punishment (π)
Figure 11.1.
Central authority extraction as a function of elite willingness to pay
The figure presents the optimal tax level for the central ruler over the maximum tax that the elite is willing to pay without
defecting If elite power , the ruler will set for , where , and otherwise. If elite
power increases to this expands the range of values where the ruler will set to , as represented in the dashed line. See Appendix Section A.2 for the analysis.
(T *)
(Tˆ). ζ = ζ′ T *= Tˆ Tˆ > Tˆ′ f(Tˆ′ = f(ω) − ζ′) T *= ω
ζ′′ > ζ′ T *= Tˆ Tˆ > Tˆ′′
The model illustrates a nonlinear relationship between the elites’ willingness to back the government and
the optimal tax level the ruler chooses (Figure 11.1). When elites are highly aligned with the center, the ruler
can increase taxation at little political cost. As elites’ willingness to pay taxes decreases—perhaps because
they possess better outside options or fear punishment less—they can successfully demand that the ruler
p. 219
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Preference Alignment
Elite Political Power
limit extraction. However, once the maximum tax that elites are willing to pay falls below a certain
threshold, the ruler will revert to a coercive strategy to maximize the probability of state survival. As shown
in Figure 11.1, this threshold depends on the domestic political power of elites, ζ. A stronger domestic elite
has a greater ability to demand reduced taxation.
The degree of political con ict or consensus between elites and the state has been central to the HPE
literature on state-building. In the remainder of this section, we discuss this literature in light of our
theoretical framework.
The preference alignment between elites and the ruler plays an important role in this framework. Elites are
more willing to accept higher taxation when they bene t more from state survival for material, social, or
political reasons. Conversely, elites who have less to lose from state collapse become less willing to tolerate
state extraction.
One factor that contributes to preference alignment between elites and the center is elites’ reliance on
state-provided public goods, such as military defense. Besley and Persson (2009; 2014), for example,
describe why incumbent and opposition political actors should be more willing to invest in scal capacity if
revenue will be spent on common-interest goods like defense (see Arias 2013 for a related argument on
colonial Mexico). As Slater’s (2010) work on state development in Southeast Asia illustrates, elites and
central authorities may also nd common ground against shared domestic threats.
Central authorities may take steps to increase elite preference alignment to encourage support for the state
under higher levels of taxation. For example, they might allow rising elites to have greater in uence in state
policy and public goods provision (Kurtz 2013; Saylor 2014; Beramendi, Dincecco, and Rogers 2019) or
attempt to incorporate rival elites into the state (Chen, Wang, and Zhang 2021). Elite homogeneity—such as
through concentration in a single urban core—can make it easier for the state to tailor its activities to align
with elite preferences, encouraging state-building (Soifer 2015; Mazzuca 2021). Greater geographic
dispersion among already linked elites might shift their preferences toward state-building so that public
goods like defense can be spread across a larger territory, as Wang (2022) shows in Imperial China. A
common interest in state-building may emerge among rival elites if greater taxation is tied to political
restrictions for the masses (Mares and Queralt 2015; 2020).
Conversely, threatened, nonaligned elites may be able to exploit the political environment to sabotage
state-building (see, e.g., Migdal 1988). Suryanarayan (2021) and Suryanarayan and White (2021), for
example, describe how elites can exploit social-status cleavages to create broad coalitions in support of
weakening the central government. Sanchez-Talanquer (2020) further shows how elites can co-opt state
building e orts to reshape their in uence and undermine their e ectiveness.
p. 220
A more powerful elite that can damage the government through defection can more e ectively demand
lower taxation. This can deter state-building when elites and the central authority have opposing interests.
In contexts where elites control considerable coercive power—such as in what North, Wallis, and Weingast
(2009) characterize as “natural states” or Besley and Persson (2014) describe as “weak states”—central
rulers may be outgunned by rivals in the periphery, limiting any potential for signi cant state-building. At
the other extreme, when elites are too weak to threaten the government through defection, the ruler has
little reason to limit extraction to cater to their preferences.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Limited Government
Shifts in the coercive power of elites can therefore precipitate changes in state-building trajectories.
Because the potential for political centralization is limited where rival elites remain strong, a sharp decline
in elite power may enable state-building. Gar as (2018), for example, shows how an economic shock that
temporarily weakened local elites in postrevolutionary Mexico provided a window for local political
authorities to consolidate their advantage and invest in state capacity. A shock that bolsters the coercive
power of nonaligned elites, by contrast, can curb state extraction by raising the costs and reducing the
bene ts of taxation for the ruler.
This model illustrates that elites’ bargaining power, their ability to secure a lower level of taxation than
would be favored by the ruler, depends both on their political power (ζ) and preference alignment with the
central authority (λ). Elites must be su ciently powerful to pose a threat to the ruler through defection, and
they must have a moderate (but not perfect) degree of preference alignment so that the central authority
has an incentive to appease them through lower taxation. This illustrates a connection to the literatures on
scal contracts and institutions of limited government. Institutions that bolster elite political power or
improve the quality of elites’ outside options can place e ective limits on state extraction and can promote
state-building.
This connection is clearer if one considers an extension of the model where the ruler is able to divert tax
revenue for personal rents at the expense of state strength. In the baseline model with elites, an increase in
taxation represents a double-edged sword. Greater taxation lowers elites’ bene t of backing the ruler, but it
also bolsters state strength and thus increases the chance that elite defection is punished. If the ruler were
to spend this extra revenue on rents, the increase in taxation would reduce elites’ utility without the
corresponding increase in the threat of punishment, unequivocally reducing elites’ willingness to back the
state. Thus, when elite power (ζ) is high enough (provided outside option λ is moderate), the threat of
defection places a natural limit on rent-seeking. “Limited government” in our model thus arises
endogenously from speci c domestic political coalitions, which must be sustained for credibility to endure
(Stasavage 2003; 2007), rather than as exogenous features of the institutional environment (see, e.g., Besley
and Persson 2009; 2014).4
The prospects for state-building are therefore greater when rulers are constrained to spend in ways that
align with the preferences of taxpaying or debt-granting elites (Bates and Lien 1985; Levi 1988; North and
Weingast 1989; Ho man and Rosenthal 1997; Gehlbach 2008; Cox 2016) or where institutions limit a ruler’s
ability to increase extraction (Gar as 2019). These ideas have found empirical support in studies that
examine institutional changes along these lines cross-nationally (Dincecco 2009; 2011; Cox 2016) and
subnationally (Gar as 2019).
p. 221
5
Elites and Commoners in State-Building
The model of the previous section illustrates how a particular form of domestic political con ict, that
between elites and the central authority, can shape the trajectory of state-building. We now expand our
discussion of domestic politics to consider the actions and interests of another social group. Ordinary
citizens or commoners—such as peasants, workers, or the urban poor—can also alter the political costs and
bene ts of centralization, both directly and indirectly via their relationship with local elites. As the
literatures on state collapse and revolution illustrate, the complex interplay between commoner, elite, and
ruler incentives during an unforeseen crisis can lead even a seemingly stable political system to unravel
(see, e.g., Skocpol 1979).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


State-Building Model with Elites and Commoners
The outbreak of Mexico’s War of Independence provides one example. Spanish colonial authorities
depended on local elites to control the threat of commoner rebellion in the periphery. During the eighteenth
century, the colonial state implemented a series of centralizing reforms at the expense of these
intermediaries, aimed at increasing tax revenue. Though largely e ective, the true political costs of these
reforms only became apparent years later when a large-scale drought a ected the peasant economy during
a period of state weakness. Faced with an upsurge of commoner rebellion, the disa ected elites became
unwilling to bear the costs of maintaining order, allowing the localized peasant crisis to grow out of control
and eventually threaten the survival of the central government (Gar as and Sellars 2022b).
We extend our framework to incorporate commoners, focusing in particular on the role of elites as
intermediaries between commoners and the central authority. We model commoners as a separate political
class that is not directly taxed (an assumption we revisit later) and whose primary motivations are
unrelated to national politics, elite con ict, or the exogenous threat. As our model illustrates, even when
commoners have no direct stake in state-building, their political actions may have important consequences
for centralization, both directly and via shifting incentives for elite intermediaries to back the central
authority during times of crisis.
p. 222
The central authority (A) again chooses how much tax revenue (T) to extract from the economic elite (E),
who control wealth (ω), some of which may originate from the broader population. As earlier, tax revenue
bolsters state strength, and the level of taxation may in uence the willingness of elites to back the state,
now by restoring local political order (e = 1) or by defecting (e = 0) when faced with local rebellion by
commoners (C).
The commoners’ choice to rebel depends on local conditions ( ), the bene ts of rebellion (β), and the
perceived threat of repression by elites. We model —which might capture commoners’ economic
opportunities or the current quality of their social or political situation—as stochastic and unrelated to
political centralization or taxation (however, see the Discussion section for a relaxation of this assumption).
Speci cally, ∼ Unif [ ]. If commoners rebel, they forgo and instead receive the material and
social bene ts of rebellion (β), which could encompass both social components (e.g., feelings of collective
belonging) and material components (e.g., goods seized during rioting). If the elite represses the rebellion,
commoners su er a cost ψ from repression. We assume that , so that the
possibility of repression remains a meaningful deterrent to mobilization even when conditions are poor. We
further assume that commoner payo s do not directly depend on whether the state survives.
η
η
η η − ν, η + v η
β−ψ < η−ν < β < η+ν
If commoners do not rebel, elites take no action. If they do rebel, elites choose whether to back the authority
and repress the uprising or to defect. The cost of repression is μ > 0. Because commoner uprisings might
a ect elites, this parameter can be alternatively interpreted as the immediate cost of backing the
government relative to inaction (i.e., μ would be low if elites directly absorbed the costs of allowing a
rebellion to continue). As earlier, we assume that elite defection lowers the strength of the central
government by ζ, which might capture the need to divert resources to reestablish order or a decrease in
defensive capability against the exogenous threat due to ongoing political upheaval. If the government
survives despite commoner rebellion and elite defection, elites pay a punishment cost of π > μ , which
implies that elites are better o complying if they expect the state to survive.
The model otherwise proceeds as in the prior section. The strength of the government is given by S = f(T), or
S = f(T) − ζ if elites defect. A stochastic shock, S ∼Unif [σ - δ,σ + δ], determines the extent of the threat after
the elites’ decision. The state survives if S ≥ S and falls otherwise. We provide a summary and analysis of this
model in Appendix Section A.3.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Discussion
Elite Bargaining Power Revisited
Incorporating the threat of rebellion from below allows us to draw connections to other prominent
arguments about state-building and state collapse, as summarized in Table 11.3. This formulation draws
attention to an alternative view of elite bargaining power, the role of elite-mass relations, and the
connection between local and national political con ict in state-building.
p. 223
Table 11.3. Commoner model: Summary of additional predictions
Theme in literature Parameter in model Predicted change in the central authorityʼs dependence on elites
Elite cost of compliance
Repression cost (μ) Increases
Commoner conditions
Average material/social benefits of status quo (η)
Decreases
Attractiveness of rebellion
Material/social benefits of rebellion (β) Increases
As in the previous section, elite bargaining power in this extended model depends jointly on elites’ political
strength and their preference alignment with the center. Now, however, elite coercive power is linked to the
threat of rebellion from below. When the threat of rebellion is high (when commoner conditions are poor or
the attractiveness of rebellion is high), rulers are more dependent on elite cooperation for state survival,
which increases elites’ ability to demand lower taxation. When there is little risk of rebellion, by contrast,
the ruler has less to lose from alienating elites through increased extraction.
Factors that decrease the willingness and ability of commoners to rebel should therefore also decrease the
bargaining power of elites to demand lower taxation. HPE research has found some empirical support for
this assertion. Gar as and Sellars (2021) show that a sudden decline in the potential for commoner rebellion
facilitated state centralization in early colonial Mexico. Bai and Jia (2016) conversely illustrate how
alienating elites was especially dangerous for central authorities facing a high risk of commoner rebellion in
late Imperial China, in part because the center relied on local elites for backing when rebellions broke out
(Bai, Jia, and Yang 2021).
As in the previous model, preference alignment is an important mediator in the relationship between elites’
coercive and bargaining power. As elites themselves stand to lose more from allowing commoner rebellion
to grow out of control (i.e., when μ is lower), they become more willing to back the state even when taxation
is high. As Dincecco and Wang (2018a) document, elites threatened by rebellion in Imperial China bene ted
from bolstering the state as a way of enhancing their own security and therefore accepted increased
taxation. However, when the state became weaker following China’s defeat in the Opium War, elites turned
to the private substitute of family clans for security, contributing to eventual state collapse. This example
illustrates the importance of state stability in encouraging elite compliance. There is little reason for elites
to invest in bolstering a state that cannot survive, as our model demonstrates.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Local and National Interdependence
How State-Building Backfires
p. 224
Commoners’ behavior in this framework in uences the path of state-building, even though commoner
preferences do not directly depend on elite taxation or state survival. Because the political negotiation
between elites and the central authority di ers based on the threat of rebellion from below (which
determines elite bargaining power), local conditions a ecting commoners in uence decisions about
political centralization and taxation made at the national level. Similarly, while commoners in the model are
assumed to care only about local conditions, their choice to rebel depends on elite taxation because this
in uences elites’ willingness to repress revolt. This illustrates an interdependence between local and
national political concerns, a central feature of the classic literature on rebellion (Moore 1966; Wolf 1969;
Tilly 1978).
A natural extension of this model might allow commoners’ local conditions to di er based on the level of
elite taxation. For example, elites may be able to shift the burden of taxation to commoners through, for
example, extracting wealth from local individuals or villages. This would lower commoner welfare,
increasing their willingness to rebel. Slantchev and Kravitz (2019) build on this idea to examine how tax
revolts can provide information to rulers about the burdens of taxation that are being passed on to the poor
in areas where the government lacks monitoring capacity. In our model, a shift in the burden of taxation
from elites to commoners would have an ambiguous e ect on state-building. It would increase the relative
bene ts of rebellion for commoners, increasing the bargaining power of elites to demand lower taxation
from the central authority. However, the ability to pass on the burden of taxation to commoners would also
insulate elites from the consequences of increased extraction, which would raise their willingness to remain
loyal to the government even under high tax levels. Elites would therefore bear lower direct but higher
indirect costs of increased taxation.
This extended model once again illustrates how the strength of the central government depends on both the
size of the state (i.e., tax revenue) and the political support that the state enjoys from taxpayers. By
incorporating commoners, this model provides a more complex view of how political stability or instability
can shape state-building. In the model, as commoners become less willing to rebel, either because their
status quo conditions are better or because rebellion becomes less attractive, central authorities become
more willing to risk elite defection through high taxation. In other words, state-building should accelerate
where political control over commoners is most secure.
However, when authorities decide to tax beyond a level that elite intermediaries will accept, they are
implicitly gambling that commoner local conditions will be favorable. If η is realized much lower than
expected—for example, if there is adverse weather like a severe drought or other shock a ecting the
commoner economy—authorities will not be able to count on elite support to contain rebellion. This
illustrates how e orts to strengthen the government through high taxation can back re, reducing the
strength of the state during crisis and facilitating state collapse. This idea is developed further in Gar as
and Sellars (2022b), who show how unrelated political shocks converged to bring about the collapse of
colonial rule in Mexico through a similar mechanism. Skocpol (1979) develops a related argument on how
peasant rebellion and higher-level pressures often coalesced to bring about revolutionary political change.
p. 225
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Conclusions and Future Directions
We conclude with some general observations about the literature on state-building in HPE and some
potential directions for future work. As our chapter illustrates, this literature has grown considerably
beyond the classic works of Tilly, Hintze, and others on Western Europe to examine the scope conditions of
the bellicist argument, the interplay between internal and external con ict, the role of nontax revenue, and
the shifting in uence of military technology and scal legibility, among other factors. In the process, HPE
scholars have broadened the substantive focus of this research area beyond early-modern Europe to
examine contexts as diverse as twentieth-century Southeast Asia, colonial Latin America, eleventh-century
China, and the United States following Reconstruction. This work has produced a large and growing “library
of mechanisms” (Gailmard 2021) to explain when and why political centralization takes place, the process
through which state-building and state collapse occur, and the contextual factors that may enable or
foreclose speci c paths of state consolidation.
An important next step in moving this research area forward is to move toward summarizing and
synthesizing the insights that have been generated through this work. The framework we develop here
begins this e ort and provides an organizational structure for thinking about some of the di erent ways in
which HPE scholars have expanded this literature, some general lessons that might be drawn from their
work, some interesting connections between subliteratures that are often discussed in isolation from one
another, and some of the unanswered questions that remain. Scholarship has approached this topic from a
variety of angles, both in terms of substantive focus and methodological approach. There are, however,
important commonalities in how HPE scholars have thought about state-building across time and space
that might be missed when taking a narrower view of the speci c contexts or causal processes highlighted
by any given contribution. The variables that capture external security considerations, the balance of power
between the center and the periphery, the structure of the international political or economic system, and
preexisting technological and environmental conditions di er considerably by context, but many of the
lessons for how these factors structure state-building are plausibly general.
Our theoretical framework also suggests several avenues for future research. One approach might be to
explore some of the new or less examined predictions of the framework developed here. For example, the
model suggests that the variance—not just the level—of external threat may shape rulers’ incentives to
strengthen the state. When there is substantial uncertainty about the severity of a threat, this
simultaneously expands the range of situations where state-building could occur while also reducing the
expected bene t of marginally increasing state strength. This hypothesis has not, to our knowledge, been
explored empirically.
p. 226
Another path forward might be to expand on some of the connections between di erent strands of the
literature. For example, elite bargaining power in state-building—the extent to which elites are willing and
able to demand a lower extraction from the center—should depend not just on elites’ political strength but
also on their preference alignment with the ruler and the elasticity of state coercive power with respect to
revenue. This prediction could be investigated empirically or further analyzed theoretically.
Finally, the stylized setting that we examine in this chapter could be complicated in several ways to generate
new insights. Some black boxes that might be worth opening include thinking about di erent ways that
central authorities might use tax revenue to shore up political strength or further unpacking the coarse set
of social actors that we examine here—a uni ed center, a uni ed elite, and a uni ed set of commoners—to
think about how divisions within these categories or identity cleavages (e.g., class, nationality, or ethnicity)
might alter the path of state-building.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Notes
1. Our framework is intended to complement more exhaustive reviews of the study of the state in HPE and across the social sciences, such as Dincecco and Wang (2023), Koyama (2023), Moriguchi and Sng (2023), and Vogler (2023) in this volume. Other examples include Levi (2002), Spruyt (2002), Brautigam (2008), Besley and Persson (2014), Ho man (2015), Bardhan (2016), Blaydes (2017), Johnson and Koyama (2017), Berwick and Christia (2018), and Dincecco and Wang (2018b).
2. Related but distinct literatures examine how prior institutional development (Gerring et al. 2011) and the di usion of technologies of legibility, taxation, and administration (e.g., Grzymala-Busse 2020; Huang and Kang 2022) can facilitate state development.
3. We omit nontax revenue in this model extension, though predictions are unchanged if it is included.
4. Though distinctive, this argument is also somewhat reminiscent of Acemoglu and Robinsonʼs (2017; 2020) path to an “inclusive state.”
5. See also Cox (2023) in this volume.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


References
Abramson, Scott F. 2017. “The Economic Origins of the Territorial State.” International Organization 71, no. 1: 97–130. Google Scholar WorldCat
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2017. “The Emergence of Weak, Despotic and Inclusive States.” NBER Working Paper.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2020. The Narrow Corridor: States, Societies, and the Fate of Liberty. New York: Penguin Random House. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Acharya, Avidit, and Alexander Lee. 2018. “Economic Foundations of the Territorial State System.” American Journal of Political Science 62, no. 4: 954–66. Google Scholar WorldCat
Ahmed, Ali T., and David Stasavage. 2020. “Origins of Early Democracy.” American Political Science Review 114, no. 2: 502–18. Google Scholar WorldCat
Allen, Robert C., Mattia C. Bertazzini, and Leander Heldring. 2020. “The Economic Origins of Government.” Working Paper. Oxford University/NYU-Abu Dhabi.
Ardant, Gabriel. 1975. “Financial Policy and Economic Infrastructure of Modern States and Nations.” In The Formation of National States in Western Europe, ed. Charles Tilly, 164–242. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Arias, Luz Marina. 2013. “Building Fiscal Capacity in Colonial Mexico: From Fragmentation to Centralization.” Journal of Economic History 73, no. 3: 662–93. Google Scholar WorldCat
Bai, Ying, and Ruixue Jia. 2016. “Elite Recruitment and Political Stability: The Impact of the Abolition of Chinaʼs Civil Service Exam.” Econometrica 84, no. 2: 677–733. Google Scholar WorldCat
Bai, Ying, Ruixue Jia, and Jiaojiao Yang. 2021. “The Nexus of Elites and War Mobilization.” Working Paper.I University of California, San Diego.
Bardhan, Pranab. 2016. “State and Development: The Need for a Reappraisal of the Current Literature.” Journal of Economic Literature 54, no. 3: 862–92. Google Scholar WorldCat
Bates, Robert, and Da-Hsiang Lien. 1985. “A Note on Taxation, Development, and Representative Government.” Politics & Society 14, no. 1: 53–70. Google Scholar WorldCat
Beramendi, Pablo, Mark Dincecco, and Melissa Rogers. 2019. “Intra-Elite Competition and Long-Run Fiscal Development.” Journal of Politics 81, no. 1: 49–65. Google Scholar WorldCat
Berwick, Elissa, and Fotini Christia. 2018. “State Capacity Redux: Integrating Classical and Experimental Contributions to an Enduring Debate.” Annual Review of Political Science 21, no. 1: 71–91. Google Scholar WorldCat
Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2009. “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation, and Politics.” American Economic Review 99, no. 4: 1218–44.
p. 227
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Google Scholar WorldCat
Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2014. “Why Do Developing Countries Tax So Little?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, no. 4: 99–120. Google Scholar WorldCat
Blaydes, Lisa. 2017. “State Building in the Middle East.” Annual Review of Political Science 20, no. 1: 487–504. Google Scholar WorldCat
Blaydes, Lisa, and Christopher Paik. 2016. “The Impact of Holy Land Crusades on State Formation: War Mobilization, Trade Integration, and Political Development in Medieval Europe.” International Organization 70, no. 3: 551–86. Google Scholar WorldCat
Boix, Carles. 2015. Political Order and Inequality. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Boone, Catherine. 1994. “States and Ruling Classes in Postcolonial Africa: The Enduring Contradictions of Power.” In State Power and Social Forces: Domination and Transformation in the Third World, ed. Joel Migdal, Atul Kohli, and Vivienne Shue, 108–39. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Boone, Catherine. 2003. Political Topographies of the African State. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Brambor, Thomas, Agustín Goenaga, Johannes Lindvall, and Jan Teorell. 2020. “The Lay of the Land: Information Capacity and the Modern State.” Comparative Political Studies 53, no. 2: 175–213. Google Scholar WorldCat
Brautigam, Deborah. 2008. “Introduction: Taxation and State-Building in Developing Countries.” In Taxation and State-Building in Developing Countries: Capacity and Consent, ed. Deborah Brautigam, Odd-Helge Fjeldstad, and Mick Moore, 1–33. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Brewer, John. 1990. The Sinews of Power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Cantoni, Davide, Cathrin Mohr, and Matthias Weigand. 2021. “The Rise of Fiscal Capacity.” Working Paper. Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversität München.
Cassidy, Traviss. 2019. “The Long-Run E ects of Oil Wealth on Development: Evidence from Petroleum Geology.” Economic Journal 129, no. 623: 2745–78. Google Scholar WorldCat
Centeno, Miguel Angel. 1997. “Blood and Debt: War and Taxation in Nineteenth-Century Latin America.” American Journal of Sociology 102, no. 6: 1565–605. Google Scholar WorldCat
Centeno, Miguel Angel. 2002. Blood and Debt: War and the Nation-State in Latin America. Penn State University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Chen, Joy, Eric H. Wang, and Xiaoming Zhang. 2021. “Leviathanʼs O er: State-Building with Elite Compensation in Early Medieval China.” Working Paper. Cheung Kong Graduate School of Business.
Cox, Gary. 2016. Marketing Sovereign Promises: Monopoly Brokerage and the Growth of the English State. Cambridge University Press.
p. 228
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Cox, Gary. 2023. “Historical Political Economy of Legislative Power.” In The Oxford Handbook of Historical Political Economy, ed. Je ery A. Jenkins and Jared Rubin, 329–51. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Dal Bo, Ernesto, Pablo Hernandez, and Sebastíán Mazzuca. 2022. “The Paradox of Civilization. ́ Pre-Institutional Sources of Security and Prosperity.” American Political Science Review. 116, no. 1: 213–30. Google Scholar WorldCat
Dell, Melissa, Nathaniel Lane, and Pablo Querubin. 2018. “The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and Economic Development in Vietnam.” Econometrica 86, no. 6: 2083–121. Google Scholar WorldCat
Dincecco, Mark. 2009. “Fiscal Centralization, Limited Government, and Public Revenues in Europe, 1650–1913.” Journal of Economic History 69, no. 1: 48–103. Google Scholar WorldCat
Dincecco, Mark. 2011. Political Transformations and Public Finances: Europe, 1650–1913. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Dincecco, Mark, Giovanni Federico, and Andrea Vindigni. 2011. “Warfare, Taxation, and Political Change: Evidence from the Italian Risorgimiento.” Journal of Economic History 71, no. 4: 887–914. Google Scholar WorldCat
Dincecco, Mark, James Fenske, and Massimiliano Onorato. 2019. “Is Africa Di erent? Historical Conflict and State Development.” Economic History of Developing Regions 34, no. 2: 209–50. Google Scholar WorldCat
Dincecco, Mark, and Yuhua Wang. 2018a. “Internal Conflict, Elite Action, and State Failure: Evidence from China, 1000–1911.” Working Paper. University of Michigan and Harvard University.
Dincecco, Mark, and Yuhua Wang. 2018b. “Violent Conflict and Political Development over the Long Run: China versus Europe.” Annual Review of Political Science 21. 341–58 Google Scholar WorldCat
Dincecco, Mark and Yuhua Wang. 2023. “State Capacity in Historical Political Economy.” In The Oxford Handbook of Historical Political Economy, ed. Je ery A. Jenkins and Jared Rubin, 253–69. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Dunning, Thad. 2008. Crude Democracy: Natural Resource Wealth and Political Regimes. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Ertman, Thomas. 1997. Birth of the Leviathan: Building States and Regimes in Medieval and Early Modern Europe. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Fearon, James D., and David D. Laitin. 2003. “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War.” American Political Science Review 97, no. 1: 7590. Google Scholar WorldCat
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesús, Mark Koyama, Youhong Lin, and Tuan-Hwee Sng. 2020. “The Fractured-Land Hypothesis.” NBER Working Paper.
p. 229 Gailmard, Sean. 2021. “Theory, History, and Political Economy.” Journal of Historical Political Economy 1, no. 1: 69–104.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Google Scholar WorldCat
Garfias, Francisco. 2018. “Elite Competition and State Capacity Development: Theory and Evidence from Post-Revolutionary Mexico.” American Political Science Review 112, no. 2: 339–57. Google Scholar WorldCat
Garfias, Francisco. 2019. “Elite Coalitions, Limited Government, and Fiscal Capacity Development: Evidence from Bourbon Mexico.” Journal of Politics 81, no. 1: 94–111. Google Scholar WorldCat
Garfias, Francisco, and Emily A. Sellars. 2021. “From Conquest to Centralization: Domestic Conflict and the Transition to Direct Rule.” Journal of Politics 83, no. 3: 992–1009. Google Scholar WorldCat
Garfias, Francisco, and Emily A. Sellars. 2022a. “Fiscal Legibility and State Development: Theory and Evidence from Colonial Mexico.” Working Paper. University of California, San Diego and Yale University.
Garfias, Francisco, and Emily A. Sellars. 2022b. “When State Building Backfires: Elite Coordination and Popular Grievance in Rebellion.” American Journal of Political Science 66, no. 4: 977–92. Google Scholar WorldCat
Gehlbach, Scott. 2008. Representation through Taxation: Revenue, Politics, and Development in Postcommunist States. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Ilia Rainer. 2007. “The Modern Impact of Pre-Colonial Centralization in Africa.” Journal of Economic Growth 12, no. 3: 185–234. Google Scholar WorldCat
Gennaioli, Nicola, and Joachim Voth. 2015. “State Capacity and Military Conflict.” Review of Economic Studies 82, no. 4: 1409–48. Google Scholar WorldCat
Gerring, John, Daniel Ziblatt, Johan Van Gorp, and Julian Arévalo. 2011. “An Institutional Theory of Direct and Indirect Rule.” World Politics 63, no. 3: 377–433. Google Scholar WorldCat
Goenaga, Agustín, Oriol Sabate, and Jan Teorell. 2018. “The State Does Not Live by Warfare Alone: War and Public Revenue in the Long Nineteenth Century.” STANCE Working Paper.
Grzymala-Busse, Anna. 2020. “Beyond War and Contracts: The Medieval and Religious Roots of the European State.” Annual Review of Political Science 23: 19–36. Google Scholar WorldCat
Herbst, Je rey. 2000. States and Power in Africa: Comparative Lessons in Authority and Control. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Hintze, Otto. 1975. Historical Essays. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Ho man, Philip T. 2012. “Why Was It Europeans Who Conquered the World?” Journal of Economic History 72, no. 3: 601–33. Google Scholar WorldCat
Ho man, Philip T. 2015. “What Do States Do? Politics and Economic History.” Journal of Economic History 75, no. 2: 303–32. Google Scholar WorldCat
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Ho man, Philip, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 1997. “Divided We Fall: The Political Economy of Warfare and Taxation.” Working Paper. California Institute of Technology.
Huang, Chin-Hao, and David C. Kang. 2022. “State Formation in Korea and Japan, 400–800 CE: Emulation and Learning, Not Bellicist Competition.” International Organization 76, no. 1: 1–31 Google Scholar WorldCat
Hui, Victoria. 2015. War and State Formation in Ancient China and Early Modern Europe. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Iyer, Lakshmi. 2010. “Direct versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-Term Consequences.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92, no. 4: 693–713. Google Scholar WorldCat
Johnson, Noel D., and Mark Koyama. 2014. “Tax Farming and the Origins of State Capacity in England and France.” Explorations in Economic History 51, no. 1, 1–20. Google Scholar WorldCat
Johnson, Noel D., and Mark Koyama. 2017. “States and Economic Growth: Capacity and Constraints.” Explorations in Economic History 64: 1–20.
Google Scholar WorldCat
Karaman, K. Kivanc, and Şevket Pamuk. 2013. “Di erent Paths to the Modern State in Europe: The Interaction between Warfare, Economic Structure, and Political Regime.” American Political Science Review 107, no. 3: 603–26. Google Scholar WorldCat
Kiser, Edgar, and Yong Cai. 2003. “War and Bureaucratization in Qin China: Exploring an Anomalous Case.” American Sociological Review 68, no. 4: 511–39. Google Scholar WorldCat
Ko, Chi Yu, Mark Koyama, and Tuan-Hwee Sng. 2018. “Unified China and Divided Europe.” International Economic Review 59, no. 1: 285–327. Google Scholar WorldCat
Koyama, Mark, Chiaki Moriguchi, and Tuan-Hwee Sng. 2018. “Geopolitics and Asiaʼs Little Divergence: State-Building in China and Japan a er 1850.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 155: 178–204. Google Scholar WorldCat
Koyama, Mark. 2023. “Legal Capacity in Historical Political Economy.” In The Oxford Handbook of Historical Political Economy, ed. Je ery A. Jenkins and Jared Rubin, 271–92. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Kurtz, Marcus. 2013. Latin American State-Building in Comparative Perspective: Social Foundations of Institutional Order. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Lange, Matthew K. 2004. “British Colonial Legacies and Political Development.” World Development 32, no. 6: 905–22. Google Scholar WorldCat
Lee, Alexander. 2019. “Land, State Capacity, and Colonialism: Evidence from India.” Comparative Political Studies 52, no. 3: 41244. Google Scholar WorldCat
Levi, Margaret. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. University of California Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
p. 230
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Levi, Margaret. 2002. “The State of the Study of the State.” In Political Science: The State of the Discipline, ed. Ira Katznelson and Helen V. Milner, 33–55. W. W. Norton & Company. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Mamdani, Mahmood. 1996. Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late Colonialism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Mares, Isabela, and Didac Queralt. 2015. “The Non-Democratic Origins of Income Taxation.” Comparative Political Studies 48, no. 14: 1974–2009. Google Scholar WorldCat
Mares, Isabela, and Didac Queralt. 2020. “Fiscal Innovation in Non-Democratic Regimes: Elites and the Adoption of the Prussian Income Tax of the 1890s.” Explorations in Economic History 57, no. 1: 62–76. Google Scholar WorldCat
Mayshar, Joram, Omer Moav, and Luigi Pascali. 2022. “The Origin of the State: Land Productivity or Appropriability?” Journal of Political Economy 130, no. 4: 1091–144. Google Scholar WorldCat
Mayshar, Joram, Omer Moav, and Zvika Neeman. 2017. “Geography, Transparency, and Institutions.” American Political Science Review 111, no. 3: 622–36. Google Scholar WorldCat
Mazzuca, Sebastian. 2021. Latecomer State Formation: Political Geography and Capacity Failure in Latin America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Michalopoulos, Stelios, and Elias Papaioannou. 2013. “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary African Development.” Econometrica 81, no. 1: 113–52. Google Scholar WorldCat
Migdal, Joel. 1988. Strong Societies and Weak States: State-Society Relations and State Capabilities in the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Moore, Barrington. 1966. Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World. Boston: Beacon. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Moriguchi, Chiaki, and Tuan-Hwee Sng. 2023. “The Size of Polities in Historical Political Economy.” In Oxford Handbook of Historical Political Economy, ed. Je ery Jenkins and Jared Rubin, 237–51. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
North, Douglass, and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.” Journal of Economic History 49, no. 4: 803–32. Google Scholar WorldCat
North, Douglass, John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social Orders. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Olson, Mancur. 1993. “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development.” American Political Science Review 87, no. 3: 567–76. Google Scholar WorldCat
Osafo-Kwaako, Philip, and James Robinson. 2013. “Political Centralization in Pre-Colonial Africa.” Journal of Comparative
p. 231
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Economics 41, no. 1: 534–64. Google Scholar WorldCat
Paik, Christopher, and Jessica Vechbanyongratana. 2019. “Path to Centralization and Development: Evidence from Siam.” World Politics 71, no. 2: 289–331. Google Scholar WorldCat
Pierskalla, Jan, Alexander De Juan, and Max Montgomery. 2017. “The Territorial Expansion of the Colonial State: Evidence from German East Africa 1890–1909.” British Journal Political Science 49, no. 2: 711–37. Google Scholar WorldCat
Queralt, Didac. 2019. “War, International Finance, and Fiscal Capacity in the Long Run.” International Organization 73, no. 4: 713–53. Google Scholar WorldCat
Queralt, Didac. 2022. Pawned States: State-Building in the Era of International Finance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Sánchez-Talanquer, Mariano. 2020. “One-Eyed State: The Politics of Legibility and Property Taxation.” Latin American Politics and Society 63, no. 3: 65–93. Google Scholar WorldCat
Saylor, Ryan. 2014. State-Building in Boom Times: Commodities and Coalitions in Latin America and Africa. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Scheve, Kenneth, and David Stasavage. 2010. “Democracy, War, and Wealth: Lessons from Two Centuries of Inheritance Taxation.” American Political Science Review 106, no. 1: 81–102. Google Scholar WorldCat
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1954. “The Crisis of the Tax State.” International Economics Papers, no. 4: 5–38. Google Scholar WorldCat
Scott, James C. 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Scott, James C. 2009. The Art of Not Being Governed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Scott, James C. 2017. Against the Grain: a Deep History of the Earliest States. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Skocpol, Theda. 1979. States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France, Russia and China. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Slantchev, Branislav L., and Tory A. Kravitz. 2019. “No Taxation without Administration: Wealth Assessment in the Formation of the Fiscal State.” Working Paper, 1–70. University of California, San Diego.
Slater, Dan. 2010. Ordering Power: Contentious Politics and Authoritarian Leviathans in Southeast Asia. New York: Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Soifer, Hillel. 2015. State-Building in Latin America. Cambridge University Press.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Spruyt, Hendrik. 1996. The Sovereign State and Its Competitors. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Spruyt, Hendrik. 2002. “The Origins, Development, and Possible Decline of the Modern State.” Annual Review of Political Science 5, no. 1: 127–49. Google Scholar WorldCat
Stasavage, David. 2003. Public Debt and the Birth of the Democratic State: France and Great Britain 1688–1789. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Stasavage, David. 2007. “Partisan Politics and Public Debt: The Importance of the ʻWhig Supremacyʼ for Britainʼs Financial Revolution.” European Journal of Economic History 11, no. 1: 123–53. Google Scholar WorldCat
Stasavage, David. 2011. States of Credit: Size, Power, and the Development of European Polities. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Stasavage, David. 2020. The Decline and Rise of Democracy: A Global History from Antiquity to Today. Cambridge University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Suryanarayan, Pavithra. 2021. “Status Politics Hollows Out the State: Evidence from Colonial India.” Working Paper. London School of Economics and Political Science.
Suryanarayan, Pavithra, and Steven White. 2021. “Slavery, Reconstruction, and Bureaucratic Capacity in the American South.” American Political Science Review 115, no. 2: 568–84. Google Scholar WorldCat
Tilly, Charles. 1975. “Reflections on the History of European State-Making.” In The Formation of National States in Western Europe, ed. Charles Tilly, 3–83. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. Addison-Wesley. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Tilly, Charles. 1990. Coercion, Capital, and European States, A.D. 990–1990. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Vogler, Jan. 2023. “Bureaucracies in Historical Political Economy.” In The Oxford Handbook of Historical Political Economy, ed. Je ery A. Jenkins and Jared Rubin, 373–99. Oxford University Press. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Wang, Yuhua. 2022. “Blood Is Thicker Than Water: Elite Kinship Networks and State Building in Imperial China.” American Political Science Review 1–15. Google Scholar WorldCat
Weber, Max. 1999. Gesammelte politische Schri en von Max Weber. Potsdamer Internet-Ausgabe. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
Wolf, Eric. 1969. Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century. New York: Harper and Row. Google Scholar Google Preview WorldCat COPAC
p. 232
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Appendix State-Building in Historical Political Economy
A.1 Analysis of Ruler Model
A.2 Analysis of Elite Model
We solve for the ruler’s optimal level of taxation as a function of the parameters of the model. Using the
distribution of S, his maximization problem is:
(A1)
mTax( f(T +ρ)−(σ−δ)
2δ )α − cT
subject to 0 ≤ T ≤ ω. The rst order conditions are given by:
(A2)
f ′(T +ρ)α
2δ = c
Note that is positive and decreasing in T by the concavity assumption. When this expression
holds, optimal tax revenue is increasing in the rents from o ce ( ) and decreasing in non-tax revenue ( ),
in the uncertainty about the threat ( ), and in the cost of taxation ( ).
f′(T + ρ)
aρ
δc
We additionally consider potential corner solutions. If , the ruler’s optimal choice will be to
collect no taxes. This is more likely to hold when the expected threat ( ) is very low, non-tax revenue ( ) is
very high, the technology is very ine cient (i.e., is very small), the cost of taxation ( ) is very
high, and the bene ts of maintaining power ( ) are very small. Because taxation is costly, the ruler will also
never tax beyond what is necessary to ensure state survival (i.e., ). At the opposite
extreme, there are no bene ts to taxation when state failure is inevitable (if ).
f ′(ρ) < 2δc
α
σρ
f(⋅)
p. 233 f′(T ) c
a
f(T + ρ) = σ + δ
f(ω + ρ) < σ − δ
If , the ruler will extract all wealth. This is more likely when societal wealth ( ) and non-tax
revenue ( ) are small, when the bene ts of maintaining power ( ) are very high, and when the technologies
of defense ( ) and taxation ( ) are highly e cient.
f ′(ω + ρ) > 2δc
αω ρa
f(⋅) c
To summarize, the game timing and payo s are:
1. The authority chooses tax revenue (T) to extract from the elite.
2. Elite chooses whether to side with the government (e = 1) or to defect (e = 0).
3. A stochastic shock drawn by Nature (S) determines the extent of the threat and the survival of the
government.
• State survives: The authority receives If elites back the authority, they receive
. If they defect, they receive
• State collapses: The authority receives . If elites back the authority, they receive . If
they defect, they receive
uA = α.
uE = ω − T + λ − μ uE = ω − T + λ − π
uA = 0 uE = −μ
uE = 0
We solve for the subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE) of this game by backwards induction, beginning
with the elite’s choice to back the government or defect after observing the tax level. Elites back the
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


A.3 Analysis of Commoners Model
government if the expected bene t of doing so exceeds the expected cost, or if:
(A3)
( f(T )−(σ−δ)
2δ )(ω − T + λ) − μ ≥ ( f(T )−ζ−(σ−δ)
2δ ) (ω − T + λ − π)
or if . Elites are more likely to back the government when their
utility under state survival (wealth and bene t ) and the cost of punishment ( ) are higher and when the
cost of compliance ( ) and expected level of external threat ( ) are lower. If , elites are more
likely to back the government as elite power ( ) increases. Otherwise, an increase in will encourage
defection (see the chapter for a discussion).
ζT − πf(T ) ≤ ζ(ω + λ) + π(δ − σ − ζ) − 2δμ
ωλ π
μ σ ω−T +λ>π
ζζ
We are interested in how an increase in taxation in uences the willingness of elites to back the government.
For some parameter values, elites’ best response does not depend on the level of taxation. We concentrate
on cases where the elite backs the government under some tax levels but not others. Taking the derivative of
expression A3 with respect to , we see that whether compliance is increasing or decreasing in T depends
on the sign of the expression .
p. 234 T
ζ − πf ′(T )
We turn to the rulers’ problem. Let represent the maximum feasible (i.e., between 0 and ω) level of
taxation under which the elite would back the government. When the elite’s best response does not depend
on the tax level or when , the ruler sets to maximize the probability of remaining in power,
with or without elite support. When < ω, the authority’s optimal choice is to either maximize extraction
subject to retaining elite support ( ) to maximize extraction in general . The authority chooses
the lower tax level when:
Tˆ
Tˆ = ω T = ω
Tˆ
T = Tˆ T = ω
T * = Tˆ < ω
(A4)
ζ > f(ω) − f(Tˆ)
See Figure 11.1 and the chapter discussion.
The timing of the game is:
1. The authority chooses amount of tax revenue to extract from the elite’s wealth ( ).
2. A stochastic shock drawn by Nature reveals the local conditions for the commoners ( ) and
commoners decide to rebel (c = 1) or not (c = 0)
3. If commoners rebel, the elites choose whether to restore order (e = 1) or to defect (e = 0). They
otherwise take no action.
4. A stochastic shock drawn by Nature (S) determines the magnitude of the threat to the state; it survives
if S ≥ S and falls otherwise.
Tω
η
Payo s are given by:
• Central authorities: They receive if the state survives, if it collapses.
• Elites: If commoners do not rebel, they receive if the state survives and if it
uA = α uA = 0
uE = ω − T + λ uE = 0
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025


Notes
falls. If the elite represses rebellion, they receive if the state survives and
if it falls. If elites defect when facing rebellion, they receive if the state survives
and if it falls.
• Commoners: They receive if they do not rebel, if they rebel and the elite does not
repress, and if they rebel and the elite represses.
uE = ω − T + λ − μ uE = −μ
uE = ω − T + λ − π
uE = 0
uC = η uC = β
uC = β − ψ
We solve for the SPNE by backwards induction, beginning with the elite’s decision to repress if rebellion
occurs. Note that if elites are faced with this choice, their problem is identical to the one in the previous
model (see equation A3). We focus our discussion on situations where the elite backs the authority under
some but not all levels of taxation (i.e., when < ω, where is the maximum taxation that the elite is
willing to accept without defecting, as above).
Tˆ Tˆ
Turning to the commoners stage, note that commoners face no relevant uncertainty because opportunity
cost ( ) and taxation (T, which determines elite compliance) have been set at the time of their action and
because their payo s do not depend on state survival. By the assumption that , commoners
will only rebel when two conditions are met: local conditions are su ciently poor ( ) and elites who
face rebellion defect ( ).
η
η+v<β−ψ
p. 235 η < β
T > Tˆ
The ruler’s problem is analogous to the above: he decides whether to set T = (to count on elite backing) or
(to maximize the state’s ability to withstand elite defection). Using the distribution of local
conditions ( ) and the assumption that , the probability of commoner rebellion if T > is
. Using this expression and rearranging, the authority sets the lower tax level when:
Tˆ
T =ω
η η − v < β < η + v Tˆ
β−η+ν
2ν Tˆ
(A5)
ζ( β−η+ν
2ν ) > f(ω) − f(Tˆ)
As commoners become more likely to rebel (as increases or declines) or as uncontrolled rebellion
becomes more dangerous (as rises), authorities face more pressure to appease domestic elites with lower
taxation to maintain control.
βη
ζ
p. 236
* We are grateful to Alex Debs, Je ery A. Jenkins, Didac Queralt, Jared Rubin, Jan Vogler, Austin Wright, and seminar participants at Yale for their comments and suggestions.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edited-volume/44005/chapter/394003975 by London School of Economics user on 07 February 2025