A Short Hfstorv of
AMBRICu




A SHORT HISTORY OF GREECE




A SHORT HISTORY OF
GREECE
FROM EARLY TIMES TO I964
BY
W.A.HEURTLEY, H.C. DARBY C.W. CRAWLEY AND C.M.WOODHOUSE
CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
1967


PUBLISHED BY THE SYNDICS OF THE CAMBRIDGE l'Nl\ERSITY PRESS
Bentloy House. 200 Euston Road. London, N.W. 1 American Branch: 3:^ East 57ih Street, New York, N.V. 10022
©
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Firsl puhlishfd 19G5 RfprinUd 1967 First paftrrback edition 1967
I
First printed in Great Britain by Willmer Brothers & Haram Ltd, Birkenhead Reprinted, by Lithography, in Great Britain by HazelI Watson &' Viney Ltd, Aylesbury, Bucks
I


CONTENTS
LIST OF MAPS AND DIAGRAMS page vii
publisher's note viii
I ANCIENT GREECE
by W. A. HEURTLEY
1 Prehistoric Greece i
2 The Rise of the Greek City States 7
3 Classical Greece 15 4 Macedonian and Hellenistic Greece 25 5 Roman Greece 30
II MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
by H. C. DARBY
1 Byzantine Greece 35 2 Prankish and Venetian Greece 52 3 Byzantine Civilization, by s. j. papastavrou and w. H. plommer 72 4 Turkish Greece 77
III MODERN GREECE, 1821-1939 bj C. W. CRAWLEY
1 The War of Independence, 1821-32 91 2 The Reign of Otho I, 1833-62 98 3 The Reign of George I, 1 863-1 91 loi 4 The Crisis of 1912-23 109 5 Domestic Affairs, 1923-40 124
6 Poreign Affairs, 1923-40 130 7 Modern Greek Literature by s. j. papastavrou 135


CONTENTS
IV MODERN GREECE, 1939-64
by C. M. WOODHOUSE
1 Relations with the Fascist Powers 138 2 The Enemy Occupation 143 3 Post-war Troubles 151
4 The Beginning of Reconstruction' 161
5 The Cyprus Dispute 165 6 The Return to Normality 174
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 184
INDEX i8q
VI


LIST OF MAPS AND DIAGRAMS
1 Prehistoric Greece page 2
2 Greek Settlements in the Mediterranean, c. 550 B.C. 10
3 Architectural orders—Doric, Ionic and Corinthian 14
4 Greece in 431 B.C. 17 5 Reconstruction and plan of the Acropolis 20 06 Athens 22 7 The empire of Alexander, 323 B.C. 26 8 The Byzantine Empire, a.d. 962-1190 37 9 The Balkan Peninsula about a.d. 800 42
10 The Balkan Peninsula, a.d. 910-1265 44
11 The Balkan Peninsula, 1340-55 45
1
2
The distribution of the Vlachs in the Balkans 47
13 Greece in 12 14 54
14 Greece in 1265 55 15 Greece about 1355 57 16 Greece in 1388 60 17 Venetian possessions in the Greek lands 67
18 Genoese possessions in the Greek lands 70
19 Greece in 1440 78 20 The growth of Greece, 1 832-1 922 98
21 The Balkans in 1878 104
22 Rectification of the Turco-Greek frontier, 1897 106
23 The Balkans, 1 91 2-1
3
112 24 The Macedonian Front, 1918 116 25 The languages of Greece and adjoining areas 118 26 Major ethnic groups in Macedonia, 191 2 and 1926 122 27 The Occupation of Greece, 1 94
1
144 28 Modern Greece 162
vu


PUBLISHER'S NOTE
Most of the material and all the maps in this book
were originally published by the Naval Intelligence Division of the Admiralty as part of a Handbook
on Greece, in three volumes, for service use. By
arrangement with the Controller of Her Majesty's
Stationery Office, the original owner of the copy
right, the historical sections are now reissued in this
shorter form. The original contributors were C. W.
Crawley, Professor H. C. Darby and the late W. A. Heurtley. A chapter on the history of Greece since 1939 has been added by the Hon. C. M. Woodhouse, M.P. The publishers gratefully acknowledge
the help of Professor N. G. L. Hammond, Professor R.Jenkins, Mr S.J. Papastavrou, Dr W. H. Plommer
and Mr F. H. Stubbings.
Complete consistency in the transliteration of
Greek proper names is impossible. Where there is an
anglicized version it has been used, otherwise the
Greek spelling has been followed as far as possible. Three companion volumes have already been
published : A Short History of Germany, i8ij-ig4^, by
E. J. Passant, with contributions by C. J. Child, W. O. Henderson, and Donald Watt; A Short History
of France, by H. Butterfield, D. W. Brogan, H. C.
Darby, and J. Hampden Jackson, with contributions by Sir Ernest Barker, A. Ewert, and I. L. Foster;
and A Short History of Italy, by the late C. M. Ady
and the late A. J. Whyte, revised and edited by H. Hearder and D. P. Waley.
Vlll


CHAPTER I
ANCIENT GREECE
/. PREHISTORIC GREECE
Greek history, narrowly speaking, begins about 800 B.C., but Greek origins go back for more than two thousand years before that date. CiviHzations had succeeded one another and had
left material remains. Though it is not possible to speak of a
historical background to those remains, it is possible, by piecing
together the evidence of archaeology, mythology, tradition and
legend, to gain a more or less coherent picture, at least in
outline, of the general course of events. For the earlier phases,
the principal evidence is, for obvious reasons, supplied by
archaeological excavation, but the interpretation of this evi
dence is naturally somewhat speculative.
THE BEGINNINGS, BEFORE 3OOO B.C.
The earliest inhabitants of Greece of whom we have any know
ledge were in a pre-metal stage of civilization. Their settle
ments, most numerous in the plains of Thessaly, which suited
their agricultural economy, are now known to date in some
cases as far back as the 5th or 6th millennium B.C. Their tools
and weapons were of stone, and their pottery, both plain and
painted, was of exceptionally fine quality. A similar culture is
, represented in central Greece at least as far south as Corinth
and Crete too had an equal early neolithic civilization, best
known from the central site of Cnossus, but this seems to have
had but little contact with the mainland. The origins of these
cultures are still obscure, though evidence of affinities with
Asia Minor is accumulating. In a second phase of this pre-metal age, settlement in central
Greece and the Peloponnese seems denser than before. Many


ANCIENT GREECE
old sites remained occupied, but, at some, changes in pottery
and new house-types suggest the arrival of a new people; and
the occurrence of a few fortified settlements illustrates for the
\p£LOPC/^^/£SE
^- Ct
200 Ki Cnossus* ''^Maliia^r-^X
AviaTria^a>.Phaestus -

^
^
Fig. I. Prehistoric Greece
first time a recurring feature in Greece's history : the possibility
of conquest and government by relatively small bodies of well
organized invaders.
THE MINOAN AND HELLADIG CIVILIZATIONS, 3000-1 100 B.C.
The use of metal (first copper, then bronze), already long
2


PREHISTORIC GREECE
familiar in the East, had been spreading westwards and had reached the coast of Asia Minor. From here it was carried, early in the third millennium B.C., by what seems to have been a mass migration of people to Greece, overland through
Macedonia into Thessaly, and by sea via the islands to central and southern Greece and Crete.
The Minoan Civilization
This third civilization carried with it the seeds of development,
which reached their full flowering in Crete. The geographical
position of the island favoured intercourse with Egypt and the
East, and, owing to this intercourse and to their own natural
talents, the Cretans made a rapid advance in knowledge and
skill. In their spacious palaces, designed for comfort and con
venience, Hfe seems to have been easy and serene. The arts
flourished, especially those of the lapidary, the goldsmith, the
worker in ivory, the fresco painter and the vase painter; and
such a degree of excellence was reached in these arts that
Cretan civilization can be compared with, and in some respects
surpasses, that of Egypt or Sumeria. The centre of all this
splendour was the great palace of Cnossus ; other palaces were at Phaestus, Ayia Triada, and Mallia. That the Cretans were
familiar with the art of writing is proved by the hundreds of
clay tablets, inscribed first with pictographs which may repre
sent words and later with linear signs which represent syllables.
This * Linear B ' script has been found only at Cnossus, and on the mainland at Pylus and Mycenae. The earher * Linear A'
script occurs only in Crete.
The Minoan civiUzation, so called after the legendary king Minos, seems to have been based on sea-power and on seaborne trade ; and evidence has been found of Minoan contacts not only with Greece, Syria and Egypt but with lands as far
distant as Sicily and Spain. Perhaps it was the sense of security
given them by their navy which allowed the islanders to leave
unfortified their palaces and the towns which clustered around


ANCIENT GREECE
them. Consequently^ when invasion came, after more than a
thousand years of peaceful development, it found them un
prepared.
The Helladic Civilization
On the mainland, development was much less rapid. The immigrants of the early third millennium B.C. settled in the
neighbourhood of Corinth, in Argolis, and on the island of Aegina. From here, perhaps, they spread northwards into
Boeotia and the Sperchios valley and southwards as far as
Messenia, and, eventually, westwards to Ithaca and Levkas in
the Ionian islands. Their standard of living was not high; and
their settlements were small, not more than villages, and only
rarely fortified. Their potters produced vases of extraordinarily
fine quaUty, but undecorated: simple gold ornaments have
been found in their tombs.
Middle Helladic
About 2000 B.C. signs of upheaval appear on the mainland. At
some sites, marks of a general conflagration, houses of a new
type built on the debris of the earlier, new styles of pottery,
and different burial customs, indicate a change of population.
Converging lines of evidence make it likely that this upheaval was caused by the entry into central and southern Greece of the first Greek-speaking people, sometimes called Achaeans, perhaps as part of a westward movement through Asia Minor. The new civilization, now known as Middle Helladic, which
was to prevail for four hundred years, may have been materially
poorer than that which it displaced ; but its pottery, especially
its plain wares, suggests an austere and controlled vigour.
The Mycenaean Civilization
The contact of this civilization with that of Crete produced
4


PREHISTORIC GREECE
great changes, and, from about 1600 B.C. onwards, palaces
veiy like the Minoan were being built for the nobles of the mainland; Minoan artists were decorating them and Minoan
craftsmen were supplying objects of luxury. Thus arose the civilization known as Mycenaean, in which Minoan imagina
tion was yoked to Helladic restraint and order. The fusion is
illustrated by the difference between the palaces of the main
land and those of Crete itself. The Minoan palace is a medley of rooms and corridors which seems to have grown rather than to have been planned. The Mycenaean palace, on the other
hand, gives the impression of having been planned in relation
to the megaron or hall, in which stood the hearth; the hall
was approached by a series of vestibules, broad stairways and
ramps leading directly from the main gateway in the circuit
wall. The reason for this arrangement was perhaps religious, the hearth having a sacred and symbolic character, and being
the focus of the life of the palace. Mycenaean palaces too, in
contrast to Minoan, were strongly fortified, the seats of a
quasi-feudal aristocracy, perhaps newly arrived and themselves
creating the demand for Minoan fashions. The first of these
overlords at Mycenae, the chief centre, were buried in the
rectangular Shaft Graves, but this type of royal burial was soon
replaced throughout southern and central Greece by the ' bee
hive' tombs, the most distinctive architectural monuments of the Mycenaeans. The profusion of gold vessels and ornaments
in the Shaft Graves suggests a somewhat barbaric taste, but mainland craftsmen learned rapidly from their Minoan masters,
and within 200 years of the first contacts with Crete there is
little to distinguish the two cultures, with some hints of a
mainland reaction upon Cnossus itself. Indeed the occurrence of Linear B script on the mainland, and the decipherment, in
1952 by Michael Ventris, of the Linear B texts of both areas as
ail early form of Greek, make it almost certain that by the 15th century B.C. Mycenaeans had conquered Cnossus; but whether it became subordinate to Mycenae or was ruled by some independent prince we cannot tell. Either way, the two


ANCIENT GREECE
centres seem to have become rivals, perhaps as competitors for
east Mediterranean trade; and when c. 1400 B.C. we find the Minoan palaces sacked, never fully to recover, this can hardly be attributed to any power but one from the mainland. For henceforth the Mycenaeans were dominant in the Aegean and expanded their overseas activity throughout the east Mediter
ranean, notably in Cyprus, important for its copper mines. For nearly two hundred years more the mainland palace sites at
Mycenae, Tiryns, and Pylus, with other minor centres, continued to prosper, though not, we may deduce, without internal
rivalries, early in the course of which Orchomenos and Thebes in central Greece had been eclipsed by Mycenae and the
Peloponnese.
The Trojan War
About 1200 B.C. an expedition in which most of the Mycenaean nobility took part was launched. Ostensibly it sought to
avenge the abduction of Helen, the wife of Menelaus, king of
Sparta, by Alexander (Paris) of Troy, but in reality it aimed at obtaining control of the commercial advantages which Troy at the entrance to the Dardanelles commanded as mistress of
the shortest crossing for trade between Europe and Asia. Here
was the key to the rich Black Sea trade. The expedition
achieved its immediate object, the capture of Troy, and left a profound impression on Greek folk memory; but, ultimately, it turned out to be a disaster, for the Mycenaean power never recovered from the exhaustion which the protracted campaign
had involved.
THE DORIAN INVASIONS, IIOO-80O B.C.
Almost as great an impression was left by another event or
series of events, which occurred within the 'third generation' after the Trojan war, and which completed the disintegration of the Mycenaean power. This event was the * coming of the


THE RISE OF THE GREEK CITY STATES
Dorians'. The Dorian invasion formed part of wider movements which were taking place beyond the northern frontiers
of Greece, and which had the effect of shifting southwards
Greek tribes already established in northern Greece, who, in
their turn, displaced others. Aided by weapons of iron, the
Dorians pushed through to the Peloponnese, dispossessed the Mycenaeans, destroyed their strongholds, and drove them overseas or into the mountains. This movement was long drawn
out, and the unsettled conditions of the time were unfavourable
to civiHzation.
The art of the *Dark Ages', as this period has not in
appropriately been named, is known chiefly from the gigantic painted vases which have been found associated with tombs or
sanctuaries. On the mainland of Greece, the last phase of
Minoan-Mycenaean vase-painting lingered sufficiently long
for some of its elements to be incorporated in the new style
which succeeded it. The vase-painters' repertoire now con
sisted almost exclusively of rectilinear designs, which, in Attica,
came to be symmetrically disposed with mathematical pre
cision over the whole surface of the vase. Votive offerings made
of bronze, which often take the form of figurines of men or
animals, have been found in sanctuaries, notably at Olympia.
The art of this period is known under the generic name of 'Geometric'.
2. THE RISE OF THE GREEK CITT STATES
THE GROWTH OF THE CITY STATE, AFTER 8oO B.C.
The years following the arrival of the Dorians, from 800 B.C. onwards, were marked by recovery after invasion and by the
rise of the city state. The beginnings of this characteristic
Greek institution date from the later days of Mycenaean rule,
when, mainly for reasons of security, the inhabitants of a
district moved from their scattered villages and took up their abode beneath the walls of the neighbouring castle. Thus, in


ANCIENT GREECE
Attica, these villages or groups of villages were originally independent, and it was only when the lords of the Acropolis
had obtained a certain pre-eminence that the villages sur
rendered their independence and merged their governments in a single government with its centre at Athens. By this arrangement, Athens became the head of a united state, which
included all Attica, and of which all the inhabitants of Attica
became citizens. The poHtical rights of citizenship could be
exercised at any time by going to Athens, and the duty of the
state to protect its citizens in time of danger was recognized by
allowing them to shelter within the walls. The other city states
developed on more or less similar lines, but the villages of
Boeotia were never welded into complete unity with the leading city of Thebes; and in the Peloponnese the city of Sparta
always remained dominant in relation to the other settlements,
whose inhabitants had no political rights in the Spartan state.
The years following the formation of the city state formed essentially a period of experiment in methods of government. Athens, for instance, soon passed from monarchy to oligarchy;
next, an attempt to estabhsh a * tyranny' (the Greek term for
the unconstitutional rule of an individual) in 630 B.C. failed;
then the rich industrialist, Solon, was given dictatorial power
to introduce constitutional and social reforms on democratic
lines (594 B.C.); from 561 to 528 B.C. the 'tyrant' Peisistratus
was in power, a period incidentally of great building and
artistic activity; finally in 507 B.C., the reforms of Cleisthenes
introduced a genuinely democratic constitution, in which the
Assembly of citizens had sovereign power. The other states,
after somewhat similar experiments, arrived at some kind of democratic government, with the exception of Sparta, which retained its peculiar dual kingship and constitution based on a
rigid military code, attributed to the semi-legendary law-giver Lycurgus.
Despite their democratic character, slavery was a common
institution in the Greek city states, especially in the fifth and
fourth centuries B.C. It was justified by the Greeks on the
8


THE RISE OF THE GREEK CITY STATES
grounds of necessity; without it, citizens would be unable to
devote their time to serving the state. The slaves were mostly
Thracians, Scythians and Asiatics, and only rarely Greeks.
For the most part they were either purchased or captured in war or piracy. They were employed in domestic work, in
agriculture, in industry (conditions in the silver mines of Laurium were very bad), and in public service as roadmen,
clerks and policemen. There have been very varied estimates
about the number of slaves in Greece, and it has even been
said that the slave population of fifth-century Athens out
numbered the freemen.
All the city states had this in common, that in relation to
their neighbours they were sovereign and independent. Between them, boundaries were fixed, war or peace declared, ambassadors exchanged, treaties and alliances made. All the apparatus, in fact, which has been employed throughout his
tory by large countries or empires in their mutual relations, is
here seen in full employment by tiny states, most of them
smaller than an English county. The process of world history,
exhibited in microcosm, gives a peculiar value to Greek history.
It has been said with truth that there is no history of ancient
Greece, only a history of separate Greek states. But despite this
political dismemberment and despite their local antagonisms,
the Greeks were spiritually one. The rise of the great sanctuaries
at Delphi and Olympia, the institution of periodic festivals and
games, the peculiar position of the Delphic oracle described as
the ' common hearth of Greece '—all these stand for the Greek
consciousness of a common heritage, and for a strong sense of
unity.
GREEK COLONIZATION, 77O-55O B.C.
Commercial enterprise went hand in hand with political experiment. This commercial development was earliest and greatest not in mainland Greece, but among the Ionian cities of western
Asia Minor, peopled, so tradition ran, by Greeks from Attica


ANCIENT GREECE
in the days of the Dorian invasions. These cities were aided in
their early development by contacts with the rich inland state
of Lydia. The leading city, Miletus, opened up the Black Sea trade. Phocca and Samos similarly opened up trade with the
western Mediterranean. A great movement of colonization
was thus inaugurated between 770 and 550 B.C. (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Greek settlements in the Mediterranean, c. 550 B.C.
Based on W. R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas, p. 12 (London, 1930). Note the absence of Greek settlements in north-west Africa -^id south-east
Spain—areas occupied by the Carthaginians.
Commerce, however, was not the only motive for founding
colonies. Discontented with conditions at home, especially in
those states where a defective land system made it difficult for
many to get a living, or impelled merely by a spirit of adven
ture, groups of citizens set sail to try their fortunes overseas. Once founded, these colonies remained politically independent
but in as close touch with their mother cities as circumstances
permitted ; they sent representatives to the Pan- Hellenic games,
and never lost consciousness of being Hellenic cities and outposts
of civilization among barbarians. Some of these cities have vanished, but many have survived; Syracuse, Taranto and Istanbul, for example, were originally Greek colonies.
As their trade expanded, Greek merchants were brought into relations witl> Phoenician merchants of the Syrian coast-towns,
10


THE RISE OF THE GREEK CITY STATES
who had for some centuries monopolized the trade of the
Mediterranean, and who already had trading stations in
Greece, on the coast of Asia Minor, in Sicily and North Africa and beyond. The result of Greek competition was to deprive
these Phoenicians of their Aegean and of some of their Sicilian
markets, and to confine them to the eastern and western comers of the Mediterranean and the African coast.
Trade was revolutionized in the late seventh century by the
invention of coinage, values having previously been estimated
in heads of cattle. This invention was due to the Lydians of Asia Minor, and was adopted from them by their neighbours,
the Ionian Greeks, from whom it passed to the other city states.
THE RISE OF HELLENIC CIVILIZATION
The early importance of Ionian Greece on the western shores
of Asia Minor was evident not only in colonizing activity but
also in artistic development. It was here, too, that the begin
nings of Greek literature and philosophy were to be found.
Some have called this early development 'the springtime of
Greece'; others have named it 'Greece before Greece'; and it has also been said that 'Greece was educated by Ionia'. This early development was at one time obscure, but it is now
evident that the inland state of Lydia in Asia Minor played
an important role in the evolution of the Ionian cities.
Vase painting
In the Ionian cities, in Cyprus and in Crete, the Minoan
Mycenaean civilization had not come so near to vanishing point as on the mainland; and now, quickened by contact with
the civiHzations of Egypt and the East, metal-working, vase
painting and other arts revived. From Cyprus and Crete the
products of these schools soon found their way to the mainland
where similar local schools experimented with the new elements, each in its own way. 'Geometric' art was revolu
tionized. For about a century and a half, that is from about 700 to 550 B.C., Corinthian vases dominated the market, and
II


ANCIENT GREECE
were exported in large quantities to Sicily and Italy, but around 550 the monopoly had passed to Athens, on account of
the superiority of her potters and painters, and the great period of Attic vase painting now began. Many of the pictures painted, or rather sketched, on these vases are masterpieces,
and exhibit the finest quaUties of Greek art. The cutting of
dies in the mints of many of the Greek city states also gave
Greek craftsmen an opportunity for the exercise of their
amazing skill and sense of beauty in the production of coins.
Sculpture
Among the earliest subjects of Greek sculpture, standing
figures, male and nude, are very frequent. They have been
found at various sanctuaries on the mainland and in some of
the islands, and were dedications, set up in the precincts of
temples, according to Greek religious custom. Terra-cotta
prototypes of these figures, dating from about 700 B.C., have
been located in Crete, where, indeed, Greek tradition itself
placed the origin of Greek sculpture. The life-size figures of
this type, in stone and later in marble, in the rest of Greece
and the islands, belong mostly to the sixth century and are
the products of local schools, but many show strong Ionian
influences.
Architectural sculpture during this period is represented in
the Acropolis Museum by some remarkable sculptured groups from the pediments (gables) of temples or shrines on the
Acropolis destroyed by the Persians. These figures are of
coarse local stone and, except for the flesh parts, are painted
in bright colours. Sculpture in relief was also popular, either
in the form of architectural ornament or of tombstones. Finds
in bronze and ivory also show considerable technical development.
Architecture
In this period was fixed the type of the Greek temple, based
12


THE RISE OF THE GREEK CITY STATES
on the Mycenaean megaron, to which, in course of time, more and more columns were added. The closed central part {sikos)
was divided into a vestibule, a hall {naos) in which was the
statue of the god, and a room at the back [opisthodomos)
reserved for the temple treasure or votive offerings. A row of
columns ran round the sikos. The altar at which offerings
were made stood outside the temple in the open air. The
temple and its altar stood in a walled enclosure (ieron), which
might include other temples with their altars, small shrines
and votive statues, as at Delphi, for instance, or Olympia.
Architecturally, Greek temples are of three * orders', the Doric,
the Ionic and the Corinthian, readily distinguished by dif
ferences in their columns (Fig. 3).
Literature
In this period, too, Greek literature, philosophy and science
had their beginnings, and these, as in the case of the visual arts,
must be looked for outside Greece. Homer, the earliest Greek poet and perhaps the greatest, is beheved to have composed
the Iliad in Ionia, and a later poet composed the Odyssey,
attributed also to Homer. These epics reflect contemporary
civilization to some degree, but they are concerned with events
which had occurred some four centuries earlier—the Trojan
war and its aftermath. The mature perfection of their tech
nique, and their elaborate rules and conventions, presuppose
a school of epic poetry with a long tradition behind it. This
school may, conceivably, have had its origin in the lays sung
by minstrels at the courts of Achaean nobles. The first authors
of the rare fragments of lyric poetry which have survived and
which show no less distinction in this more intimate class of
poetry were also the eastern Greeks of Asia Minor. Thales, the
first of the long line of brilliant Greek thinkers, who sought to
solve the problem of the universe, was a Greek of Miletus. Other Ionian thinkers were Anaximander, Pythagoras and Hecataeus.
13


Fig. 3. Architectural orders—Doric, Ionic and Corinthian l>)ric. based on the Parthenon, Athens; Ionic, from the Erechtheum, Athens; Corinthian, from the Temple of Olympian Zeus, Athens. Only a general impression of the chief characteristics of the three orders can be given on such small-scale drawings.
14


CLASSICAL GREECK
'?. CLASSICAL GREECE
THE PERSIAN WARS
Towards the end of the sixth century B.C. there came an event which was to have a profound influence on Greek history. In
order to understand this, it is necessary to consider the historical events which had formed a background to the high civihzation
of Ionia on the western shores of Asia Minor. The relations
between the Greek settlements there and their inland neigh
bours had been fairly good, at least until the seventh century,
when they fell under the control of the inland state of Lydia.
The Lydians, in turn, were defeated by the expanding state of
Persia in 546 B.C., and the Greek cities of Ionia automatically
became part of the vast Persian empire, now stretching to the
borders of India. But in 499 B.C., these Greek cities revolted,
and it was this revolt which was to have far-reaching effects on
their fellow-Greeks in the west, for Athens had assisted the
Ionian Greeks, and Darius, the Persian king, determined to
punish the insignificant little city which had defied him. He
sent a fleet of transports to the coast of Attica (490 B.C.) ; the troops disembarked in the bay of Marathon and were attacked by a small force of Athenians who had marched out from
Athens. After a short engagement, the Persians were routed
and hastily re-embarked for home. Ten years later, Xerxes, the
successor of Darius, dispatched another expedition. The army came by land through Macedonia, and the fleet sailed along
the coast. The army was halted at the pass of Thermopylae
by a small force of Spartans, whose heroic resistance was,
however, soon overcome, and the Persians pressed on to Attica.
They took Athens and destroyed all the buildings on the Acropolis. The Greek fleet, however, more than half of which
was Athenian, defeated the Persian fleet in the Bay of Salamis.
In the following year the Persian army, which had withdrawn
15


ANCIENT GREECE
to an entrenched camp on the north slope of Mt Cithaeron near the town of Plataea, was routed by a confederate Greek
army. Salamis and Plataea were decisive, and the Persian
menace was thus effectively removed. By this time, the pattern of Greece as it was to be during the
next three centuries had taken shape. The five city states, Athens, Sparta, Thebes, Argos and Corinth, had each acquired that individuality with which they were henceforth to be associated in later times. The subsequent history of Greece until the time of the Roman conquest was to be, in a great
measure, the history of the interrelations of these five city
states. Curiously enough, the Cretans, who had played such a great
part in the prehistoric period, scarcely appeared in the affairs
of classical Greece. Thus they took no part either in the
Persian or in the Peloponnesian wars, nor in any of the conflicts
of the Hellenistic period. The internal history of Crete during
these years, as Polybius (202-120 B.C.) has told us, was one
long series of bitter civil wars. The leading cities involved were
Cnossus, Gortyn and Cydonia, though, in alliance with these,
there were many other independent cities.
THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE AND THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
The prestige acquired by Athens, from her share in the defeat of the Persians, enabled her to found a maritime confederacy
with its headquarters and treasury in the island of Delos, and
later to transform the confederacy into an empire based largely
on tribute (Fig. 4). The treasury was shortly afterwards
removed to Athens 'for security' (454 B.C.), and some of the money was used to pay for the ambitious building programme of the statesman Pericles, now leader of the Athenian democracy. This high-handed action on the part of Athens provoked
hostility throughout Greece, and many of the city states pre
pared to range themselves on the side of Sparta, between
16


CLASSICAL GREECE
whom and Athens, it was clear, rival interests and 'ideology'
would inevitably lead to a collision.
In 43 1 B.C. the Peloponnesian war broke out, a war in which
most of the city states took part. The conflict has become more famous than perhaps its importance and the numbers engaged
Athens and Allies
Sparta an J Allies
200 Km.
Fig. 4. Greece in 431 B.C.
Based on: (i) J. B. Bury, A History of Greece, p. 396 (f^ondon, 1924); (2) W. R. Shepherd, Historical AtlaSy p. 17 (London, 1930). The areas of the non-tributary allies of Athens (e.g. Thessaly) are not completely shaded.
in it would seem to justify, because detailed description of it
has been left by a historian of genius, Thucydides, himself a contemporary and a participant. Moreover, the war is of
peculiar interest to a student of sea-power, because, as well as
exemplifying a struggle between rival political ideologies, it is a


ANCIENT GREECE
fine example on a small scale of how a war waged between a
maritime and a continental power tends to be conducted.
Pericles himself had a clear vision of the strategy involved.
To the Athenians he said: 'The visible field of action has two
parts, land and sea. In the whole of one of these you are
completely supreme. . . . Your naval resources are such that
your vessels may go where they please.' Of the Spartans he
wrote: *In a single battle the Peloponnesians and their allies
may be able to defy all Hellas, but they are incapacitated
from carrying on a war against a power different in character
from their own. . . . Familiarity with the sea they will not find
an easy acquisition.' As a maritime power with only a small
army, Athens was obliged to avoid large-scale engagements on
land, and to seek out those parts of the theatre of war where
her navy could most effectively damage Spartan interests by
detaching Spartan allies either by force or persuasion. This
accounts for the fighting off the western coasts of Greece and
in Sicily. Sparta, on the other hand, as a continental power
with only a weak navy, was obliged to direct her blows at the
continental possessions of Athens. Thus the invasion of Attica
and destruction of the crops right up to the walls of Athens
formed the routine part of each year's campaign, and there was much fighting in Thrace, where Athens had powerful
tributary allies. It is little wonder therefore that, with the
opponents fighting in different spheres, the struggle dragged
on for years in an indecisive fashion. The weakness of the Athenian position was that she depended for her food supply on imported corn, and should her ' hfe-Hne
'
be cut, she would be faced with starvation. The main source of her corn supply was south Russia, and Athenian interest in
the route to the Black Sea was correspondingly great; the islands of Scyros, Lemnos and Imbros marked the way. Whenever the Athenian Assembly met, the agenda always contained
the item * Respecting corn'. Thus ten times a year attention
was officially drawn to this vital question. At length in 405
B.C. Athenian power was crushed at its weakest spot. The


CLASSICAL GREECE
Athenian navy was caught by surprise and destroyed at Aegospotami in the Hellespont itself. The Spartans had suc
ceeded in fitting out an adequate fleet with the aid of Persia,
and it was by sheer good fortune that they had in Lysander
an exceptionally competent admiral. In the following year, Athens was blockaded and forced by famine to surrender.
Treachery also contributed to the Athenian downfall, and this
is not surprising, for there were in almost every city state dis
contented factions, prepared to assist the common enemy if,
by so doing, they could destroy their political rivals or upset
the existing constitution.
Despite Spartan predominance, Athens later succeeded,
amidst the complicated rivalries of the Greek city states, in
recovering something of her lost empire. It is interesting to note which three islands she bargained for and obtained
Scyros, Lemnos and Imbros. At last by the Peace of Callias
in 371 B.C. the two states agreed to recognize each other's predominance: that of Athens on sea and that of Sparta on
land. During the struggle, Corinth, at first dreading the development of Athenian trade, had been on the side of Sparta;
but after 395 B.C. the domineering attitude of Sparta forced
her into alliance with Athens.
But already new forces were rising in the Greek world. Thebes became prominent for a time, but by now the political
life of Greece was in great confusion. The mutual rivalries of
the city states were intense, and within each city the rivalry
of parties was so great that it often endangered the life of the
state. Into this confusion the new power of Macedonia was
soon to arrive.
THE CIVILIZATION OF THE FIFTH AND FOURTH CENTURIES B.C.
Much more important than the political history of Greece was
the Greek contribution to the art and thought of later times.
The intense life of the small communities of the Greek city
19


ANCIENT GREECE
'^^^fe^Ur
20


CLASSICAL GREECE
States brought artistic achievement to its highest point. The
architecture of fifth-century Athens reached a splendour unknown in Europe up till then and perhaps unsurpassed since;
and in this glorious setting the writers and thinkers of the city
produced works that have become the inspiration of later
times.
Architecture
The great period of classical Greece, the fifth and fourth
centuries B.C., was one of great building activity. During these
years the Greek temple reached and passed its zenith. In the
fifth century the Parthenon, the Erechtheum, and the Theseum were built at Athens; the great temple of Zeus at Olympia; the temples at Bassae, Sunium, and Aegina; and the round temple
at Delphi. To the fourth century B.C. belong the temple at
Tegea, and the new temple of Apollo at Delphi. Of secular
buildings, the Propylaea on the Acropolis were built in the fifth
century, and the monument of Lysicrates in the fourth. To
the fourth century also belong many of the theatres, of which
that of Epidaurus is the most noteworthy, and many of the
secular buildings attached to the great sanctuaries, as, for instance, the Leonidaeum at Olympia, and the Gymnasium at
Epidaurus. Some of the finest examples of fortifications, too,
were built in the fourth century—at Eleutherae, Messene and elsewhere.
Fig. 5. Reconstruction and plan of the Acropolis Based on drawings from (i) H. Luckenbach, Kurist und Geschichte, pp. 41-2 (Munich and Berlin, 1920); (2) Sir Banister Fletcher, History of Architecture, p. 77 (London, 1896, loth ed. 1938).
A Propylaea L Platform for votive statues B Pedestal of Agrippa M Roman temple C Pinacotheca N Parthenon D Roman cistern P Theatre of Dionysus E Clepsydra 9, Aesculapium F Caves of Apollo and Pan R Stoa of Eumenes G Statue of Athena Promachus s Odeum of Herodes Atticus H Sacred Olive tree T Mycenaean wall
J Erechtheum V Temple of Athena of Victory K Old Temple of Athens
21


ANCIENT GREECE
ATHENS «•- One ofUkHafeth.
cmt. B.C. HMtofV/kaofThtm
ittocla (nh-ancBLC)
Fig. 6. Athens
Based on plans in Les Guides Bleus—Grece, pp. ii and 20 (Paris, 1935). Classical Monuments: i, Acropolis; 2, Theatre of Dionysus; 3, Odeum of Herodes Atticus; 4, Tomb of Philopappos; 5, Pnyx; 6, Areopagus; 7, Portico of Attalus; 8, Portico of the Giants; 9, Roman Market; 10, Tower of the Winds; 1 1, Library of Hadrian; 12, Thescum Temple of Hephaestus ; 13, The Sacred Gate; 14, The Dipylon Gate; 15, Cemetery; 16, Temple of Olympian Zeus; 17, Arch of Hadrian
;
18, Monument of Lysicrates. Byzantine Churches: 19, The Old Cathedral (Ayios Elevtherios) ; 20, Church of Kapnikarea; 2 1, Churchof Our Lady of the Great Monastery; 22, Church of Saint Theodore. Modern Buildings: 23, University Library; 24, University; 25, Academy; 26, Royal Palace; 27, Zappion; 28, Stadium; 29, New Cathedral.
Sculpture
Outstanding examples of architectiiral sculpture of the fifth
century are the pediment groups from the temples of Aegina, Olympia and the Parthenon. Separated from each other in
point of time by intervals of about twenty years, they illustrate
stages in the process by which Greek sculptors were ridding themselves of certain conventions and coming to see 'things as
22


CLASSICAL GREECE
they are'. The Parthenon groups have been acclaimed as the
noblest achievement of Greek sculpture and their place is
assured, but some modern critics prefer the Olympian. Among
the famous statues of the fifth century were the colossal gold and ivory figures of Athena in the Parthenon, and of Zeus at' Olympia, both works of the Athenian sculptor Phidias. What
these were like can only be conjectured from small-scale copies
or representations on coins. But large-scale copies of works
by two other renowned sculptors, Myron and Polycletus, are
familiar in European collections, e.g. the Discus-thrower (Discobolus) of Myron, and the Athlete with a spear (Doryphorus)
of Polycletus.
Fourth-century architectural sculpture is well represented in
the National Museum at Athens by fragments from the pediment sculptures of the Temple of Athena at Tegea, and from the Temple of Asclepius at Epidaurus. The former are prob
ably by Scopas, the architect of the temple. Other great
sculptors of the period were Praxiteles and Lysippus who made
many bronze statues of athletes.
Literature
The great period of Greek architecture and sculpture was
also the great period of Greek literature and thought. The works of Homer had become known in mainland Greece in the
course of the sixth century, and their influence had been
immediate and decisive. But before that a school of epic poetry had existed on the mainland, though its origins are
obscure. The Boeotian, Hesiod, had used the same metre as Homer but without Homer's mastery. His theme, too, was not war and adventure, but husbandry and the sorrows of the peasant. The influence of Homer is plain, however, in the
great lyric odes of Pindar {c, 522-450 B.C.), composed in honour of victories in the Olympic and other games, and
intended to be recited in the cities from which the victors came.
Attic drama had its remote origins in the religious songs and
23


ANCIENT GREECE
dances performed at the temples of gods or the tombs of heroes,
and this rehgious character was never lost; so that when these primitive songs and dances had developed into plays, per
formed in theatres before large audiences, the plots were still
concerned with the gods and heroes of mythology, and, as
such, were famiUar to the audience. Interest was thus not so
much in the plot as in the author's handhng of it. The plays were produced in daylight, without elaborate costumes or
scenery, before highly critical and inteUigent spectators. The
great age of Greek tragedy was the fifth century, and the three
great tragedians, Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, had no
successors. Aristophanes, the greatest of the comic dramatists,
belongs also to this age.
Prose of the fifth century is represented by Herodotus and
Thucydides. Both were historians, the former a naive but
entertaining collector of information, in which fact and fable
were indiscriminately mixed ; the latter endowed with a critical
sense, a philosophic outlook, great powers of description, and
a fine style. When it is realized that this kind of descriptive
writing was in its infancy, that no official reports were available,
and that his material had to be laboriously collected by word of mouth, Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War must be regarded as a work of genius.
Literary activity of the fourth century reflects the contem
porary spirit of inquiry in numerous works of philosophy and science, and in technical treatises. Oratory was brought to a
fine art, and speeches for delivery either in the Assembly or in
the law courts were prepared with the same elaborate care as poems. Many of the speeches of Demosthenes, the protagonist of Greek independence against the kings of Macedonia, have been preserved and have the permanent value of great literature.
In this age of inquiry the same religious and social problems which vex the modern mind were being discussed with the utmost freedom. Freedom was, however, held to have gone
too far in the case of Socrates, whose perpetual questioning of
24


MACEDONIAN AND HELLENISTIC GREECE
everything in heaven and on earth was considered by the orthodox to be sapping the foundations of the state. He was tried and condemned to death in 399 B.C. His work was continued by his disciples who never forgave democracy for
the treatment of their master, so that the ideal constitution
envisaged by the greatest of them, the philosopher Plato, was
almost an absolutism on the Spartan model. Aristotle, the
other great figure in Greek philosophy, was born in 384 B.C.
After having been tutor to Alexander the Great, he settled in Athens in 335 B.C. where he founded the Lyceum, which soon supplanted Plato's institution, the Academy. His works on the
science of ethics, politics and metaphysics place him among
the greatest thinkers of all time.
4, MACEDONIAN AND HELLENISTIC GREECE
THE EMPIRE OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT
Macedonia had hitherto played but a small part in Greek affairs. It had lagged behind the development of southern
Greece, but, amidst the confused conditions in the middle of
the fourth century, the rising state of Philip of Macedon (359336 B.C.) had decided advantages. It was unexhausted by long
wars and it possessed natural resources, in cereals, gold and
timber, greater than those of any of the city states to the south.
Under Philip the northern area was consolidated into a strong
unit that extended into Thessaly, and the confused politics and
divisions of the south provided ample opportunity for inter
ference. At length, at the battle of Chaeronea (338 B.C.),
Philip defeated an army of Athenians, Thebans and others,
induced to join together by the new threat of this northern
power. It was hatred of Philip that inspired the famous
* Philippics' of Demosthenes. But in the following year all the Greek states, with the exception of Sparta, had answered
an invitation to send representatives to a Pan-Hellenic Con
gress under Philip's presidency at Corinth. In 336 b.g. Philip
3 25 wo


ANCIENT GREECE
was assassinated, and his son Alexander succeeded him. It was this Alexander who was to become 'the Great' by turning against Asia and conquering what seemed almost the whole
world, or at any rate that part of it which mattered.
That the Greeks should attempt an attack on the .vast Persian empire and succeed might seem an almost impossible feat, unless the state of the Greek world and of the Persian empire is remembered. Among the Greeks the idea of an attack on Persia had long been current. During the fourth century there had grown up the idea that any dominant power
Fig. 7. The empire of Alexander, 323 b.c.
Based on W. R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas, pp. 18-19 (London, 1930). The route of Alexander's march is indicated by a heavy line.
in Hellas would be obliged by self-interest and by racial duty
to turn its arms against Asia, to rescue the Ionian Greeks of Asia Minor, and to conquer an empire. Many Greek writers had dwelt upon the theme. Then, in the second place, the
condition of the Persian empire invited an aggressor. The
king, no longer powerful, was by now little more than a
titular lord over ever-rebelling provinces. Treachery or lack
of resources had brought one rebel after another to disaster, but nn empire whose high officers dared such adventures was
clearly nearing its death. The Persians, too, had become involved more than once in the politics of the Aegean world,
26


MACEDONIAN AND HELLENISTIC GREECE
and there had been a number of invasions of Asia Minor bySpartan forces. Philip of Macedon had been planning an
invasion, and had announced his design at the Congress of
Corinth in 337 B.C. His son Alexander now inherited the idea
and, two years after the death of his father, he crossed into
Asia Minor with a force of about 35,000 infantry and 4,500
cavalry.
The account of the victorious march of Alexander to Egypt
and right across Persia over the Khyber Pass to India itself
reads like a legend (Fig. 7). In the midst of his work of
organization, and while planning new conquests, he contracted
a fever and died at Babylon in 323 B.C. The great empire he had created broke up with his death, but his work was far from
being transitory in character. He had carried the seeds of Greek culture to the East. The Greek language and Greek
ideas were spread right over the Near East, and became an
important factor in the political and religious history of these
lands. As for Alexander himself, his name passed into the
legendary cycles of medieval Europe.
POLITICAL HISTORY AFTER THE DEATH OF ALEXANDER, 323-I46 B.C.
Several states arose upon the ruins of Alexander's empire. The
Ptolemies ruled in Egypt ; the Seleucids in Syria and for a time
in Persia itself. Various smaller states arose in Asia Minor. In Greece itself, Macedonia remained a powerful kingdom in the north, but was not again to dominate the world; while in the
south, the Greek city states acquired varying degrees of freedom.
These years were characterized by the formation of coaUtions
or ' leagues ' among the Greek states, of which the purpose was
to offer a united front against the interference of Macedonia.
This united front was seldom achieved, and the leagues even
took to fighting one another. In the course of the rather con
fused history of the period, Athens was twice occupied by
Macedonian troops, once in the year after Alexander's death
and again in 262 B.C. when she took the wrong side in one ol'
27


ANCIENT GREECE
the numerous disputes for the Macedonian throne. An out
standing event of this period was the appearance before Delphi of a band of Gauls, a detachment from the main body which was on the move towards Asia Minor. They were thrown back by the Aetolians, now the official guardians of the sanctuary.
The Aetolian cities, hitherto some of the most backward and least heard-of in Greece, had formed themselves into a league after the death of Alexander, and were prominent in Greek
affairs throughout the third century. In 220 B.C. they went to war with the Achaean League, a coaUtion founded forty years eadier, which had defended Greece against Macedonia, but which was now supported by Macedonia against the Aetolians.
By this time, however, events in the west were casting their shadow over Greece, and the war was brought to an end in
217 B.C.
During the Second Punic War between Rome and Carthage, Philip V of Macedonia allied himself with Hannibal (215 B.C.),
and, to offset this, the Romans secured the alliance of the
Aetolians and Spartans. The Romans, who had, some years
before, been thanked by the Aetolians and Achaean leagues
for clearing the Illyrian Sea of pirates, thus acquired a firmer
footing in Greece. In the second of the three Macedonian
Wars which followed, Philip was defeated (197 B.C.), and the
victorious Roman consul Flamininus in a moving scene at the
Isthmian Games of 196 B.C. declared Rome the * protector of Greek freedom'.
The third Macedonian War ended in the defeat of Philip's
son and successor, Perseus, at the battle of Pydna (168 B.C.)
and the dissolution of the Macedonian empire. Anti-Roman elements continued to be active both in Macedonia and Greece, so that in 148 B.C. the Romans made Macedonia a Roman province, and Sparta, Rome's ally, gave the Romans a pretext for suppressing the Achaean League and adding Greece to her empire as a dependency of Macedonia (146 B.C.). Crete,
however, was not subdued until 67 b.g. and only then after a campaign of three years.
28


MACEDONIAN AND HELLENISTIC GREECE
HELLENISTIC CIVILIZATION
Architecture
Greek building activity in this period was largely in the lands
to which Hellenism had spread, following the wake of Alex
ander's conquests. In Eg\pt, Syria and Asia Minor, Greek
architects were busy laying out new cities and erecting secular
and religious buildings which Greek sculptors were embellish
ing. The most impressive monuments of the Hellenistic Age,
as this period is called, is the great altar of Zeus at Pergamum
in Asia Minor, adorned with sculpture in the rather florid style
characteristic of the Pergamene school. In Greece itself, a
number of monumental secular buildings were erected, such as
the Portico of Attains and the 'Tower of the Winds' at Athens
and the Portico of Echo and the Palaestra at Olympia. At
Delos, too, there are many buildings of this period, and
domestic architecture is represented there as nowhere else.
The finest mosaic of the period is that recently discovered in
the 'Roman Villa' at Corinth. Fortifications continued to be
built, and the hills of Aetolia are still crowned with walls,
towers and gates recalling the days of the Aetolian League. At Oeniadae, in Acarnania, the remarkable harbour-works,
still to be seen, were constructed by Philip V of Macedonia in
219 B.C.
Sculpture
The sculpture of the Hellenistic Age exhibits the characteristics
of an art that has passed its best period, but is, nevertheless,
full of life and vigour, and there was no falling oflf in technical
skill. The chief schools of sculpture were those of Pergamum, Rhodes and Ephesus; in Greece itself, little was produced. Well-known works of this period are the Aphrodite of Melos,
the Apollo Belvedere (known only from copies), the Dying
29


ANCIENT GREECE
Gaul, and the * Victory', all of Samothrace. Portraits were
extremely popular and there was a great demand for busts of
famous persons, living and dead, to adorn public buildings,
libraries and the like.
Literature
The schools of philosophy at Athens remained open, but intellectual pre-eminence passed to Alexandria. Here, though
the creative genius which had characterized Attic writers of
the fifth and fourth centuries was spent, the Attic literary
tradition was carried on by scholars and men of learning
attracted by the great library. Historians, grammarians, commentators and scientists predominated, and even poetry ac
quired a flavour of learning. Epicurus (341-270 B.C.) taught
at Athens during the earlier part of the period. Poets also
cultivated an artificial but often charming simplicity, and the
pastoral idylls of Theocritus and many epigrams (a form of poetry which became popular at this time) are among the most
beautiful things in Greek literature. Epic poetry, also, was
revived with some success.
5. ROMAN GREECE
GRAECO-ROMAN POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
As part of the Roman state, Greece entered upon a period of peace such as she had not before known in her history. The Romans treated the Greeks in a generous manner, and the Pax Romana was regarded by most Greeks as a reUef from the confusion of the Hellenistic period. As the contemporary historian Polybius wrote, Tf we had not perished quickly, we
30


ROMAN GREECE
should not have been saved'. The Achaean League was dissolved and, fearing a competitor, the Romans destroyed the
city of Corinth. For administrative purposes, the Greek states were subordinated to the Roman province of Macedonia, but Athens and Sparta were given special privileges. The quiet of the new Roman province was disturbed, however, when in 88 B.C. Athens and some other cities unwisely allied themselves with Mithridates, king of Pontus in Asia Minor, who was in conflict with Rome. For her share in the war, Athens was
sacked by the Roman general Sulla, and the walls of the
Piraeus were levelled.
During the last decades of the Roman republic (up to 27
B.C.), Greece was scarcely affected by the wider events of
Roman policy, yet two civil wars were fought out on Greek
soil or in Greek waters, and many Greeks took sides in the conflicts. The struggle between Caesar and Pompey was
decided at Pharsalus in Thessaly in 48 B.C., and although the
Greeks had supplied Pompey with a fleet, the victorious Caesar
treated them leniently; individual cities, however, received
severe punishment. Greece also became involved in the struggle between Mark Antony and Octavian until the great naval victory of Actium (31 B.C.) in which Octavian was triumphant. The geographer Strabo, who was in Greece two
years later, has left a melancholy account of the effects of civil
war upon the countryside; large tracts of country remained
desolate and many notable cities stood in ruins.
Under the Roman emperors, from Augustus (Octavian) on
wards, Greece was specially favoured. Augustus himself separated Greece from Macedonia and formed it into the separate province of Achaea with its capital at Corinth which had been refounded in 44 B.C. Nero thought a Greek audience was *the only one worthy of himself and his accomplishments'.
The results of the liberality of Hadrian are still to be seen at
Athens (see p. 33). Marcus Aurelius, too, found time to visit
Athens where he established a university in a.d. 176. Large
numbers of Romans were attracted to the country— to visit
31


ANCIENT GREECE
its sanctuaries, to admire its artistic treasures, and to study at
Athens. In return, Greek culture was having considerable influence upon Roman thought and writing; indeed many
Romans were complaining that Rome itself was becoming ' a Greek city'. Captive Greece was taking her barbarian captors captive. But already a new ingredient was being added to the
combined civilizations of Greece and Rome, for about the year A.D. 54 St Paul had visited Athens and Corinth. It was at
Corinth that the two Epistles to the Thessalonians were written.
Subsequently, the Episdes to the Corinthians show something
of the life of the most flourishing city of Roman Greece. Some
believed, but for long the new faith made litde progress, and
the beginnings of the Christian Church were smaU. A picture of the Greek countryside under the Roman empire
is given in the famous 'Description of Greece' written by
Pausanias about the years a.d. 160-80. Compared with
Strabo's time, the land was much more prosperous, but a lot
of it was still in a desolate state, and the economic life of the
country was not as flourishing as its intellectual and social
pre-eminence might imply. It is true that new luxury industries
(marble, textiles, table delicacies) were springing up to meet
the needs of Rome, but the only cities with a really flourishing trade were Corinth and Patras. The Roman peace was broken in a.d. i 75 by the Costoboci,
a northern tribe who raided into central Greece. They were
defeated by the local militia, and retired beyond the Roman
frontier. This was the first hint of northern interference that
was to prove so important a factor in later Greek history. A
more serious invasion was that of the Goths, They appeared on the frontier about a.d. 250, and the Emperor Valerian
caused the walls of Athens to be rebuilt and other fortifications
to be put across the Isthmus. But these precautions did not save Athens, for the Goths captured and pillaged the city in
a.d. 267. Ultimately they were repulsed and retired beyond the Danube, and Greece was spared another Gothic invasion
for over a century (see p. 37).
32


ROMAN GREECE
GRAECO-ROMAN CIVILIZATION
Architecture
The Graeco-Roman style which now came into being was fundamentally Greek, but a certain loss of fineness may have been due to the Roman element or to an inherent tendency
already perceptible in Hellenistic work. However that may be,
the principal cities and sanctuaries of Greece now received
magnificent additions in the way of monuments and public
buildings in this style. Such are almost all the buildings of
Corinth. The damage and loss inflicted by Mummius, Sulla
and Nero were to some extent offset by the enlightened
liberality of the Emperor Hadrian (a.d. 117-38), who showed his deep interest in Greece by repairing and adding to old
buildings, and erecting new ones. He completed the magni
ficent temple of Zeus at Athens, built the library, and also the
arch known by his name; and, in more questionable taste, he
erected many statues of himself at Olympia and other places.
Another individual who has left memorials of his liberality was
Herodes Atticus, a rich citizen of Marathon (a.d. i 01-177). At Athens he built the Odeum, still named after him; at
Corinth he enlarged and beautified the Peirene fountain and built the Odeum; at Olympia he built an aqueduct to take
water into the sacred enclosure. At Olympia, too, a palace and a triumphal arch were built by the Emperor Nero.
Sculpture
After the sack of Corinth, hundreds of works of Greek art,
especially statues, were shipped to Rome ; Sulla and the Emperor
Nero carried off more. When the demand for originals could
no longer be satisfied, Greek sculptors produced copies to take
their place, and it is from these copies that our conception of
much of Greek sculpture is formed. Greek sculptors also made
33


ANCIENT GREECE
portrait busts for Roman families. The extreme realism of these portraits was no doubt demanded by Roman patrons, who wanted a portrait to be before all things a likeness, but
it had been anticipated in portraits of the Hellenistic Age.
Literature
Greek had now become a cosmopolitan language; educated
Romans made a point of learning it, and Greek slaves, imported to Rome, introduced a knowledge of it into Roman famihes. Thus it came to have a profound influence upon
Latin literature. The numerous treatises on scientific subjects,
medicine, philosophy and the like, which Greek scholars con
tinued to produce, created a vocabulary of abstract terms
which became international and are still in use. The two out
standing historians of the period were Polybius (202-120 B.C.),
whose History was originally designed to record the dramatic rise of Roman supremacy in the Mediterranean, and Plutarch
(a.d. 46-120), famous for his Lives, Christianity directed
Greek thought into new channels, and, in the language of the
Greek philosophers, theologians found ready to hand an instru
ment well adapted to express the fine distinctions which the
definition of Christian doctrine required.


CHAPTER II
MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
/. BYZANTINE GREECE
THE EASTERN ROMAN EMPIRE
The Roman emperors had for some time felt the need of a
new administrative centre when in a.d. 285 the empire was
divided into two by Diocletian—an eastern and a western half.
Diocletian took up his residence in the east, at Nicomedia near the Sea of Marmora, where he could keep in close touch with
the critical frontiers on the Danube and the Tigris, and where
oriental ideas of sovereignty could be developed unhampered
by the republican traditions of Rome itself. Early in the next
century, Constantine reunited the two halves, but fixed the
capital in the east, and between 328 and 330 he enlarged the old town of Byzantium to form the city of 'New Rome which
is Constantinople'. Soon the whole empire was divided again,
and what had started as an administrative partition became
after 395 a more fundamental separation.
The fates of the two empires in east and west respectively
were very different. Whereas the western empire collapsed
under the strain of the Barbarian invasions, the Roman empire
in the east continued for centuries as a permanent factor amidst the changing political geography of Europe and the Near East.
The wealth of the eastern provinces, the strategic position of
the capital, and the intelligent policy of successive emperors,
explain this contrast between east and west, and account for
the survival of the eastern provinces as an imperial entity.
The eastern or Byzantine empire was thus a continuous
development of the Roman empire, and was characterized by
the fusion of two traditions—Greek and Roman. In language,
literature and theology, Greek influence was paramount. In
35


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
law, diplomacy and military tradition, the Roman tradition
was important. The administrative reorganization of Diocletian and Constantine was but part of wider changes that were transforming
the old pagan empire of Rome into the medieval Christian
empire called Byzantine. The religious attitude of Constantine
had been as momentous as his imperial policy. Christianity
now became the recognized religion of the empire. Soon, the
minor bishopric of Byzantium became the patriarchate of
Constantinople, and a Council in 381 gave it first place in the
Eastern Church, directly after the see of Rome. It had to face
the opposition of the older patriarchates of Antioch, Alexandria
and Jerusalem until these were engulfed in the advancing tide
of Islam during the seventh century. There remained the problem of relations with Rome, and, after a chequered his
tory, varied by schisms and heresies, the final break came in
1054, when the two great leaders of the Christian Church put
each other under a ban.
The separation of the eastern and western empires had meant
that Greek interests were henceforward identified with those
of the Byzantine emperors. This was in some senses a gain,
in others a loss. On the one hand, Greek became the language of the court, and Greek culture became an important element
in Byzantine civilization. On the other hand, the imperial
city grew at the expense of Greece; Constantinople, rather than Athens, became the important factor in Greek life, and Greece
became increasingly provincial. The Greeks themselves now
became known not as 'Hellenes' but as 'Romaioi'. It was
Justinian too, who, in 529, virtually abolished the University of Athens, the stronghold of pagan philosophy. Christianity was now spread throughout the whole of Greece, save in the mountain regions of Laconia, which did not become Christian until well into the ninth century.
THE DANUBE FRONTIER
The Byzantine emperors had continually to face two groups of
36


BYZANTINE GREECE
frontier problems, to the east and north respectively (Fig. 8). The former were concerned with the attacks of the Moslems
upon the Asiatic provinces of the empire ; but it was not until
the rise of the Ottoman Turks in the fourteenth century that the Greek lands themselves were threatened by this eastern
peril. The other frontier problems were caused by the restless tribes beyond the Danube, and Greece was affected by these
from an early date.
Extent of the Byzantine Empire
ui 962 ^1 in 1190
SOO Km.
Fig. 8. The Byzantine Empire, a.d. 962-1190
Based on R. L. Poole, Historical Atlas of Modern Europe, plates 5 and 6 (Oxford, 1902). This shows the reaction of the Byzantine frontiers to attacks from Europe and Asia.
The strength of the empire lay in its seaward margins. Compare, for example, with Fig. 10.
This Danube frontier was an old problem that had frequently confronted the Roman emperors. In the third century some Goths ^ad raided as far as Athens (see p. 32). These newcomers proved to be but a vanguard. Towards the end of the fourth century, the Visigoths (the western branch of the Goths),
37


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
fearing the Huns of the steppelands behind them, had defeated the imperial generals, and had poured into peninsular Greece
(378-95). But their destiny lay in the west, and, before the
end of the century, they had moved northwards, and so into Italy; by 412 they had reached Spain. The Huns themselves raided the empire up to the neighbourhood of Constantinople
itself more than once in the 440's, and Ostrogoths also threat
ened the city more than once in the 480' s before they left for
Italy in 488. But neither in the fourth nor fifth centuries was
there any large-scale settlement of northerners on the lands of
the empire. These raids of Goths and Huns were only a prelude to far greater movements of peoples from beyond the river. Indeed,
one of the most important factors in the history of Greece from the sixth to the twelfth century was the complete breakdown
of the Danube frontier. The ethnography of the northerners that came swarming southwards is not always clear. The
Byzantine chroniclers speak of Slavs, Antae (also Slavs), Bul
gars, Huns (by whom they may have meant Bulgars), Avars, Cumans and Patzinaks; the vague names of 'Getae' and
' Scythians ' are also mentioned. Of these, the two peoples that
had direct effect upon the fortunes of medieval Greece were
the Slavs and the Bulgars.
THE SLAVS
Of all the northerners the Slavs were the most important to Greece. Expanding from their homeland in the Pripet marshes,
the Slavs reached the lands immediately to the north of the
Danube by, at latest, the third century^, but there is no sure
evidence that they had penetrated (at any rate in considerable
numbers) southwards into the peninsula before the end of the fifth century. Early in the sixth century their raids became
frequent, and Macedonia, Thessaly and Epirus were repeatedly
devastated; and with the reign of Justinian (527-65), condi
tions along the Danube deteriorated. Despite the fierce re
sistance put up by the imperial troops, hordes of Slavs and
38


BYZANTINE GREECE
Bulgars crossed the river almost every year to raid and loot.
In 540, they raided Greece as far south as the Isthmus of
Corinth, and Justinian was forced to organize defensive measures on a large scale. Large numbers of new forts were set up
and old ones were strengthened. From the river Sava to the
Black Sea some eighty castles were built or restored, and
behind these some hundreds of fortified positions provided a
'defence in depth'. Despite these efforts, the raids continued.
It is unlikely that they led to permanent settlements on any
large scale, but their influence upon the countryside was very
marked. The historian Procopius, who lived during the first
half of the sixth century, compared the ravaged lands of Greece
to the 'Scythian deserts', and he described how the inhabitants
fled into the mountains and the forests for safety.
In the latter part of the sixth century, after the death of
Justinian, the Slav raids grew in intensity, and about the year
580 an army of some 100,000 'Slavonians' poured into Thrace
and Illyricum. A contemporary chronicler, John of Ephesus,
tells of the horror that now fell upon the countryside and
it is from this time that we must date the arrival of Slav
settlers in considerable numbers into Greece. Raiding had
passed definitely into settlement. To the north, the lands of
what is now Yugoslavia were likewise open to the penetration
of other Slav peoples (Slovenes, Croats and Serbs) during the
first half of the seventh century.
The widespread incursions of the Slavs were reinforced by
those of the Avars, a nomad group prominent in the northern
lands during the sixth and early seventh centuries. Moreover,
in the early years of the seventh century, the main effort of the Byzantine empire was engaged in a struggle with the Persians,
and the European provinces were thus left exposed. The Byzantine diplomats spoke of lands occupied by the Slavs in Thrace, Macedonia and Greece as grants made through the
generosity of the emperor; the frontier might therefore be
placed either at the Danube or at no great distance from the
Aegean Sea according to the imperial or the Slav point of view.
39


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
Some dates stand out. In 597, and again in 609, Salonica,
protected by its strong walls and by its Saint Demetrius, had
managed to withstand the i^ssault of the surrounding Slav
tribes in Macedonia. In 623, Slavs were raiding Crete. In
626, a united horde of Avars, Slavs and Bulgars were besieging
Constantinople, not for the first time, but they failed to take the city. The Avar power ceased to be important after about 630, but Slav pressure southwards continued. Thus in 674 a
body of Slavs seized the opportunity of an Arab siege of
Constantinople to settle in the rich plain of Thessaly, where the
place-name of Velestinon still recalls the name of one of their
tribes (the Velegezetes).
It is difficult to form a clear picture of the extent of Slav
settlement in Greece during these years, and the subject has
aroused much controversy. A contemporary encyclopedist,
Isidore of Seville {d, 639), summed up the situation by saying
that ' the Slavs took Greece from the Romans ', but it is certain
that the large towns, at any rate, did not fall to the Slavs. Athens was still in Greek hands, nor, wrote J. B. Bury, ' had
the country yet become Slavised, as it is said to have become
in the following century'.^ There is little evidence about the
relations of the immigrant Slavs and the Greeks at this time,
but it seems likely that the newcomers were easily converted
to Christianity and that they lived more or less under the suzerainty of the Byzantine emperor.
It is not surprising that, in view of these incursions, the command of the imperial army in Greece was an important
office. The system of themes, or districts under military organization (^^^ma= regiment), that had been found necessary to meet the Persian and Arab wars of the seventh century, was now extended under the Emperor Leo III (717-40) from Asia to Europe. The number of themes varied, but by the tenth century they comprised about thirty, of which eight covered what is now Greece and the Aegean islands.
* J. B. Bury, A History of the Later Roman Empire, A.D. jg^ to 800, vol. 1 1, p. 280
(London, 1889).
40


BYZANTINE GREECE
It was during the eighth century that Slav influence became
greatest in Greece. In 746 a great plague breaking out in the Near East reached Monemvasia in the Peloponnese, and, from there, spread over the whole empire. The population of
Greece suffered heavily, and was then further reduced by the migration of many skilled workmen to Constantinople ; whole
families left both the mainland and the islands. Empty districts
were thus left free to be colonized by the Slavs who now pressed
southwards in greater numbers than ever. In the words of the
imperial historian, Constantine Porphyrogenitus, *all the open
country was Slavonized and became barbarous, when the plague was devouring the whole world'. According to W.
Miller,^ this is the real explanation of the Slav colonization of
Greece. Whatever be the truth, the Slavs had by now certainly spread widely over the Greek lands. So widespread were their
setdements that in the eighth century the southern Balkan lands and mainland Greece were known as 'Sclavinia' (Fig. 9).
The central government at Constantinople, alarmed at this
influx, dispatched the general Staurakios to deal with the new
comers, and they were reduced and forced to pay tribute (783).
But early in the following century, when the imperial forces
were being threatened by Saracens and Bulgars, the Slavs of
the Peloponnese rose in revolt, and, conspiring with the Sara
cens, they attacked the fortress of Patras (807). But the siege
was raised, and, after sorii<5 time, the rebellion was put down.
There was a fresh rising in the Peloponnese in the year 841-2,
which was again suppressed, and military colonists were
established here as in northern Greece. Special terms were made with two Slav tribes in the south near Mount Taygetos

the Milings and the Ezerites, who agreed to pay tribute. These
two tribes were in rebellion again in the middle of the tenth century, and, although they were once more reduced to obedience, it is apparent that they still retained a large measure of independence.
The military reduction of the Slavs prepared the way for
^Essays on the Latin Orient, p. 39 (Cambridge, 192 1).
4 41


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
their assimilation, and in this work the Church played a great part. With the foundation of monasteries and churches went
on the active work of assimilation. The Orthodox religion and the Greek language regained the ground they had lost, and by the tenth century many people of Slav descent were occupying
M)
25 Km.
Fig. 9, The Balkan Peninsula about a.d. 800
Based on R. L. Poole, Historical Atlas of Modem Europe, plate 4 (Oxford, igoii).
This map shows dominant political groupings rather than ethnic distributions
;
thus Slavs were also to be found in the areas marked as 'Avars' and 'Bulgars'. For
the Byzantine frontier against the Slavs, see p. 39.
42


BYZANTINE GREECE
high positions in the empire. But even in the thirteenth century,
some Slav tribes still lived apart from the Greeks and main
tained their old customs in the mountainous districts of Elis
and Arcadia. The Milings remained separate longest, possibly
even until the eve of the Ottoman conquest.
The Slavs have left evidence of their settlement in the numerous Slavonic place-names that are to be found in Greece today. Over much of the Peloponnese a Slavonic place-name
can be found every three or four miles.
THE BULGARS
The Bulgars, like the Huns and the Avars before them, were
peoples from the Asiatic steppes who during the sixth century were to be found in the country north of the Black Sea. Their
early history in Europe is obscure, but it seems fairly certain
that they took part in some of the attacks of the Slavs and the
Avars against Salonica and Constantinople during the sixth
and seventh centuries. Towards the end of the seventh century,
the main body moved southwards and, in 679, established themselves between the Danube and the Balkan Mountains.
The river definitely ceased to mark the northern frontier of
the Byzantine empire. South of the Danube, the newcomers found the land already peopled with Slavs, and the new state that came into being
was the result of fusion between Bulgars and Slavs. The two
centuries that followed 679 were marked by intermittent war
fare with the Byzantine emperors. In order to check the grovvth of the Slav and Bulgar population in Thrace and Macedonia,
the emperors established Syrian and Armenian colonists there
in the eighth and ninth centuries. Later emperors followed the
same policy, and from the eleventh to the thirteenth century
colonies of Uzes, Patzinaks and Cumans from the lands to the north of the Black Sea were introduced.
/Uthough continually raiding the empire, the Bulgars were
culturally its children, and in 865 they officially adopted the
43


^o) >

\J X,,^ y\
\y '• i;.v^i C' c
'•J\ .:.;;^vv^
\ ,r„.^^,^p
A.D. 1214 ^:^"n-_ A.D. I2b5
44


BYZANTINE GREECE
Greek form of Christianity. Under Simeon the Great (893
927) the Bulgar state greatly extended its frontiers westward over the Slavs of Serbia and southward into northern Greece
(Fig. 10). In Macedonia and in Epirus, the empire was able to keep only the coastlands, and Bulgar raids penetrated even
as far south as the Isthmus. The new Bulgarian realm soon
broke into two owing to revolt in the western Serb provinces.
In 972, eastern Bulgaria came to an end, and by 1018 the now independent western unit had also been recovered by the
empire. From 1018 to 1186, the Bulgars ceased to form a separate state. The second Bulgarian empire, which came into
existence as the result of revolt of Bulgars and Vlachs, once
more included a part of northern Greece within its territory,
but it lasted only for a short time (i 186-1258), and was ultimately succeeded by Serb domination in the Balkan penin
sula (Fig. 11).
^
OTTOMAN
TURKS.
'•/cs^r
AJ IN 7,^
A.D. 1340 '^T--^ '^
.HUNGARY
TAj/eS •«.> TURKS
A.D.1355
Fig. II. The Balkan Peninsula, a.d. 1340-55
Based on: (i) E. A. Freeman, Atlas to the Historical Geography of Europe, maps 40 and 41 (London, 1903) ; (2) W. R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas, p. 89 (London, 1930).
The area included in the Byzantine empire is stippled. Z) = Durazzo; /?=Ragusa.
Fig. 10. The Balkan Peninsula, a.d. 910-1265
Based on: (i) E. A. Freeman, Atlas to the Historical Geography of Europe, maps 34-37
(London, 1903); (2) W. Miller, The Latins in the Levant, p. 81 (London, 1908); (3)
W. R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas, pp. 59, 67, 89 (London, 1930).
The area included in the Byzantine empire is stippled. C = Croatia ; Z^ = Durazzo;
//= Hungary; /^ = Ragusa.
45


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
Although Macedonia and the lands around had passed from Bulgar control, Bulgars continued to be an important element in the population of the area. Unlike the Slavs of peninsular
Greece, the Bulgars and Slavs of these areas were not assimi
lated by the Greeks, and they remained distinct groups.
Linguistically separate from the Greeks, they were to form a
comphcating factor in the 'Macedonian problem' of later
times.
THE VLAGHS
Apart from the Slavs and the Bulgars, another non-Greek people emerge in the history of medieval Greece. Their
language is a dialect of Romanian and is therefore derived
from Latin; and it is generally admitted that they are des
cended from Roman colonists and Latinized provincials in the
areas north and south of the Danube.^ Their existence may
be inferred from records as early as the sixth century in date,
but the first definite mention of them was not until the year
976. During the next two centuries, reference to them became frequent, but they were intermingled with other peoples in
such a way that it is difficult to form any clear idea of their
distribution. Several districts were called after them; thus
* Great Vlachia' was the name given to Thessaly, and 'Little Vlachia' to Acarnania and Aetolia, while there were Vlachs
also in Bulgaria and to the north. These last were involved in
the revolt against the Byzantine empire which led to the
establishment of the second Bulgarian empire in 1186 (see
P- 45)In the eleventh-century Strategicon by Cecaumenos, there is
a description of the Vlachs around Trikkala and Larissa, in Thessaly. Their mode of living then seems to have been- very
similar to that of recent times ; from April to September they lived
^ The Vlachs, or Wallachs, called themselves Romans; the name *Vlach' was applied to them by their neighbours; its origin is identical with the English 'Wealh' or 'Welsh' (i.e. stranger), and represents a Slavonic adoption of a general term applied by Teutonic peoples to Roman provincials in the fourth and fifth centuries.
46


BYZANTINE GREECE
with their flocks in the mountains, and descended to the plains
only in winter. There is also reference, in the same account,
to the appointment of a Byzantine official to administer the
Vlachs. Towards the end of the eleventh century, these southern Vlachs were mentioned by the Byzantine historian Anna Comnena, who referred to nomadic folk * commonly called Vlachs ' in the mountainous region of Thessaly. About
.^Uskiib,
WCSkopje)
80 Km.
^ ^^<;^
tnickala
Fig. 12. The distribution of the Vlachs in Balkan lands
Based on A. J. B. Wace and M. S. Thompson, The Nomads of the Balkans, p. 206 (London, 19 14). Different authorities give varying ideas about the exact distribution of the Vlachs; this map, for example, differs in detail from the distribution of Vlachs as given on Fig. 25.
the year 1 170, Benjamin of Tudela described them thus: 'Here are the confines of Wallachia, a country of which the inhabi
tants are called Vlachi. They are as nimble as deer and
descend from their mountains into the plains of Greece committing robberies and taking booty. Nobody ventures to make war on them, nor can any king bring them to submission.' At
the division of the Byzantine empire in 1204, Great Vlachia
47


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
was included in the kingdom of Salonica under Boniface, but
it soon reappeared as an independent principality under its
old name (see p. 58).
THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF BYZANTINE GREECE
If it is difficult to obtain any detailed evidence about the
coming of Slavs and Bulgars into the Greek lands, it is even
more difficult to form a clear picture of the domestic history
of Greece in the Byzantine empire from the death of Justinian
in 565 to the fall of Constantinople in 1204. Certain facts, however, stand out : something can be said about the economic
condition of the area, and especially about its commerce ; some
evidence is also available about the internal political condition
of the Greek themes during the twelfth century; the advent of
western armies into Greece, culminating in the great invasion
of 1204, is comparatively well documented; and, lastly, there are archaeological remains which speak for themselves of the
former Byzantine influence in the land.
Until the coming of the ships of the western cities of Venice,
Genoa and Amalfi, in the eleventh century, the Greeks were
to a great extent the carriers of the eastern Mediterranean. Though the land was filled with Slav immigrants, the Greek
cities of the coast were still able to maintain their mercantile
connexions. A great movement of exchange centred on Con
stantinople itself, and in the ninth and tenth centuries Byzantine
trade was at its height. It is true that the advance of Islam
had restricted trade in the eastern Mediterranean, but the Black Sea trade was important; amber, furs and metals came from Russia and the northern shores of Asia Minor. Greek
ships also carried much of the trade between Constantinople
and the west, but the Italian merchant fleets gradually shut
out the Greeks from western waters. The Italian cities, at first
the rivals, were soon the superiors of the Greeks in wealth and industry, and they came ultimately to dominate the carrying trade of the Aegean.
48


BYZANTINE GREECE
One great hindrance to Aegean shipping was piracy. In 826 or 827, some Saracens, who had migrated from Spain to Alexandria, fell upon Crete, at that time recovering from an earthquake, and conquered it. Their control was marked by
religious toleration which reconciled the inhabitants to their
rule ; and in the years that followed. Christians helped to man
the ships of the Moslem corsairs who menaced the coasts and
islands of the Aegean. Cretan pirates became the terror of the
eastern seas, and Crete grew into a great centre for traffic in
slaves. At last, after many attempts, the island was restored to
Christian rule in 961. Some of the Moslems left; others sank
into serfdom. As in the Peloponnese, the missionary followed the soldier, and many Greek and Armenian Christians were
attracted here. The Christian recovery of the island was in the
main successful, though not a few Moslems kept their religion.
But the recovery of Crete did not mean the abolition of piracy
in the Aegean. The chronicle ascribed to the English Benedict
of Peterborough states that in 1191 piracy was still rife; some
of the Aegean islands were uninhabited for fear of the pirates
;
in other islands, they themselves lived. Despite their depreda
tions, however, commercial activity, though interrupted, never broke down, and indeed, with the coming of the Italian cities,
it greatly increased. An important item in Greek trade was silk. About the year
550 two Persian monks had smuggled some eggs of the silkworm into the Byzantine empire, and from these precious eggs
were derived all the varieties of silk-worm that stocked the
western world for over a thousand years. The silks of the Byzantine empire became famous throughout medieval Europe, and the cities of central and southern Greece shared greatly
in this prosperity. Thebes in particular became an important
centre. No silk is now made at Thebes and there are no
mulberry trees there, but the plain around the town is still known as 'Morokampos' from the mulberry trees which once
gave the town its prosperity.
Though the carrying trade was passing into the ships of the
49


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
west, the Greek cities did not lose their prosperity. Some
indication of conditions in Greece in the twelfth century is furnished by the large number of Jewish communities in the area. Benjamin of Tudela, writing about 1160, provided a list
of the Jewish communities. The great city of Thebes had
about 2,000 Jews who were 'the most skilled artificers in silk
and purple cloth throughout Greece'. Salonica, 'a very large citv' on the Via Egnatia from Durazzo to Constantinople, had
about 500 Jews; Armylo (Almiros), another 'large city', had
400; Corinth had 300; Egripo (Khalkis) was 'a large city upon the sea-coast where merchants come from every quarter', and it had about 200 Jews. There were also many smaller Jewish
communities.
THE POLITICAL CONDITION OF GREECE IN A.D. 1200
Though the economic circumstances of the Greek cities in the
twelfth century seem to have been moderately prosperous, the
political condition of Greece was far from happy. The financial oppression of the Byzantine government was heavy, and money that should have been spent on the defence of the country went
instead to support the ostentation of the imperial capital.
Byzantine officials regarded the country, in the words of a
contemporary, as an 'utter hole', to be exploited as much as
possible; the imperial governors received no salaries, but made
their office self-supporting. Besides this, the Greek population
had to endure the exactions of native tyrants. Under the
Comneni dynasty of the twelfth century, feudalism had made
considerable progress. Large tracts of land were under the
control of families whose quarrels disturbed the life of the
country. The historian Niketas speaks of these notables
[archontes) as 'inflamed by ambition against their own father
land, slavish men, spoiled by luxury, who made themselves
tyrants, instead of fighting the Latins'.
Beset by imperial exactions, disturbed by internal feuds, raided by pirates, occupied in part by Machs, threatened by
the rising second empire of Bulgaria, it is little wonder that
50


BYZANTINE GREECE
the condition of Greece seemed ripe for western interference.
The raids of western princes in the twelfth century and the
ever-growing strength of the western cities (especially of Venice)
in the Aegean Sea, formed but a prelude to the great disaster that fell upon the Byzantine world in 1 204.
WESTERN INTERFERENCE UP TO I204
The Norman conquerors of southern Italy, seeking to match
the exploits of William the Conqueror in England, seized a
pretext to invade the Byzantine provinces that lay so near
across the narrow Straits of Otranto. Between 1081 and 1084, they occupied Corfu, took Durazzo, and penetrated as far as
Larissa in Thessaly. They retired only to return again in 1 106,
but without success. For forty years Greece was left alone,
until the expedition of Roger of Sicily in 1 1 46. In that year, a
landing was made at Itea on the north of the Gulf of Corinth, and the Normans marched to Thebes. The city was looted and many of its silk weavers were sent back to Sicily. From Thebes the invaders marched to Corinth, plundered it, and
then sailed home with their booty. In the years that followed,
the Normans became increasingly involved in the domestic
intrigues of the empire, and after 40 years a Norman army
once again marched across Greek soil (1185). Starting from
Durazzo, it made for Salonica, and a fleet was sent by sea to
help in the siege of the city. After successfully looting it, the Normans were defeated and returned home.
Faced with the Norman peril in the eleventh century, the emperor had sought aid from Venice whose wealthy merchants
were now trading in eastern waters. The price of assistance
was free trade throughout the empire, and a charter of 1082 laid the sure foundation for Venetian supremacy in the com
merce of the Aegean and the Black Seas. ' On that day ', says one historian, * began the world commerce of Venice.'^ The Venetians were soon everywhere. Their very success, however,
* G, Diehl, Une republique patricienne : Venise, p. 33 (Paris, 191 5).
51


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
aroused distrust, and, to counteract Venetian influence, suc
ceeding emperors granted commercial privileges to Pisa,
Genoa and Amalfi. During the twelfth century the empire and
Venice were sometimes at war and sometimes acting together,
according to the exigencies of the moment; but all the while the antagonism between the two powers was developing. It was this antagonism together with Norman raids of the twelfth
century that provided the background for the spectacular events of 1204 which inaugurated a new period in the history
of Greece.
2. PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
THE FOURTH CRUSADE
From the end of 1 1 99 onwards, a fourth crusade was preached in France and Germany. Its leading members were French feudal lords like Baldwin of Flanders; its goal was Jerusalem; and its immediate strategic objective was the heart of Moslem
power in Egypt. The Venetians agreed to provide transport, and, by August 1202, the army was assembled at Venice, but
the crusaders then found it impossible to pay the sum agreed upon. The Venetians therefore proposed that payment be
postponed in return for help against the Adriatic city of Zara which had been occupied by the Hungarians. In spite of papal
protests against this attack on a Christian city, the crusading
fleet sailed in November 1202, and Zara was successfully taken. But this diversion to Zara was only a preliminary to a much
greater diversion. For a long time, many in the west had looked with hatred towards the Byzantine empire, and, during the preparations of 1200-2, the crusading plan had become involved in a series of complicated motives which led the
crusaders ultimately not against the infidel but to Constanti
nople. Venice in particular had everything to gain by an
attack on its great commercial rival in the east. The details of
this great diversion are obscure and have been the subject of
controversy, but the result is clear enough. In June 1203, the
52


FRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
crusading fleet appeared outside the harbour of Constantinople,
and the crusaders were very soon in possession of the city.
Involved in disputes about the imperial throne, they decided to divide the empire amongst themselves. A new emperor was
to be elected with control over one-quarter of the empire. The
remaining three-quarters were to be divided, one-half to the
Venetians and one-half to the crusaders. The year 1204 is one
of the great landmarks in European history. Count Baldwin of Flanders was elected emperor to rule over
a restricted Latin empire that included the territory on either
side of the Sea of Marmora together with some nearby islands. Venetian nobles occupied many other islands, and Venice
assumed direct sovereignty over a number of other areas. Rewards for the Frankish adventurers were found on the mainland of Greece. Representatives of the old Byzantine emperors
remained only in three areas—in the territory around Nicaea
in Asia Minor, in Epirus, and in Trebizond on the Black Sea
coast. Although the Latin empire at Constantinople lasted only
for 57 years, some of the Venetian and Frankish states con
tinued for two or three hundred years. From 1204 onwards
until the coming of the Turk, the history of the Greek lands lost
its unity and became the story not of one but of many separate
states. The units that thus arose in the Greek world fall con
veniently into the following groups, each of which must be
considered separately (Fig. 13):
(i) The Latin empire of Romania, 1204-61. (2) The Greek empire of Nicaea, 1 204-1453.
(3) The Latin kingdom of Salonica, 1204-23. (4) The duchy of Athens, 1 205-1460.
(5) The principality of Achaia, 1 205-1432.
(6) The duchy of the Archipelago, 1 207-1 566.
(7) The county palatine of Cephalonia, 1 194-1483.
(8) The despotat of Epirus, 1 204-1 336.
(9) Scattered Venetian possessions, various dates from 1 204
to 1 715 in the Aegean and to 1797 in the Ionian
Islands.
53


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
(10) Scattered Genoese possessions, various dates from 126
to 1566. (11) The Knights of Rhodes, 1 309-1 522.
Fig. 13. Greece in 1214
Based on: (i) The Cambridge Medieval History, vol. 4, map 43 (Cambridge, 1923); (2) W. Miller, The Latins in the Levant, p. 81 (London, 1908). Venetian possessions are shown in black. The empire of Trebizond lay along
the south-eastern shores of the Black Sea—off this map.
THE LATIN EMPIRE OF ROMANIA, I204-61
The Latin empire, lying athwart the Sea of Marmora, soon began to shrink both in Thrace and in Asia Minor. In Thrace,
it had to face the attacks of the Bulgars, and in y\sia Minor it had a rival in the Greek empire of Nicaea which still main
tained the Byzantine tradition. Only the rivalries of the states
around kept it alive for as long as 57 years, and it fell to the
Nicaean Greeks in 1261. The last of the emperors to reign,
like the first, was named Baldwin. He fled to the west where
the empty title of 'Latin Emperor' continued until the death
of its last holder in 1383.
54


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
THE GREEK EMPIRE OF NICAEA, I2O4-I453
The Latin empire of Constantinople was never able to make
much progress in Asia Minor. There, in the prosperous city
of Nicaea, Theodore Lascaris, the son-in-law of a former
Byzantine emperor, established a court that soon became the centre of a small but reviving Greek empire. Under Theodore
and 'his successors, the new empire was organized efficiently
and its frontiers were extended in Asia Minor and over the
islands of Lesbos, Chios, Samos and Icaria. Soon, it recovered ground in Europe, and the Maritsa became its northern
boundary against Bulgaria. In 1246, much of the Epirot empire of Salonica was annexed and the Byzantine frontier
was carried to the Adriatic itself (Fig. 1 4)
Fig. 14. Greece in 1265
Based on W. R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas, p. 89 (London, 1930). Venetian possessions are shown in black; /?=Ragusa.
The Lascarid dynasty was replaced by the noble family of
Palaeologus in 1259, t>ut this involved no change of external
55


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
policy, and at last, in 1261, Constantinople itself was captured.
It was the culmination of a steady progress since 1204. Now,
after an interval of 57 years, the empire of Nicaea became merged in that of Constantinople. The revival had not
recovered the whole of Byzantine territory, but at any rate
it had got back the heart and centre of the empire, together
with a substantial extent of territory. The revived Byzantine empire was to last another two hundred years, and its European must be distinguished from
its Asiatic history. In the Peloponnese, in 1262, it recovered
Monemvasia together with Mistra and Maina (^ee p. 62), and during the fourteenth century this southern base became a most important element in the empire (Fig. 16). By 1432, the whole Peloponnese had been restored to, Byzantine rule, with
the exception of some coastal stations held by Venice (see p.
63). The story of^Byzantine recovery in .northern Greece was
different. For a "time the frontiers of the empire continued to
expand. Tlje greater part of Thessaly (Wallachian Thessaly)
was added in 13 18 (see p. 58), and in 1336 the despotate of Epirus itself was won (see p. 66) . But at this very moment of success, the great resurgence of Serbia under Stephen Dushan
wrested a great part of these possessions from Byzantine rule.
Stephen's empire stretched to the Gulf of Corinth, and all that
remained to Constantinople in the north was Thrace and the
district around Salonica (Fig. 15). It is true that the Serbian
state soon broke up into fragments; these, however, did not return to Byzantine rule, but passed to a new power, the Turks, who were soon to engulf the whole Aegean world. In Asia Minor, the Byzantine empire had started to shrink almost as soon as its centre had been transferred from Nicaea to Constantinople. Various Turkish powers encroached on imperial territory until only a narrow strip remained along the
Sea of Marmora. With the rise of one of these powers, the Ottoman Turks, the loss was accelerated, and, by the middle of the fourteenth century, only a few isolated Byzantine points were left in Asia Minor. But the Ottomans d'd not restrict
56


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
their activities to Asia. By 1356 they had landed in Europe,
and in 1361 they transferred their capital to Adrianople. What
Stephen Dushan had torn from Byzantine territory, the Otto
mans were now to inherit—and more. By the two battles of the Maritsa (1371) and Kossovo (1389), the power of the Bulgarians and the Serbians was broken, and their territories passed into Turkish hands; by 1390, the Turks had reached the Danube. In 1393, they conquered Thessaly and Neopatras.
At the end of the century, the Byzantine empire consisted only
of Salonica, the Peloponnese and Constantinople. In 1453, the
great city itself fell. What the Fourth Crusade had started in
1204, the Ottomans now completed, and by 1461 they were masters of almost all mainland Greece. The islands of the
Aegean, however, held out for over another century, and not until the duchy of the Archipelago fell in 1566 was Ottoman supremacy as complete in the islands as on the mainland (see
p. 64).
^ ^KINGDOM
"C ''^ \ BULGAR ;
^A <
"1^. % 1 -V k V '\*^
0^ U-v, ^\\V\\
''
/ °' ^^^^ .nopie*!
f
OTTOMAN
TURKS -J
^„„. .Iph.a ^
: s / \/ y ::^l "S
^/ f V »v
^
1 rtuCHY ' ' r <(/ 1 MvKlonp Off TVIE >>. .-'
Tr-.
6, ^- -- '
^^
'^"""^ AKCH}PEUV,GO ,1^;^.^
iLe, /
Wlh^flBMM* ^ K or
'
mf C-iPRUS ''-'
Fig. 15. Greece about 1355
Based on W. R. Shepherd, Historical Atlas, p. 89 (London, 1930).
Venetian possessions are shown in black; /? = Ragusa. The island of Santa Maura (Levkas) was not united to the county of Cephalonia until 1362.
5 / wo


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
THE LATIN KINGDOM OF SALONICA, I204-23
The leader of the crusaders, Boniface of Montferrat, obtained,
as his share of the spoil, the title of king and a grant of land
including Macedonia, Thessaly and much of central Greece. He set out in the autumn of 1204 to take possession of his kingdom and to parcel it out among his barons. .Thus Larissa
became the fief of a Lombard noble; Velestino passed into
the hands of a Rhenish count; the commanding position of Boudonitza, near the pass of Thermopylae, was assigned to the
Pallavicini family from near Parma, and their ruined castle still looks down on the countryside around. The new kingdom
was not destined to last very long. The reluctance of the king to acknowledge the ovcrlordship of the emperor of Romania
was a source of weakness; and the attacks of the Bulgars formed
another weakness. In 1223 the kingdom was occupied by the
despot of Epirus, and it remained under Epirot control until
the reviving Greek empire of Nicaea annexed the greater part
of it in 1246 (see p. 55).
A branch of the Epirot dynasty continued, however, to rule in Thessaly, for one of its members had married the heiress of
the hereditary chieftain of the Wallachians (see p. 66). This
principality, sometimes independent, and sometimes in alliance with one of the surrounding states, was known variously as
'Great Wallachia' or the 'Duchy of Neopatras' (Fig. 14).
\Vhen the line of the Wallachian princes became extinct in
1 3 1 8, their territories were divided. The greater part of the rich Thessalian plain was annexed by the Byzantine empire. The southern area, including the city of Neopatras itself, in the
valley of the Spercheus, was conquered by the Catalan Company, then dominating Athens, and this enlarged state became
known as the 'duchies of Neopatras and Athens' (see p. 59).
THE DUCHY OF ATHENS, I205-I460
One of the associates of Boniface was a Burgundian noble named
58


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
Othon de la Roche who, in 1205, received the territories of
Athens and Thebes in the south of the kingdom of Salonica.
This unit in central Greece maintained its identity long after the Latin kingdom of Boniface had disappeared, and it became one of the most permanent of the Prankish states in Greece. At first its ruler was known merely as *Sire' or *Megaskyr'
(Great Lord), but from the middle of the thirteenth century onwards he became the *duke' of Athens. After twenty years'
rule, Othon, with his wife and his two sons, left Greece for
ever to return to his native land (1225), ^.nd he bequeathed his domain of Thebes and Athens to his nephew Guy who
carried on his work. Under the tolerant Frankish regime, the silk manufacture of Thebes once again prospered ; Athens, too was prosperous. ' The splendour of the Theban Court and the
excellent French spoken at Athens struck visitors from the West.'i
But at the beginning of the fourteenth century this prosperous Frankish rule was cut short from an unexpected quarter. A
band of Catalan mercenaries, after fighting in Sicily and in Asia Minor, was employed by the duke of Athens against the
neighbouring principality of Neopatras, but they soon proved dangerous allies. Disputes about payment culminated in the
overthrow of the Franks. On a fatal day in the spring of 131
1
the Catalans were outstandingly victorious on the plain of
Boeotia, and only a few Frankish knights survived the battle;
the widows of the fallen provided wives for the newcomers. The Catalan mercenaries, surprised by their own sweeping
victory, which so struck the imagination of their contemporaries,
sought a ruler outside their own ranks, and turned to their
former employer, Frederick II of Sicily. Thus it was that for over half a century the duchy of Athens was ruled in name by absentee dukes of the Sicilian House, while the real power was
wielded oy vicar-generals appointed to represent them. To the north, the Catalans conquered the southern part of the Wallachian duchy of Neopatras, including the city of Neo
^ W. Miller, The Latin Orient, p. 29 (London, 1920).
59


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
patras itself (1318), and the double title of * dukes of Athens
and Neopatras' was borne by the kings of Aragon, the suc
cessors of the SiciUan rulers, long after the Catalan duchy had
disappeared.
-^
t
SERBIAN ^J^LORENTlN D. OF
*J AN INA
in . inoa
or
.e*^ )/
<\
-^fT^V ^i^DUCHY OF
FLORENTINES^
S-. . ATHENS
t
O II C H V
OF THE
MoTleT.lVcl^
C.?rifl'o
/
ARCHIPELAGO
200 Km.
%
,^;)
.t>
Fig. 16. Greece in 1388
Based on W. Miller, The Latins in the Levant, p. 332 (London, 1908). Venetian possessions are shown in black. The southern portion of the despotat of Epirus was now under the control of an Albanian chieftain (Ghin Boua Spata) at Arta; the northern portion, centred on Janina, had been held by a Serbian chieftain (Thomas Preliubovitch), but he died in 1385 and his widow married Esau Buondelmonti, a Florentine noble.
The sons of the mercenaries did not possess the fighting quaUties of their fathers; and in 1388 Athens was occupied by a Florentine family of bankers named AcciajuoU who were
60


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
prominent in the affairs of the Peloponnese to the south. Thus
began the third chapter in the history of the medieval duchy
of Athens (Fig. 1 6) . The Catalans vanished from the scene almost as completely as the Franks before them, and the next
half-century saw many Florentine families in the area. But
the independence of the duchy was difficult to maintain before
the rising tide of Turkish successes. In June 1456 the Turks occupied Athens, and Thebes fell four years later. From 1460 onwards, central Greece remained Turkish, apart from two brief intervals when the Venetians occupied Athens (1466 and
1687-8). By the time of the arrival of the Turks, a new element had been added to the population of Attica and Boeotia. Towards the end of the Catalan regime the area had been disturbed by
civil war, and, to repair the ravages, Albanian settlers were
invited to colonize the waste lands {c, 1380). After the occupa
tion of Epirus by the Tocco family in 141 8, still more Albanians
came in under the Florentine dukes. The settlement had
permanent results. From these colonists of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries are descended many of the Albanians of
Attica and Boeotia who still speak Albanian as well as Greek.
THE PRINCIPALITY OF ACHAIA, I205-I432
Just before the conquest of Constantinople, Geoffrey de Villehardouin, nephew and namesake of the historian of the con
quest, was driven by bad weather into the port of Modon in
the Peloponnese. While he was staying there and becoming
involved in the local quarrels, the great drama of the break-up of the Byzantine empire was taking place. In the winter of
1204, Boniface was taking possession of his kingdom of Salonica,
and Geoffrey accordingly made his way to the headquarters
of Boniface. There he outlined to an old friend from Champagne, William of Champlitte, a scheme for the conquest of the Peloponnese, promising to acknowledge William as his overlord. The two men, with only a few hundred soldiers, won


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
almost the whole of the peninsula in a single battle. The newly won land was partitioned into twelve baronies among their
followers, the ruins of whose baronial castles can still be seen
standing in strong positions. William, recalled by affairs in
France, died on his way home, and Geoifrey then became
'^ prince of Achaia' in his stead.
There were two areas which Villehardouin was unable to
acquire. One was the territory around the Venetian ports of
Modon and Coron, guarding the sea route to the east; occupied
m. 1206, they remained in Venetian possession until 1500. The other was the southern rock of Monemvasia, * the Gibraltar of
Greece', under the flag of the Byzantine state of Nicaea; this,
however, was conquered in 1246, but only with the aid of
Venetian galleys, and only after a siege of three years. Then,
in the south, the fortress of Mistra was built to overawe the
Slavs of Taygetos and the restless people of Maina. But
Monemvasia was not kept for long. The third of the Ville
hardouins, William, became involved in disputes between the
despotate of Epirus and the reviving empire of Nicaea; captured by the Nicaean Greeks, he was restored to freedom only in
return for the fortresses of Monemvasia, Mistra and Old Maina
(1262). It was the gain of this southern territory that paved
the way for the ultimate restoration of Byzantine authority in
the Peloponnese (Fig. 14).
William de Villehardouin left no male heir, and the marriage
of his daughter Isabella to the son of Charles I of Naples united
the fortunes of the principality with those of the Angevin power
at Naples. After William's death in 1278, the principality was ruled by deputies appointed from Naples, for Isabella, though young, was already a widow. She next married Florent of Hainaut, a young Flemish nobleman who thus became prince of Achaia, and, after this, many Flemings appeared in Greece.
Widowed for a second time, Isabella married a prince of the House of Savoy, and the Flemings were replaced by Piedmontese. The newcomers were so unpopular, however, that Isabella and her husband left Greece for ever, and the govern
62


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
ment lapsed to the Angevin power at Naples. A disputed
succession followed, and the barren title of ' prince of Achaia
'
continued to pass from one absentee to another.
This unsatisfactory state of affairs continued during the
fourteenth century, until a band of mercenaries did for Achaia
what the Catalans had done for Athens in 13 ii. The origin of the Navarrese Company is obscure. They had been employed by the king of Navarre in his struggle with Charles V
of France; and, seeking adventures farther afield, became
involved in the complications of the succession to Achaia.
They soon occupied much of the peninsula, and, in 1383, their
leader declared himself 'vicar' of the principality; his successor
exchanged the title for that of 'prince' in 1396 (Fig. 16). It was from his widow's nephew that the Byzantine emperor was able
to take the whole of the Peloponnese by 1432 (see p. 56), apart from a few points held by Venice ; for to Modon and Coron the Venetians had added Argos (1388), Nauplia (1388) and Lepanto (1407). But the Byzantine reconquest was not to last long. By
1 46 1 the advancing tide of Tui;kish success had engulfed the
whole of the Peloponnese up to the limits of the \^enetian
colonies (see p. 76).
In the middle of the fourteenth century, the Byzantine rulers
of the Peloponnese had strengthened their army by recruiting
large numbers of Albanians. These mercenaries were followed by colonists, and a large number of Albanians then settled upon
the waste lands of the province, where their descendants remain
to this day.
THE DUCHY OF THE ARCHIPELAGO, I207-I566
At the partition of 1 204, the Greek islands ha d been allotted to
Venice, but the government of the republic decided to leave their occupation to private citizens. Accordingly, Marco Sanudo, a nephew of the doge, set out with some companions
to win a principality among the islands of the Cyclades (1207). They succeeded in founding a state that was in some ways the
63


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
most Stable of all those brought into being by the Fourth Crusade. Sanudo kept Naxos and some other islands for him
self, and partitioned the surrounding islands amongst his
fellow-freebooters. Thus at Andros and elsewhere arose those feudal castles whose ruins still dominate the landscape. Sanudo had no wish to become merely a local governor
under the repubhc, and so he acknowledged the overlordship
of the Latin emperor who formed the islands into a duchy known sometimes as the duchy of Naxos, of 'the Dodekanesos'
and of 'the Archipelago'. The nominal suzerainty was later
transferred to Achaia (1236) and then to Naples (1267), though Venice more than once claimed overlordship. The
duchy survived the revival of Byzantine power (see p. 56), and the Sanudo dynasty continued until 1383, when it was replaced by that of the usurper Francesco Crispo, a member of a Lombard family who had come to have possessions in
Melos. The Crispi remained in power for the next two cen
turies.
Under the rule of the Crispi, Venetian influence became in
creasingly important in the affairs of the island barons, and Venice more than once took over the government of Andros, Naxos and Paros. But not even Venetian interference was able
to save the islands from the Turkish raids which grew in
creasingly frequent. At last, in 1566, the Turkish conquest
took place ; for thirteen years a Jewish favourite of the Sultan,
Joseph Nasi, ruled as an absentee duke, until the final incorporation of the duchy into Turkey in 1579. Nowhere else
in Greece did Latin rule leave so many traces as among these
islands of the Cyclades—in memorials, in language and in religion, and the Roman Church has remained important here up to this day.
THE COUNTY PALATINE OF CEPHALONIA, II94-I483
Even before the Fourth Crusade, Matteo Orsini, a member of
an Italian family, had made himself master of the islands of Cephalonia, Zante and Ithaca (1194). During the Venetian
64


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
occupation of Corfu (1206-14), he acknowledged the supre
macy of Venice, but afterwards transferred his allegiance to the prince of Achaia. His descendants became involved in the
poUtics of Epirus, and ruled over that province from 13 18 until it was reunited to the Byzantine empire in 1336 (see p. 66).
Meanwhile, in 1324, the islands had been annexed outright by the Angevins to Achaia, and the county was not granted
out again until 1357. It was then given to the Tocco family from Beneventum who united Santa Maura (Levkas) to the
other islands. By 141 8 the Tocci had also revived the conti
nental dominion of the Orsini, and had made themselves
masters of the country south of Janina (Fig. 19). The court of
Cephalonia during these years was described by Froissart as
a second fairyland. But family dissensions soon enabled the
Turks to interfere; Janina was lost in 1430, and by 1449 Arta,
Aetolia and Acarnania had also become Turkish. The islands
likewise fell to the Turks in 1479, although with the exception of Santa Maura they were soon recovered by Venice and held
for over three hundred years {c, 1482-1797) ; Santa Maura did not become Venetian until 1684.
THE DESPOTATE OF EPIRUS, I204-I336
While the Byzantine empire was being appropriated by the
crusaders, the difficult country of Epirus was seized by a
representative of the imperial family, Michael Angelus Comnenus, who maintained his newly acquired territory against
all comers. The court of Arta became, like that of Nicaea, a refuge for Greeks against the Latin invaders of the Aegean
world. The second 'despot' of Epirus conquered the neighbouring kingdom of Salonica in 1223, and founded a new Greek empire of Salonica. This success both alarmed the Franks and
also offended the rival Greek empire of Nicaea. In 1246, the Nicaean emperor was able to conquer the province of Salonica,
but the Wallachian principality of Neopatras, to the south,
was left independent until 13 18 (see p. 58).
65


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
In the west, Epirus itself still remained free until the last of
the direct line from Michael Angelus was killed, in 13 18, by a member of the Orsini family of Cephalonia who then main
tained the independence of the despotate until it was reunited
to the Byzantine empire in 1336. Soon, however, the area was annexed by the expanding state of Serbia under Stephen
Dushan (1349), and a large part of northern Greece fell under
the control of the Serbs. On the break-up of the Serbian
empire after Stephen's de^th in 1355, there was great confu
sion; Epirus was disputed by Serbs, Albanians and others (Fig.
16) until the southern portion was acquired by the Tocco
family from Cephalonia in 141 8 (see p. 65). By 1449, however, the area had passed under Turkish control, and with it the obscure people of Albania who, in the fourteenth century, had been expanding southwards towards Acarnania and AetoHa and even into Thessaly where the Vlachs had hitherto formed
the bulk of the population.
VENETIAN POSSESSIONS, I204-1797
Before 1204 Venice already occupied a commanding position
in the eastern Mediterranean trade that played so great a part in the economic life of medieval Europe. That she could
undertake the transport of the Fourth Crusade is in itself a
measure of her power. Her gains at the partition of 1204
reflected these maritime interests, and marked a turning point
in her history. While the Frankish adventurers occupied the mainland of Greece, Venetian influence was predominant in the islands and coasts of the Aegean. Modon and Coron, * the
right eye' of the republic, were important stations on the
eastern route; Crete, purchased in 1204, was held, despite
many insurrections, till 1669; Euboea, gained in 1209, was
Venetian until 1470, and early in the fifteenth century large numbers of Albanians were induced tp settle on the unculti
vated lands of the island.. But a map of territorial possessions
does not do justice to Venetian enterprise in the Aegean, for
66


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
frequently Venice acquired influence and trading rights with
out actual dominion and administrative responsibiUty. The Venetians who created the duchy of the Archipelago owed
isoi-3 M-V'^-^? Lepanto
, I407-C)4 , '51 i6i7-g9
Itl "^'
Cephalonia 1483-5 I SCO - 170
Zante
i4«2-i797
isoo It
ModonJ >206-fS
-f#fNaxos
37-1 soo isii -17
^^sii-17
?Monemva$ia y^H'' ^ O, 1370-^4
l464-i;40 '—^ <x ^ ^ If^
-^7-79 |^Se'-3'?.%7
L^
^.J^:
Carpathosj
'00 Km.
^.arpatt
I3061S
\
Casos i3o6-issa
Fig. 17. Venetian possessions in the Greek lands
Based mainly on The Cambridge Medieval History, vol. iv, pp. 476-7 (Cambridge, 1923). It is difficult to construct a really satisfactory map of Venetian possessions because sovereignty was sometimes not clearly defined, and Venice frequently acquired influence and control without administrative responsibility. Venetian citizens, too, held land from other powers, e.g. in the case of the duchy of the Archipelago (see p. 64). The dates on the map, moreover, do not take account of some changes in status, e.g. Venice paid tribute to the Turks for Zante from 1485 to 1699. Nor is any attempt made to indicate the occupation of the Peloponnese between 1685-7 and 1 715 (Monemvasia was not taken until 1690). In Crete, after 1669, Venice still retained Grabusa (G) until 1691, and the island in Suda Bay {S) and Spinalonga {Sp) until 171 5.
67


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
allegiance to the Latin empire; elsewhere, too, Venetian citi
zens held lands from other powers; thus a member of the Zorzi family of Venice in 1355 became marquess of Boudonitza, a dependency of the principality of Achaia.
In the centuries that followed the Fourth Crusade, Venice
increased her colonies in the Aegean and the Peloponnese by
purchase and by conquest. 'Never', we are told, 'was there a
state so dependent on the sea.' Structurally, the Venetian
empire was coming to consist of a series of strategic points,
calling stations, islands, and merchant quarters in cities, all of
which were strung along the greatest of medieval trade routes.
Although these possessions fluctuated, the net result was an
increase in dominion until, in the fifteenth century, Venetians
and Turks were meeting at every point. The defence of the
Aegean against the Turk had fallen to Venice. The first
Turkish war lasted from 1464 to 1479, and thereafter there
was intermittent warfare, with many oscillations in Venetian
sovereignty (Fig. 17). Though the Venetian commander Morosini conquered the Peloponnese in 1685-7, ^^^ province
was finally lost to the Turk in 1 715. In that year, too, the last
island that Venice held in the Aegean—Tenos—was also lost;
the Ionian islands together with Gerigo and Cerigotto, however,
she kept until 1797 (see p. 89).
GENOESE POSSESSIONS, C. I261-I566
Genoa played a less important part than Venice in the history
of the Aegean. She had no Byzantine tradition to pull her
eastward, but soon, like Venice, she was benefiting by the carrying trade of the Grusades; the earUest treaty between Genoa and the Byzantine empire is dated 1155. Genoa took no part in the Fourth Grusade, but with the overthrow of the
Latin empire in 1261 came the opportunity of the Genoese. In return for assisting the Greek empire of Nicaea, they exacted
commercial privileges; the price was free trade throughout the
empire, a monopoly of shipping in the Black Sea, and permis
68


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
sion to found colonies in the Aegean. In the city of Con
stantinople, now restored to Byzantine hands, they were
assigned the suburb of Galata as their special quarter, and
they also obtained the rich city of Smyrna in Asia Minor.
From the events of 1261, then, dates the rise of Genoa as an Aegean power (Fig. 18). Genoese families now appeared in the islands. The Zaccaria were soon exploiting the alum mines of Phocea (1275) and the
rich mastic plantations of Chios (1304) ; the latter island passed
ultimately into the control of a Genoese chartered company whose partners, abandoning their own names, became known
I as *the Giustiniani'.^ The rich island of Lesbos passed in 1355
! into the hands of the Gattilusio family which became connected by marriage with the Byzantine imperial house, and which
extended its control to the nearby islands of Thasos, Lemnos, Samothrace and Imbros, as well as to Phocea in Asia Minor and to Aenos on the mainland of Thrace.
The vicissitudes of these and the other Genoese islands were many; and the rivalry between Venice and Genoa, breaking
at times into open war, was the main key to the local politics
of the Aegean world. But as the fourteenth century drew to a
close, a new factor overshadowed this rivalry—the coming of
the Turks. Though each city negotiated commercial treaties with the new enemy, they sometimes sank their differences in an attempt to meet this menace to western interference in the
Aegean. One after another, the Genoese islands passed into
Turkish hands. With the loss of Chios in 1566, Genoese sovereignty disappeared from the Aegean.
THE KNIGHTS OF RHODES, I309-I522
At the break-up of the Byzantine empire in 1204, Rhodes was seized by a Greek noble, Leon Gabalas, but it was soon under
' This is the only example ot this method of control by Latins in the Aegean, The company was known as the maona. Other examples of Genoese companies were the maona of Cyprus founded in 1374, and that of Corsica fotmded in 1378.
69


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
the control of Italian adventurers, who, during the thirteenth
century, were compelled at times to acknowledge the overlord
ship of the emperor of Nicaea. Raided frequently by the
Turks, it was occupied in 1309 by the Knights of St John, who, since the fall of the Holy Land in 1291, had lived in Cyprus. The dominion of the Knights soon stretched over the neigh
bouring islands which were governed on feudal principles.
Fig. 18. Genoese possessions in the Greek lands
Based on The Cambridge Medieval History, vol. iv, p. 477 (Cambridge, 1923).
The strategic situation of the islands in the eastern Mediter
ranean was important, for they formed a great fortress against
the Turks. Many monuments still tell of their prosperity in
the fourteenth century, despite Turkish raids. At length, in
1522, the Turks succeeded in occupying Rhodes, and the Knights were allowed to withdraw to Malta.
70


PRANKISH AND VENETIAN GREECE
PRANKISH CIVILIZATION IN GREECE
The Frankish occupation formed a curious episode in the
history of Greece. The newcomers from the west—ItaUans and Frenchmen, Catalans and Navarrese, Germans and
Flemings—established a feudal constitution in all the states
they founded. Thus, below the twelve barons of Achaia, for whom most information is available, there were greater and
lesser vassals, then freemen, then serfs. Elsewhere there were
variations, but the same general features of feudal society were
to be found. To this land of opportunity came the younger
sons of French noble houses seeking adventure and fortune.
Of the court of Geoffrey de Villehardouin's successor in
Achaia, the Venetian historian Marino Sanudo wrote: * Knights came to the Morea from France, from Burgundy, and above all from Champagne, to follow him. Some came
to amuse themselves, others to pay their debts, others again because of crimes which they had committed.'^ Pope Honorius III in the thirteenth century could well speak of Greece as
*New France'. The social life of this feudal society, with its
brilliant courts and gay tournaments, was a bright one; and a
picture of the fine array of western chivalry has been preserved
for us in the anonymous Chronicle of the Morea, versions of which exist in French, Italian and Aragonese as weir as in Greek.
The Greeks, apart from those in Crete, seem to have accepted
the occupation with tameness, which contrasts with the fre
Iquent rebellions they raised under the Turks. Occasionally,
especially in Achaia, old native families were to be found
holding fiefs under the western barons.
At first, the Franks took over the existing Greek ecclesiastical
*!organization, but installed Roman Catholic churchmen every
where. There were fruitless attempts to reunite the churches
3f Rome and Constantinople, but the Roman faith made very little headway among the Greeks. Later on, towards the end
^ W. Miller, Essays in tlie Latin Orient, p. 90 (Cambridge, 19^1).
71


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
of the fourteenth century, the Greek Church recovered a good deal of ground, and some Orthodox bishops were allowed to return to their sees. The Greek people found in them an ally
against their foreign rulers. It was in the Ionian islands and
in the Cyclades that Roman Catholic influence was most
permanent, and it survives up to the present day. The Frankish occupation has left many traces upon the
countryside, in great castles and isolated towers, but it made
little mark upon the Greek people and their institutions. Conquerors and the conquered never really amalgamated except
to produce some despised half-castes [Gasmouloi) who usually
sided with the Greeks. The new-comers did not come in suffi
cient numbers to obtain a firm grip on the country, and they
remained to the end a series of garrisons in a foreign land.
Their conquest became an episode, not a formative factor in ij
the life of Greece. 'New France' was to pass away for ever before the advance of the Turk, leaving behind not much more
than archaeological remains to recall the brilliant interlude of
western chivalry.
3. BYZANTINE CIVILIZATION
LITERATURE
The prolific literary output of the Byzantines reflects every
aspect of their life, culture and thought. Their literary tastes and scholarly pursuits were determined by an all-too-conscious effort to preserve and perpetuate the lore of classical Greece
whose legitimate heirs they considered themselves to be, while
their deep devotion to the Christian faith, their passion for
theological discussion and the practical wisdom which dis
tinguished them inspired a great variety of writings of consider
able interest and originaHty. In secular poetry they cultivated
the forms of classical Greek poetry, especially the epigram, and
occasionally poets like Paul the Silentiary in the sixth century
and George Pisides in the seventh succeeded in attaining wij
72


BYZANTINE CIVILIZATION
and grace in their verse. There were a number of Byzantine historians beginning with Procopius and Agathias, both of whom
wrote about the reign of Justinian, and ending with Laonicos
Chalcocondyles, Sphrantzes, Ducas and Critobulos of Imbros,
the four historians of the fall of Constantinople, in 1453. They
all write about their own times and all strive to emulate the diction and manner of Herodotus, Thucydides or Polybius.
This self-conscious atticism, at a time when the language was
increasingly diverging from the prosody, grammar and vocabu
lary of Attic Greek, renders almost all educated secular writing produced during the Byzantine era frigid and rhetorical. For
colour and freshness one has to turn to works of a popular
character written for the most part by uneducated monks for a
humbler public. Such are the numerous world chronicles, the Lives of Saints, or the Begging Poems of Ptochoprodromos.
Also interesting is the emergence in the tenth century of an epic
saga around Digenis Akritas, a legendary hero whose exploits in
the eastern frontier of the empire are celebrated in a written
epic and in many folk ballads. Contact with the Franks of the West resulted, from the twelfth century onwards, in a number
of verse romances in the vernacular, influenced by western tales
of chivalry as well as by the late Hellenistic romances.
Religious literature flourished widely and comprises theo
logical, ascetical and liturgical works. It was a field in which
the Byzantines excelled, producing mystical writings of great
beauty, and religious poetry which reaches its highest level in
the sixth century in the poetic genius of Romanes, whose hymns
(kontakia) rank among the greatest achievements of ecclesiastical
poetry.
Scholarly and educational activity centred chiefly on the literature of ancient Greece and continued on the whole the
tradition of Alexandrian scholarship: textual and philological
commentaries, lexica, anthologies, encyclopaedias and the pro
duction of copies of classical texts represent the invaluable con
tribution of the Byzantines to the presei^vation and transmission
of the Greek classics.
6 73


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
ART
From its beginnings to the fifteenth century Byzantine art is marked in every phase of its development by an extraordinary
vigour and an unusual wide range of output. It was the first
great Christian art which sought to interpret the dogmas of
faith in the realm of the visual and to establish conventions
in an iconography which became an indispensable part of Orthodox worship. The interior decoration of churches
(mosaics, frescoes, icons) was of supreme devotional significance
and formed an integral part of the building design. It was in
tended not only to celebrate the glory of God but to help the congregation to communicate with the Divine by edifying and
instructing them. Various influences were at work in the development of
Byzantine art, but from the start two main stylistic trends can
be distinguished: the 'free and relaxed' style of the Hellenic
tradition which the Byzantine artists had inherited from the Graeco-Roman world and which remained a living force,
asserting itself in each of the 'Golden Ages' of Byzantine art
the Justinianic, the Macedonian, the Comnenian and the
Palaeologan; and the marked tendency towards expressionism,
abstraction or realism, all of which Byzantium may have ab
sorbed from Oriental influences. Quite often all these styles are
to be found in one composition, with remarkable results in the
subtlety of representation. It seems certain that Byzantine art
became highly centralized at quite an early stage. Constan
tinople took the lead in matters artistic and set the tone through
out the empire. Fine examples of this art have survived wherever the empire spread and even beyond its frontiers : the mosaic decoration of the Great Mosque of Damascus is the work of Byzantine artists. The mosaics of SS Cosmas and Damian in Rome, of San Vitale and St Apollinare in Classe in Ravenna,
of St George and St Demetrius in Salonica, of Sancta Sophia, the Church of the Holy Apostles and Kahriye Djameh (Church of Chora) in Constantinople, of Daphni near Athens, or Hosios
74


BYZANTINE CIVILIZATION
Loukas near Delphi—to mention only a few—rank among the
great masterpieces of pictorial art. Equally superb is the Byzantine achievement in wall paintings and iconography. Greece is rich in churches decorated with
frescoes of the best periods of Byzantine art, and the Byzantine
Museum and the Benaki in Athens contain a representative
collection of some very fine icon-paintings. The peninsula of
Mr Athos should also be mentioned as one of the chief reposi
tories of Byzantine culture and art. The minor arts too flour
ished during the Byzantine period. Many examples of decora
tive sculpture, ivory carvings, enamels, silver plate, ornamental
tapestries, liturgical objects and illustrated manuscripts have
survived.
ARCHITECTURE
In the fourth century various cities, Salonica, Ephesus and,
above all, Constantinople, housed the Roman court and took over the tradition of Rome. The most sumptuous and permanent buildings were now churches, whether large congrega
tional halls {basilicas) or centrally-planned domed buildings to
mark holy sites {martyria) ^ to serve as mausolea, or to enclose
tanks for the public baptism of crowds of catechumens. The
fourth- and fifth-century basilicas (e.g. St Demetrius and Haghia
Paraskevi at Salonica) were spacious, purely Roman buildings,
with apsidal east ends and timber roofs of low pitch. The
baptisteries resemble the cold plunge-baths in Roman Thermae,
The martyria and mausolea developed more original plans
a
circle in a decagon, a cross, or a cross in an octagon. The best examples of each of these styles are the Tombs of Theodoric
and Galla Placidia at Ravenna, and Santa Fosca at Torcello.
The interior was veneered with marble for the full height of its
lower arcades, and a' ")ve that with mosaic. This decoration, taken from imperial Rome, remained the Byzantine ideal.
The threat of fire compelled architects to substitute vaults for
timber roofs. The Romans had already used simple tunnel
vaults or cross-groined vaults (four tunnels intersecting at right
75


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
angles over each bay). In Roman concrete these could span up to loo ft, but the Byzantines lacked Roman pozzuolana and
Roman slaves. I'unnels and cross-groined vaults, still used for
smaller spans, were unstable over larger, when made of bricks
or emptv wine-jars. The circular dome was the obvious solution
and architects soon learned to place this over a square com
partment, supporting it on spherical triangles (pendentives) or
corbelled arches (squinches) in the corners of the square. The
main hall of Justinian's masterpiece, Sancta Sophia at Con
stantinople (a.d. 532-8), by far the largest Byzantine building,
has three internal divisions, like the vaulted Basilica of Maxentius
\c. a.d. 310) in Rome. But whereas the latter had three equal
cross-vaulted bays, Sancta Sophia has a central dome and two
lower semi-domes, giving a far more 'poetic' effect.
Justinian's architects also developed two other sorts of
church, both like Sancta Sophia with a western vestibule
(narthex) : the polygonal nave. With apses (exedrae) opening
from alternate sides (SS Sergius and Bacchus) or all sides (San
Vitale, Ravenna) ; and the cruciform church, with a dome over
the crossing and each arm (Holy Apostles at Constantinople, St
John's at Ephesus and St Mark's at Venice). The second plan
inspired all the later churches. The cross was enclosed in a
rectangle, allowing space in the corners for the two ritually
necessary rooms, the prothesis and diakonikon, each side of the
eastern arm, or chancel. All three were now masked by a heavy
screen, the iconostasis. In some churches the crossing remained
small, but the whole building grew loftier (Holy Apostles,
Salonica; Kahriyeh Djameh, Constantinople). In others dome
and crossing grew larger, and absorbed parts of the other bays.
This gives great spaciousness even to small interiors, as at Hosios Loukas and Daphni. The exterior was also more regarded now, and, as in Kahriyeh Djameh, some mouldings, borrow^ed from the West, enlivened the Byzantine flatness.
Compared with the churches, all Byzantine military and
civil bnildings, except the walls of Constantinople and perhaps
Nicaea, are negligible.
76


TURKISH GREECE
4. TURKISH GREECE
THE OTTOMAN ADVANCE
It was at the request of a Byzantine emperor that the Ottoman
Turks first came into Europe to fight against the Serbs. But
having defeated the Serbs, they refused to return to their
Asiatic homeland, and in 1354 estabhshed themselves on the European shores of the Dardanelles. A long and successful campaign in Thrace followed: Adrianople was captured in 1360, and the Turkish capital was then moved to this city from
Brusa in Asia Minor. From this base in Thrace the Turkish
conquest of south-eastern Europe began. The desperate effort
of the Serbs, the Bulgars, the Vlachs and the Albanians to stay
the progress of the Turks was shattered at Kossovo in 1389. The chronology of the Turkish advance is sometimes confusing,
as the Christian states were frequently defeated and became tribu
tary some years before they were completely annexed (Fig. 19). The Latin states fell one after another during the next
century. Macedonia (except for Salonica) was occupied by
1380; Salonica itself may have resisted until 1430. In 1393 Thessaly was annexed. The duchy of Athens was occupied in
1456-60; and by 1461 the Turks were also in complete control of the Peloponnese, apart from some coastal points held by the
Venetians (see p. 63). In the north, Janina fell in 1430; the continental domain of the Tocco family had completely disappeared by 1449; and in 1479 the Turks extended their
rule to the nearby Ionian islands, but they did not keep these
for very long; Zante went to Venice in 1482, and Cephalonia and Ithaca in 1500; Santa Maura, however, except for a brief
period (1502-3), did not become Venetian until 1684. By the time that Constantinople itself had fallen in 1453,
the Turks were in control of almost all the Greek mainland. Soon, the Aegean islands were mastered also. Lemnos, Imbros,
Samothrace and Thasos were acquired in 1456-7, Lesbos in 1462, Euboea in 1470. But over a century was to elapse before
77


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
Turkish control was complete. Not until the duchy of Naxos
and the island of Chios had fallen in 1566 were the Turks in as complete control of the Aegean Sea as of the Greek mainland; I
Crete itself did not fall until 1669, and the island of Tenos f
•V
ARCH'PfLAGO ^s>^^
J
Fig. 19. Greece in 1440
Based on : ( i ) E. A. Freeman, Atlas to the Historical Geography of Europe, map 43 (London, 1903); W. R. Shepheftl, Historical Atlas, p. 93 (London, 1930).
Venetian possessions are shown in black; J5 = Bosnia; M= Montenegro; R = Ragusa.
lingered on under Venetian sovereignty until as late as 1715. In the Aegean islands, a number of Albanians were settled,
especially in the latter half of the sixteenth century, as part of a
scheme of colonization.
.
TURKISH CONTROL OF GREECE
The Greek lands, divided among so many sovereignties since
1204, found unity once more in a foreign rule centred at
Constantinople. The main features of the political organization of the Turkish lands were simple. The whole area was under
the administration of the beglerbeg (lord of lords) of Rumili
78


TURKISH GREECE
(European Turkey) stationed at Sofia. In 1470, the Greek lands
comprised six *sanjaks' organized on a military basis: (i) Morea
(Peloponnese), (2) Epirus, (3) Thessaly, (4)Salonica, (5) Euboea,
Boeotia and Attica, (6) Aetolia and Acarnania. Other sanjaks were added as the islands and Crete were acquired. Each
sanjak was divided into 'cazas' or subdistricts, of which, for
example, there were twenty-three in the Morea. A great deal
of the local administration, however, was left in the hands
of the Greek 'archontes', or notables, of every town and even
of every hamlet ; these undertook, for example, the farming of
taxes and the work of policing.
Greeks were used not only for local administration but also
for more general administrative purposes. It was a feature of
Turkish policy to use Christians themselves to hold together
and govern the vast Turkish empire, and this policy reflected
itself in the Church, in the army and in the civil service.
The Church
The Turks did not attempt any wholesale conversion of the
Greeks to Islam, but sought to manage the Christian population through its own Church. Indeed, some Orthodox Christians had been in favour of the change by which a Turkish sultan replaced a Byzantine emperor inclined to reunion with
Rome. As Voltaire said, the Greek clergy ' preferred the turban
of a Turkish priest to the red hat of a Roman cardinal'. This
hatred of the western Church enabled the sultan to interfere, and even to appear as a patron of the Orthodox faith. The
Greek Patriarch was treated with great respect, and freedom of Christian worship was guaranteed. Here was an insurance
against the possibility of a western and Catholic, crusade to
deliver the eastern lands. It is true that the Patriarch came
more and more under the control of the Turkish authorities,
but then the Christians themselves were soon intriguing and
bidding for the office. It is true also that many Christian
churches, even St Sophia itself, were converted into mosques
79


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
wherever Moslems were numerous, and minarets disappeared from Macedonia and Thessaly only in the twentieth century with
the Greco-Turkish exchange of populations. But still the fact
remains that the Turkish regime was, with but few exceptions,
a tolerant one. The great financial distinction between true believers and
Christians was the payment of the 'haratch', or capitation tax,
by every male unbeliever over ten years of age (except by priests, by the blind, by the maimed and by old men). A Christian had also to pay twice the duty paid by a Moslem
(5% as against 2^%) on imports and exports. Hardship,
however, arose not from the legal taxes, but from various
exactions by the provincial governors, so much so that in 1691
the central government prohibited the exaction of additional
taxes on the plea of local necessity. Despite this, the Christians
continued to suffer from the corruption of Turkish administra
tion, but then so did their fellow-Moslems. Many Christians
escaped either into Venetian territory or overseas. Some entered
the Venetian employ as mercenaries, and the Greek *stradioti'
were known all over Europe. Numerous Epirote families settled
across the waters in Calabria.
The Janissaries
There is a good deal of obscurity about the origin and working
of the corps d' elite of the Turkish army, the janissaries (yeni
tscheri=new troops). About the year 1330 the corps was
formed, recruited entirely from Christian children, taken at an
early age (at about six or seven) and brought up as Moslems
in a sort of military brotherhood, in which marriage was pro
hibited. From then on, every Christian father was compelled,
at intervals of five years, or oftener, to make a declaration of
the number of his sons, and one boy out of every five, or one
out of every family, was taken by the officers of the sultan.
The recruitment was enforced in all parts of the Ottoman
empire in Europe, but mainly in Bosnia, Bulgaria and Albania.
It is surprising that of the many insurrections against Turkish
80


TURKISH GREECE
rule, only one (the Albanian agitation of 1565) seems to have
been roused by this terrible tribute.
By the sixteenth century the janissaries numbered about 12,000-20,000, ana had grown into a powerful and favoured corps; what was at first a curse came to be regarded by many parents as a blessing. There is even record of Moslems who
lent their children to Christians so they might become members
of so powerful a body. Creatures of the sultan, the janissaries in turn imposed their yoke upon him; they mutinied more
than once, and in 1566 extorted the privilege of legal marriage, and membership of the body became to some extent hereditary.
They lasted as a corps until 1826, but long before this they had
ceased to be recruited from tribute-children; the last regular
levy on children was in the year 1676. The result both of the levy, and of the migration of Greeks into Venetian territory
and overseas, was a considerable diminution in the numbers of
Greeks in the Greek lands. Indeed, by the end of the seven
teenth century the time had come when 'a taxable infidel seemed a more valuable asset than a less remunerative be
liever in the true faith of Islam'.
^
The Civil Service
The genius of the Turks was for conquest rather than adminis
tration, and so they used their conquered subjects to run the
machinery of their empire. Some Greeks rose to high office;
many even rose to the rank of Grand Vizier. Indeed, in the
middle of the sixteenth century, the Venetians were reporting
that the great offices in the Sultan's service were usually filled by Greeks and that many Turks were complaining of the
favour shown to the Greeks. For some time the condition of this advancement was conversion to Islam, but about the
middle of the seventeenth century the religious test was
abolished for a number of the important offices of state, and
in the following century the Grand Dragoman of the Porte
(a secretary of state) was usually a Greek; so was the Grand
* VV. Miller, Essays on ihe Latin Orient, p. 36G (Cambridge, 1921),
«> I


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
Dragoman of the Fleet; and the Morea, too, was placed under i
a native governor.
GREEK AND VENETIAN RESISTANCE
Although individual Greeks prospered in the Turkish empire,
the Greek cause suffered; and when national and private
interests clashed, the former only too often were sacrificed.
This is not to say that all Greeks patiently endured the foreign
yoke. Immediately after the conquest, assistance from the west
had seemed possible, and there were many later proposals for
a western crusade against the Ottoman power, but all these
suggestions brought no substantial relief. A Spanish expedition
in 1532, under the Genoese Andrea Doria, captureci Coron and a great part of the Morea, but the Spaniards were expelled
in the following year, and the Greeks were treated with great severity. Throughout the whole period of the Turkish occupa
tion. Christian bandits known as 'klephts' maintained a semi
independent existence in the more mountainous regions north of the Isthmus. They preyed upon the more peaceful people of the plains, and to combat them the Turks organized a
Christian gendarmerie known as 'armatoli'. The exploits of
both are recorded in the ballad poetry of Greece.
The Christian defence now fell upon Venice. The first Venetian-Turkish war of 1463-79, which cost Venice both Argos and Euboea, was followed by repeated outbursts of
hostilities for over two and a half centuries. Modon, Coron and
Lepanto were lost in 1500, and, with the Turkish capture of Naupha and Monemvasia in 1540, the last foothold of Venice in the Peloponnese disappeared; on the other hand, the Venetians had acquired a hold upon the Ionian islands of Zantr '1482), Ccphalonia and Ithaca (1500). In the Aegean, the Northern Sporades, Mykonos and Aegina were lost in the war of 1537-40. All that then remained to Venice were Crete, Tenos and the Ionian possessions.
Up to the middle of the sixteenth century, most of the islands of the Aegean, however, were still in western hands. The fall
82


TURKISH GREECE
3f the duchy of the Archipelago in 1566, and the capture of
Chios from the Genoese in the same year, meant that the
Turks were now in as complete control of the islands as of the
mainland. The Turkish attack on Cyprus in 1570 produced
a fresh outburst of warfare, and a large Christian fleet was
collected with the help of the Papacy and of Spain. The
Christian victory in the naval engagement ofTLepanto (1571), famous though it has become, brought little relief to Greece.
Roused by the prospect of help, the Greeks of the Peloponnese
had risen to arms; but Christian counsels were divided; the
last Greek resistance in Maina was quelled, and in 1573 the
Venetians made a peace with the Turks that lasted until 1645. During the seventy years of peace there were occasional
Greek risings. In 1585 there was revolt in Acarnania and
Aetolia, and again in 161 1 there was another revolt around
Janina. -Early in the seventeenth century the restless people of Maina were also in rebellion and they were not reduced, in
jname at any rate, until 1614. During these years, and indeed
jduring the whole period 1460- 1684, piracy was a more im
ijportant source of disturbance than revolt. The corsairs of
IjNorth Africa, of Catalonia, Dalmatia, Genoa, Malta, Sicily I and Tuscany, repeatedly plundered the coasts of Greece ; some
[jwere Christians, some were Moslems, but, in any case, that
Ifmade no difference to their victims. ' The unparalleled rapacity
jof these pirates devastated the maritime districts to such a
ijdegree that, even at the present day, many depopulated plains
Son the coasts of the Archipelago still indicate the fear which
ijwas long felt of dwelling near the sea.'^ This was said even as
illate as the latter half of the nineteenth century. I; During the Cretan war (1645-69) between Venice and the jTurks, two rebellions were prompted by the Venetians in Greece. The Albanians of the Peloponnese rose in 1647, and
in ^659 the people of Maina (who, incidentally, sold Christians
to Turks as well as Turks to Christians) were able to sack Kaiamata. By taking advantage of local feuds, the Turks were
I
^ George Finlay, A History of Greece, vol. v, p. 57 (Oxford, 1877).
\ 83


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
able to reduce the Mainotes, many of whom fled the country
to Italy and to Corsica, where their descendants still live around Cargese. These diversions in the Morea could not prevent
Crete from falling into Turkish hands in 1669, except for the
three fortresses of Grabusa, Suda and Spinalonga (Fig. 17). The renewal of war between Venice and Turkey in 1684
brought greater success to the Christian cause. In 1683, the Turks had been repulsed from Vienna; their best soldiers were engaged in Hungary, and the moment seemed ripe for western
interference in Greece. The Venetian forces were under
Francesco Alorosini, and he entered into negotiation with the
peoples of the two historic centres of resistance to the Turk

Epirus and Maina. In 1684 he captured the Ionian island of Santa Maura, and by August 1687 ^e was the possessor of all the Peloponnese, except Monemvasia (not reduced until 1690). He marched north of the Isthmus and captured Athens, but
failed in an attack on Euboea. After long negotiations the Treaty
of Carlowitz in 1699 gave Venice the whole of the Peloponnese.
The new province was in a sorry condition. Much of the
land had gone out of cultivation; the neglect under Turkish
administration had been aggravated by the destruction of war and by pestilence. According to one estimate, the population
had fallen from over 200,000 inhabitants before the war to
under 100,000. Venetian policy restored prosperity to the
area; agriculture was improved; colonists were settled on
empty lands, and many thousands of families arrived from the
northern shores of the Gulf of Corinth. It has been estimated
that the population of the province rose from 116,000 in 1692
to 177,000 in 1 70 1, and to over 250,000 in 1708; and these figures are probably underestimates.^ But although Venice
improved the land, she failed to keep the sympathies of its people. The commercial policy of the republic hampered the
trade of the area; Venetian soldiers were quartered on its inhabitants; there were religious difficulties between Roman
Catholics and Orthodox. Soon, the Christian inhabitants of
\S . Miller. /i\.uij.\ on the Latin Orinit, p. 418 (Cambridge, i«)-'i).
84


TURKISH GREECE
the peninsula forgot the evils of the old regime. In 1710 one
French traveller found the Greeks of Modon wishing for their return under Turkish domination, and envying the lot of those
Greeks who still lived under it.^
Such were the conditions, when, in 17 14, the Turks, having
defeated Russia, were free to attempt the recapture of the
peninsula. The campaign of 1715 was marked by striking Turkish victories and by mutinies in the Christian garrisons. Even Maina acknowledged the Turk; Tenos, the last Venetian
island in the Aegean, also surrendered; and, in Crete, the last
Venetian fortresses were likewise lost. By the treaty of Passaro
witz in 1 718, Venice relinquished her claim to the Peloponnese.
Her most eastern possessions were now the islands of Cerigo
and Cerigotto. Although she still held the Ionian Islands and
four nearby places on the mainland, she ceased, from this time
onward, to be an important factor in the fortunes of Greece.
But although Venice was no longer a decisive influence in
the Greek world, the Venetian interlude was not without
result. The material prosperity of the Greek lands continued ' to improve, and Turkish policy henceforward made a conscious
attempt to placate the Greek subjects of the empire. The people of the Peloponnese were exempted from the land-tax for two
years. Immigrants were exempted for three years, for the Turks were anxious to attract newcomers to settle on the
wasted lands, and from this period dates another immigration
of Albanians. At the heart of the empire, in Constantinople,
an administrative aristocracy was developing among the
Greek officials. Known as Phanariotes, from the 'Phanar'
quarter of the city, these Greeks played an increasingly im
portant part in administrative affairs during the eighteenth
century. The four great Phanariote officers were those of
dragoman of the Porte, dragoman of the Fleet, prince of
Moldavia and prince of Wallachia. Around these great ones were crowds of minor Greek officials. Moreover, if Venetian power was declining, so was Turkish
' A. cle La Moiraye, Travels, vol. i, p. 333 (London, 1 723.1.
85


I
MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE |t
power, despite the victory of 1 718. The Turkish failure to take !
Vienna in 1683 marked the transition from an expanding to
,
a declining Turkey., In the north-west, Austria, and in the I
north-east, Russia, were soon to press back the Turkish frontiers.
With the eighteenth century, too, came the beginnings of an i effort to make the Greek lands independent.
i
RUSSIAN INTERFERENCE ^'
Of the two rising enemies of the Turk, Russia was, to exercise ;
the most decisive influence upon Greek affairs. Russian i
interest in south-east Europe was a natural corollary to the i expansion of the Russian state under Peter the Great (1689- ' 1 725) and his successors, and the Russo-Turkish wars were an i
inevitable consequence of a Russian Black Sea policy. Russian i
imperial agents appeared in various parts of European Turkey <
to prepare their fellow-Orthodox Christians for the day of I
liberation. The possibility of active resistance, however, did i
not come until after the middle of the century. In the sixtiesij
Russian agents were busily stirring up trouble in the historic 1
centre of disaffection at Maina, and an English visitor to 
Greece in 1767 heard people frequently talk of their approaching deliverance through Russian aid. The Sultan appears tc >
have shown but a careless contempt for these intrigues.
In 1 768 the Russo-Turkish war broke out over the question of (
Poland, and two brothers named Orlofl' at once proceeded- to 1
Greece to organize an insurrection. The hopes of Catherine
the Great were so high that Voltaire even thought it possible that Constantinople might soon become the capital of the Russian empire. But the small Russian force that landed in \
the Peloponnese in 1 769 failed to rouse Greek national feeling.
Many Greeks had no wish to exchange one foreign ruler for another, and were not prepared to swear allegiance to Gatherme. ; jj The result was a complete defeat of the Russo-Greek forces by
the Turks at Tripolitsa. But if the Russians had failed in the
Peloponnese, they had been successful north of the Danube;
i\nd, too, the Russian fleet that appeared in the Aegean sue
86


TURKISH GREECE
ceeded in occupying many of the Cyclades, which were greatly depopulated owing to corsairs and emigration. The war was ended in 1774 by the Treaty of Kutschuk Kainardji, by which
Russia secured a firm grip upon the north shore of the Black
Sea, and obtained also an international sanction for the rights
of the Orthodox Christians of the Turkish empire. This vague
stipulation was to provide a pretext for Russian interference
in the domestic affairs of the Turkish empire.
During the early years of the peace, both Greeks and Turks suffered greatly from bands of Albanians who had been employed in the Turkish army but who now ravaged far and wide, both in the Peloponnese and to the north of the Isthmus.
The condition of much of the countryside was desperate. The population of the Peloponnese (excluding Maina) had again
been reduced to 100,000, and it was estimated that about 80,000 people had either died or emigrated; many had gone to the Crimea; over 12,000 had gone to Istria. The Albanian marauders were not put down until the dispatch of a Turkish expedition to the Peloponnese in 1779; some Albanians were
induced to settle peacefully, others were exterminated. After
this there was considerable improvement in the countryside;
even the restless Mainotes were induced to pay regular tribute.
Despite the plague of 1 781-5, the population of the Pelopon
nese had greatly increased by the end of the century.
Russian interest did not abate after 1774. Catherine at one
time suggested a restoration of the Byzantine empire, under her grandson, with Constantinople as its capital. Russian propaganda continued to be active in the Greek lands; a
military academy for Greeks was established in Russia, and its
pupils were selected from the principal Greek families by the
IRussian consuls. In 1 783, a commercial treaty with the Sultan gave Greeks the right to trade under the Russian flag. From
now onwards, Greek shipping spread actively over the Medi
terranean, and increasing commercial prosperity contributed
to the new sense of Hellenic unity that was developing during
ihe years.
87


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
In 1787 Russo-Turkish antagonism once more flared into
war over the question of the Crimea, and Russian agents
scattered manifestos throughout Greece, inviting co-operation against the Turk. This succeeded in rousing the Albanian Christians around Suh, but it was evident that they were not suflicicntly strong to provide a major diversion in the war.
Nor were the exploits of pirates in the Aegean, infamous
though they were, sufficient to turn the scales of warfare
against the Turk. In 1792, Catherine, without consulting her
Greek supporters, concluded the Treaty of Jassy with the
Sultan; this treaty extended the Russian frontier to the Dniester
in the north, and provided for a general amnesty for all Greeks
involved in the war. By this time, however, a new factor in the form of the French Revolution had appeared to complicate
the policies of all European states.
THE RISE OF GREEK NATIONAL FEELING
The struggle for Greek independence was to come about not merely as an instrument of Russian policy but as a result of
rising national self-consciousness among the Greeks themselves.
The French Revolution, breaking out in 1789, was a powerful stimulus to every people in Europe, and the enthusiasm of its
rallying cries—Liberty and Freedom—found a responsive
answer in Greece. One of the warmest supporters of the new
ideas was Constantine Rhigas (1760-98), born at Velestino.
It was he who wrote the famous Greek version of the Marseil
laise, paraphrased by Byron as 'Sons of the Greeks, arise'. It
was he, too, who founded a Heiairia, a society to promote
Greek patriotic sentiment and to provide the Greeks with arms. Believing that the influence of the French Revolution would
shortly lead to action in the Balkans, he went to Vienna to organize the movement among exiled Greeks and their sympathizers. From here, he published many Greek translations
of foreign works, not in classical Greek but in the common
tongue. He also formed a collection of national songs which.


TURKISH GREECK
though not pubhshed until sixteen years after his death, was
passed from hand to hand in manuscript, arousing patriotic
enthusiasm everywhere in Greece. His work w as cut short, for he was handed over by the Austrian government to the Turks,
and was shot in 1798. The death of Rhigas did nothing to abate the intellectual
ferment that \s as active among the Greeks, and one indication of this was the work of Adamantios Korais (i 748-1 833). He was the son of a merchant of Smyrna, though from 1782
onwards he lived in France (in Paris itself after 1788). Inspired by the French Revolution he devoted himself to furthering the cause of Greek independence. Laying great stress on the
classical inheritance of the Greeks, he sought to systematize the
written language of his country in accordance with classical
tradition. The result, something between the classical tongue and the common speech, was not merely of academic interest;
for, in Greece as in other countries, the codifying of the written
language, so that it became intelligible to all peoples and
classes, was a powerful factor in calling into being a new nation, and the name of Korais must ever remain an important one in
the story of the Greek revolt. Nor was Korais the only man to
work along these lines. In the Ionian islands, a school of
writers was busily at work collecting folk songs to feed Greek
patriotism with memories of its past glory and heroism. It is true they wjote in the popular tongue and did not follow the
systematization of Korais, but both schools of thought were
symptoms of an educational revival and of the new feeling of nationahty in Greece.
Despite the great influence of the French Revolution upon Greece, the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars hardly touched Greece itself. In 1 797, the Venetian RepubHc was extinguished and the Ionian islands were occupied by the French as a
stepping-stone to the East. The general commanding the
French troops was instructed : ' Be careful in issuing proclama
tions to the Greeks to make plenty of reference to Athens and
Sparta.' Napoleon himself addressed the Mainotes as 'worlhy
7 89 w r.


MEDIEVAL AND TURKISH GREECE
descendants of the Spartans who alone among the ancient
Greeks knew the secret of preserving political liberty'. The
common fear of French interference in Greece even drew
together for a short time those irreconcilable foes, the Tsar
and the Sultan; France was forced to evacuate the Ionian
islands in the following year, and in 1800 they became a federal republic under the joint protection of Russia and
Turkey. But the unnatural aUies were soon at war, and in 1807 the islands were ceded to France. They were taken by
the British in 1809-10, and emerged in 18 15 as a protectorate
under British control, and so they remained until 1864.
The Congress of Vienna in 181 5 did not attempt to solve the
problem of south-eastern Europe, and Greece remained part of the Sultan's domain. There were, however, signs everywhere
of the new spirit of Greek nationality. A new Hetairia had
been created at Odessa in 18 14, and its influence now extended throughout European Turkey. Thus the Albanians in Greece
felt as Greek as the Greeks, and were to play a great part in
the liberation to come. A feeling of expectancy was evident
among the Phanariotes of Constantinople as well as among the bishops of the Orthodox Church. Travellers who returned from Greece brought away the impression that a crisis was at hand.
In the meantime, Turkish administration continued steadily
to decUne. Inefficiency and corruption were to be encountered
everywhere. The local officials of the empire were straining after independence, and a series of rude shocks prepared the
way for the Greek insurrection. Serbia had been in revolt
since 1804, and an Albanian adventurer, Mehemet Ali, had become virtually independent in Egypt. Another Turkish official, AH Pasha of Janina, had also become independent in
Epirus, and, with Turkish action aga* t the rebel, a favour
able moment had arrived for the war of liberation. The first outbreak against the Turk in Moldavia and Wallachia (1821) was soon quelled. But before this northern revolt was over, tlic Greeks of the Peloponnese had risen and the struggle for Greek independence had begun.
90


CHAPTER III
MODERN GREECE, 1821-1939
I. THE WAR OF INDEPENDENCE, 1821-32
THE PREPARATION FOR WAR
The literary' and classical revival of the late eighteenth century
was merged with the ferment of ideas produced by the *En
lightenment' and the French Revolution. But the rise of
Russia at the expense of Turkey led the Greek clergy and
people to renew an older and simpler dream of freedom, in
which the expulsion of the Turks and possession of land were more prominent than the purification of language or ideas. The Greeks had never been fully disarmed : the klephts of the
Peloponnese, half brigands and half patriots, had become more daring than ever. Napoleon sent emissaries from Italy
to the Peloponnese in 1797, and hundreds of peasant warriors enlisted in the Ionian regiment of the French Republic, which had momentarily annexed these islands. Many Greeks looked also to Ali Pasha of Janina, who was conducting, with French
backing, a spirited struggle for his own independence in Epirus.
Finally, the Greek (and Albanian) sailors, particularly those
of the islands of Hydra and Spezzia (Spetsai) off the eastern
coast of Argolis, were rising in wealth and confidence, and felt
little fear of the Turkish navy, which was manned by unreliable -Greek cr«ews and commanded by Turkish officers often ignorant
of the sea.
The meri~ who created or revived the more or less secret
society, Filiki Hetairia, at Odessa in 1814 were rather revolu
tionary than traditionalist in temper. It was active among the hellenizing elements in Wallachia and Moldavia and among Greeks engaged in shipping and trade with Constantinople
and the Black Sea; but its influence in Greece was limited
91


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
until 1819-20, and its activities were then soon merged in the general movement which was hardly secret any longer. Encouraged by some of the Russian Consuls in Turkey, but not
countenanced by the Russian Government, the society's agents
glorified Russia as the expected leader of a crusade. The meeting between Napoleon and the Tsar at Tilsit (1807) had been followed by a new Russian war against Turkey; and the Peace Treaty of Bucharest (181 2) between Tsar and Sultan
left a number of still unsettled disputes which might lead to a
diplomatic rupture at any time. It was true that the statesmen at Vienna in 1 814-15 agreed on a conservative system in
Europe, and could ill afford an upheaval in the Balkans. But
the Quadruple Alliance did not include any guarantee of the
Turkish empire; while the Holy Alliance, and the character of
Alexander I who initiated it, implicitly excluded any such idea.
The Greek patriots expected help from the Tsar or at least
from his Corfiot minister. Capo dTstria; they were hardly
aware of the Tsar's growing distrust of revolutionary movements anywhere. In spite of appearances, therefore, the
Levant was in no such state of tranquillity as the Sultan, Metternich, and most of the European merchants desired.
THE STRUGGLE, 182I-27
The War of Independence could not have been won by the
Greeks without the armed intervention of foreign Powers; but, equally, the movement could hardly have been permanently suppressed if these Powers had held aloof. The Powers were
led to intervene, partly in order to remove the deadlock which threatened constant disturbance and piracy in the Aegean, but
also by the pressure of public opinion at home; and the very
success of the Greeks in creating this deadlock was due rather
to the spirit which animated them than to their physical
resources in so unequal a struggle.
The signal for revolt was given in March 1821 by a raid upon
Jassy and Bucharest from Russian territory; but this ill-con
92


82 1-32
sidered enterprise was disavowed by the Tsar, and was finally suppressed in June without eliciting any sympathy from the Romanian peasantry. Meanwhile, in April, a spontaneous but
ill-coordinated rising in the Peloponnese, led by the clergy, the 'primates' (landowners and magistrates) and many armed chieftains, began with a wholesale extermination of the Turks.
Turkish reprisals, including the execution of the Patriarch at
Constantinople, led to the departure of the Russian ambassador
and a formal rupture of relations. For the next four years the
other Powers attempted, with diminishing success, to prevent
the revolt in Greece from becoming the occasion of a general attack by Russia upon Turkey, which might be followed by an upheaval all over Europe. England, no less than Austria, was anxious to keep the Tsar quiet. Both were relieved when
Capo dTstria, the advocate of a forward policy, had to retire
in 1822; but in Switzerland, for the next five years, he was
active in promoting sympathy and relief for the Greeks. And,
whereas Metternich hoped to see the revolt soon quietly
suppressed. Canning began to see an opportunity either of intervening alone to England's advantage or, if that were
impossible, of joining hands with the Tsar in order to keep
some control over the issue. In either case, the Greeks were
likely to profit.
In spite of personal, sectional and regional quarrels, much
savage cruelty and a great lack of discipline, the Greeks showed
themselves to be brave soldiers and skilful sailors. The Pelo
ponnese was nearly cleared of the Turks, who failed to open
the way for its reconquest either by way of Attica and the Isthmus or across the Gulf of Corinth. The Turks underrated
their enemies and failed at first to secure the coasts and islands
against the Greek ships under Andreas Miaoulis. During this respite the Greeks were unable to organize their government
on a firm basis. An assembly, not recognized by rival bodies,
produced in January 1822 a little-heeded 'Constitution of Epidaurus', and elected the Phanariote Alexander Mavro
kordato as President. The militaiy chicfiains resented the
93


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
attempt to Ibrm a regular government. But the 'European'
Greeks had on their side both the wealthy islanders and the
European Committees which were collecting funds (in England
chiefly under the influence of Byron and also of the Benthamites)
;
between them, they held the purse-strings, and by the end of 1824
their authority seemed to be well established. Meanwhile, the Sultan purchased the help of his nominal vassal, Mehemet Ali, Pasha of Egypt, by allowing him to subdue and occupy Crete and by promising further rewards for the conquest of the Peloponnese. Miaoulis was no longer
able to deny the sea passages to their combined fleets. Early in 1825, Mehemet's son Ibrahim landed an Arab army of
more than 10,000 men at Modon in the south, and soon overran a great part of the Peloponnese, without, however, being
strong enough to reduce it systematically. North of the Isth
nms, Missolonghi (Mesolongion) held out in the west until
April 1826, two years after Byron's death there, and the
Moslem forces could not recover Attica until the French
philhellcne Fabvier was forced to sunender the Acropolis in
June 1827. ^y t^is time the prospect of foreign intervention
was at last taking shape.
FOREIGN INTERVENTION, 1827-29
At the eleventh hour the Greek provisional government had just agreed on a compromise between the factions : the ' Russian
'
party of Kolokotronis and the chieftains secured in April the
election of Capo d'Istria (henceforward known as Capodistrias) as President for seven years ; the choice of Sir Richard Church and of Lord Cochrane to command the Greek forces on land
and at sea was a concession to the ' English ' party of the islan
ders and some of the primates; the 'French' party of Kolettis, whose support came mainly from north of the Isthmus, was satisfied by the pubhcation in May 1827 of the extremely democratic 'Constitution of Troizen'. NaupHa was still in Greek hands, and Ibrahim, when he took the field again in
94


THE WAR OF INDEPENDENCE, 182I-32
April, Still found so many centres of armed resistance that he
adopted a new policy of systematic devastation among the vineyards of Messenia and Elis. Before his death in December 1825, Tsar Alexander I had
already ceased to discuss the Greek question with his conti
nental allies, and leaned towards the more active policy which
his successor Nicholas I was to pursue more resolutely. Can
ning disliked the double prospect of an Egyptian occupation in Greece and of Greek piracy in the Aegean, but he was
hardly in a position to move alone in response to a Greek
appeal for British protection (June 1825). The upshot was the
Protocol signed by the duke of Wellington at St Petersburg on 4 April 1826. The two governments agreed to impose on both
parties, by means of joint or separate mediation, a settlement
giving to the Greeks, within unspecified boundaries, an autonomous but tributary status, with compensation for the Turkish
proprietors. On 29 April the Assembly made a formal request
for mediation on this basis, but staked out its claim for the
future by arguing for the inclusion of every region, subdued
or not, that had taken up arms during the revolt.
Even before the Protocol was signed, the Tsar sent an
ultimatum to the Sultan requiring negotiation on outstanding Russo-Turkish disputes, and the resulting Convention of Akkerman (October 1826) was a diplomatic success for Russia. The Bourbon government of France, to whom a section of the
Greeks had also appealed, desired to share, not in a revolution,
but in a crusade. This prolonged but enlarged the negotiations.
The tripartite Treaty of London (6 July 1827), signed during
Canning's brief premiership, added little to the proposals of
the Protocol, but an additional article provided for sending a
combined fleet to Greek waters in order to enforce an armistice
on both parties—* without however taking any part in the
hostilities'. Both parties accepted the armistice, but neither
Ibrahim on land, nor the English philhellene Hastings at sea, ceased operations. Stratford Canning at Constantinople went
a little beyond his instructions by referring in a private lettrr
95


MOUER N (; REECE, 1 8 2 I - I Q39
to cannon-shot as the final arbiter; this was repeated by
Admiral Codrington to his captains. By such ambiguities the
governments were able to avoid direct responsibility for the decisive conflict in the Bay of Navarino on 20 October, when the Turkish and Egyptian fleets were destroyed by the naval
squadrons of England, Russia and France. Metternich might
call this encounter a 'frightful catastrophe', and Wellington,
who came into office in January 1828, might describe it as an
'untoward event'; but the ambassadors had already left Con
stantinople, and England was not released from her obligations
under the treaty even if Russia should separately pursue the
quarrel to the point of war. The Egyptians soon evacuated the Peloponnese, after a mere
show of resistance to a French force, which arrived in the name of the three Powers and which stayed there from 1828 to 1833.
But the Sultan would not yield. He had denounced the Convention of Akkerman and almost invited the Russian declara
tion of war (April 1828); nothing but a disastrous second campaign forced him to accede to the Treaty of London as part of the peace treaty signed at Adrianople (14 September 1829) i"^ ^he presence of a Russian army.
THE NEW KINGDOM, 1829-32
The future status and the frontiers of Greece were still undetermined. Wellington thought that a small independent state under a European sovereign would be less open to Russian
influence than a larger territory still tributary to Turkey. As
President, Capodistrias was somewhat unjustly suspected by England and France of being a tool of the Tsar. His services to Greece have been underrated, but in attempting personal
rule he had not sufficient means of enforcing it; faction and anarchy culminated in his assassination (October 1831). Meanwhile Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, soon to be the first king of Belgium, whose name luid been canvassed as early
96


THE WAR OF INDEPENDENCE, 1821-32
as 1825, accepted and then declined the throne of Greece (February-May 1830); it was accepted in May 1832 by King
Louis I of Bavaria, an enthusiastic philhellene, for his younger
son Otho, then aged 17 (see table on p. 102). Delegates from
Thessaly, Epirus, Chios and Crete attended the fourth National
y\ssembly (August 1829), t>ut these regions were in full Turkish
occupation. Wellington wanted at first to liberate only the
Peloponnese and the lesser islands, excluding even Euboea;
but the three ambassadors in conference at Poros (December 1828) had recommended a more generous settlement, and public opinion could not conceive a Greece without Athens at
least. The northern frontier, as offered to Leopold in 1830,
ran south-westwards from the Gulf of Zeitoun to the mouth of the Aspropotamos ; but Palmerston was able to secure for Otho
in 1832 the line proposed at Poros in 1828, from the Gulf of Volos in the east to the Gulf of Arta (Amvrakia) in the west, including Acarnania but leaving the northern shore of both
gulfs (and the southern point of the latter) in Turkish hands
(Fig. 20). A Turkish garrison remained in the Acropolis until March 1833, and Athens was a mere village when it became
the capital of Greece.
Among the islands, the ambassadors had proposed to include both Samos and Crete, with the support of Palmerston in
opposition. But Palmerston in office could not or would not
reverse the decision of 1830, which was based on the view
that Samos (like Chios and Mytilene) was too near the coast
of Asia Minor, and Crete too rich and distant a prize, with its
strong Turkish minority, to be entrusted to the infant state.
Samos obtained, and Chios recovered, a tolerably autonomous status, though Samos was badly misgoverned and Chios never
recovered its old prosperity after the Turkish massacre of the
islanders in 1822. Crete was restored to the Sultan in 1840
after fifteen years under Egyptian rule; two generations of
periodical risings passed before the Turkish garrison was re
moved in 1898, and the Cretan Greeks' desire for full union
with Greece was not satisfied until 191 2.
97


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
^^ 18b4
m2 1881
^
1913 (v3 1922
ZOO Km
Fig. 20. The growth of Greece
Based on (i) R. Muir and G. Philip, Historical Atlas, p. 86, 6th ed. (London, 1924) ; (2) I. Bowman, The New World, pp. 403 and 515, 4th ed. (New York, 1928). The frontier of 188 1 was modified in 1897 when a number of small points were retroceded to Turkey. The Treaty of Sevres (August 1920) gave Greece thegreater part of EasternThrace and also Smyrna, the latter subject to a plebiscite in five years' time. These provisions came to nothing after the disaster of September 1922 (see p. 120), and were cancelled by the treaty of Lausanne (July 1923).
2, THE REIGN OF OTHO /, 1833-S2
Since Leopold's withdrawal had been grounded pardy on
rumours of opposition, the Powers did not consult the Greeks
in advance about their next choice. Russia stipulated against
any Constitution as a condition of advancing her share of the
promised loan of 60,000,000 francs from the three Powers. The Bavarian Regents for the young King Otho, who landed at NaupUa on 6 February 1833, determined to administer the
98


THE REIGN OF OTHO I, I 833-62
country from the centre, giving office only to the most 'European' Greeks such as Trikoupis, Kolettis and Mavrokordato.
Bavarian ministers soon gave place to Greeks; but, on coming
of age in 1835, Otho himself presided over his Cabinet. Much
was gained in the first ten years of Bavarian rule, but the
leaders and veterans of the revolution were ill content, and
some of them kept the tradition of local insurrections alive for many years. Officials nominated and removable by the Crown filled the place that had been occupied under the Turks by the
primates and clergy in a crude form of local self-government. The establishment of an autocephalous state Church was un
popular, lacking the consent of the Patriarch until 1852, and coming from a king for whom as a Roman Catholic no Ortho
dox rite of coronation was possible. Centralization, police
supervision, taxation and statistics became the order of the day.
Although the bloodless revolution of September 1843, which
forced the king to promise a Constitution, was managed by the
military men, Orthodox and Russian in their sympathies, the
first prime ministers under the Constitution of 1844 were
Mavrokordato, who was associated with the 'English' party,
and then his rival Kolettis, who was favoured by the French.
Both of them shared the official belief in centralization ; but, whereas the former wanted the Greeks to put their modest
house in order before looking to expand, the latter shared the more popular view that expansion was the first condition for improvement. Wearing the national dress and surrounded by
patriots of the 'national party', Kolettis gained the sympathy
of the king, and still more of the energetic queen. After his death in 1847, memories of the War of Independence were
kept alive in the names of succeeding ministers. It was intended that the nominated Senate (Yerousia) of twenty-seven members should be a conservative check upon the Chamber
of Deputies (Vouli) elected by universal manhood suflfrage,
but in practice the Senate soon became a platform for criticism
by the Opposition.
Nationalist sentiment was stirred by Palmerston's over-hasty
99


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
blockade of the Piraeus in 1850 for the sake of dubious monetary
claims (a proceeding endorsed by a small majority in the Commons but censured in the House of Lords), and more
permanently by the rising agitation in the Ionian islands for
union with Greece. Since the islands had come under British
protection in 181 5, successive governors had done much to
improve their material prosperity, already proportionately
much greater than that of Greece itself. But the constitutional
reforms of 1849, greatly relaxing the constraints imposed in
181 7, did no more than past coercion to allay unrest. The
Greek character of the islands emerged from beneath the
upper layer of ItaUanate society on which the English govern
ment, like its Venetian predecessors, had hitherto reUed for
support. The progress of nationalist and democratic feelings was not in itself a danger to the dynasty. The king and queen were now thorough 'Greeks', and were never so popular as when
their impulse to support insurrections in Epirus and Thessaly during the Crimean war was rudely checked by an Anglo
French military occupation of the Piraeus (1854-7). But after 1859 the Greek desire to imitate Garibaldi could hardly be shared by the German king, although he would not agree to
renounce future attempts against Turkey as the condition for
accepting Lord John Russell's offer of the Ionian islands. At
the same time, a new generation of politicians was growing up,
nursed at the University of Athens in the principles of the
French Revolution ; the rising spirit of opposition was heralded
by the election of Epaminondas Delegeorges to the Chamber
in 1859. In October 1862 a rising in Acarnania, following a
revolt in February of the garrisons at Nauplia and elsewhere, brought the king and queen hurriedly back in their yacht from
a voyage round the coastal ports, only to find the garrison of
Athens in revolt and a provisional government already set up. They sailed away on 24 October and retired to Bamberg, where the ex-king died four years later. Otho was somewhat pedantic and Amalia often impulsive;
100


THE REIGN OF GEORGE I, 1863-I913
but later generations have given a more generous recognition
both to their sincerity and to the progress of Greece under their
rule. In thirty years, population and shipping had alike been
doubled, and foreign trade (no doubt at its lowest ebb in 1833) had been more than quadrupled, only to be more than doubled again in the next decade. Athens had grown from a village
into a small city, and Piraeus from almost nothing into a busy
port. Without repudiating a special relation to the protecting
powers, the king had done his best to make Greece a state more nearly independent in fact ; and, without adding to its territory
during his reign, he had rather encouraged than repressed the
assertion of its future claims.
3, THE REIGN OF GEORGE /, 1863-1913
The revolution itself was bloodless, but faction spread into
minor civil war, while the three Powers tried to find a new
ruler. In order to exclude a nephew of the Tsar, who was
favoured by the Russians and the French, the British govern
ment insisted on respecting the Protocol of 3 February 1830,
which disqualified members of the Powers' reigning families.
In spite of this, the National Assembly ratified an overwhelm
ing plebiscite in favour of Prince Alfred, Queen Victoria's
second son; but three months later they accepted the second
son of the heir to the Danish throne, whose supporters in the
plebiscite (like those in favour of a Greek by birth) had num
bered only six. This settlement was embodied in a Treaty between Denmark and the three Powers (13 July 1863); in October, after 30 years, the Greeks again welcomed a stranger
aged 17 as their king (see table on p. 102). A speculative hope, which had moved many to ask for Prince Alfred, had become a public assurance with the pro
posal for the Danish Prince—England's free consent to the
union of the Ionian islands with Greece (Fig. 20). The cession of the islands, completed by a treaty between Greece and the
lOI


<
H <
a
(d
o
QuO
boO
2u:
ox
>
&
'to
I
I
"^ CO
Ii
2>
ti o bo .s
25 ^
6_'
.2 Co
bo
boU -o c
I3
•2 .s
3
">
la-?'
o .--o o
Z
CO o flJ ^
UJ2
u3 
<^ >
O
r-.
'C ^
^£
oc
^ S'
•c
II
"J
O'-S
-a
3?* S5
a>_
d box pH o
102


THE REIGN OF GEORGE I, 1863-I913
three Powers on 29 March 1864, was partly a sacrifice, but also a means of escape from a diplomatic deadlock and a relief
from trying to govern in face of a Greek unionist Assembly.
The islanders gained at first moral rather than material satis
faction; the upper classes were ill content, and the clergy
objected to the inevitable transfer of authority from the
Patriarch at Constantinople to the Synod in Athens. Yet the cession was an unprecedented gesture by a Great Power, and
an immense gain to Greece in wealth, population and prestige,
and also in the admixture of an aristocratic culture which had
never been subjected to the Turks and was rooted in centuries of Venetian rule.
The title of George I as 'King of the Hellenes' (not 'King of
Hellas') indicated that he must be a constitutional or even a
democratic ruler. It is a tribute to his tact that he was able
for nearly fifty years to keep his footing in the system set up
by the Constitution of 1864, with only occasional resort to the
dismissal of an undefeated ministry or to his right of forming an
extra-parliamentary Cabinet. The first crisis of the reign was
occasioned by the condition of Crete. Behind the tale of fiscal,
judicial and educational grievances was the desire for union
or at least for autonomy, which inspired the desperate struggles
of the insurrection of 1866. The proposal of Napoleon HI and the Tsar for an open Cretan plebiscite was supported by all the Powers except England; but neither Derby nor Gladstone would contemplate anything more than autonomy. The Sultan formulated an Organic Statute which became the nominal law
for the next ten years. Feeling in Athens had been running high in favour of combining support for the Cretans with a new bid for Thessaly and Epirus; but in February 1869 a new premier had to agree, under pressure from the Powers in con
ference, to a declaration renouncing aggression against Turkey.
Another set-back for Greek ambitions was the creation of the Bulgarian Exarchate in 1870 by the Turks at the prompting oi
the Russians: for different reasons, both saw the advantage of isolating Orthodox Slavs in European Turkey i'rom the Greek
103
I


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
influence of the Patriarch. About the same time, internal
quarrels were aggravated by nice questions of constitutional
legality.
Factious passions, easily aroused, were as easily forgotten in
a common wave of patriotic feeling during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8. But the Greeks had Httle sympathy for the
Slavs in revolt, and still less for the increasingly Pan-Slav
Fig. 21. The Balkans in 1878
Jiased on (i; The Cambridge Modern History Atlas, map 119, 2nd ed. l Cambridge,
1924) ; (2) C. Grant Robertson and J. G. Bartholomew. An Historical Atlas of Modern
Europe, plates 23-25, 2nd ed. ^Oxford, 1924^
policy of Russia. Their public resolution 'to occupy the Greek provinces of Turkey' (2 February 1878) came too late, and
was followed so quickly by an armistice between Russia and
Turkey that the Greek army never marched. Volunteers supported a short-lived movement in Epirus; the more serious
104
11


THEREICJN OF GEORGE I, 1B63-I913
risings in Thessaly and Crete were brought to an end by the
mediation of British consuls and by the Turkish undertaking
at San Stefano to adhere more strictly to the Organic Statute
in Crete and to extend its principles to the provinces of Turkey
in Europe. At the Congress of Berlin, which undid the Slav
character of the Russian Treaty of San Stefano (Fig. 21), England unsuccessfully supported the Greeks' claim to direct
representation, but secured for them an undertaking by the Powers to press upon the Sultan an improvement in their
northern frontier so as to run from the mouth of the Salamvrias
(Pinios) to that of the Kalamas (Thiamis) opposite Corfu.
The Turks were resigned to the loss of Thessaly, the richer
but more indisputably Hellenic region; but they clung to
Janina, Preveza and Arta in the west—a region which they
and the Moslem minority described as part of 'Albania', while
to the Greeks it formed a part (and only the southern part) of
'Epirus'. Finally a Conference, from which Greece was ex
cluded, led to a Convention (24 May 1881) w^hich left Janina and Preveza to Turkey but gave to Greece the town and
district of Arta as well as almost the whole of Thessaly (Fig.
22). The Cretan Christians were for the moment not ill
satislied with the concessions made in the Pact of Halepa (October 1878). When Cyprus was unexpectedly ceded in 1878
to Britain (subject to a tribute to the Sultan), the Greek
majority there were as yet more grateful for liberation from
Turkey than critical of the fiscal burdens and constitutional
restrictions of virtual Crown Colony rule.
Fruitless mobilizations, in 1881 and again in 1886, only
added to the public debt. The bellicose Deligiannis, premier
for the first time in 1885, was ousted by his senior and more
realistic rival Trikoupis, ^^ hose periods of office, now as earlier,
were spent in trying to make good by .economic reforms the
expenses of the 'National Party's' policy of expansion. Tri
koupis lived to appease the beginnings of a new outbreak in
Crete (1889), t)ut died in 1896, at the moment when the inability of Turkish governors to restrain the Moslem minority
» 105


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
produced the final insurrection. This time, in spite of the
Powers, Deligiannis \yas supported by the king as well as by
all parties in arming for war, both in Crete and on the conti
nent. Turkey replied to the incursion of irregular bands into
Macedonia by a declaration of war (April 1897): a month later, the Powers had to intervene to save the nation from
defeat and the dynasty from overthrow in a conflict undertaken
against their advice. Certain strategic points along the northern
frontier were retroceded to Turkey (Fig. 22), and the Powers
rs!| Ceded to Turkey in 1897
Frontier in 1897
40 Km.
Fig. 22. Rectification of ihe Turco-Greek frontier, 1897
Based on 'Map to illustrate the rectification of the Turco-Greek frontier in 1897 '. Lithographed at the Intelligence Division, W.O., Feb. 1898 (I.D.W.O.no. 1317):
the map is on a scale of i : 400,000.
instituted a Commission of Control over sufficient Greek revenues to serve the interest of the indemnity to Turkey and of
older national debts also. One half of the Cretan problem was
settled (November 1898) by a four-Power occupation of the chief towns and by appointing as High Commissioner the Gr^ek
106


THE REIGN OF GEORGE I, 1863-I913
king's second son, Prince George, who did much to pacify the
island and to make its autonomy a reaHty. After a disagree
ment with his Cretan councillor, Eleutherios Venizelos, and a proclamation of union with Greece by the Cretan opposition,
Prince George resigned in 1906: the island was being rapidly
and peacefully hellenized under his successor, and the remain
ing international troops had just been withdrawn, when the Near-Eastern crisis of 1908 produced another but still premature proclamation of union. In Macedonia, the Sultan had discovered an ideal method
of fostering Balkan rivalries by showing favour in turn to the
different 'nationalities' which he there misgoverned. After
the creation of the Exarchate in 1870, Bulgarian churches and
schools had been at first encouraged. But the creation of a
virtually independent Bulgaria in 1878, and the inclusion of
Eastern Roumelia in 1885, followed by the growing violence
of Bulgarian agitation after 1895, ^^^ the Sultan to show some
favour to the Serbs of Macedonia, and also the Vlachs, whom the Romanians had lately begun to claim as their kinsmen. It
suited the Turks in 1905 for the first time to give the Vlachs
distinct privileges, in such a way as to instigate a diplomatic
rupture between Romania and Greece. Of the rival claims in Macedonia, the Sultan most feared those of the Greeks and
made fewest concessions to them. In spite of the Powers' pro
gramme of reforms (1903), the reign of terror of the Bulgarian Macedonian Committees became so bad that in 1904 the Greeks organized rival armed bands under klephts and even
army officers. In 1905, the Sultan was forced by a naval
demonstration to accept the measures of international control, which had been arranged by the Powers and were later pro
longed in March 1908 for six years. But the experiment had
done little to pacify the province before it became the starting
point of a novel and momentous revolution.
Since the suspension in 1878 of the Turkish Constitution, hastily conceded two years earlier, Abdul Hamid had enjoyed an Indian summer of bureaucratic power. Administrative
107


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
despotism and foreign control were alike resented by a party
of 'Young Turkish' reformers; their secret 'Committee of
Union and Progress', founded at Geneva in 1891, was transferred to Paris and then in 1906 to Salonica, where it spread rapidly among the army officers, with the sympathy of the Jews and Freemasons. When Enver Bey proclaimed the Constitution in Macedonia and threatened to march on Constanti
nople, the Sultan gave way the next day, 24 July 1908, and
the Powers optimistically agreed to withdraw their controls.
But the proclamation of Prince Ferdinand as independent
'Tsar of the Bulgarians', and the simultaneous annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina by Austria (5-7 October 1908), com
bined with dissensions in the Young Turkish ParHament to
produce a counter-revolution at the capital (13 April 1909). Thereupon the Committee's Macedonian army marched on Constantinople, deposed Abdul Hamid (27 April 1909), and came to terms with Bulgaria and Austria at the expense of the
Serbs, whose friends in Russia failed them.
The Greek government stood aloof from this crisis in the
history of the Turks and the Balkan Slavs, and also dared not accept the renewed proclamation of union made by a Cretan provisional government. Although the remaining European
troops left the island, the Young Turks insisted on forcing
Greece under threat of war to disavow the agitation in Crete,
Macedonia and Epirus, and to place the future of Crete once more in the hands of the Powers (August 1 909) . This humilia
tion led to the seizure of power at Athens by the newly formed
Military League of officers, who were dissatisfied with the
handling of the Cretan question; they invited to Athens the
Cretan leader Venizelos, who was technically a Greek subject.
Victorious in the elections which followed his appointment
(18 October 1910) as prime minister, Venizelos succeeded in
persuading the Military League to dissolve itself in return for
such a revision of the Constitution of 1864 as should make
military intervention in politics unnecessary; this was carried
out (January-June 191 1) by the 'Second Revisionary National
108


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
Assembly'. The elections for the next ordinary Chamber (25
March 191 2) gave him 150 out of 181 members, including all but one of those from north of the Isthmus : always his popu
larity was to be greatest in the newest and frontier regions, and
least secure in the conservative Ionian Islands.
Venizelos's advent to power began a stormy period of triumphs and disasters, of which King George I lived only to
see the beginning: on 18 March 191 3 he was assassinated by a
Greek in the newly occupied city of Salonica, after the virtual union of Crete to Greece and a few months before the fiftieth anniversary of his accession. Between the unhappy Turkish war of 1897 and the appointment of Venizelos as prime
minister in 1910, the king's prudent restraint prevented criti
cism of the dynasty from becoming serious; before and after
those dates he had been generally popular. During his reign,
the Ionian islands, Thessaly and Arta, and finally Crete, had
been incorporated (Fig. 20) ; population had been trebled and
its density doubled ; foreign trade and the tonnage of merchant shipping had alike been more than trebled. Brigandage had been much reduced, nearly 4000 km. of roads and over 1000 km. of railway constructed, and the way was now opening at
last for connexion by rail with Europe. Unfortunately, the
corruption of politics and the violent intervention of the army
had not been eliminated by the surgical operation of 1 911.
4, THE CRISIS OF 1912-23
THE BALKAN WARS, I912-I4
The First Balkan War
The Balkan peoples soon perceived that the Young Turks
were more nationalist than liberal. Then in September 1911
the Italians took occasion to make war on Turkey for the
possession of Tripoli and Cyrenaica, which they had long coveted; they brought pressure to bear by occupying Rhodes,
Cos, Leipsos and ten islands of the Dodecanese (April-May
109


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
1 91 2). A congress of island delegates declared, however, for
union with Greece, and the Treaty of Lausanne (i8 October
191 2), which ended the war with Turkey, provided (in vain)
that the Italians should leave these islands as soon as the Turkish evacuation of the two African provinces (now known
as Libya) should be complete. Thus the Turkish revival, and the ambitions of Italy, gave the Greeks new reasons for thinking
that no time must be lost in making sure of their share in the
'Turkish inheritance'.
Venizelos had already renewed relations with Romania and made overtures to Bulgaria. Bulgaria first negotiated with
Serbia a Treaty of AUiance (13 March 191 2), followed by a Military Convention (12 May), envisaging offensive action
against Turkey and providing for the division of the spoils ; her
Treaty with Greece (29 May) remained defensive in form, but was soon followed by a Military Convention. By September 1 91 2, Montenegro had also come to understandings with the
three larger Balkan States. Early in October she declared war on Turkey, the other three States sent an ultimatum which could have but one answer, and the Greek Chamber completed the annexation of Crete by admitting its deputies and appoint
ing a governor. On 17 October Turkey declared war on Montenegro, Bulgaria and Serbia, but made a bid for Greek
neutrality. Venizelos, however, with his eyes on Macedonia,
rulfiUed his obligations to Bulgaria by declaring war on Turkey
(18 October). The Greeks took a full share in the sweeping
victorv of the Balkan Allies. The armv of the Crown Prince Constantine cleared southern and western Macedonia and entered Salonica on 8 November, only to be joined there by a
rival and suspicious Bulgarian ibrce. The armistice signed on
3 December 191 2 did not include the Greeks, but the Turks acquiesced, under pressure from the Powers, in the full demands
made by the Allies at the London Conference. Thereupon Elnver Bey overthrew the government, repudiated the terms and renewed the war on 3 February 1913; but Janina surrendt red to the Greek Crown Prince on 6 March (twelve days
no


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
before he became King Constantine), Adrianople fell to the Bulgarians, and Scutari to the Montenegrins. By the Treaty
of London (30 May 191 3) Turkey ceded collectively to the Balkan Allies all her territory in Europe (apart from Albania),
except Constantinople and its approaches within a line drawn
from Enez (Ainos) on the Aegean to Midia on the Black Sea.
Crete was finally ceded to Greece, but the fate of the Turkish
Aegean islands and of Albania was to be seittled by the Powers.
The Second Balkan War
The previous dedsion of the Powers (20 December 191 2),
under pressure from Austria and Italy, to accept the principle of an independent Albania, thus depriving Montenegro of Scutari,
Serbia of access to the Adriatic, and Greece of 'Northern
Epirus', led directly to the second Balkan War. The partition of Macedonia became more crucial than ever. In face of Bulgarian provocations, Serbia and Greece made an alliance
on 2 June, and replied to a Bulgar attack at the end of the month by a general advance. In a short but bloody campaign,
the Serbs invaded Bulgaria, the Greeks seized the whole of Macedonia and most of the Thracian coast, and the Romanians took the opportunity to occupy the southern Dobrudja without
firing a shot. By a treaty with Bulgaria signed at Constantinople on 29 September 191 3, Turkey recovered Enez, Adrianople and Kirk-Kilisse, which it had already reoccupied, and also pushed the frontier a little northwards from Midia on the Black Sea. The Treaty of Bucharest (10 August 191 3) between Bulgaria and her Balkan enemies gave most of Macedonia to
the Greeks ; the eastern frontier now reached the Aegean at the mouth of the Mesta (Nestos), excluding Xanthe but including the coveted tobacco port of Kavalla (Fig. 23). The peace treaty between Greece and Turkey (14 November
191 3) left to the decision of the Powers the two most important
questions of the islands and Albania. Among the Turkish Aegean islands, nine had been occupied by the Greeks during
11


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
the war ; in addition, the Assembly of Samos, which had often
been in conflict with its princes, proclaimed union with Greece, and was officially annexed by a Greek force on 15 March 191 3. In February 19 14 the Powers recognized Greek sovereignty over all these islands except Tenedos and Imbros; but for the Italians, the Greeks would no doubt have occupied the Dodecanese also during the Balkan War. The Powers made it a
Fig. 23. The Balkans. 1912-13
Based on C. Grant Rot)ertson and J. G. Bartholomew, An Historual Atlas of Modern Europe, plate 25, 2nd ed. (Oxford, \iy2^^.
condition of their award that the Greeks should withdraw from
those districts of northern Epirus (Santi Quaranta, Chimarra,
Argyrokastro and Koritsa) which they had occupied during the war but now had to surrender to the new state of Albania.
But before the Greek troops had gone, the Greeks in these districts obtained a limited autonomy under international supervision by an arrangement made at Corfu on 17 May.
I \2


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
Prince William of Wied, the chosen ruler of Albania, who
arrived at Durazzo in March, had no authority outside that port and little enough within it.
THE WAR OF I 9 I 4- I «
Thus the outbreak of the European War in August 191 4 was for
the Greeks, as for their Balkan neighbours, only the intensifica
tion of a crisis which had begun two years earlier. The first
signs of the fateful rift between King Constantine and Venizelos
appeared at once. Both men were popular, Venizelos as archi
tect of the Balkan alliance and Cretan union, Constantine for
his leading part in the Balkan campaign. But their sympathies
in the war, as well as their expectations of its outcome, were sharply opposed. The king admired the German army, and
declined with regret an invitation from his brother-in-law the
Kaiser to join the Central Powers. The Cretan statesman was more impressed by the naval power of the Entente countries (also the original guarantors of Greece), by their economic ties
with Greece, and by the strength of their case in the eyes of the
world. Having assured Serbia that, although he could not
move against Austria, he would help her to repel any Bulgarian attack, he made it clear (23 August) that Greece would be
ready to join the Entente Powers against a Turkish attack in return for a guarantee against the Bulgarian danger. A fort
night later, having got their leave to reoccupy northern Epirus,
he advised the king to concert plans with the Allies for an
occupation of Gallipoli; but Greece remained neutral when England declared war on Turkey (5 November). In two further memoranda to the king (January 191 5), he supported
England's invitation to reconstitute the Balkan alliance by
surrendering Kavalla to the Bulgarians in return for AlHed
promises of 'important compensations' on the coast of Asia Minor. In February, he persuaded a Crown Council of former prime ministers to recommend the dispatch of one division to
Gallipoli.
113


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
Dismissed by the king (6 March), Venizelos kept a majority of
nearly 60 at the elections held on 13 June, returned to office on 23 August, and at once renewed his pledges to Serbia against a
Bulgarian attack. When Bulgaria mobilized in September, he
persuaded the reluctant king to mobihze too, and to invite
France and England to supply the army that Serbia lacked;,
before Constantine could change his mind, French troops began
to disembark at Salonica. On 4 October the king again dis
missed him, and again dissolved the Chamber after it had defeated the new ministry. This government, controlled by the Palace and the General Staff, was pledged to 'benevolent
neutrality' towards the Allies and to the view that the Treaty
with Serbia applied only to a purely Balkan conflict. Serbia
was overrun before Allied help could reach her, and Venizelos's
liberal party abstained from the elections (19 December). A Bulgarian force was allowed to occupy Fort Roupel, one of the
keys to eastern Macedonia (May 1916). Greek confidence in the Allies' intentions had not been improved by the Treaty of London (26 April 191 5), which was known to have assigned the Dodecanese to Italy in full
sovereignty, and to have arranged a partition of Albania more
favourable to Italy than to Greece. Confidence in the Allies'
power was also weakened by their inability to help Serbia or
to force the Dardanelles. With the fall of Venizelos, the Allies,
distrusting the king's no longer benevolent neutrality, intro
duced martial law at Salonica, replaced the Greek troops in
Epirus by Italians, and demanded the demobilization of the
Greek army, a 'non-political' government and fresh elections.
Venizelos sailed for Crete, appealed to the Greeks to *save
what may still be saved', landed at Salonica (5 October 1916) and there organized a provisional government which soon declared war on Germany and Bulgaria. Greece now* had two governments : that of Venizelos, supported throughout the newly won regions, but not yet formally
recognized by the AUies beyond the limits ofits actual authority;
that of Constantine, supported by his League of Reservists in
114


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
the provinces of old Greece, and behaving so as to make itself
intolerable to the Allies. The king gained by Athenian resent
ment at the drastic measures of the Allies, who expelled the
enemy legations from Athens, obtained full control of the
Piraeus and of the recently completed railway to Salonica, and punished Greek resistance to a landing party (i December)
by blockading the coasts and insisting on the removal of all
Greek troops and equipment to the Peloponnese. America's
entry into the war (April 191 7), and the failure of the king's
appeals to Berlin for an attack on Venizelist Macedonia, forced
him to show less open hostility to the Allies; but they in turn
had lost patience, and presented an ultimatum requiring his
immediate abdication, and intimating also that the Crown
Prince George, suspected of pro-German sympathies, would
not be acceptable. The next day (12 June 191 7) King Con
stantine appointed his second son, Alexander, in his place,
avoiding a formal abdication, and left Greece with his family
for Switzerland. The French deported some of his supporters to Corsica, and occupied Athens.
At the end of June 191 7 Venizelos, as prime minister of a
reunited government, decl^^ed war on the Central Powers and
recalled the Chamber of June 1915, all but ten of whose
members joined in a vote of confidence. A large number of
anti-Venizelist civil servants and officers were removed, and,
although most of the former had been reinstated by 1920,
many of the latter remained as an irreconcilable and dangerous element in politics., The Allied army had been pinned at
Salonica for a year after landing there in October 191 5. With
the help of Serbian forces brought there from Corfu, they had
been able in November 191 6 to recover at Monastir a small
corner of Serbian territory; in July 1917 a pact signed at Corfu
announced the projected union of the Yugoslavs in a single
state. By the spring of 1918, 250,000 Greeks had been remobilized. But it was not until September 1918 that the
combined French, English, Greek and Serbian armies began
the oflensivc which led to the capitulation of Bulgaria, the abdi
115


MODERN GREECE, l8 2 1-1939
cation of King Ferdinand (4 October), the recovery of Belgrade,
and the signature of an armistice by Turkey on 30 October
1918 (Fig. 24).
\ "\/- THE Mj^CEDONIAN FROMT
Allied lines in 19I8 —i-—i— September ISth. - 22nd. - - - - 30th. 100 Km.
Fig. 24. The Macedonian Front, 191
8
Based on H. VV. V. Temperley, A History of the Peace Conference, vol. iv, p. 14 (London*
1921). The allied line was held by Italians, French, Greek, Serbian and British troops
;
facing them were Germans west of the valley of the Vardar and Bulgarians to the east.
THE PEACE SETTLEMENT, I919-23
The personahty of Venizelos impressed itself strongly at the Peace Conference. Once more Bulgaria paid dearly for the
miscalculations of her rulers: by the Treaty of Neuilly (27 November 191 9) she was partly disarmed and had to restore the southern Dobrudja to Romania, while Greece not only recovered eastern Macedonia but also cut Bulgaria off from
the Aegean by obtaining western Thrace with the small port and railway of Dedeagach (renamed Alexandroiipolis). The
Treaty stipulations for giving Bulgaria economic outlets to the
sea were to be a cause of endless argument: while the Bul
116


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
garians looked for the recovery of Dedeagach, and the Greeks
offered alternative facilities by rail westwards to Salonica, both
parties were too suspicious to agree upon the natural solution

a direct and not very difficult outlet by rail from Sofia down
the Struma valley to Salonica. The Treaty also provided for 'the
reciprocal and voluntary emigration of persons belonging to
racial minorities'. This provision was not so important as that for the compulsory Greco-Turkish exchange of populations that
was to come in 1923, because far fewer people were involved; but it helped to make the northern frontier of Greece an ethnic
as well as a political one (Fig. 25).
In spite of the armistice terms, the Turks could not easily be
disarmed in Asia Minor, and the final settlement with them was long delayed by dissensions among the Powers, by the
rashness of the Greeks, and by the revolution which was re
creating Turkey herself. The Greeks wanted to keep the future
of Constantinople open by making it an international city,
and were represented in the Allied garrison there. Asking for
a large part of the coast of Asia Minor, they were allowed in May 1 91 9 to occupy Smyrna and in December to reoccupy northern Epirus. Early in 1920, in view of the unexpected
strength of the hostile Kemalist movement, the Allied Supreme Council decided to keep the Sultan at Constantinople but to
allow the Greek army to pacify Thrace and also Asia Minor northwards from Smyrna to the Dardanelles. The Treaty of Sevres (signed on 10 August 1920 but never ratified) was highly favourable to Greek ambitions: Greece was to obtain Adrianople and all eastern Thrace to Chatalja
within 20 miles of the capital, together with Gallipoli and the
northern shore of the Sea of Marmora (subject to an Inter
national Commission for the Straits). Smyrna and its hinter
land were placed under Greek administration, with provision
for a local parliament which might opt after five years for
incorporation in Greece (Fig. 20j: Venizelos's aim was to
provide a check on Turkish nationalism and a refuge for the
Greeks of Asia Minor (scattered, but numbering a million or
117


Fig. 25. Ihe languages of Greece and adjoining areas
Based mainly on (i) South-East Europe: Ethnographical Mat), Geographical Section, General StafT, No. 3703a (1918); (2) map in Greek Rejugee Settlement (League of Nations, Geneva, 1926) ; (3) Grande Atlante del Touring Club Italiano, plate 16 (3rd ed. Roma, 1933); (4) A Gazetteer of Greece, Fig. (Permanent Committee on Geographical Names, London, 1942).
The distribution of Vlachs is based on the G.S.G.S map and differs from that ofF'ig 12.
118


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
more) in case of oppression. Turkey ceded all the Aegean
islands which had already been occupied, but the fate of some
remained uncertain until 1923 (see p. 121).
The population of Venizelist Greece had swollen in eight
years from under three to six and a half millions. But the
triumph was short-lived. The country was exhausted by war and prolonged mobilization, and exasperated by the corrup
tion of adventurers attached to Venizelos's party and profiting
by his absorption in making war or peace. Six weeks after the Chamber had unanimously endorsed the treaties, the accidental death of King Alexander (25 October 1920) fatally revived
the one issue that Venizelos most wished to avoid. His prefer
ence was for a constitutional monarchy, and he offered the
Crown to Constantine's third son. Prince Paul; but Paul
refused it, as properly belonging to his father or his elder
brother George. Venizelos's opponents then all combined to
defeat him by more than two to one at the elections (14 November), and, after his departure and the removal of his
officials, arranged a plebiscite (5 December) in which the
\^enizelists abstained and all but a handful of over a million
Greeks voted for the return of King Constantine. A fortnight
later the king reached Athens after more than three years of
exile. Probably the revival of Turkey and the jealousy ofltaly
would have deprived even a Venizelist Greece of the full
harvest of the Treaty of Sevres; in addition, the Allies now
refused to recognize Constantine and withdrew their financial
support. France made haste to secure herself in Syria by a
reconciliation with Ankara (20 October 192 1). In England, Mr Lloyd George's pro-Greek policy was feared, not only in
official quarters as likely to offend Moslem sentiment in India,
but also by the public as likely to delay complete demobiliza
tion.
Meanwhile the three Powers (England, France and Italy) which met in London (February-March 1921) to discuss a revision of the Treaty of Sevres in Turkey's favour, were con
firme in their views by the failure of a preliminary Greek
119


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
attack (March-April). In a second offensive, the Greek army
came within 60 miles of Ankara (July), but had to retreat
again after a costly defeat at the River Sakaria (26 August).
Constantine, who had rejected AUied offers to mediate in the
spring, now placed the fate of Greece unconditionally in the hands of Lord Curzon and the Powers (December 192 1), and
carried on at home a policy of revenge against the Venizelists.
His minister Gounaris ignored one defeat in the Chamber
(March 1922); and, although he resigned in May when he could no longer conceal the Powers' proposals (note of 26
March) for the evacuation of Asia Minor, he formed a new
coalition. At the end of August the Turks took the offensive
and entered Smyrna a fortnight later (9 September 1922). Most of the city was burned to the ground amid the confusion
of escaping Greek civilians and soldiers. Before resigning, the
Greek government ordered demobilization of the demoralized
army. The consequence of this disaster haunted Greek politics for
fifteen years or more. When Colonel Plastiras headed a
revolution among units of the army assembled in Chios, King
Constantine abdicated (September 1922) in favour of his eldest son George II (who had been excluded as pro-German by the Powers two years earlier), and died next year at Palermo.
Six of his leading advisers, including his prime minister and
commander-in-chief, were among those tried by a revolu
tionary court martial of eleven officers (only two of whom, however, were Venizelists), and were shot on 29 November
1922. This unusual violence was due to panic, and to revulsion
in Athens against a government which had long concealed by grandiose promises the real weakness of Greece's changed
situation. The execution of civilian politicians shocked those
of other countries, but Lord Curzon, presiding over the Conference which had just met at Lausanne, did not break off relations with the revolutionary government.
The settlement with Kemalist Turkey was at last completed by the Treaty of Lausanne (24 July 1923). For the most part,
120


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
the treaty merely confirmed the changes in the Treaty of
Sevres already brought about by intervening events or decisions of the Powers. It also substantially confirmed the arrangements for a compulsory Greco-Turkish exchange of population that had been agreed by the Convention of Lausanne in January of the same year. The elimination of the Greeks from Asia Minor was
a fact which the Powers, themselves in part responsible for the adventure, could only temper by the arrangements made for an
exchange of populations (Figs. 25 and 26). A revision of the
frontier in Thrace had already been settled at Paris in March
1922, and Turkey now recovered the line of the Maritsa which she held in 19 14. In November 1921 the Conference of Ambas
sadors had restored northern Epirus to Albania, with the frontier
of 19 14. Tenedos and Imbros, reserved for Turkey in 1914 but occupied by the Powers during the war and handed over to
Greece after the Treaty of Sevres, were now to be demilitarized along with the Greek islands of Lemnos and Samothrace. An agreement, wrung from Italy by Venizelos at the height
of his power (29 July 1919) and confirmed in 1920 by the
Treaty of Sevres, had assigned to Greece the islands of the Dodecanese, with the important exception of Rhodes which
was to exercise an option by plebiscite within five years ( 1 9 1 9)
or fifteen years (1920) after the supposed case of the cession of Cyprus to Greece by England. This agreement was repudiated
by Italy in 1922, the Treaty of Sevres being still unratified; and at Lausanne all these islands were ceded by Turkey un
conditionally to Italy. The Italians argued that their first
conditional promise of evacuation, made to Turkey in 191 2,
was overridden by the Allies' offer of the islands to Italy in the
Treaty of London (April 191 5) and by the state of war with Turkey which followed; and that their second promise of evacuation, made in 1919-20 in favour of Greece, was over
ridden by the non-ratification and general revision of the
Treaty of Sevres, and by the non-fulfilment of the condition
which applied only to Rhodes. But the real reason lay in their
de facto occupation since 191 2 and in their intention, carried
9 121 W G


Fig. 26. Major ethnic groups in Macedonia, 191 2 and 1926 j
Based on a map in Greek Refugee Settlement (League of Nations, Geneva, 1 926) . S
The main feature of the map is the disappearance of the Moslem element. There is also a reduction in the number of Bulgarians in many eparchies; * Macedo-Slavs* are included under the heading 'Bulgarians'. The large rectangle shows the changes in the ethnic composition of Macedonia as a whole.
122


THE CRISIS OF I912-23
out gradually, of developing naval and air bases there. The
islands remained directly under the Italian Foreign Office,
and the inhabitants had no chance of expressing any desire for union with Greece.
Cyprus, with about 350,000 inhabitants (one-fifth Turks),
had been occupied by England in return for her services to
Turkey in 1878, annexed in 1914 when she declared war on Turkey, and momentarily offered to Greece in October 191
5
on the unfulfilled condition that Greece would immediately enter the war. But England promised France in 191 6 not to
alienate Cyprus (so near to Syria) without French consent; its cession by Turkey to England at Sevres was confirmed at Lausanne and it became a Crown Colony in name, as it had
long been in effect, by Letters Patent of 10 March 1925. At
the same time the number of elected members of the Legislative
Council was increased, but not so as to give an elected Greek
majority. The annual tribute of about ;;(^93,ooo, due to Turkey
by the Convention of 1878, had been assigned from the first to the service of the Ottoman debt ; proving a heavy burden on
the island, it was soon partly offset by variable grants from
the Treasury (fixed in 19 10 at ^^50,000), and then wholly
remitted (1928) in return for a small annual contribution of
;(^i 0,000 for imperial defence. The island was not used as a
strategical base, and was somewhat neglected. In 1925 and
1929 the elected members petitioned for redress of grievances
and for union with Greece; the decisive rejection of the latter demand by both Conservative and Labour governments did not put an end to financial and educational grievances. A
budget dispute in 1931 led to riots at the capital and demon
strations involving about one-third of the villages. As a result
6f this episode, the Legislative Council was suspended. The
agitation for union, which hardly existed before 191 9, met with some sympathy in Greece, but no encouragement from Veni
zelos; it was hampered by the islanders' knowledge of the much heavier financial burdens laid on post-war Greece. The Treaty of Lausanne put an end to an almost continuous


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
Ibreign crisis of more than ten years' duration. The Greeks,
discouraged but acquiescent, began to sec that their 'Great i
Idea' could hardly be reahzed in full and that defence of their gains by reconciliation with their neighbours was more urgent
than further expansion. In spite of recent set-backs, those
gains were great indeed. But reconciliation abroad was bound
to be slow in coming, at least while the domestic crisis was still
unsolved.
5. DOMESTIC AFFAIRS, 1923-40
THE REPUBLIC OF I923-35
After the abdication of Constantine in September 1922, the country had to face the issue between Republicans and
Royalists—an issue easily confused with that between Veni
zelists and anti-Venizelists. The Populists, who favoured a
democratic monarchy, abstained from the elections (December 1923), in which the Venizelists won 200 and the Republicans
120 seats; but the latter had such energetic backing from officers of the army and navy that the young King George II
left Greece without formally abdicating. Invited by the National Assembly, Venizelos made a brief reappearance as
prime minister (January 1924), but returned to Paris when
his proposal for a plebiscite, to be followed by a general election, was opposed by the Republicans. Supported by the Republican Officers' League, the new premier Papanastasiou first used a vote of the Assembly to proclaim the Republic on 25 March
1924 and then held a plebiscite (13 April) in which more than
two-thirds of the voters confirmed his action.
In June 1925 the leader of this Officers' League, General ^
Pangalos, overthrew the next ministry, dissolved the Assembly
which had completed the draft of a Constitution, issued by proclamation a modified Republican Constitution (30 Sep
tember 1925), and promised to submit it for ratification after
124


DOMESTIC AFFAIRS, I923-4O
fresh elections. But in January 1926 he announced his intention to concentrate all executive and administrative powers in his
own hands, postponed any election indefinitely, and suspended
the whole of the new Constitution except the first Article which
declared Greece to be a RepubHc. Security of tenure for the civil service was suspended, and newspapers were forbidden
to publish any protests. Without extolling dictatorship in
principle, Pangalos professed to be overriding Athenian party
politics in the interests of the country as a whole, and promised
to revive the Constitution with increased powers for the Presi
dent shortly to be elected. By skilful manoeuvres he secured
his own election as President ia April 1926. Four months later he was overthrown by General Kondilis, a former associate
whom he had exiled. After dissolving the RepubHcan Guard
of Pangalos by force, Kondilis thereupon offered to dissolve his
own party (National Republicans) and to give up the premier
ship after the general election fixed for November 1926. This
example of public spirit made possible a Coalition government of leading Royalists and Republicans to match a Chamber in which the latter had only a small majority. Under Republican pressure, and working on the previous Assembly's draft of
1925, the new Chamber at last adopted the final text of the
Republican Constitution on 2 June 1927. But the resignation
of the Royalist Tsaldaris, and then of the Republican leader
Papanastasiou, soon weakened a hitherto surprisingly successful
coalition.
Venizelos still corresponded with friends and supporters in
Greece, and his figure loomed large. After a long visit to Crete
he came to Athens in March 1928, reassumed the leadership
of his old party, and on 3 July took office once more, forming a government which was supported by two-thirds of the new Chamber. Once more his record during four and a half years
of power ( 1 928-1 932) was to be one of striking success in
foreign policy and of growing difficulties at home. At home,
his construction of a Senate under the Constitution of 1927 had no popular appeal, he was unable to promise lower taxa
125


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
tion, and his wise reconciliation with Turkey in 1930 (see p. 130)
was denounced by RoyaUsts as betraying the interests of
Greece. In principle a constitutional monarchist, he thereby
lost the full confidence of the Republicans ; in practice friendly
to the republican experiment and long opposed to the restoration of any member of Constantine's family, he was thereby exposed to the unjust imputation of being nothing more nor
less than a Venizelist. The currency crisis of 1931 began a ding-dong struggle in which Venizelos was first momentarily defeated by the Republicans in the Chamber and then lost ground in two successive elections (September 1932, February
1933) to the 'Populist' party of the moderate Royalist Tsal
daris. When Venizelos resigned for the third and last time in nine months, Tsaldaris once more formed a government (10 March 1933), restoring the decided Royalist Metaxas as
Minister of the Interior and the anti-parliamentary, now
almost Royalist, Kondilis as Minister of War, but dropping
Papanastasiou, the symbol of republicanism in the last two
Cabinets.
Tsaldaris remained in office for two and a half years, and
presided over the transition to monarchy. His party held a
majority in the Chamber, but the Venizelists in opposition
controlled the Senate, which was thus able to block measures
passed by the Chamber. The opposition argued that in such a case a joint meeting of Senate and Chamber was obligatory; the government, that it was merely permitted. Extreme
Royalists like Metaxas were in favour of suspending the Con
stitution, on the ground that the Senate's obstructive tactics
made government impossible. On the other side, the Republi
cans alleged, not without reason, that ministers supported by
the Populist party were undermining the Republican Constitution by favouring the movement for restoration ofthe monarchy.
General Plastiras, who had begun the revolution in Chios in 1922, twice attempted a Republican military coup (March 1933 and March 1935). On the second and more serious occasion, the insurgent officers were overpowered in Athens,
126
^t


DOMESTIC AFFAIRS, 1923-40
and Plastiras's own movement in Macedonia was forestalled at Salonica. When the cruiser Averoff put to sea with some smaller ships and joined the movement, Venizelos, who was in Crete, was momentarily persuaded to lead it, but he soon
withdrew to Rhodes and thence to Paris, while the warships surrendered themselves to the government. This episode probably convinced him that the RoyaHsts had the upper hand ; he
was to give a provisional blessing to the restored monarchy before his death on i8 March 1936. The attempted coup was followed by some death sentences, and by a purge in the civil service and the army. The Chamber was then dissolved, the Senate abolished, and the security of tenure ofjudges and civil
servants suspended. The Liberals and Republicans abstained
from the elections held on 9 June 1935, so that the monarchists almost monopoHzed the new Chamber; but the extreme
Royalists were still a minority among them.
A
fifth National Assembly for constitutional revision empowered the government to hold a free plebiscite ; but General KondiHs, backed by the most decided enen^ies of the Republic,
first forced Tsaldaris to declare himself openly for a monarchy,
then replaced him as prime minister (10 October), got the new Chamber to declare in favour of the monarchical form of government and the Constitution of 1911, and himself became
regent in the name of King George II. After all this, the
plebiscite (3 November 1935), in which 97% of the votes were
said to have been cast in favour of the king's return, was merely
a matter of form. The Republicans alleged that the secrecy of
the ballot was not observed, and that many Royalists cast
more than one vote. Against this, it was argued that the
Greeks were tired of the Venizelist feud with Constantine's family, and had postponed a change until now only through
fear of civil war and loss of political Uberties. But, with their rapidly increasing economic dependence on Nazi Germany (which hurt the towns but benefited the peasantry), the tide
was setting not only against the Republic but against constitu
tional monarchy too.
127


MODERN GREEC:E, 182I-I939
KING GEORGE II AND GENERAL METAXAS, 1935-41
King George II, who had lived mostly in England since he left
Greece in 1923, attempted reconciliation by discarding the
parties which had secured his return in November '1935. He insisted on a general amnesty, got rid of Kondilis, who died
shortly afterwards, and dissolved the Chamber with a view to constitutional revision by a new National Assembly. But the
free elections held in January 1936 produced a deadlock like
those of 1933, exposing incidentally the unreliabiUty of the
recent plebiscite : fifteen Communists held the balance between
143 Monarchists and 142 Liberals, Republicans and Agrarians. On the death of the king's non-party premier Demertzig in April, General John Metaxas, who did not share the king's
belief in the value of parliament, obtained the consent of the Chamber to an adjournment for five months, governing meanwhile by decree. His path was smoothed by the death of
several political veterans—not only Kondilis (31 January) and
Demertzig (13 April), but also Venizelos (18 March) and
Tsaldaris (15 May). Konduriotis, the first President of the
Republic (1924- 1929), had died in August 1935; his successor, Zaimis, who had also formerly been ten times prime minister,
died in September 1936 at the age of 81. Nevertheless, Metaxas
met with obstruction from the political parties and from the
recently appointed legislative commission of forty deputies. The Communists' appearance of strength was accidental, but
he used their threat of a general strike to convince the king
that constitutional monarchy was impossible in Greece and to
get his consent to decrees dissolving the Chamber and declaring
martial law (4 August 1936). No date for new elections was
fixed, and constitutional guarantees of liberty of the subject
were suspended. The virtual dictatorship inaugurated by General Metaxas, in imitation of Mussolini and Hitler, was still unshaken when
he died in January 1941, successfully defending his country
128


DOMESTIC AFFAIRS, I923-4O
against the Italian attack, and before the onrush of the German
invaders. His dictatorship was more intelKgent than that of
General Pangalos ten years earlier. In a broadcast address (10 August 1936) he began by appealing to the youth of Greece
against outworn politicians, parties and parliaments. He
announced and partly carried out a programme of social reforms, coupled with rearmament. Without pursuing his
initial suggestions for a 'corporative State', he introduced
minimum wages, insurances and maternity benefits, organized youth movements and started a ten-year programme of public works. Since the depression which started in 1929, the Greeks had already doubled wheat production and increased industrial
output by more than 50%, in an effort to reduce imports and
so offset the falling market for their two main export crops

tobacco and currants. Clearing agreements with Germany enabled them to sell these crops at high prices in Reichsmarks
;
but these marks remained in Germany as a credit fund with which Greece might buy (also at high prices) such armaments
and industrial products as Germany could spare—not always what Greece most wanted. Finding a large unused credit in Reichsmarks, Metaxas had no choice but to buy from Germany; but he declared his readiness to trade with England if
she would undertake to buy a definite quantity of tobacco or
currants.
Opposition to the new regime continued for a time. The
Athenians disliked a censorship which affected not only the
press but University studies and even the speeches of Pericles,
o;: those of Antigone in the theatre; moreover, a form of
government which silenced opposition was certainly distasteful
in principle to the country as a whole. But after some critics
had been banished to the islands in 1938, there was no more
trouble. The Greeks knew that it was not easy for them to
combine political liberties with unity, in lace of dangers from
authoritarian neighbours. When war came, the Republican officers were allowed to rejoin the army and the Greeks were united as they had never been during the war of 1914-18.
129


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
6, FOREIGN AFFAIRS, 1923-40
RELATIONS WITH TURKEY
The problem of migration and resettlement, which over
shadowed all else for some years after 1922, was partly domestic
and partly international. Few countries have had to undergo
such an upheaval as this migration, which suddenly increased the population of Greece on balance by about 20% without
adding to its territory and within a few months of military
defeat and political revolution.
The gradual absorption of the refugees made possible the reconciliation with Turkey which was the main achievement
of Venizelos during 1 928-1 932. The negotiations, begun in 1929, were hindered by fears of naval rivalry, which Venizelos
allayed by advising the Chamber to build light craft only. A final Convention about the exchange of populations (10 June 1930) prepared public opinion. for his visit to Ankara and
signature there of a Treaty of neutrality, conciliation and
arbitration, a Protocol on parity of naval armaments, and a commercial Convention (all signed 30 October 1930 and ratified 5 October 1931). The Greek people followed his lead
and ceased to look on the Turks as their natural enemies. Old ambitions were tacitly abandoned. * The ghost of the Roman Empire, which had so long haunted the Near East, was finally exorcised.' Relations continued to improve: in 1932 Greece warmly supported the admission of Turkey to the League of Nations, and a ten-year agreement for consultation and guarantee of frontiers was signed on 14 September 1933. Nor did Greece make any objection to the Montreux Convention of 20 July 1936, by which Turkey recovered full strategical control of the Straits, and Greece incidentally regained the right to fortify the islands of Lemnos and Samothrace.
130


FOREIGN /S.FFAIRS, I923-4O
RELATIONS WITH THE BALKAN POWERS
The Pact of 1930 between Greece and Turkey was preceded by other Balkan agreements. Both parties acknowledged the
help of Italy, which had already made its own pacts with Turkey (30 May 1928) and with Greece (23 September 1928). Greece already had a pact with Romania (21 March 1928); in announcing the pact with Italy, Venizelos declared that the
question of the Dodecanese no longer existe4, and soon afterwards (November 1928) he made an agreement with Albania. By the treaties of November 1926 and November 1927 Albania had become almost a protectorate of Italy; Mussolini was
anxious to strengthen his position there by promoting Balkan
pacts under Italian patronage rather , than under that of France, Yugoslavia and the Little Entente. The Yugoslav
government, fearing isolation in the Balkans, ratified at last
its conventions of 1924 and 1925 with Italy, and accepted
Venizelos's offer (October 1928) to negotiate on outstanding
differences. Yugoslavia had taken offence in 1924 at the terms of a Greek agreement with Bulgaria about minorities, and had
denounced the alliance of 191 3 ; negotiations for its renewal had
failed in 1925. A settlement (1926) of Yugoslav claims relating
to port and railway facilities at Salonica was rejected by the
Greek Chamber in 1927; but the initiative of Venizelos led at
last to the signature of six protocols relating to these claims,
and of a pact between the two countries (27 March 1929). Yugoslavia was linked with Romania in the Little Entente, and had a pact with Turkey dating from 1925. A Bulgarian treaty with Turkey (6 March 1929), and an agreement with Yugoslavia on frontier questions only (26 September 1929 and
14 February 1930), added to the links in this chain of pacts,
which was greatly strengthened by the reconciliation between Greece and Turkey; Bulgaria, the one * unsatisfied' Balkan state, was still on bad terms with Greece and had no general pact with Yugoslavia ; the differences between them were hard
131


MODERN GREECE, 1821-I939
to bridge, and public opinion was suspicious in all three
countries. With this exception, the moment seemed favourable for discussion of a Balkan entente or even of a Balkan federal pact. Common economic problems pointed in the same
direction. In October 1930 the first of a series of unofficial 'Balkan
Conferences* was held at Athens. Greek, Turkish, Yugoslav,
Romanian, -\lbanian and Bulgarian delegations were present,
together with observers sent by the governments. The initiative
came from Papanastasiou, the RepubUcan leader, and Veni
zelos gave it his blessing. The Conference agreed on a regular constitution, chose a Balkan flag and hymn, advocated an
annual meeting of foreign ministers, and set up a committee
to draft a Balkan pact against war, and for mutual help. Other
committees suggested postal union and co-operation in the
fields of social legislation and economics. But Bulgaria pro
tested, with sympathetic Itahan comment, because the agenda
excluded concrete apphcations of minority questions and con
fined discussion to the general principles. A second unofficial
Balkan Conference was held in October 1931, when 200 delegates were welcomed by the Turkish government at Istanbul and afterwards by Kemal himself at Ankara. This Conference initiated a Balkan Chamber of Commerce but made little
progress in the direction of a draft Balkan pact : the Bulgarians
reopened the minorities question, and even threatened to raise
the still more thorny question of revision of frontiers. The third
Conference met at Bucharest in October 1932, and the fourth
at Salonica in November 1933, both continuing the non
poUtical discussions, but avoiding consideration of a poUtical
pact. A fifth Conference, arranged for Belgrade in 1934, was cancelled owing to Yugoslav fears that it might endanger the
progress of their separate negotiations with Bulgaria, which had
just produced a commercial treatv in May 1934. Official discussions between Greece and Bulgaria had been confined
mainly to the subject of financial claims; a temporary- settlement made in 1927 was upset by the Hoover moratorium on
132


FOREIGN AFFAIRS, I923-4O
war debts (1931), and a final setdement, discussed in 1933,
was delayed by Bulgaria's refusal to abandon her claims for
revision of the peace treaties.
The modest success of these unofficial Conferences, and still
more the need to resist revisionist claims which had the support of Italy and Germany, led Greece, Turkey, Yugoslavia and
Romania, in spite of Bulgarian abstention, to sign a Pact (9 February 1934), including a mutual guarantee of frontiers
and promise of consultation. A protocol explained that the
obligations of the Pact would arise if any Balkan state should
join another Power in aggression against one of the signatories.
But the force of this protocol was lessened by declarations
which excluded any obligation for Turkey to fight Russia or
for Greece to fight any greater Power; the Turks feared that
revisionist Bulgaria might join Russia in attacking Romania,
the Greeks that she might join Italy in attacking Yugoslavia,
With these reservations the Pact was ratified by the Greek
Senate, and registered at Geneva in October 1934. Meeting again at Ankara in the autumn, the same states adopted
statutes for a Balkan Entente, modelled on those of the Little
Entente—a combination equally opposed to revision of the
peace treaties.
The Balkan Pact of 1934 reflected a certain distrust of Italy, which was deepened by the Franco-Italian agreement of
January 1935; Greek opinion in particular was very hostile to
Italy throughout the Abyssinian dispute. When 'sanctions'
had been withdrawn in July 1936, Italy assured these states
that she intended no retaliation; but the visit of Dr Schacht
to Athens in June, and German press discussion of collabora
tion between Germany and Italy in the Balkans, made the
value of such assurances doubtful. Nevertheless, General
Metaxas, in power since April 1936, was generally considered to be an admirer of Italy and Germany; in the Balkan Conference at Belgrade (May 1936) he showed that he was anxious to minimize the commitments of Greece under the pact, at least until his programme of rearmament should have made
133


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
some progress. He was well aware that Greece must take
account of the British navy, as well as of the German or Italian army, and showed less readiness than Bulgaria to submit completely to German economic predominance. But in Balkan
pohtics he preferred isolation, at the risk of having to fight
Bulgaria without support, to far-reaching security pacts in
volving the danger of conflict with the Axis Powers. Holding that the interests of Greece were Mediterranean, not conti
nental, he clung to the friendship of Turkey and tried to avoid
giving offence to the protagonists in the impending conflict.
Romania also leaned towards isolation after. the fall in August
1936 of M. Titulescu, a leading exponent of 'collective security*.
The mood in the Balkan capitals began to be that of sauve qui
pent.
It was natural that Yugoslavia, conscious that the solidity of both the Little Entente and the Balkan Entente was weaken
ing, should seek to reinsure herself elsewhere. Her pact with Bulgaria (24 January 1937), although vague and brief, was intended to have the same symbolic importance as the pact between Greece and Turkey seven years earlier. Her poUtical and commercial treaties with Italy (25 March 1937) were more warmly welcomed in the Italian than in the Yugoslav
press. For the sake of breaking up the Little Entente, it cost
Italy nothing to make reassuring statements about her intentions in Albania, and it was worth while for Germany to relax for a time in Italy's favour her own economic hold on Yugo
slavia. In spite of being partly responsible for it, both Greece and Romania felt misgivings about the new Yugoslav policy, but they made the best of it by joining next year with Yugoslavia and Turkey in coming to terms with Bulgaria. This Pact of Salonica (31 July 1938) appeared to restore and extend
the common front of the Balkan States ; but the four ' satisfied
'
states, whose Pact of 1934 had originally been directed against Bulgaria, now had to admit her on terms which showed how
the successes of the revisionist 'Axis Powers' had weakened their
own position. Bulgaria still did not undertake to guarantee
134


MODERN GREEK LITERATURE
existing frontiers, and legalized her own rearmament by getting
release from the military clauses of the Treaty oi Neuilly {1919) in return for nothing more than a oromise not to seek revision by force. Revision by force soon became the order of the day.
7. MODERN GREEK LITERATURE
After the fall of Constantinople the Byzantine tradition of learn
ing passed to Rome, Florence and Venice, while popular literature came mostiy from Crete which had been under Venetian occupation since the Fourth Crusade. Out of the beginnings of a Greco-Venetian culture there sprang up in Crete
during the seventeenth century a small but healthy crop of
literary works, all written after Italian models, all full of life and colour, with no memory of ancient Greece, but all unmistakably
Greek in character and feeling. These works, the religious play
Abraham's Sacrificey the Erophile, which has been called *an
Elizabethan tragedy of love and blood', the postoral comedy
Gyparis, and the best known of all (and most widely read in
Greece to this day), the Erotokritos, a romantic epic, and a few
more, are all written in demotic, or popular Greek, with a Cretan
flavour which indicates their origin and adds to their charm.
The Turkish conquest of Crete in 1669 brought this phase to an end, but its stirrings were heard in the Ionian Islands where a school of poetry emerged headed by Dionysios Solomos ( 1 7981857), who was born in Zante and spent most of his life in Corfu.
He remains in quality, as well as in time, the first poet of the Greek Kingdom, who pointed the way for all subsequent Greek poetry. Like Wordsworth he believed that the purest poetry was written in the simplest language, and for that he drew both from
the rich tradition of Greek folk poetry and from the cultivated
poetry of Crete. He elevated the demotic language to a refined
artistic medium capable of expressing with simplicity and power
his feelings for nature, freedom, truth, love and death. The first
few stanzas of his Hymn to Liberty were adopted as the national
anthem ofGreece. Also from the Ionian Islands came two notable
135


MODERN GREECE, 182I-I939
contemporaries of Solomos: Andreas Kalvos, who wrote lyric
odes of great beauty in an idiosyncratic purist language ; and
Aristoteles Valaoritis, a romantic poet of uneven merit, who
modelled his patriotic verse on the heroic popular ballads.
The literary scene in Athens was dominated for a long period
by a school of poets, all of whom wrote in the katharevousa or purist
Greek (see p. 88). All came under the influence of the weaker
aspects of French romanticism. The reaction came in the i88o's
when the controversy over the language question flared up in a
violent form as a result of the publication of a polemical work,
My Journey, by John Psycharis, who advocated the abolition of
the katharevousa and the adoption of the demotic as the language
of the state, scholarship and literature. His theories were fiercely
opposed by scholars, but were welcomed by men of letters. This
conflict brought about a re-assessment of Greek values which was
quickened by a renewed interest in Greek folklore and folk
poetry. Out of this restlessness a new poetic movement was born. The young poets and writers who sought to link modern Greek
literature with its traditions and at the same time to bring it in
line with contemporary European trends rallied round Kostes
Palamas (1859- 1943). An unusual creative vitality followed,
especially in the field of poetry. Parnassianism, symbolism and
surrealism were all represented. Palamas, whose output, both in
verse and in prose, was prodigious, was the central personality for
over fifty years and exercised an immense influence on the
development of Greek poetry. Angelos Sikelianos (i 884-1951),
drawing his inspiration from the classical and Christian tradi
tion, added a new tone to Greek poetry. George Seferis (b. 1900), the third major poet of this century, was awarded the Nobel
prize for literature in 1963. His first poems, which appeared in
1 93 1 , revealed a new sensibility and a remarkable assimilation
of the Greek tradition. This was expressed in terms of a modern
symbolism, and in his terse and allusive verse the broken statues of antiquity, Odysseus and his companions, or the wreck of a ship in the bay of Poros, acquire a haunting reality. A unique
figure is Constantine Cavafy (i 868-1 933), a poet who lived and
136


MODERN GREEK LITERATURE
worked in Alexandria and was remote from the literary movements of the Greek mainland. His poetry has a refined aestheti
cism and melancholy at the transience of youth and sensual
pleasures, and is often inspired by moments in ancient and later
Greek history in which he brings out with poignancy the irony,
humour, or pathos of a situation.
Modern Greek prose is represented by numerous short-story
writers and novelists like Emmanuel Roidis (i 835-1 904),
Gregorios Xenopoulos ( 1862-195 1), Stratis Myrivilis, EUas Venezis, George Theotokas, Nikos Kazantzakis (1885-1957) whose novels have been translated into many European
languages, and Pantelis Prevelakis. On the whole, modern Greek prose-writing is perhaps somewhat below the high level reached
by poetry, though in some of the delightful short novels of
Vassilis Vassilikos (b. 1933), which have appeared recently,
there is good evidence that prose writers are becoming more
sophisticated and more accomplished in their craft.
137


CHAPTER IV
MODERN GREECE, 1939-64
I. RELATIOyS WITH THE FASCIST POWERS
The anxieties about Italian intentions which impelled the
Greek government to strengthen its relations with other Balkan
powers were soon justified. In April 1939, after Hider had
completed the destruction of Czechoslovakia, Mussolini invaded Albania on Easter Monday and overran it \irtually without a struggle. The Greek government saw that more
drastic precautions were necessarv% and communicated to the
British government its fears for Corfn. On 13 April the British and French governments announced a unilateral guarantee of
Greece's territorial integrity-, which also extended to Romania. The ItaUans denied that they had any aggressive intentions against Greek territor\-, and gave e\idence of good will by
withdrawing troops from the Greco-.\lbanian frontier in
September, and also by reaffirming their pact of friendship
with Greece, signed in 1928, later in the same month. A
friendly exchange of notes on 30 September closed the affair
so far as immediate diplomatic contact was concerned, but
clearly the Greeks could not look at the future with com
placence.
The government continued its efforts to consolidate the
Balkan Entente. They tried to persuade Bulgaria to join, by
ofiering the Bulgarians a firee zone in Salonica, like that of the Yugoslavs, but without success. More important were their
continued negotiations with Britain and France, and indirectiy also those of Britain and France with Turkey. One outcome of the former was an Anglo-Greek financial agreement, though its
effectiveness was limited by the fact that Germany had a strong position in the Greek economy, as the main customer for the
main export product, tobacco ; and also by the resentment felt
138


RELATIONS WITH THE FASCIST POWERS
in London at the failure of the Greeks to settle the payments
due on past loans. The chief matter for satisfaction to the
Greeks was the announcement, in May and June, of AngloTurkish and Franco-Turkish agreements on -mutual aid against aggression in the Mediterranean area. The agreements were reformulated in October 1939 (after the outbreak of the second
world war) in a tripartite treaty to the same effect. There
were, however, qualifying clauses in the treaty which in the
event provided Turkey w.th loopholes, so that the Turks did
not actually declare war on the Axis powers until the second
world war was nearly finished. The Greeks rightly judged that their security would depend
primarily on their own efforts. Although Metaxas reaffirmed
Greek neutrality in September 1939, on the outbreak of the second world war, public opinion was strongly on the side of
Britain and France. In 1940, especially after the fall of France
and the declaration of war by Mussolini on Hitler's side, the Greeks began preparing for war with a calm courage and a
deliberate lack of ostentation or provocation which impressed
and moved every foreign observer. The call-up of certain extra categories of men began in May, and on 4 June Metaxas made a speech warning his people of the danger. The Italian government began to bombard him with notes of complaint
and protest, particularly against the Greeks' condonation of
British violations of their neutrality. It is a fact that such breaches took place, and were condoned: it would have taken an impossibly severe Greek government to prevent them, in
the current state of public opinion. Nevertheless, Metaxas
reaffirmed Greek neutrality on 5 August, and Mussolini re
affirmed his friendly intentions, while 'unidentified' aircraft
attacked Greek ships at sea and other incidents took place
which were generally ascribed to Italian provocation. Finally,
on 15 August, the Greek light cruiser Helle, which was in the
harbour of the island of Tenos to attend the Feast of the Assumption, was torpedoed and sunk by a submarine of whose
nationality there was never the slightest doubt. At the same
139


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
time Mussolini began to accuse the Greeks of official responsibility for the murder of one Daut Hodja, an Albanian bandit
killed in a border brawl. Metaxas ordered mobilization to take place unobtrusively
in September 1940, but continued to maintain the forms of neutrality by undertaking commercial negotiations with Ger
many and appealing privately to Hitler to restrain his ally.
But after the meeting of Hitler and Mussolini at the Brenner
Pass in October, it was clear that no respite was likely. On
26 October Mussolini accused the Greek army of violating the Albanian frontier, no doubt for the sake of his own public
opinion. On 27 October a reception was held at the Italian
Legation in Athens: Metaxas was present, and no indication was given that war was imminent. Early the following morning
the Italian Minister called on Metaxas to deliver an ulti
matum, while Italian troops in Albania were already crossing
the frontier. Metaxas replied with one word—'No!*—which
has become the most famous retort in Greek history since Leonidas at Thermopylae told the Persians to 'Come and get
it
!
' Greek public opinion received the declaration of war with
enthusiasm and almost with relief. Greece thus voluntarily
became Britain's only combatant ally at the darkest moment
of the war. If it was Britain's 'finest hour', it was also Greece's.
Such British help as was available, which was very limited,
was immediately sent to Greece, supported by a military
mission and a loan of ^^5 million. Naval support was valuable,
but the biggest impression was made by the small number of R.A.F. aircraft which appeared over the Albanian front. It was, however, almost entirely due to the Greek army, of which Metaxas was himself Commander-in-Chief with General
Alexander Papagos as Chief of Staff, that the Italian invasion
was repulsed. Within a few days, Greek troops crossed the
frontier into Albania, and occupied the principal towns in the south: Koritsa in November and Argyrokastron in December. Southern Albania was looked upon in Greece as essentially
Greek territory, and known as 'Northern Epirus'. Having a
140


RELATIONS WITH THE FASCIST POWERS
large Greek-speaking Orthodox population, it was expected to be incorporated into Greece at the peace settlement. But after
these initial successes, the tide of war turned against the
Greeks. They never captured Valona, the principal port of southern Albania; and at the end of January 1941 Metaxas
died, leaving the fate of his country in weaker and less decisive
hands. It was becoming apparent that Hitler would have to come
to the rescue of Mussolini in the Balkans. A more important
motive, known for certain only in retrospect, was that Hitler
had already decided to attack Russia, and needed security on his southern flank. German troops therefore began moving
into Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria early in 1941, with the
consent of their respective governments, which recognized
that the only way of avoiding submission to Hitler was by
submission to Stalin. Only Yugoslavia held out for a time.
Meanwhile, the British government, in anticipation of Hitler's
intentions, tried to persuade the Greek government to allow a
British expeditionary force to land in Greece, in fulfilment of
the guarantee of April 1939. So long as Metaxas lived, he
insisted that British troops should land in Greece only after
the Germans had crossed the Danube or entered Bulgaria, and
then only if the British force were sufficient to ensure that a
front could be held. His specific requirements were more
exacting than the British government could meet at the time,
having also to face an Italian threat to Egypt from the Libyan
desert. After Metaxas' death, his successor, Alexander Koryzis,
a mild and unbelligerent banker, reaffirmed his predecessor's
requirements and asked again if they could be met. As a
consequence of British successes against the Italians in the
North African desert, it now seemed that they could. After a
visit to Athens by a number of high-ranking British visitors
(including Anthony Eden, the Foreign Secretary, General
Dill, the C.I.G.S., and General Wavell, the Commander-inChief of the Middle East) the Greek government decided to
accept the proffered British force as adequate. It began to
141


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
arrive in Piraeus harbour during March, watched by all the officials of the German Legation in Athens, which was formally
neutral. There was now no doubt that Hitler intended to attack
Greece. Although censorship tried to prevent Greek opinion
from anticipating the worst, a notable *open letter' to Hider
was published by a leading editor, Vlakhos, in his paper, the
Kathimerini, which correcdy expressed the determination of
virtually every Greek to fight to the last. The attack was delayed while Hider tried to bring Yugoslavia to submission. He persuaded the Yugoslav Regent and Prime Minister in March to adhere to the German-Italian alUance, but a popular
revolution in Belgrade a few days later overthrew the government, ended the Regency, and brought the boy-king Peter to
the throne. Staff talks began a few days later between the
Yugoslavs and the western allies, but it was too late. On 6 April the Germans attacked both Yugoslavia and Greece,
Hitler's lust for revenge being particularly concentrated on the
city of Belgrade. Yugoslavia was overrun in a few days, and Greece was invaded simultaneously from Bulgaria, Albania
and Yugoslavia.
The possibility of successfully forming a defensive front in
Greece had already been prejudiced by a disastrous misunder
standing between the Greek and British military authorities,
the cause of which has never been cleared up. The British believed that it had been agreed that General Papagos should
withdraw his forward divisions from northern and north
eastern Greece to the line of the River Aliakmon, south-west
of Salonica, where the British expeditionary force would join them to form a front. Papagos beheved it had been agreed
that he should not do this until the BriUsh had first ascertained
the Yugoslav government's intentions, since if Yugoslavia
joined in resisting the Germans it might be possible to hold
Salonica and even to eliminate the ItaUans in Albania alto
gether. He had waited in vain for a report on this matter from
the British Military Mission, until it was too late to carry out
142


THE ENEMY OCCUPATION
an orderly withdrawal. The result was that good Greek
divisions were overrun in the north-east, and the Aliakmon Line was too thinly held. The Balkan front began to crumble
in a few days.
On 1 8 April the Prime Minister, Koryzis, committed suicide, and another former banker, Emmanuel Tsouderos, was appointed by King George in his place, after the king had
briefly acted as prime minister himself. Two days later a
corps commander. General Tsolakoglou, signed an armistice in the north without authority. Papagos repudiated his action, but proposed to the British cornmander, General Wilson, that the British force should be withdrawn from Greece. He
promised every possible help in extricating them—a promise
that was amply fulfilled, and with a lack of recrimination almost unexampled between allies. The withdrawal and evacuation went on through the last ten days of April and into the first week of May. The king escaped with his new government to Crete, of which Tsouderos was a native, and a large part of the British expeditionary force, including a high pro
portion of Australians and New Zealanders, was also transported to Crete by the Royal Navy, though losses were naturally heavy. On 30 April the Germans appointed General Tsolakoglou Prime Minister. On 20 May they launched an
attack on Crete with parachutists and airborne troops, and
overran the island after a ferocious battle ten days later. The
king and his government, as well as a high proportion of the allied troops, were evacuated to Egypt.
2. THE ENEMY OCCUPATION
By I June 1941 the Germans had the whole of Greece under their domination, but they never effectively occupied more
than a limited geographical extent of the country. The Bul
garians were allowed to annex the north-eastern comer (Eastern Macedonia and Western Thrace); the Italians were
143


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
invited into Athens, where their reception was not respectful;
and the Germans themselves took charge of the principal
routes of communication, which were important to them in view of their impending incursion into North Africa, where the
Italians had also suffered a humiUating setback. The greater part of Greece, being covered in mountain ranges with very
*^*^fcM
Fig. 27. The Occupation of Greece, 1941
Based on official sources.
inadequate communications, was left largely to itself; and that
meant, in many cases, that it was left to starvation. But it also meant that it was left to the guerilla bands which soon formed
themselves out of the remnants of the Greek army and the less
law-abiding sections of the mountain population (Fig. 27).
During the enemy occupation, from 1941 to 1944 (and even
into 1945 in the case of Crete and some other islands), the
history of Greece divided into two streams, which flowed in
their respective courses almost independently of each other.
144


THE ENEMY OCCUPATION
In Greece itself, there was a succession of collaborating govern
ments, a restless and suffering population, and a resistance movement which developed great strength and far-reaching
political ambitions. Outside Greece, the legitimate government under the king continued to be recognized by the allies,
dividing its time between London and Egypt, and exercising
control over Greek subjects and armed forces in the Middle East. There was some communication between the two
divisions of Greek life, but it was irregular and imperfect.
Individual travellers contrived to escape from Greece via Turkey from time to time during the occupation, and among them were important political and military figures. There
were also numerous clandestine wireless links between Greece and the outside world ; but most of them were under British
control, in the sense that all outgoing traffic passed through
British headquarters, and in many cases the Greeks in charge
of the transmissions were chosen, trained and controlled by the
British authorities.
Partly because the communications were so imperfect, and partly because the Greek government in exile regarded their
substance as tendentious, the gulf between occupied Greece and the free Greek world grew dangerously wide, and grave misunderstandings took place. The most serious was the
failure of the government in exile to appreciate the strength of
anti-monarchist feeling which developed in occupied Greece.
For a variety of reasons, the resistance was led largely by
Communist and Venizelist elements, who agreed in opposing
the return of the king after the war. The leading Cornmunists had been in prison when the Germans arrived in Greece; and
by an incredible act of folly (no doubt because the Soviet Union was still Germany's ally) the Germans released many of them, whereupon they went into hiding and began to
organize resistance, especially after the German attack on
Russia in June 1941. The leading Venizelists, though few of them were in prison, had played no active part in Greece during Mctaxas's dictatorship, since there was no parliament
145


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
or recognized opposition, and those who were serving officers had all been dismissed. They therefore provided a pool of
active, able men, who were pro-allied but anti-monarchist,
from which a resistance movement could readily be formed. Officers and politicians who had supported the Metaxas
regime, on the other hand, were discredited and disheartened
by defeat. Many escaped abroad, most of the rest stayed at home to await events, and only a few turned their minds to
resistance.
Two, if not three, separate Greek worlds thus came into
existence. In occupied Greece, apart from the puppet governments, which were held in universal contempt, the predomi
nant idea—though not necessarily the idea of the majority

was that after the war the old social and economic order would
be swept away, and some Of the most forceful personalities intended to sweep away the monarchy with it. Among the
Greeks in exile, the old order still held sway, and the return of the king after the war was taken for granted. Apart from the handful of collaborators, both the Greeks in Greece and
those abroad were firmly loyal to the Allies. Naturally in each
of the two worlds strong elements of the other were also
embedded, but they did not serve to bridge the gulf. The British government supported the king and his government as the legitimate rulers of Greece, but they also needed the help
of the resistance in Greece. The consequent embarrassment of policy was aggravated when the Americans joined the alliance,
since although President Roosevelt joined Churchill in personally supporting the king, many American officials and
politicians tended to judge the anti-monarchist leaders of the
resistance as more deserving of pohtical support. During the
early years of the occupation, however, these differences were
concealed by the exigencies of the war effort and the struggle
for survival.
Resistance began sporadically. In Athens, small groups
were formed, from patriotic, pro-allied and idealistic motives,
to carry out sabotage and intelligence for the allies, and to help
146


THE ENEMY OCCUPATION
escaped prisoners-of-war and the starving population. Since
students played a prominent role, in 1942 the university was
closed. Soon, larger organizations were developed, particularly by the Communist Party of Greece {Kommunistikdn Komma
Ellddos—KKE), whose first major success was to frustrate the
recruitment of labour for export to Germany. In the moun
tainous provinces, again small groups were first formed, either from remnants of the army or from the brigands who had been
active at all stages of Greek history. Larger organizations
gradually absorbed and expanded them in 1942: firstly, the National Popular Liberation Army [Ethnikos Laikos Apelefthero
tikos Straids— ELAS), under the political direction of the
National Liberation Front {Ethnikdn Apeleftherotikdn MetoponEAM), which was nominally an all-party coalition but in
reality a creation of the Communists ; secondly, the National
Republican Greek Army {Ethnikds Dimokratikds Ellinikds
Stratds—EDES) ; and others of less note. The first major
success of these forces was the destruction of the Gorgopotamos
railway viaduct in November 1942, carried out in conjunction
with a small British parachute force which thereafter became
the British Military Mission to the Greek guerillas. In the
same month the first puppet prime minister, Tsolakoglou,
resigned and was replaced by a former university professor,
Logothetopoulos, who had a German wife. Outside Greece, the king's government under Tsouderos continued to act in the people's name. Greece was admitted
to membership of the United Nations and signed their declaration. An agreement was made with the British government on the employment of Greek forces under British command, and with the U.S.A. for Lend-Lease supplies. The government also succeeded in making arrangements for Swedish ships to carry food to the starving population of Greece. Looking to the future, an agreement was signed with the Yugoslav government in exile to form the basis of a post-war Balkan Union,
but events overtook the good intention. The most difficult
problem for the future was to assure the status of the king,
147


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
who was widely regarded as having broken his constitutional
oath when he allowed General Metaxas to set up a dictator
ship. In the summer of 1942, the first important poHtician to
escape from Greece, Panayiotis Kanellopoulos, who was made Deputy Prime Minister under Tsouderos, confirmed the
strength of feehng in Greece about this question. Later in the
year, Tsouderos publicly stated on behalf of the king that after
the war the Greek people would have the final say in deter
mining their new conditions of life. But this did not satisfy the
leaders of the resistance. The uneasy stirrings of the Greek
political world became evident early in 1943, when a major
re-shuffle of the government in exile took place in March and
the king established his residence in Cairo; while in Athens
Logothetopoulos was removed in April and replaced by John Rallis, who remained the puppet Prime Minister till the end of
the occupation.
The resistance leaders in the mountains were also quarrelling,
not solely or even mainly about the constitutional question of
the monarchy. All the main military leaders were by back
ground anti-monarchist: Colonel Stephanos Saraphis and Colonel Dimitrios Psaros, who led small independent armies,
had both been cashiered in 1935 for supporting the last
Venizelist rising; and Colonel Napoleon Zervas, the leader of
EDES, had taken part in more than one republican coup d^etat
in the 1920's. But the prospect of Communism, embodied in
EAM/ELAS, began to overshadow the constitutional question,
and affected them in different ways. Zervas decided to make his peace with the monarchy as the lesser evil, and under
British persuasion he exchanged amicable messages with the king. Saraphis and Psaros were both attacked by ELAS during 1943, and both were defeated and captured. Saraphis then changed sides, and became the titular Commander-in
Chief of ELAS. Psaros held out, and with the help of British
intervention ht* was released and allowed to re-form his force;
but it played no further effective role, and in 1944 it was again destroyed by ELAS, and Psaros was murdered. The leading
148


THE ENEMY OCCUPATION
figure in these atrocious operations was the Communist Athanasios Claras, known by the pseudonym of Aris Veloukhiotis. The poHcy was that of the Communist Party (KKE) working through EAM, but Aris was a rebelUous personaUty
who often acted irresponsibly on his own initiative.
By the middle of 1943, when North Africa was cleared of the enemy and the invasion of Southern Europe was imminent,
a critical situation had arisen in Greece. It was assumed by
most Greeks that the invasion would take place in Greece,
and the course of allied preparations corroborated this impres
sion, in some cases deliberately in order to deceive the Germans.
The guerilla leaders were persuaded to stop quarrelling and
unite their forces in order to disrupt all German communica
tions through Greece in July 1943, as part of an allied deception
operation. The price of the necessary supplies was that they
should all sign an agreement, drafted by the British Military
Mission, constituting themselves as * National Bands of Greek
Guerillas'. They all did so, and the operation was successful;
but it deceived the Greeks, including the Communists, as well
as the Germans. Although the expected invasion took place
in Italy instead of Greece, the KKE nevertheless calculated
that the Germans would be out of Greece before the end of
1943 and acted accordingly. A joint mission of guerilla leaders
was sent to Cairo in a British aircraft in July 1943 from a landing-ground constructed in the mountains, and the Communist spokesmen presented demands to the king and Tsouderos which were unacceptable. On their return to Greece by the same means, the Communists launched an attack on all
rival guerilla forces, intending to destroy the opposition in
anticipation of the end of the occupation. They were streng
thened by a windfall of Italian weapons, acquired in August
when the Pinerolo Division surrendered to the British Military
Mission just as Mussolini's regime was falling in Italy. The
attack by ELAS on its rivals was successful, except against
Zervas, who held EDES together on his native territory in north-west Greece (Epirus).
149


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
Under British pressure, the king made several attempts to
satisfy the less extravagant demands of the more moderate
resistance leaders. In July 1943 he promised a 'fully representative' government upon the liberation, to be followed by
elections to a Constituent Assembly within six months; in
November he declared that 'when the hour of liberation struck, he would examine anew the date of his return'. But early in 1 944 the anti-monarchist infection spread to the Greek
armed forces in Egypt. A mutiny broke out, which the British
and loyal Greek forces suppressed. Tsouderos resigned after a
disagreement with the king just before the mutiny, and was
succeeded by Sophoklis Venizelos (a son of the great Cretan),
who resigned in his turn after a few days. George Papandreou, a Venizelist who had recently escaped from Greece, was then asked to form a government. He decided to convene a conference in the Lebanon to create a government of national
unity, with the participation of resistance leaders. The Com
munists had already formed a provisional administration called
the Political Committee of National Liberation (Politiki Epi
tropi Ethnikis Apeleftheroseos—PEEA) in the mountains, but they
sent representatives to the Lebanon Conference. Their representatives (including Saraphis and several Communists) agreed
to join Papandreou's Government of National Unity, but PEEA repudiated their decision, again at Communist dicta
tion. Negotiations continued through the summer of 1944,
while all efforts by ELAS to destroy Zervas' forces' failed and the withdrawal of the Germans became obviously imminent, though a year later than the Communists had expected. They finally decided in August to join Papandreou's government,
no doubt hoping to subvert it from within. An almost bloodless take-over of Athens and most of Greece by the allies followed in October 1944, as the Germans withdrew northwards.
By November 1944 the atmosphere had worsened again. When the British commander, General Scobie, ordered the
dissolution of the guerilla forcx's, EAM refused and the Com
150


POST-WAR TROUBLES
munist ministers left Papandreou's government. Early in December violence broke out in Athens between the Greek
and British authorities on the one side and EAM/ELAS on
the other. Representatives of the U.S.A. in Athens were
ordered to remain neutral. After weeks of fierce fighting, during
which Zervas's forces were driven out of Epirus and almost all
of Greece fell into Communist hands except parts of Athens,
Salonica, Patras and the islands, ELAS were finally defeated
by large British reinforcements from Italy. Churchill and
Eden personally intervened in the bitter quarrel, arriving in Athens on Christmas Day. Papandreou resigned at the end of December, being succeeded by General Plastiras, the famous
RepubHcan of the 1920's and titular leader of EDES. Still
more significant, the king, now in London, agreed not to
return to Greece until he should be recalled by a plebiscite;
and more reluctantly, he appointed the Archbishop of Athens, Damaskinos, as Regent. Negotiations for a truce with ELAS began on 10 January 1945 and succeeded three days later. ELAS agreed to surrender their arms, which turned out to be more numerous than had been expected. In February a conference between the Greek government, the British Ambassador, and EAM/ELAS was held at Varkiza, near Athens. It
ended in agreement on liberal reforms, an amnesty for poHtical
crimes, and a plebiscite to be held on the monarchy under
international supervision. The surrender of ELAS was re
pudiated by Axis Veloukhiotis, who took to the hills again,
where he was killed by security forces in the summer. The
problems of reconstruction had now to be faced in the most unpromising circumstances, though with liberal help from
UNRRA and the aUies.
3. POST-WAR TROUBLES
The liberation of Greece from enemy occupation became complete only with the surrender of Germany in May 1945,
151


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
since German troops had remained in Crete and other islands
(including the Dodecanese, which still belonged to Italy) after
their withdrawal from the mainland in October 1944. The five years which followed were in some ways no less painful
than the preceding five years of war and occupation. The
problems of reconstruction fell into several categories, all of
which were interlocked and interacted on each other. First,
there was the problem of economic disorganization. The
administration had entirely broken down, especially in the
provinces; towns and villages had been largely destroyed and
the population had been reduced by starvation, fighting and
deliberate reprisals; road and rail communications were at a standstill; ports had been put out of action and shipping sunk;
the currency was ruined by galloping inflation; foreign trade,
on which Greece depended for essential food-supplies, was
non-existent, and in particular Greece's most important customer (Germany) for her most important product (tobacco)
was virtually destroyed. The Greeks' dependence on foreign
aid, whether British, American or international, was to con
tinue for many years.
The second category of problems was social, political and
constitutional. The division between the Greeks who had
escaped abroad, including the government and some of the
armed forces, and those who had spent the war in Greece,
remained to be reconciled. So did that between those in Greece who had resisted the occupation and those who had acquiesced or even collaborated in it; so did that between monarchists and republicans, and that between Communists and the rest. Parliamentary democracy had also to be restored,
having been in abeyance since 1936; and the personal position
of King George had to be regulated. Finally, in the third
category, there were the problems of Greece's foreign relations.
These had to be revised and re-established in many different
directions: with Greece's traditional allies, in particular Britain and France; with her most important new ally, the United
States; with her ex-enemies, particularly Germany and Italy;
52
J


POST-WAR TROUBLES
with the Soviet Union and the Communist bloc, particularly
Greece's three northern neighbours, Albania, Yugoslavia and
Bulgaria; and with the principal neutral and newly independent countries of the Eastern Mediterranean. Unlike other occupied countries, Greece was to enjoy no
period of respite for reconstruction. All the problems made
themselves felt at once, and were reflected at once in the
development of the political situation. In April 1945 General
Plastiras was forced to resign, having come under attack for
compromising sentiments he was alleged to have expressed while living in France during the war, and he was succeeded
as Prime Minister by Admiral Voulgaris at the head of a
non-political or 'service' government. The leading figure in
the new government was the eminent economist. Professor Varvaressos, who put forward a vigorous but exacting plan for economic recovery in June. Two months later, when his plan
was shelved, he resigned.
The prestige of the 'service' government progressively
declined : it had no solution to the problem of inflation, nor
to that of the political prisoners, both collaborators and Com
munists, who congested the gaols throughout the country; nor could it make any practical headway with its commitment to
hold free elections by the end of the year. In September the Regent, Archbishop Damaskinos, visited England and was warmly received; but he was unable to bring back what he
chiefly hoped for—increased economic aid and support for
Greece's territorial claims against Albania and Bulgaria. He
had also hoped, and many British philhellenes had urged, that the British colony of Cyprus might be ceded to Greece, espe
cially as the cession by Italy of the Dodecanese was already promised. But he received only the personal honour of a G.C.M.G. In October Voulgaris resigned, nominally because of opposi
tion to his announcement of elections in January. A prolonged
political crisis followed, during which the Regent himself
became Prime Minister for a few days. Themistoklis Sophoulis
153


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
and Sophoklis Venizelos successively failed, to form governments, and one formed by Panayiotis Kanellopoulos on i
November lasted less than three weeks. It was succeeded by a slighdy more stable government composed of relatively youthful poUticians of the Centre, some of whom had distinguished
themselves in the Resistance, again under the aged Sophoulis.
The new government boldly tackled the problem of restoring parliamentary democracy by proclaiming an amnesty and the
withdrawal of 60,000 prosecutions in December, and an
nouncing elections for 31 March 1946. The British, French and United States governments accepted invitations, which were made under the terms of the Varkiza Agreement, to form
a mission to supervise the elections (the Allied Mission for
Observing the Greek Elections—^AMFOGE), but the Soviet
government refused the invitation on the ground that it would
constitute interference in Greece's internal affairs. They also
used the first meeting of the U.N. Security Council in January
1946 to demand the withdrawal of British troops from Greece,
without success.
The elections were nevertheless held and resulted in a 60%
poll, of which the Populist Party led by Constantine Tsaldaris won more than half AMFOGE reported that the result had been fairly achieved, but the Communists claimed that all those who had abstained would have voted for them. Tsaldaris became Prime Minister on 18 April, and announced that a referendum on the future position of the monarchy would be
held on i September. In June a sharp dispute took place in Parliament about the form of the referendum, since the question posed by the government was whether or not King George
should return to his throne, not, as the opposition desired, whether Greece should be a monarchy or a republic. However, the government had its way; in August the AngloAmerican mission (from which the French had withdrawn) expressed approval of the state of the register; and on i September the Greeks voted by a large majority (1,166,512
out of 1,861,146 registered voters) in favour of the King's
154


POST-WAR TROUBLES
return. He arrived in Greece on 28 September for his second
restoration, to confront a rapidly deteriorating situation. Fighting had broken out in northern Greece in May, and in the Peloponnese in November. The economic situation was
catastrophic, despite an increase of aid from Britain and a loan
from the U.S.A. Inflation continued; rebuilding and the
restoration of communications were at a standstill ; and in the
absence of rationing there were grave abuses in the distribution
of food. The country was on the brink of civil war ; nor were the grievances confined to the Communists. In December 1946 Tsaldaris complained to the United Nations that the Yugoslav government was helping to promote
rebellion in Greece. The U.N. agreed to send an investigating
commission, which arrived in January. In the same month Tsaldaris resigned, and was succeeded by Dimitrios Maximos, an elder statesman of the right wing who formed a somewhat wider cabinet in which General (as he now was) Napoleon Zervas, the former leader of EDES, became Minister of Public
Order. An event more portentous for the future in the same
month was the arrival of a U.S. economic mission to investigate
Greece's needs, which were of growing interest to the United States government because the task of supporting Greece was already beginning to look beyond the powers of Britain alone. On 12 March President Truman announced his famous plan, the 'Truman Doctrine', for economic aid to Greece and
Turkey, beginning with the provision of $400,000. The first American Mission for Aid to Greece arrived in Athens in July. Meanwhile King George had died suddenly in March. His
successor was his younger brother, Paul, who found himself
inheriting a country threatened by disaster. The report of the first U.N. Commission, which broadly supported Greek com
plaints, was the subject of violent dispute by the Communist
bloc at the United Nations, and a vote in the Security Council
to continue its work was vetoed by the Soviet representative
on 29 July. The Secretary-General, Trygve Lie, nevertheless ruled that the United Nations Special Commission on the
^55


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
Balkans (UNSCOB) was still in existence. Greece had thus
become one of the first major themes of dispute in the cold war. Twice during 1947, in June and December, the Greek Communist rebels in northern Greece tried to seize the town
of Konitsa, near the Albanian border, in order to establish a
capital and to demand international recognition. The Greek
government was therefore faced with a full-scale civil war, in which the Communist states on the northern borders were
undoubtedly helping the rebels. Attempts to react with equal vigour were handicapped at first by public opinion in Athens,
where left-wing sympathies were still surprisingly strong. Maximos's government, for instance, was compelled to resign
after complaints at the ruthless methods of General Zervas in
preserving pubhc order, though later it did not pass unobserved that a man whom Zervas had arrested, and whom the
following government released, was responsible for assassinating
a senior Minister in the streets of Athens. The new government was formed in August by a coalition between Tsaldaris and
Sophoulis; and for the next two and a half years, until the
Communist rebellion was suppressed, Greece continued to be
ruled by governments of 'national unity' on an inter-party
basis.
The new government offered an amnesty to the rebels, which was ignored. In November a joint General Staff was created by the Greek and United States governments. On 24 December the Greek Communist lea.der, Markos Vaphiadis, proclaimed an independent government in the northern mountains. UNSCOB, which was now back at work in Greece, urged that no government should recognize the regime
of Markos; nor did any do so—not even, curiously enough, the Communist governments which were supporting him and
which had recently established the Cominform in Belgrade.
For a time, however, all seemed to go well with Markos's
forces, although their efforts to capture Konitsa were repulsed.
Whenever they were defeated in local actions, they could
withdraw across the northern frontiers to reorganize and re
.56


POST-WAR TROUBLES
equip. Moreover, they took with them many thousands of
Greek children, who could be trained later in countries of the
Communist bloc to continue the struggle. In 1948 the Com
munists were able to extend their operations over an even
larger extent of Greece than had been held by the guerillas
during the German occupation, including the Peloponnese
and Attica up to the suburbs of Athens.
There was little to cheer the Greek population during 1948. Among the few items of good news was the formal completion
of the cession to Greece of the Dodecanese islands by Italy as
part of the peace treaty; and in November a treaty of Amity,
Commerce and Navigation was signed with Italy—the first with any ex-enemy. During the summer the Corinth Canal was reopened and the railway viaduct over the River Gorgo
potamos (destroyed by guerillas and British officers in 1942)
was repaired; but it was an indication of the tragic situation
that such necessary reconstruction had to wait three years after
the end of the war. The road from Athens to Salonica was also repaired at great speed with American aid, and reopened in
mid- 1 948, but only to military traffic in convoys. Meanwhile,
about 700,000 refugees—nearly 10% of the population— had
fled from the fighting in the north, and almost all of them were homeless. At the end of October Martial Law was proclaimed throughout Greece. In November Sophoulis resigned, but re-formed an almost identical government a few days later. It was
a measure of the desperate state of affairs that although no one could devise any effective alternative government, Sophoulis
won a vote of confidence on his reappointment only by 168
votes to 167.
When exactly the tide turned is not easy to say. The
Americans made a notable contribution by the vigour with which they re-equipped the Greek forces and repaired the
communications, especially the roads into the interior, without
which it was impossible to defeat the rebels or guarantee the
safety of loyal villages. The support of most members of" the
United Nations was also staunch: against Soviet opposition,
157


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
the General Assembly expressly condemned Albania, Yugo
slavia and Bulgaria for aiding the rebellion, on the basis of an UNSCOB report in November 1948. Changes in the leadership both of the Greek government and forces, and of the Communists, also played a part. In January 1 949 General Papagos, who had been in com
mand against the Italians in Albania in 1940-41 and later a prisoner of v^ar in Germany, was appointed Commander-inChief; and in the same month a new coalition government was formed under Sophoulis again, in which Alexander Diomedes
was Deputy Prime Minister and virtually the effective leader. In the following month Markos was deposed from the Communist leadership and never heard of again. He was succeeded as head of the War Council by Nikos Zakhariadis and as Prime Minister by Partsalidis. These changes were perhaps
connected with the great upheaval in the Communist camp
which led to the breach between Tito and Stalin, the expulsion
of Yugoslavia from the Cominform in the summer of 1 948, and
the Yugoslav decision to close the frontier with Greece in July
1949. Certainly this last decision was a major factor in bring
ing the Communist rebellion to defeat.
It was already apparent that only aid from the north kept
the rebellion going. Early in 1949 the Peloponnese was cleared of rebels; most of the leading Communists in Athens were under lock and key by April; and in the same month the
process of clearing the north also began, with such good results
that in July some 100,000 refugees were able to return to their
homes. The end of the rebellion was then not long delayed.
After Tito had closed the Greco-Yugoslav frontier, the decisive
battles were fought in August. The rebels were helped by fire from Albania, but the lack of freedom to manoeuvre into and out of Yugoslavia was fatal to them. On 6 September the government announced the virtual end of the war, which was acknowledged by the rebel radio in October with an announce
ment of the ' temporary cessation ' of hostilities. Shortly before
the climax of the struggle, Sophoulis had died in June, still
158


POST-WAR TROUBLES
holding office as Prime Minister, and it was left to his successor, Diomedes, to proclaim the victory and to face the problems of
reconstruction. The problems were formidable, and Diomedes did not last
long to face them. Inflation was still unchecked: prices were
rising, the balance of trade was seriously adverse, industrial
unrest was growing; and even the civil servants struck in
protest against the high cost of living. Diomedes resigned in
January 1950 after a breach with his colleague, Venizelos. It
was the end of the Liberal- Populist coalition, which was succeeded by a 'caretaker' government under Ion Theotokis, to
prepare for elections in March. Grave though the situation
was, however, at least internal security was no longer a source
of anxiety. It was announced that all death sentences for
treason passed by military courts were to be reviewed; and
Martial Law was lifted before the elections. Two further signs
of the historic watershed across which Greece was now passing
were the beginning of the withdrawal of British service missions,
and the opening of discussions with the Yugoslavs to re-estabUsh
diplomatic relations and restore communications. The general
election of March 1950 also marked the end of an era: the
alternate dominance of the Populists under Tsaldaris and the Liberals under Venizelos was broken by the emergence of a new party, the National Progressive Union of the Centre (EPEK), led by General Plastiras and Tsouderos.
As a result of the elections, none of the three main parties
could form a government without the support or acquiescence
of one of the other two. Tsaldaris refused to try; Venizelos
tried, but resigned after two weeks, not without some pressure
from the United States Ambassador—itself a new phenomenon
in Greek politics. Plastiras formed a government with Liberal
support in April, but lost the support of Venizelos when he
released a large proportion of the detained rebels. Venizelos then formed a purely Liberal government in May, which
lasted until September, when he lost a vote of confidence. He next formed a new government with the support of the Popu
159


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
lists under Tsaldaris, but resigned in November after a dispute
with Tsaldaris, and formed yet another coalition with a small
minority party, the Democratic Socialists. The coalition was
generally supported by EPEK, and lasted until June 1951, when the Democratic Socialists.resigned. Venizelos continued
in office, with the help of the Populists and EPEK in turn, but only for another month. This period of unstable coalition
government ended in the late summer of 195 1 with the break-up of EPEK, from which Tsouderos withdrew, and the dissolution
of Parliament to enable new elections to be held on the basis of an electoral law aimed at promoting the emergence of
fewer and larger parties. The need for a more stable kind of parliamentary democracy was strongly felt in this uneasy period, and was accentuated
by the extreme gravity of the international events which co
incided with it. Two months after the elections of 1950, the Korean War broke out, and Greece hastened to offer a brigade
and an Air Force contingent to serve under the United
Nations. The outbreak of the war had far-reaching consequences for Greece as for other European countries. The fear
of aggression in Europe led to the invitation to Greece and
Turkey to become associated with the North Atlantk: Treaty Organization for Mediterranean affairs, and later (in 1951)
to full membership. It also led to a closer association of
Greece with both Yugoslavia and Turkey for local defence in
the Balkan area. American military aid was increased, but
financial aid for economic reconstruction was cut in the
autumn of 1950, partly as an indication of disapproval of the
unsatisfactory political situation. That situation failed to im
prove, and consequently gave the western world an unfortunate
impression of Greek irresponsibility. One of those who felt
the justice of allied disapproval most keenly was Alexander Papagos, who had been promoted Field-Marshal and Commander-in-Chief of all the armed forces in 1950. Accordingly he resigned all his appointments in May 1 95 1 , and two months
later announced the formation of what he called, in imitation
160


THE BEGINNING OF RECONSTRUCTION
of General de Gaulle's Rossemblement Franfais, the ' Greek Rally
'
10 fight the forthcoming elections.
4. THE BEGINNING OF RECONSTRUCTION
It is from the elections of September 1951, although they again
failed to produce a decisive result, that the beginning of
Greece's reconstruction can be dated. Under a new system
of what was called 'modified proportional representation', the
Greek Rally won 36% of the votes and 114 seats out of 250.
The election was also notable for the first re-emergence of the Communists as a parliamentary party, under the guise of the Union of the Democratic Left (EDA), which won 10 seats.
Since no party had an overall majority, and since Papagos
refused to enter any coalition—and indeed unsuccessfully
demanded that new elections should be held at once on a
simple majority system—a coalition of the familiar kind was formed by Plastiras with the Liberals. Papagos announced
that he would support the government in its foreign policy, which was one of loyalty to NATO and support for the United Nations, but not on its domestic policy, which included a wide
Pacification Bill to wind up the aftermath of the civil war.
It was clear that the government could not have a long life
;
nor, according to Papagos, could the system of government of which it was typical. Nevertheless a number of important
events marked its single year of office. Greece became a full member of NATO in October 1951 and was elected to the
Security Council in December. UNSCOB was withdrawn, having served its purpose. A new constitution was promulgated on I January 1952, in which a major innovation was
that strikes were forbidden in the civil service. Cordial relations were developed with Italy, Turkey and Yugoslavia; and the Yugoslavs even returned some of the Greek children carried
off in the civil war. Increasing attention was paid to Middle
Eastern affairs, particularly in Egypt: Greece recognized, by
161


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
implication, the Egyptian claim to the Sudan in June 1952, and also expressed an interest in the abortive Anglo-American plan for a Middle East Defence Organization in September.
I Thracf V Thtssaljr
u EoJtiCtntral
Macrdonia VI WfsC Rcumtii III U>/t Aa<rrion/a VII tail Roumtli IV Epirm VIII Ptiopenntft
Fig. 28. Modem Greece
In October, however, the scene was dramatically changed by a new general election, in which Field-Marshal Papagos at
last had his own way. A new electoral law, strongly supported by the United States government, prescribed the majority
system of election and an increased number of seats, from 250
to 300. The Greek Rally won an absolute majority with 239
seats, and all the remaining 61 seats went to a coalition of the
162


THE BEGINNING OF RECONSTRUCTION
remains of EPEK with the Liberals. The Communist-backed
EDA lost all its seats; and a few weeks later it was publicly
linked with the organization of a secret Communist cell un
covered in Athens. The longest period of stable government in
modern Greek history was then inaugurated.
Papagos's Minister of Co-ordination, Spyros Markezinis, announced an economic plan on lines laid down by Professor
Varvaressos in 1945, and visited the U.S.A. in April 1953 to
seek American aid for agricultural improvements and the
development of electric power and industry. A drastic reduc
tion of the Civil Service was set in motion with some five
thousand retirements. The drachma was devalued in April,
and in August the first post-war budget to anticipate a surplus was introduced. The improvement of the economic situation was marked, although the American contribution was still
considerable and indispensable. Papagos's firm hand was
generally respected: an attempt to organize a general strike in
protest at his measures in June 1953 was not widely successful.
Greece's recovery was now well under way, though a disastrous earthquake in the Ionian Islands in August came as a reminder
that her troubles were still not at an end. The difficulties of
economic reconstruction were illustrated by the resignation of
Markezinis in April 1954. The most important developments during Papagos's tenure
of office, which lasted until his death in October 1955, were in
the field of foreign affairs. There took place both an improve
ment and an extension of Greece's international relations,
marred however by one painful exception—the prolonged
dispute over Cyprus. The trend of improvement affected particularly Greek relations with her northern neighbours.
With Bulgaria efforts to normalize relations were partially
successful in 1953-54: frontier disputes were settled, prisoners
were exchanged, but full diplomatic relations were not yet restored, nor would the Bulgarian government agree to pay
reparations arising from the second world war. In 1955 a
somewhat similar partial rapprochement took place with Albania,
163


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
whose government proposed the estabUshment of diplomatic
relations but refused to agree to Greece's condition, that the
status of Northern Epirus (the Greek term for Southern
Albania) should be regarded as still open until settled by a
peace conference. Other members of the Soviet bloc, no doubt
influenced by the post-Stalinist thaw, made friendly overtures towards Greece. Young Greeks who had been carried off during the civil war were returned from Hungary, Romania and Czechoslovakia; and during 1954 trade agreements were signed by the Greek government with Czechoslovakia, Romania and the Soviet Union. An indication of the extension of Greece's international connections was the signature during the same year of trade agreements with Spain, Israel and the
German Federal Republic. Much more striking than any of these minor improvements, however, was the development under Papagos's direction of the Balkan Alliance with Turkey and Yugoslavia. Staff con
versations took place in 1952, and led to the signature at Ankara
on 28 February 1953 of a defence treaty between the three
Balkan neighbours, which was heartily approved by Greece's western allies. The Greek government was anxious to carry the arrangements still further. In June 1954 Marshal Tito
was invited to visit Athens, an event which set the seal on the
restoration of the traditional amity between Greece and Yugo
slavia. On 9 August of the same year a formal alliance between Greece, Turkey and Yugoslavia was signed at Bled.
It was modelled on the North Atlantic Treaty, and contained
provisions not only for the creation of a combined General
Stafi^ but also for co-operation in non-military fields and for
some common political institutions. The Permanent Council met for the first time in Ankara in February 1955, and the General Staff in Belgrade two months later. These arrange
ments were to prove, in the event, a dead letter, and the
alliance cannot be said ever to have worked effectively in
practice. In part the reason was that it never needed to do so,
because the danger of Soviet aggression in the Balkans, against
164
J


IHE CYPRUS DISPUTE
which the aUiance was directed, disappeared with the poHcy
of 'de-Stalinization' and the restoration of at least civil relations between Tito and Khrushchev. But a more decisive reason
was the steady deterioration of relations between Greece and
Turkey after 1954, as the dispute over Cyprus came to a head.
5. THE CITRUS DISPUTE
The Greeks had long hoped for the cession of Cyprus to Greece
by the British government. Indeed, the cry of'^nosis^ (union
with Greece) had been heard in Cyprus as soon as the British
arrived there in 1878, and had been constantly echoed on the
Greek mainland ever since. An unofficial plebiscite was held in Cyprus in January 1950, organized by the Church under the direction of the Archbishop, who held his office by popular
election and was expected to regard himself as a national
leader or 'Ethnarch'. Since none of the Turkish population
of the island (amounting to about 80,000 out of a total of
nearly half a million) took part in the plebiscite, the result was
an overwhelming vote in favour of enosis.
When a Cypriot delegation visited Athens, on its way to the United Nations to communicate the result, the Greek government of the day expressed the hope that Britain would respond
to the wishes of the Cypriot people, but added that it would
handle the question in due time within the framework of its
traditional friendship with the British. The same policy was
reiterated on many subsequent occasions, culminating in a
formal statement by Papagos on 1 8 March 1 954. By this time, however, the movement in favour of e'nosis was under the
vigorous direction of Archbishop Makarios, and violence was
already being considered as the only recourse by Colonel
George Grivas, a Cypriot-born officer of the Greek Army who
had played a minor and disreputable role in the closing stages
of the German occupation of Greece. Under pressure from Makarios, and also stimulated by riots
165


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
in Athens and stung by a succession of rebuffs from the British
government, Papagos finally notified the United Nations in
August 1954 that Greece wished the future of Cyprus to be considered by the General Assembly. In December the United
Nations resolved not to consider the question 'for the time being'. Renewed rioting in Athens and Salonica was severely
suppressed by Papagos, who would have preferred to find a way of dropping the matter. But circumstances became too
strong for him. An organized campaign of violence, led by Grivas, began in Cyprus during April 1955. In Greece, there
was a deterioration of the economic situation, from which some
distraction was desirable; there was bitter disappointment in the public mind both with Britain and with the U.S.A., whose
representatives voted with the British at the U.N.; there were other troubles at home, including a recrudescence of Com
munist activity and a new earthquake disaster in the neigh
bourhood of Volos ; and there was almost universal sympathy
with the Greek Cypriot rebellion under Grivas. Greece's
foreign policy began to deviate perceptibly, against Papagos's
personal inclinations, in the direction of the neutralist, anti
colonialist, and even pro-Soviet trends of the day. In the hope
of stemming the tide, the British government invited the Greek and Turkish governments in June to attend a conference in London on the Eastern Mediterranean, at which Cyprus could be included in the agenda. The Turks quickly accepted;
Makarios protested against the Turks even being invited; the
Greeks accepted only after several days' hesitation.
The conference met at the end of August, and resulted only
in a re-statement of familiar positions: the Greeks insisting
that they would accept no settlement of the Cypriot question
which excluded the possibility of enosis\ the Turks that they
would accept none which did not exclude that possibility; the
British that they would concede self-government to the island if the Greeks and the Turks could agree on terms, but without any ultimate commitment on sovereignty. The deadlock was
made worse by an outbreak of anti-Greek violence in Istanbul
166


THE CYPRUS DISPUTE
and Smyrna on 6 September, which was later proved (after the overthrow of the Turkish government in i960) to have
been officially inspired and organized. The Turks offered apologies and amends, but the Greeks angrily withdrew from
a number of inter-allied occasions, including the NATO exer
cises in the Eastern Mediterranean. The North Atlantic
Council considered the painful situation, without result. To make matters worse, the United Nations refused in September to include Cyprus on the agenda of the forthcoming General Assembly. On 4 October Papagos died. It had been expected that Papagos would be succeeded by his Foreign Minister, Stephanos Stephanopoulos. Instead, the King summoned the comparatively unknown Minister of Communications and Public Works, Constantine Karamanlis.
His policy did not differ from that of Papagos, whose loyal
supporter he had been, but he tried vigorously to recover
control of a situation which had progressively slipped from the
dying Field-Marshal's hands. In November he conducted
secret conversations with the British government, of which the
Turks were informed, and the tension decreased. At the beginning of December it was announced that the Greek appeal to the United Nations would not be renewed, and at the end of the month a Greek emissary was sent to Cyprus, where he met Makarios and the newly appointed governor, Field-Marshal Sir John Harding, the former Chief of the Imperial General Staff. The year ended in an atmosphere of relative optimism. Karamanhs then dissolved Parliament in January 1956 and held a general election on 9 February under a new and compli
cated electoral law. He also formed a new party, the National
Radical Union (ERE), to replace Papagos's Greek Rally.
Since the electoral law favoured large rather than small parties,
practically the whole of the opposition formed a single electoral combination, ranging from the Populists to the crypto-Communists. This combination won almost exactly 50% of the
votes, but only 145 seats out of 300. The remaining 155 were
167


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
won by Karamanlis, who thus had a narrow majority although
ERE won only 45.7% of the votes. It was the first general
election in which women voted, and in the new government a
woman held office for the first time.
Unfortunately, so far as Cyprus was concerned, the turn of
the year proved to have been a false dawn. For this there were two principal reasons. One was that the appointment of a
Field-Marshal as governor convinced the Greeks that Britain
intended to pursue a repressive policy in Cyprus. The other
was that Grivas's organization, known as the National Organiza
tion of Cypriot Combatants [Ethniki Orgdnosis Kyprion Agoni
ston—EOKA), began to get out of hand. As was later proved
from captured documents and admitted in retrospect, the
outbreak of violence had enjoyed the blessing and approval of Archbishop Makarios, to whom Grivas (operating under the pseudonym of Dighenis Akritas, a legendary Greek hero) con
stantly referred as his leader; but that is not to say that the
relations of the two men were easy. When it appeared, early
in 1956, that Makarios was about to negotiate a settlement
with the new governor, Grivas put out leaflets denouncing the
negotiations and swearing to continue the struggle. Under
such pressures, Makarios hardened his attitude towards the
negotiations; and the British government insisted on terms,
particularly with regard to an amnesty, which he could not
accept. Early in iVlarch the negotiations broke down, and on
9 March Makarios was deported to the Seychelles Islands. The next day the Greek Ambassador was recalled from London, and on 13 March the Greek appeal to the United Nations was renewed. Karamanlis still hoped for a compromise and a reconcilia
tion. He rejected the foreign policy of neutralism and abandonment of the western alliance, which had been advocated by his opponents at the general election. In March the Greeks again took part in NATO manoeuvres. In the speech from the throne at the opening of the new Parliament on 2 April, King
Paul reaffirmed the Greeks' desire for enosis but deplored the
168
I


THE CYPRUS DISPUTE
deterioration in allied relations. When the Soviet Foreign
Minister, Shepilov, visited Athens on his way back to Moscow
from Egypt in June, Karamanlis rebuffed his offers of aid. But the situation continued to grow worse during the summer.
The terrorism of EOKA, which had originally been directed
chiefly against Greeks who failed to support enosis, was in
creasingly turned against Turkish Cypriots and British troops. An angry exchange took place between Karamanlis and Eden
when the latter insisted that Cyprus was essential as a British
base to safeguard oil supplies from the Middle East. Within a few weeks sharp point was given to this argument when
President Nasser announced the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company at the end of July. Greece was the only
country, apart from Egypt, which refused an invitation to
attend the conference convened in London in August by the
British and French governments to discuss the crisis over the
Suez Canal. For the next three years the Greeks sought their
friendships increasingly outside the circle of the western
alliances.
An unexpected development during August 1956 was the announcement of a truce by EOKA. The governor of Cyprus,
however, chose to interpret it as an indication of willingness to
surrender, and responded to it in that sense, with the result
that fighting was resumed after a short interval. The bloodshed grew still worse during the Anglo-French campaign against Egypt, part of which was mounted from Cyprus, but
there was never any danger that the British forces would lose
control of the island. The Greeks, however, were confirmed in their determination by mounting hopes of success at the United Nations.
When the British government sent Lord Radcliffe to Cyprus
to prepare a new constitution, the Greek government rejected
the resultant draft in December without consideration or discussion, although it would probably have proved, on examina
tion and trial, to have offered them their last chance of
achieving enosis eventually through constitutional means.
1^ 169 wi;


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
Public opinion generally believed—though it is doubtful
whether the belief was shared by Karamanlis, who visited the
U.S.A. in the autumn of 1956—that pressure at the United Nations would give them what they wanted in the end.
Nevertheless the resolution on Cyprus passed by the General Assembly in February 1957 was only moderately encouraging
to the Greeks. It urged a 'peaceful, democratic and just
solution' and the resumption of negotiations to that end. Greece, Turkey and Britain all agreed ; but whereas the Greeks
construed the intention to be negotiations between Britain and
*the people of Cyprus', the Turks and the British construed it to be between the three governments concerned.
It thus seemed impossible to renew the negotiations which
all parties claimed to desire. The good offices of NATO were
offered, but rejected by Greece. A compromise was reached on the position of Archbishop Makarios after he had made an ambiguous statement deploring violence in March: he was
released from the Seychelles but not allowed to return to
Cyprus. Towards her old alHes and new friends Greece's policy continued to be neither hot nor cold. Diplomatic relations were renewed with Romania in 1956, but a Romanian proposal in September 1957 for an enlargement of the Balkan Pact to include Romania, Bulgaria and Albania was rejected
by Greece, although it was rather surprisingly accepted in
principle by Yugoslavia. The Balkan Pact was in fact already regarded as a dead letter by the Greeks, though the Yugoslav Vice-President Kardelj was politely received in Athens in October.
Towards Turkey the feelings of the Greeks were inevitably
still bitter, but as a friendly gesture the defences of Leros, a Greek island in the Dodecanese close to the Turkish coast, were dismantled. Towards the U.S.A. Greek sentiments were naturally divided. The American refusal to support their
claim to enosis was resented, but Greece's economic and military dependence remained inescapable. An agreement on
U.S. bases in Greece had existed since 1953, and the allegation
170


THE CYPRUS DISPUTE
that Karamanlis had agreed to allow the Americans to estab
lish rockets on Greek soil was strongly pressed against him by
the opposition in 1957. The Greek government also endorsed the 'Eisenhower Doctrine' on the Middle East, but refused to allow American aircraft to land on Greek aerodromes during
the 'air-lift' to Jordan in September 1957. On the other hand, the Greeks were somewhat disenchanted in their new-found
friendship with President Nasser when the policy of 'Egyp
tianization ' of foreign businesses severely hit the large Greek
community in Egypt. The Greeks continued to court the 'unaligned' countries,
including the former colonies of western powers, with the
object of mustering a sufficient majority at the United Nations, which meant in effect two-thirds of the General Assembly. In September 1957 Greece succeeded in having a motion for the
'self-determination' of Cyprus inscribed on the U.N. agenda,
and Makarios (who had installed himself in Athens) left for New York to press it home. Two events in October encouraged the hopes of the Greeks: Sir John Harding was replaced as governor of Cyprus by Sir Hugh Foot, a member of
the Colonial Service with a liberal reputation; and the British
Labour Party Conference voted in support of self-determination
for Cyprus without partition—partition being the solution now
advocated by the Turks and seriously considered by the British Conservative government. The United Nations, however, again proved a disappointment. Although the Greek motion was passed by both the Political Committee and the General
Assembly, the majority in the latter was less than two-thirds
and therefore ineffective. The United States again voted
against Greece, and in retaliation U.S. installations in Athens were damaged by bombs. The trend towards neutralism and
even towards co-operation with the Soviet bloc gathered
strength.
During 1958 many new and some surprising associations were formed. Commercial discussions with the United Arab Republic and Yugoslavia were followed by trade agreements
1 7.1


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
with the Soviet Union, Poland and Japan, and controls on trade with Communist China (imposed to please the Ameri
cans) were relaxed. Agreements were also concluded with
Albania, on clearing mines from the Corfu strait, and with
Bulgaria on frontier issues. Among the interchanges made during the year were visits by the King and Queen of Greece to the Lebanon ; by the Foreign Minister to meet his Egyptian
and Yugoslav colleagues at Brioni ; and by the Spanish Foreign Minister and Sudanese Vice-President to Athens. Relations with the British government, on the other hand, were frigid.
Nothing came of visits to Athens by the British Foreign Secretary, Selwyn Lloyd, and Sir Hugh Foot in February. The new Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, had no more success when he came in August, to expound a new plan put forward by the British government for a ' partnership ' of Britain, Greece
and Turkey in the administration of Cyprus.
It seemed, however, that Karamanlis was anxious not to be
carried away into desperate courses by the extreme feelings of
public opinion, the press and opposition, and even some of
his own colleagues. In March 1958 he resigned, after the
defection from his government of two ministers with their
supporters, and held a general election on 1 1 May. The
principal issues exploited against him were the weakness of his
policy over Cyprus and the allegation that he had agreed, or
was about to agree, to the establishment of U.S. missile bases
in Greece. It was therefore a highly significant victory when
he increased his strength in Parliament, under a voting system
known as 'reinforced proportional representation', to 173
seats out of 300, a strong majority over all his rivals combined.
Armed with this vote of confidence, he addressed himself to
the final liquidation of the Cyprus problem. First it was
necessary, in order not to appear weak, to reject the British
government's plan for 'partnership' in a tri-national adminis
tration of Cyprus. Nevertheless the British government
declared that it would impose the plan, despite its rejection by the Greeks, and on paper it came into effect on i October.
172


THE CYPRUS DISPUTE
But in the meantime Archbishop Makarios had also seen the
writing on the wall. In an unexpected statement to a British Labour M.P. in September, he declared that he would accept
independence instead of e'nosis as a solution to the Cyprus
problem. Towards the end of the year secret talks on this
possibility began in Paris under the auspices of NATO, and
the United Nations thankfully washed its hands of the problem by passing unanimously an innocuous compromise
resolution.
In January 1959 the Greek and Turkish Foreign Ministers met in Zurich and reached an outline of agreement on independence for Cyprus. In February the discussions were transferred to London, where they were joined by the Greek and Turkish Prime Ministers and by Archbishop Makarios and the leader of the Turkish community in Cyprus, Dr Kutchuk,
who later became Vice-President of the island under the Presidency of the Archbishop. Agreement was quickly reached and signed on the creation of a new Republic of Cyprus, which came into existence formally in August i960 and remained a member of the Commonwealth. The agreement was ratified by the Greek Parliament on 28 February 1959 by 170 votes
to 118 after a bitter debate. Among those who sharply criti
cized the abandonment of the claim to e'nosis was Grivas, who
emerged from his hiding place in Cyprus to receive a hero's welcome in Athens. He was awarded high decorations and promoted Lieutenant-General in recognition of what had undoubtedly been a technically remarkable achievement of sub
versive warfare. But he sharply attacked the government and Archbishop Makarios for signing the Zurich-London Agree
ments without consulting him, and made repeated threats to
enter Greek politics in a revolutionary manner, which few
Greeks took seriously. Although it was certain that by no
means all Greeks had renounced the ultimate goal of e'nosis
for Cyprus, most of them were glad to be reheved of the
dispute and the- violence which had marred the last five
years.
173


MODERN GREECE, I939-64
6. THE RETURN TO NORMALITY
The year 1959 marked a return to normality. Normality
meant an improvement of Greek relations with Britain, the
United States, and even Turkey; and a relative cooHng of
relations v^ith the Soviet bloc and the neutrals. Relations with
Yugoslavia continued to be friendly, but when Tito visited Rhodes in March 1959 the communique on his conversations with KaramanHs significantly omitted any reference to the
Balkan Pact, which was eventually declared to be defunct in June i960. During the same period there was a notable
strengthening of the national economy. Inflation had been brought under control, and the Greeks now had such an
unusual degree of confidence in their own currency that they
no longer sought to convert their savings as soon as possible
into gold sovereigns, and were even willing to invest them in government loans. The conduct of Greek ship-owners was
another sign of the times. Having for many years registered
their ships under foreign flags of convenience in order to escape Greek taxation, they began to bring them back under
the Greek flag, and even to invest their profits in new industrial
enterprises in Greece. A new shipyard at Skaramanga, an oil
refmery, the beginnings of an iron and steel industry, an
aluminium plant, an atomic reactor, were some of the results
of the economic resurgence. Tourism also began to develop
into a major industry. A five-year development plan was announced in January 1959, and in September an Industrial Development Corporation was established.
The improvement in inter-allied relations was almost im
mediate upon the signature of the Zurich-London Agreements.
It plainly responded to a deeply felt desire on the part of the
Greeks. During 1959 the visitors to Athens included the Italian
Prime Minister, the British Minister of Defence, the SecretaryGeneral of NATO, and the German Minister of Economic
Affairs. The Royal Navy and R.A.F. also paid official visits
174


THE RETURN TO NORMALITY
for the first time in recent years. As a climax, in December the American President, General Eisenhower, arrived in Athens and was received with unexampled enthusiasm. The en
thusiasm was further stimulated by the fact that Khrushchev visited Budapest in the same month and spoke warmly there
in praise of the Greek Communist Party. The fear of a revival of Communism in Greece made itself felt during the summer when a young Communist, ManoUs Glezos, who had dis
tinguished himself in the Resistance, was sentenced to five
years' imprisonment for subversive activity. When the Hungarians issued a commemorative stamp bearing Glezos's
portrait, the Greeks retorted with a stamp bearing the portrait of Imre Nagy. Relations with the Communist world were in fact back to normal. There were some unfortunate signs that the conduct of
Greek politics might also be reverting to normal. Politicians
of the opposition, who had been out of office for an unaccustomedly long period, began to become restless. Kanellopoulos joined the government as Deputy Prime Minister in January 1959, and Papandreou formed a new party in April. The
emergence of Grivas as a political figure entailed more specu
lative possibilities. After quarrelling publicly with Makarios
and accusing the government of trying to exterminate him, he
consented to a reconciliation with the Archbishop in October, but refused to support his candidature for the Presidency of
Cyprus in December—not that that incommoded Makarios,
whose election was virtually a foregone conclusion. In July i960 Grivas announced the formation of a 'new movement',
which he expressly said was not a political party, and invited
the political leaders to put themselves under his command.
Rather surprisingly, 1 7 Liberal members of Parliament did so.
Venizelos, their leader, approved their decision, though he did
not follow suit himself. His own contribution to the political
ferment was to propose, after a visit to the Soviet Union, that
the Communist Party should again be legalized, but the idea
fell on deaf ears. Another sign of the restless feeUng that it was
175


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
time for a change was the formation within Parliament of a
new group of ten deputies of the Centre. The stabiUty of the government was unaffected by these
manoeuvres, but it had other reasons for concern. One was
the activity of the Communists: many were put on trial for subversion and espionage during i960, and the connection of
the KKE with the legal left-wing party, EDA, and its
newspaper, Avyi, became notorious. Another regrettable but
transient affair was the publication by a German lawyer, Max Merten, who had been convicted of war crimes in Salonica but
amnestied, of allegations about the conduct of certain members
of Karamanlis's government and their wives during the occupation. There were acrimonious debates in Parliament on the
subject, but no evidence was ever produced. A less important
but more genuine scandal led to the resignation of a junior
minister in November i960. All this provoked accusations by
the opposition of the 'moral corruption' of the government,
accompanied by demands for fresh elections. More disturbing
than the activities of the opposition, however, were the renewed
signs that all was not well with the national economy. Greece's economic weakness was brought into prominence by the government's desire to join the European Economic Community, or Common Market, created by the Treaty of
Rome in 1957. The chronic deficit on the balance of payments combined with an unbalanced budget, of which nearly one
third was devoted to defence, made it seem unlikely that the
national economy could stand the strain of participating in the Common Market on equal terms. Moreover, in i960 the Organization for European Economic Co-operation reported that Greece's recovery was slowing down. A major difficulty was that whereas imports from the West continued unavoidably
to rise, the West did not provide a sufficient market for
Greece's agricultural surpluses, particularly tobacco. Attempts
were made to remedy the situation by encouraging western
countries to establish industries in Greece: the German
Federal Republic, for instance, set up a sugar-beet factory in
176


THE RETURN TO NORMALITY
i960. The Salonica Fair, which was revived and attracted
nineteen countries in the same year, also helped to stimulate trade; and in 1961 NATO appointed an economic mission to study the needs of Greece and Turkey. But it was clear enough
that it was necessary in any case to trade with countries of the
eastern bloc, which could help to absorb Greece's agricultural
surpluses. Hence economic necessity pulled Greece's foreign
policy in a different direction from political sympathy. New trade agreements were signed during i960 with Poland
and Czechoslovakia, and full diplomatic relations were restored
with both countries. The difficult negotiations with the European Economic Community ended early in 1961 in an agreement that Greece should become an 'associate', and a treaty
to this effect was signed on 9 July. Although the terms were
not easy, the Greeks did not regret having taken a further step
in partnership with the western alliance, to which their loyalty never wavered once the trouble over Cyprus was ended. They braved the wrath of the Bulgarian and Soviet governments both in 1959, when Greece signed an agreement with the
United States on nuclear weapons, and in 1961, when a conference of the NATO South-Eastern Command and NATO manoeuvres were held in Greek and Turkish Thrace. On the latter occasion Khrushchev attacked the Greek government in
a speech declaring that his rockets would spare 'neither olive
trees nor the Acropolis', to which Karamanlis made a dignified reply. Despite the difficult economic circumstances and uneasy
times, the spirit of the Persian Wars and the campaign of 1 940
was not defunct. That the Greek people generally approved their government
was shown for the third successive time by the general election of 1 96 1. Karamanlis resigned on 20 September, and was
succeeded by a 'caretaker' government to prepare for the
elections. He had taken the risk of passing a new Electoral Law which was relatively favourable to his opponents rather
than his own party. Nevertheless the poll on 29 October
slightly improved his majority, with almost exactly 50% of the
177


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
votes cast and 176 seats out of 300. The left-wing coalition,
within which the Communists sheltered, lost votes and seats heavily, and the Centre Union, led by Papandreou and Venizelos, with Markezinis's Progressives in alHance, won a
little over one-third of the votes and 100 seats. Karamanlis
had an overall majority of more than 50. Such a vote of
confidence in a Prime Minister who had been in office since
1955 (and indeed under Papagos since 1952) was naturally bitter to the opposition. In consequence there were unusually
acrimonious allegations of fraud at the polls, which more than
100 deputies carried to the extreme length of boycotting the
opening of Parliament in December. When they finally took
their seats in January 1962, it was to denounce the elections
as a sham and the government as unconstitutional. In one
constituency at Salonica, the Electoral Court upheld the
accusations and ordered a new poll; but elsewhere the opposi
tion gained no satisfaction.
Papandreou and Venizelos continued during 1962 to cam
paign vigorously against the conduct and outcome of the
elections. Unfortunately, since the Prime Minister of the 'caretaker' government had been an official of the Royal
Court, the King's name became personally involved in the
charges. The opposition newspaper, Eleftheria, pointedly pub
lished a serial on the history of the last great constitutional
schism, between King Constantine and the Liberals under
Venizelos's father. The opposition also made much play with
a remark of King Paul's in addressing army officers at Salonica: 'God has united us; I belong to you and you belong to me.' Papandreou pubUcly warned the King against pursuing
a 'personal policy' like his father. Sharp criticism was also
made of the administration of the Royal Welfare Fund, which had been created as an emergency measure during the civil war; and the opposition voted against the dowry accorded to
Princess Sophia on her marriage to Don Carlos of Spain. All
these pin-pricks were symptoms of a malaise such as had not
bqen felt so severely in Greek politics for a generation.
178


THE RETURN TO NORMALITY
The reluctant involvement of the Crown in politics became
more acute in the following year. It came to a head over the acceptance by the King and Queen of an invitation to make a
state visit to London. The visit was criticized by left-wing
elements in Britain (led, rather inconsequentially, by organizations formed to promote nuclear disarmament), chiefly on the
ground that a large number of so-called 'political prisoners' were
being wrongfully held in Greek prisons. The prisoners were in
fact those sentenced by various courts for crimes against the state
during the civil war of 1947-9; and as a constitutional monarch
the King had no personal power over their fate in any case. A
virulent campaign was nevertheless mounted in London against
him, and still more against Queen Frederika, as a * fascist' monarch. Echoes of the same accusations were heard in Greece
also, though the official parliamentary opposition found it
difficult to. force their criticisms to a vote in the Assembly
because they were conscious that most of the so-called ' political
prisoners' had been sentenced when they were themselves in office.
To make matters worse, an unfortunate incident involving
Queen Frederika occurred while she was on a private visit to
London during April 1963. A small crowd of left-wing Greeks,
including the British-born wife of a well-known Communist prisoner, Mrs Ambatielos, tried to approach the Queen in a
London street, with the result that she had to take refuge in a
private flat. There were various accounts of what took place on
this occasion; but the certain facts were that the British govern
ment officially apologized, their left-wing critics blamed them
for doing so, and Greek public opinion was outraged. The
desirability of cancelling the proposed royal visit to London, which was planned for July, was widely canvassed. The confused and bitter feelings engendered by the dispute were aggravated
by a disastrous incident in Salonica in May, when a left-wing
deputy, Grigorios Lambrakis, was killed after speaking at a meeting of the local Peace Committee, and another left-wing
deputy was seriously injured. Four senior police officers were
later charged with moral responsibility for the tragedy.
179


MODERN GREECE, I 939-64
In June the government came to the conclusion that in the
prevaihng circumstances it was desirable to cancel, or at least to
postpone, the royal visit to London. The King refused to accept this advice, and Karamanlis accordingly resigned on 1 1 June,
after holding office for the record period of nearly eight years.
His resignation provoked a political crisis of a kind once familiar,
but now unexpected. Papandrcou demanded the appointment of a government under his own leadership, to be charged with
the task of holding fresh elections; but neither he nor anyone
else seriously expected the King to take such a step. Instead a socalled 'service government' was appointed under Panayiotis
Pipinelis, who had previously acted as a constitutional adviser to
the Crown; but because he had held office under Karamanlis,
the opposition refused to regard his ministry as impartial for the
purposes of holding elections. Pipinelis nevertheless received a
vote of confidence at the end of the month by 1 72 votes to 14, the
opposition deputies of the Centre Union abstaining. The new
government agreed to support the King's decision to carry
through the royal visit to London. It took place from 9 to 1 1 July,
and was generally regarded as successful, despite some ugly
scenes in London organized bv supporters of the extreme
left.
The political situation in Athens continued to be both bitter
and confused. Even within the opposition there were conflicting
views. The Centre Union disliked enjoying the support of the extreme left, represented in parliament by EDA, and was
itself divided: Papandreou and Venizelos publicly admitted the impossibility of co-operation between themselves at the end of
July, though the prospect of elections soon brought them
together again. Pipinelis announced that elections would be held on 3 November, a decision which was confirmed by the King's formal dissolution of parliament in September. A few days later,
in deference to the opposition's criticisms of the impartiality ol'
Pipinelis, a new * service government' was appointed under Stavros Mavromikhalis, the President of the Areopagus or
Supreme Court, in his place. It was generally accepted that the
180


THE RETURN TO NORMALITY
appointment of so eminent a judge as Prime Minister was a
guarantee of fair elections; and so the event proved.
The general election showed a sharp but not decisive swing towards the Centre Union, which won 42% of the votes cast, against 39% for the National Radical Union (ERE) led by
Karamajilis. The distribution of seats was 140 for the Centre
Union, 128 for ERE, 30 for EDA, and two for the Progres
sives; in other words, it was only possible to form a minority or a coalition government. A few days later Papandreou formed a
government confined to his own followers, with Venizelos as
Deputy Prime Minister. Karamanlis at first declared that he would abandon politics; then withdrew the declaration; then
abruptly left Greece, consigning the leadership of his party to
Kanellopoulos. Papandreou's minority government won a vote of confidence on Christmas Eve with the support of EDA, but he at once resigned on the ground that he would not be dependent on the Communists. King Paul called upon Kanellopoulos, who was unable to form a government. Parliament was
therefore again dissolved, another ' caretaker government ' was
appointed, and elections were fixed for 16 February 1964. In the meantime a severe crisis had occurred over Cyprus, where
Archbishop Makarios, continually frustrated by the virtual
right of veto given to the Turkish minority in the constitution,
had declared his intention unilaterally to revise it in the
direction of absolute independence.
The Cyprus crisis, bursting at a moment of political un
certainty in Athens, had the gravest international consequences during 1964. Atrocities between Turkish Cypriots and Greek
Cypriots were of frequent occurrence, and the^ former, being
numerically a minority, found themselves gradually driven
into isolated pockets of the island, where the Greeks could sever their communications at will. There was constant danger of conflict between Greece and Turkey, both countries (like Brit
ain) having troops stationed on the island under the i960
treaty. More than once the two parent nations were on the
brink of war, especially after Turkish aircraft attacked Greek
181


MODERN GREECE, I939~64
Cypriot positions and harbours in August. Archbishop Makarios, behaving more and more as sole ruler of the island and
treating the Turkish minority as rebels, appealed first for the
help of British troops, which was given; and then, when their
conduct was insufficiently partisan to suit him, to the United
Nations, which sent a small international force and a Mediator.
As the year went on in increasing tension and confusion.
General Grivas emerged from retirement in Athens to lead the
Greek Cypriot forces; Makarios made overtures for less dis
interested help to both the Soviet and the Egyptian govern
ments ; the Finnish mediator died at a critical moment and was
replaced by a Latin American successor; and desperate efforts were made, particularly by the U.S. government, to work out
a new settlement by negotiation. It might have seemed, indeed, that the clock had been put back to a state of affairs which would once have been called normal in the most melancholy sense. Yet concurrently in 1964
there unfolded a series of unexpected events which not only
seemed to mark the end of an era, but also indicated a new
underlying stability in Greek affairs and gave grounds for better
hopes in the future.
The general election in February gave Papandreou a clear
majority. He won 53% of the votes cast and 1 74 seats for the
Centre Union, against 104 for the ERE and the Progressives,
and 22 for EDA. It was the first time in many years in Greece
(or indeed anywhere else in Europe outside Britain) that a
single strong and coherent party had succeeded another such
party in office by a decisive victory at the polls. Papandreou
began his term of office with vigour, despite his 75 years. He
handled the Cyprus crisis wisely, adopting a conciliatory
attitude towards the Turks and his western allies without
flouting Greek public opinion; and he was helped by the fact that world opinion was apparently moving round at last to
gnosis (with compensations to Turkey) as the best solution for
Cyprus, not least because it might be the only way of neutralizing the turbulent influence of Makarios and Grivas.
182


THE RETURN TO NORMALITY
The dramatis personae underwent other striking changes, too. Karamanhs settled abroad ; Venizelos died during the general
election; and King Paul, stricken with cancer, lived only long enough to swear-in the new government. He was succeeded by his 23-year-old son, Constantine, bearing a name which always
reminds the Greeks of past glories. Constantine II was fortunate in the moment of his accession. He was young and handsome, an Olympic gold-medalHst in i960, and about to be married
to the lovely Danish Princess Anne-Marie: altogether a fit
subject for Pindar. To say, truthfully, that his political judg
ment was unformed was to say nothing to the disadvantage of a new monarch. Papandreou, who while 6ut of office had al
most renewed with King Paul the quarrel of the elder Venizelos
with Constantine I, was unlikely to pursue it as Prime Minister
with a King young enough to be his grandson. The general election coming immediately before the death of King Paul
had in fact assured the new King of an equally loyal government and opposition (apart from the Communists in EDA), which would not have been the case had he succeeded under a
government of the traditional royalists. The opening of his
reign was auspicious, despite the international tension over
Cyprus. He enjoyed a triumph in his first speech from the Throne (in which he rightly called the Zurich-London agreements on Cyprus unworkable) ; and again at his wedding on
18 September. There were momentary flurries—for instance,
over an abortive project to bestow the title 'Royal' upon the
Army, and over the personal future of the Queen Mother, Frederika^to remind public opinion that the monarchy was still not beyond the scope of controversy. But the prevailing atmosphere at the end of 1 964 was one of fresh optimism, in which not the least element was the belief that some form of enosis for Cyprus could not now be long delayed.
\
183


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
ANCIENT GREECE
(i) Greek legends preserve the memory of a powerful and wise king (Minos) in Crete and of the heroes of the Trojan War; and the classical Greeks were constantly aware of an earlier age of greatness, the monuments of which, spectacular even in ruins, remained to view at Mycenae and elsewhere. But the modern world tended to discount legend and neglect these remains until the archaeological discoveries of Heinrich Schliemann at Troy, Mycenae and Tiryns (from 1870 onwards), and the work of Sir Arthur Evans in Crete (from 1893 onwards). The great work by Sir Arthur Evans, The Palace of Minos at Knossus, 4 vols. (London, 1921-35), not only gives a detailed description of the discoveries at Cnossus but covers the whole field of Minoan civilization, and is particularly rich in illustrations. Shorter surveys of this early civilization and its archaeological remains are given in the following books
:
G. Glotz, La Civilisation Egeenne (Paris, 1923), translated by M. R. Dobie and E. M. Riley as The Aegean Civilization (London, 1925); revised 1952 by C. Picard and P. Demargne. H. R. Hall, The Civilisation of Greece in the Bronze Age (London, 1928). J. D. S. Pendlebury, The Archaeology of Crete: an introduction (London, 1939). The same author has written an excellent Handbook to the Palace of Minos (London, J933» new edition 1954). C. H. and H. B. Hawes, Crete the Fore-rwmer of Greece 'London, 1909), is short and very readable. R. W. Hutchinson. Prehistoric Crete (Penguin Books, 1962), is authoritative and up to date. S. Marinatos and M. Hirmer, Crete and Mycenae (Thames and Hudson, i960), with brief text, sumptuously illustrated, covers both Minoan and Mycenaean civilization. General works in English on the prehistory of mainland Greece are, however, few. In the Ancient Peoples and Places series (Thames and Hudson) a volume on The Mycenaeans by Lord William Taylor is in preparation. For a summary outline see A. J. B. Wace and F. H. Stubbings, A Companion
to Homer (Macmillan, 1962), which also has accounts of the 'Homeric' sites.
On Mycenae itself see: A. J. B. Wace, Mycenae, an archaeological history and guide (Princeton, 1949). G. E. Mylonas, Aticient Mycenae (London, 1957). Helen Wace, Mycenae Guide (1961), an excellent illustrated pamphlet. (2) The authoritative bibliographies of TheCambridge Ancient History (Cambridge, •923-39 and 1961-) indicate the vast literature that is available about the history of classical Greece. The most comprehensive of the shorter histories are J. B. Bury, A History of Greece to the Death of Alexander the Great (London, 1900, 3rd ed., revised by R. Meiggs, London, 1951), and N. G. L. Hammond, A History of Greece (Oxford, •959)- These provide a clear narrative of events, and the latter is more up to date in the section on prehistory.
184


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
An interesting account of the most characteristic poHtical institution of the Greeks is given in G. Glotz, The Greek City and its Institutions, translated from the French by N. MalHson (London, 1929). Another book also by Glotz gives an account of the economic history of Greece up to the Roman Conquest

Ancient Greece at Work, translated by M. R. Dobie (London, 1926). This may be supplemented by M. L Rostovzeff's A History of the Ancient World (St Petersburg, 1899), translated from the Russian by J. D. Duff (Oxford, 1926, 2nd ed. 1930). Finally, one of the most attractive of all books dealing with Ancient Greece is Sir Alfred Zimmern's The Greek Commonwealth: Politics and Economics in Fifthcentury Athens (Oxford, 191 1, 5th ed. 1931). This gives a picture of ancient economic and social history in the light of the geographical conditions of the Greek lands and can be strongly recommended. (3) Various aspects of Greek civilization form the subject of the following works whose titles are explanatory. All present authoritative summaries of their respective subjects: G. M. A. Richter, 77?^ Sculpture and Sculptors of the Greeks (Yale, 3rd ed. 1950). W. Lamb, Greek and Roman Bronzes (London, 1929). G. M. A. Richter, A Handbook of Greek Art (London, 1959). D. S. Robertson, Greek and Roman Architecture (Cambridge, 1929). L. Robin, Greek Thought and the Origins of the Scientific Spirit, translated from the French by M. R. Dobie (London, 192B). R. M. Cook, Greek Painted Pottery (London, i960). C. T. Seltman, Greek Coins : a history of metallic currency and coinage down to the fall of the Hellenistic kingdoms (London, 1933).
A collection of essays, edited by R. W. Livingstone, provides a summary of
many aspects of Greek civilization: The Legacy of Greece (Oxford, 1921). A brief and readable survey is H. D. F. Kitto's The Greeks (Penguin, 2nd ed. 1958).
MEDIEVAL GREECE
(i) It was at one time the fashion to decry the Byzantine empire, and Gibbon poured contempt upon it. Since then a large number of writers have reassessed the part played by the empire in the history of Europe and the Near East. An authoritative account, complete with exhaustive bibliographies, will be found in The Cambridge Medieval History, vol. iv (Cambridge, 1923; a new edition is now in preparation). The volume is entitled The Eastern Roman Empire (717-1453), and is
devoted entirely to the empire. A short attractive summary of the main features of the Byzantine civilization is given by Norman H. Baynes in The Byzantine Empire (London, 1925). The following two books are particularly useful for a scholarly assessment of the evidence relating to the Slav immigration into Greece: J. B. Bury, A History
of the Later Roman Empire, A.D. 395-800, 2 vols. (London, 1889); J. B. Bury, A History of the Eastern Roman Empire, A.D. 8o2-86j (London, 1912). Useful books in English on the Byzantine Empire which have appeared since 1945 are: N. H. Baynes and H. St L. B. Moss, Byzantium: An Introduction to East Roman Civilisation (Oxford, 1948); J. M. Hussey, The Byzantine World (London,
1957); D. M. Nicol, The Despotate of Epirus (Oxford, Blackwell, 1957); G. Ostrogorsky, History of the Byzantine State (Oxford, Blackwell, 1956: very highly recommended); S. Runciman, A History of the Crusades (3 vols., Cambridge, 1951-55)
13 I05 wo


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
(2) Much was done to rehabilitate the history of Byzantine and later Greece
by the Scottish scholar George Finlay who spent many years in Greece. His History of Greece, published between 1844 and 1862, opened a field that had
hitherto been neglected by English writers. A new edition, revised by himself and edited by H. F. Tozer, was later published in 7 vols. (Oxford, 1877). (3) Not many English scholars have followed in Finlay's footsteps, but an
outstanding exception is W. Miller. Like Finlay he lays stress on the fact that ' contemporary Hellas owes as much, or more, to the great figures of the Middle Ages as to the heroes of classical antiquity'. His The Latins in the Levant (London, 1908) is a detailed authoritative work covering the period 1 204-1 566. Another detailed work by the same author is Essays on the Latin Orient (Cambridge, 1921). This is a collection of articles and monographs originally published elsewhere. It deals mainly with Frankish Greece, but also has articles on Roman, Byzantine
and Turkish Greece. A short and useful summary by the same author is The Latin Orient (S.P.G.K. London, 1920). Another account of Frankish Greece, which summarizes earlier work on the subject, is Rennell Rodd's The Princes of Achaia and the Chronicles of Morea, 2 vols. (London, 1907). (4) An account of Turkish Greece may be found in vol. v of Finlay's History
of Greece (see above) . This may be supplemented by two articles on Turkish and Venetian Greece up to 1 718 in W. Miller, Essays on the Latin Orient (see above), and by a short summary. The Turkish Restoration in Greece, lyiS-gy (S.P.G.K. London, 192 1), also by W. Miller. An account of the general setting of the history of Turkish Greece can be found in J. A. R. Marriott, The Eastern Question (Oxford, 1924). There is also Th. H. Papadopoullos' Studies and Documents relating to the History of the Greek Church and People under Turkish Domination (Brussels, 1952). (5) Of the many travel books written about Greece, two, by W. M. Leake, give an excellent and detailed picture of conditions in Greece between the years 1804-1810: Travels in the Morea, 3 vols. (London, 1830); Travels in Northern Greece, 4 vols. (London, 1835). These also contain a good deal of material about a number of other topics, e.g. the Slavs in Greece, the Frankish period.
MODERN GREECE
(i) The War of Independence has had many historians, including two Scots who took some part in it: Thomas Gordon, History of the Greek Revolution (Edinburgh, 1832); and George Finlay, same title, 2 vols. (London, 1861) or as vols, vi-vii of his History of Greece (Oxford, 1877). Useful modern books are: The Greek War of Independence (London, 1952) by C, M. Woodhouse (who took part in Greece in the 1940's); A History of the Greek People, 1821-31 (London, 1922) by
W. Miller (long familiar with the Levant and author of other works on it) ; and The Question of Greek Independence, 1821-33 (Cambridge, 1930), by C. W. Crawley (mainly on British policy, with a bibliography). See also E. Driault et M. Lheritier, Histoire Diplomatique de la Grece de 1821 a nos jours, 5 vols. (Paris, 1925-6).
(2) The best short accounts of the history of modern Greece are: W. Miller, Greece (London, 1928); J. Mavrocordato, Modern Greece i8oo-ig3i (London,
1931) ; E. S. Forster, A Short History of Modern Greece, 1821-1Q56 (3rd ed., London, 1958).
186


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
(3) For the history of the region, and of the part played by Greece in it, see, among others: Sir Charles Eliot, Turkey in Europe (London, 1908); Sir John Marriott, The Eastern Question, 4th edition (Oxford, 1940) ; W. Miller, The Ottoman Empire and its Successors, i8oi-ig2j^ 4th ed. with appendix for 1927-36 (Cambridge, 1936); A.J. Toynbee, The Western Question in Greece and Turkey (London, 1922); and various publications of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. (4) For the period of the second world war, the best sources in English are: Field-Marshal Alexander Papagos, 77?^ Battle of Greece, ig^o—ig^i (Athens, 1949),
for the campaigns against Italy and Germany; Brigadier E. C. W. Myers, Greek Entanglement (London, 1955) and C. M. Woodhouse, Apple of Discord (London, 1948), for the enemy occupation of Greece; and Sir Reginald Leeper, When Greek Meets Greek (London, 1950), for the political background among the Greeks in exile. (5) The post-war period has been the subject of many books, mainly ephemeral
in character. Among the most dependable are: Bickham Sweet-Escott, GreeceA Political and Economic Survey 1939-1953 (London, 1954), which contains a useful
bibliography, and Floyd A. Spencer, War and Post-war Greece—An Analysis Based on Greek Writings (Washington, 1952). The contrast of right-wing and left-wing views may be seen in: F. A. Voigt, The Greek Sedition (London, 1949), and L. G.
Stavrianos, Greece—American Dilemma and Opportunity (Chicago, 1952). The most reliable study of the Cyprus dispute is the work of Professor Georges Crouzet, of the University of Lille, not yet published. The best account of the Greek Communist Party (KKE) is Revolution and Defeat by Professor George Kousoulas (London, 1965)
187




INDEX
Abdul Hamid, 107-8
Abraham's Sacrifice, 135 Abyssinia, 133 Acarnania, 65, 66, 79, 97 rising against Turks (1585), 83 nationalist rising (1862), 100 Acciajuoli, 60 Achaean League, 28, 31 Achaeans, 4, 13 Achaia, principality of, 53, 61-4, 71 Acropolis, lords of, 8 museum, 12 Turkish garrison, 97 Actium, battle of, 3
1
Adrianople, 57, in, 117 captured by Turks, 77 treaty of, 96 Aegean Islands, 78 Aegina, 82 temple of, 2
1
Aegospotami, battle of, 19 Aenos, 69 Aeschylus, dramatist, 24 Aetolia, 65, 66, 79 fortifications, 29 revolt against Turkey, 83 Aetolian League, 28 Aetolians, guardians of Delphi, 28 Agathias, 73 Ainos, 1 1
1
Akkerman, contention of, (1826), 95-6 Albania, Albanian colonization of Attica, 61,
63 dispute over Epirus, 66 resistance to Turks, 77, 81, 83, 87 settlement in Aegean islands, 78 rise of national feeling, 90 independence established (1804), 9° remains in Turkish hands, 105 independence (191 2), in granted Epirus (1921), 121 invaded by Mussolini, 138, 140-2 Italian interest in, 114, 131, 134 post-war relations with Greece, 153, 163 and Balkan pacts, 132, 170
Alexander, King, 115, 119 Alexander I, Tsar, 92, 95
Alexander the Great, 25-6 Alexandria, 36, 137 Alexandroupolis, 1 1 6- 1
7
Alfred, Prince, son of Queen Victoria, lOI Ali Pasha, 90-1 .\liakm.on. River, 142-3 Allied Mission for Observing the Greek Elections, 154 Allied Supreme Council, 1 1
7
Amalfi, 48, 52 Amalia, Queen of Greece, 99-101 Ambatielos, Mrs, 179 American Mission for Aid to Greece,
155
AMFOGE, 154
Amvrakia, 97 Anaximander, philosopher, 13 Andros, 64 Angerins, 63 Ankara, 120, 164 Anna Comnena, historian, 47
.\nne-Marie of Denmark, 183 anti-monarchist groups, 145-8, 150 Antigone, character in drama, 1 29
Antioch, 36 Apollo, temple of, 2
1
'Apollo Belvedere', 29 Arcadia, 43 Archipelago, duchy of, 53, 63-4, 67, 83 architecture, early Greek, 12-13 orders, 13-14 4th and 5th centuries B.C., 21-2 Hellenistic, 29 Graeco-Roman, 33 Byzantine, 75-6 Argolis, 4 Argos, 16, 63, 82 Argyrokastron, 140 Aristophanes, dramatist, 24 Aristotle, philosopher, 25 armatoli, 82 art, oMinoan, 3 geometric, 7, 1
1
189
1


INDEX
art (cont.) in 5th century B.C., 19-21 Byzantine, 74-5 Arta, 65, 105, 109 Gulf of, 97 .\sia Minor, Ionian cities, 11,15 epic poetry in, 13 invaded by Alexander, 26 Hellenistic building, 29 Byzantine Empire in, 54-6 disastrous campaign of, 1920-21, 1 1 7-2
1
and see Turkey A>;T.)potainos, 97 Assembly, Athenian, see Athenian National, see National Athena, statue of, 23 Athenian Assembly, 18 Athenian Empire, 16-19 Athens, rise of, 8 in Persian wars, 15, 18 confederacy and empire of, 16-19 r^rivileged under Romans, 3
1
sacked by Sulla, 3
1
visited by St. Paul, 32 attacked by Goths, 32 duchy of, 53, 58-61 and duchy of Neopatras, 58 conquered by Turks, 77 captured by Venetians, 84 capital of independent Greece, 97 revolt against Ortho, 100 growth of population, loi seized by League of Officers, 108 controlled by Allies (19 16), 115 modern literature, 1 36 resistance in, 146-7 post-war riots, 151, 1 66 buildings of, 33
and see National Museum and University Attalus, Portico of, 29 Attica, 7-8 attacked by Persians, 15 Albanian colonization, 61, 63 Australians, 143 Austria, 86 Avars, 38-40 Averoffy cruiser, 127
Avyi, 176 Axis Powers, see Germany and Italy Ayia Triada, palace of, 3
Baldwin I, Lord of Flanders, 52-3 Baldwin II, 54
Balkan Chamber of Commerce, 132 Balkan Conferences, 132-3 Balkan Entente, 133-4, ^S^ Balkan Pact, 133, 164, 170, 174 Balkan Wars, 109-13 Balkans, Greek inter- war relations, 13 1-5 move towards unity, 13 1-2 Bamberg, 100 barbarian invasions, 37-8 Bassae, temple of, 2
1
Bavaria, 97 Bavarian Regents, 98-9 beehive tombs, 5 Belgrade, 116, 142, 156 Benedict of Peterborough, chronicler, 49 Benjamin of Tudela, 47, 50 Berlin, Congress of, 105 Bible, 36 Bled, Alliance of, 164 Boeotia, 4, 8, 79 battle of, 59 Boniface of Montferrat, 58, 6
1
Bosnia, 80, 108 Boudonitza, marquess of, 68 Brioni, 172 Britain, in War of Independence, 93-6 blockades Piraeus, 99-100 possible source of new royal family, loi cedes Ionian Islands, 10 1-2 and Cretan plebiscite, 103 at Congress of Berlin, 1 05 and Cyprus, 105, 123, 165-73 in World War I, 1 13-16 and Greek trade, 129 guarantees Greek territories, 138-9 help in World War II, 140-2,
H5-6
Military Mission to Guerillas, 147,
H9
supports king, 146, 148, 150 keeps troops in Greece, 150-1 votes against Enosis at U.N., 166 sends troops to Cyprus, 182
190


INDEX
British Labour Party, 1 7
1
Brusa, 77 Bucharest, Treaty of (18 1 2), 92, iii Budapest, 175 Bulgaria, early invasions by Bulgars, 38, 41, 43-6, 58 resistance to Turks, 77 Exarchate, 103, 107 granted Independence by Sultan (1878), 107-8 treaty with Serbia, no, 114 in World War I, 1 15-16 inter-war 'Balkan Conferences', 131-5 offered free zone in Salonica, 138 invaded by German troops, 141-2 annexes Macedonia and Thrace, 143 condemned by U.N., 158 post-war relations with Greece, 163, 170, 172 Bury, J. B., 40 ByTon, Lord, 88, 94
Byzantine Empire, see East Roman Empire Byzantine Greece, economic development of, 48-50 political condition, 50-1 western interference, 51-2 literature, 72-3 art, 74-5 architecture, 75-6
Caesar, Julius, 3
1
Cairo, 148, 149 Calabria, 80 Canning, George, prime minister, 93,
95 Canning, Stratford, British ambassador, 95-6 Capodistrias, president, 92, 93, 94 assassinated, 96 Carlowitz, Treaty of (1699), 84 Catalan Company, 58 Catalans, 59-60, 83 Catherine the Great, Empress of Russia, 86, 87 Cav^fy, Constantine, 136-7 Cazas, 79 Cecaumenos, writer, 46 centrahzation, Bavarian policy of, 99
Centre Union, 180, 182 Cephalonid, palatinate of, 53, 64-5, 77, 82 Cerigo, 68, 85 Cerigotto, 68, 85 Chaeronea, battle of (338 B.C.), 25 Chalcocondyles, Laonicos, historian,
73 Chamber of Deputies, see Deputies Champlitte, William of, 61 Charles I, King of Naples, 62 Chatalija, 1 17 China, Communist, 172 Chios, 55 Genoese settlement of, 69 taken by Turks (1566), 78, 83 represented at 4th National Assembly, 97 centre for revolutionary army (1922), 120, 126 Christianity, 32 becomes official religion of Roman Empire, 36 adopted by Bulgars (863), 44 Chronicle of the Morea, 7
1
Church, Sir Richard, 94 Churchill, Sir Winston, 146, 151 Cithaeron, Mount, 16 city states, 7-9 rivalry in, 19 after Macedonian Empire, 27 leagues of, 27 under Pax Romana, 3
1
civilizations, Helladic, 2, 4 Minoan, 2 Mycenaean, 4 Hellenic, 1
1
Of the 4th and 5th Centuries B.C., 19-25 Hellenistic. 29-30 Frankish, 71-2 Claras, Athanasios, 149, 151 Cleisthenese, reforms of, 8 Cnossus, I, 3, 126 Cochrane, Lord, 94 coins, Greek, 12 colonization, 9-1
1
early Greek, 9 Albanian, 61 Venetian, 67-8 Genoese, 68-9
191


INDEX
Cominform, 156, 158 Comnena, Anna, see Anna Comnena Comnenus, Michael Angelas, 65 Commission of Control, 106 'Committee of Union and Progress', 108 Common Market, 176, 177
Communist Party of Greece, see KKE Communists, 128, 145 Conference of Ambassadors (1921), 121 Congress of Berlin, 105 Constantine, Emperor, 35, 36 Constantine, Porphyrogenitus, historian, 41 Constantine I, King of Greece, leads Greek army in Balkan wars, 1 10 relations with Venizelos, 113, 114, 120 abdicates (191 7), 115 returns after plebiscite, 1 19 abdicates (1922), 120, 124 newspaper story about, 1 78 Constantine II, King of Greece, accession of, 183 marriage, 183 Constantinople, made capital of East Roman Empire, 35 Council of (381 A.D.), 36 raided by Barbarians, 38, 40, 41, 43 in the Fourth Crusade, 48, 52, 56 Genoese quarter of, 69 art in, 74-6 fall of, 77, 135
centre of Turkish government, 78 Russian designs on, 86, 87 Patriarch executed at, 93
'IVeaty of (191 3), in pn^poscd as an international city, 117 see also Istanbul Constitution, Greek, not desired by Russia, 98 accepted by Otho I, 99 of 1864, 103 of 1925, 124 of 1927, 125 'C>>rislitution of Epidaurus' (1822), 93 '(Jonstitution of Troizen' (1827), 94
(>onvention of Akkerman, see Akkerman Corfu, occupied by Normans, 51
occupied by Venetians, 65 special arrangements over (19 14), 1 12 pactof (1917), 115 anxieties over (1939), 138 Corinth, prehistoric, i Helladic civilization in, 4 city-state, 16 in Peloponnesian wars, 19 Pan Hellenic Congress at (337 b.c), 25-6 Roman villa mosaics, 29 destroyed by Romans, 3
1
refounded (44 b.c), 31 visited by St Paul, 32 invaded by Normans, 5
1
Corinth Canal, 157 Coron, 62-3, 82 Corsica, 84 Cos, 109 Costoboci, 32 Council of Constantinople (381 a.d.), 36 Crete, neolithic culture, i Minoan culture, 3-4. 1
1
terra-cotta sculpture in, 12 civil wars in, 16 raided by Slavs, 40 centre of slave trade, 49 conquered by Turks, 78, 83-5 Cretan War (1643-69), 83-5 given to Mehemet Ali, 94 not included in Independent Greece until 1912, 97 insurrection of 1866, 103 plebiscite rejected, 103 armed for war against Turks, 1 06 movement to join Greece, 106-9 attacked by Germans. 143 German occupation, 144, 152 Crimea, Greek emigration to, 87 Turkish and Russian tension over (1787), 88 Crimean War, 100 Crispi, 64 Cfispo, Francesco, 64 Critobulos of Imbros, 73 Croats, 39 Crusade, Fourth, 52, 64, 135
192


INDEX
Gumans, 38, 43 currency crisis of 1 93 1 , 126 Curzon, Lord, 120 Gyclades islands, 63, 72, 87 Cydonia, 16 Cyprus, Mycenaean influence, 6, 1
1
Knights of St John, 70 ceded to Britain, 105 dispute with Britain, 12 1-4, 153, 163, 165-73 unofficial plebiscite (1950), 165 constitutional crisis (1964), 18 1-2 Gyrenaica, 109 Gzechoslovakia, trade agreements, 164, 177
Dalmatia, 83 Damascus, Great Mosque of, 74 Damaskinos, Archbishop, 151, 153
Danube, frontier of Roman Empire,
35-9, 43 Daphni, 74, 76 Dardanelles, 6, 1 13-14, 117 Darius, King of Persia, 1
5
Dedeagach, see Alexandroupolis de Gaulle, General, 161 de la Roche, Guy, 59 de la Roche, Othon^ 59 Delegeorges, Epaminondas, loo Deligiannis, premier, 105-6 Delos, 16, 29 Delphi, 9, 21 Demertzig, 128 democracy, Athenian, 16 Demosthenes, orator, 24-5 demotic Greek, 135-6 Denmark, Greek Royal Family from, 10 1, 183 Deputies, Ghamber of (Vouli), 99 Derby, Lord, 103 devaluation of drachma, 1 63 de Villehardouin, Geoffrey, 61-2 de Villehardouin, Isabella, 62 de Villehardouin, William, 62, 7
1
Digenis Akritas, 73 Dill, General, 141 Diocletian, Emperor, 35-6 Diomedes, Alexander, 158-9 'Discobolus' (Discus-thrower), 23 d'Istria, Gapo, see Gapodistrias
Dodecanese, occupied by Italy, 109-12, 114, 121 declaration by Venizelos, 1 3
1
occupied by Germans, 152 ceded to Greece (1948). 153, 157 Leros fortifications dismantled, 1 70 Don Garlos of Spain, 1 78 Doria, Andrea, 82 Dorian invasions, 6-7 'Doryphorus' (Athlete with Spear), 23 drama, origin of Attic, 24 Ducas, historian, 73 Durazzo, 51, 113 Dushan, Stephen, 56-7, 66 ' Dying Gaul ', 30
EAM, 147-51 Eastern Roumelia, 107 Eastern Roman Empire, 35-52 annexes Thessaly, 58 breaks up, 6
1
Echo, Portico of, 29 economy, Greek, 9, 48, loi, 129, 138-9, 152-3, 176-7 EDA, 161-3, 176, 180, 181, 182. 183 Eden, Sir Anthony, 141, 151, 169 EDES, 147-9, 151, 155 Egypt, Gretan trade with, 3 art in, 3 Ptolemies rule in, 27 Hellenistic building in, 29 in the Fourth Grusade, 52
and War of Independence, 94-6 government in exile, 143, 145, 148 claim to Sudan recognized, 161 Eisenhower, General, 175 Eisenhower Doctrine, 1 7
1
ELAS, 147-51 Eleftheria, 178 Eleutherae, fortifications at, 2
1
Elis, 43, 95 Empires, Persian, 15 Athenian, 16-19 Macedonian, 25-6 Eastern Roman, 35-52 Bulgarian, 45, 50 Turkish, 77-90 Enez, 1 1
1
England, see Britain
193


INDEX
gnosis, 165, 182, 183 Entente, Little, 1 3 1-4 Balkan, 133-4, 138
Enver Bey, 108, no EOK„\, 168, 169 EPEK. 159, 160, 163 Ephesus, 29, 75 Epic, 13, 23, 30 Epicurus (341-270 B.C.), 30 Epidaurus, temple of, 21, 23 g\'mnasium of. 2
1
Epirus, attacked by barbarians, 38, 45 retained in Byzantine Empire, 53, 56 annexes Salonica (1223), 58 occupied by Tocco family (141 8), 61 under the Franks, 65-6 sanjak of, 79 delegates at Fourth National Assembly, 97 rising in (1878), 104, 108 occupied by Italian Troops, 1 14 'Epirus Northern', 140-1 ERE, 167, 181, 182 Erechtheum, 21 Euripides, dramatist, 24 Erophile, 135 Erotokristos, 135
Euboea, 79, 82, 84. 97 European Economic Community, 176-7 Exarchate, 107 Ezerites, 41
Kab\ i'l , fj4 Ferdinand, King of Bulgaria, 108, 116 feudalism, 71 Flamininus, Roman consul, 28 Flemings, the, 62 Florence, 135 Foot, Sir Hugh, 17 1-2 Fort Roupel, 1 14 fortifications of ancient Greece, 21 France, and War of Independence, 91-6 and monarchy, loi rfforts against Mussolini, 138-9
Franco-Italian Agreement (1935), 133 Franks, 65 influence on countryside, 72 influence on Byzantine literature, 73
Frederic II, King of Sicily, 59
Frederika, Queen of Greece, 179, 183 freedom, discussed by Socrates, 24 French Revolution (1789), 88-89, 9^ frescoes, 74-5 Froissart, 65
Gabalas, Leon, 69 Gallipoh, 113, 117 Garibaldi, 100 Gauls, at Delphi, 28 Geneva, 108 Genoa, traders from, 48 commercial privileges of, 52 colonization, 68-9 loss of Chios, 83 geometric art, 1
1
George I, King of Greece, 10 1-9 George II, King of Greece, High Commissioner of Crete, 107 suspected of pro-German sympathies,
becomes king, 120 leaves Greece, 124 restored, 127-8 promised fully representative government, 150 referendum in favour of return, 154-5 dies, 155 German Federal Repubhc, i()4, 176 Germany, 133-4, ^S^, 141-3 occupation of Greece, 143-52 Getae, 38 Gladstone, William, 103 Glezos, Manolis, 175 Gonnaris, 120 Gorgopotamos, 147, 157 Gortyn, 16 Goths, invade Athens, 32, 37 Grabusa, 84 **
Great War (1914-18), 1 13-16 Grivas. George, 165, 166, 173. 178, 182, forms EOKA, 168
194


INDEX
guerillas in World War II, 144-9 Gyparis, 135
Hadrian, Emperor (117-38), 31, 33 Hainaut, Florent, 62 Halepa, Pact of, 105 Hannibal, 28 haratch, 80 Harding, Field Marshal Sir John, 167, 171 Hastings, 95 Hecataeus, Greek thinker, 13 Herzegovina, 108 Helen of Troy, 6 Helladic Civilization, 4 Helle, 139 Hellenic Civilization^ 1
1
Herodes Atticus, 33 Herodotus, historian, 24, 73 Hesiod, poet, 23 Hetairia, 88, 90, 91-2 Hitler, Adolf, 128, 138-40, 141 -2 Hodja, Daut, 140 Holy Alliance, 92 Homer, 13, 23 Honorius HI, Pope, 71 Hoover Moratorium, 132 Hosios Loukas, 74-5 Hungary, 141, 164 Huns, 38 Hydra, 91 Hymn to Liberty, 135
Ibrahim, 94-5 Icaria, 55 icons, 74, 75 ideology, differences between Athens and Sparta, 17 Iliad, 13
Imbros, 18, 19, 69, 78, 121 Imperial Army, 40 Independence, Greek War of (182132), 92-6 industrial expansion in Greece, 1 74
Industrial Development Corporation, 174 Ionia, II, 13, 82, 91 Ionian Islands, captured by Turks, 77 British rule in, 89, 100
returned to Greece, 10 1-2, 109 school of poetry, 135-6 earthquake, 163 Isidore of Seville, 40 Israel, 164 Istanbul, 10, 166 Isthmian games, 28 Istria, 87 Italy relations after 191 9, 12 1-3 pacts with Greece, 131, 134 invasion of Greece, 140-1 occupation of Greece, 1 43-4 fall of Mussolini, 1 49 and the Dodecanese, 151-3, 157 improved relations with Greece, 161 I tea, 51 Ithaca, 4, 64, 77, 82
Janina, 65, 77, 83, 103, no janissaries, 80-1 Japan, 172 Jassy, treaty of, 88, 92 Jerusalem,, 36, 52 Jews in Greece, 50 John of Ephesus, chronicler, 39 Justinian, Emperor, 36, 38, 39, 48
Kahriye Djameh, 74, 76 Kalamas, 105 Kalamata, battle of, 83 Kalvos, Andreas, 136 Karamanlis, Constantine, 167-70, 172, 174, 177, 180, 181, 183 Kardelj, 170 Karellopoulos, Parayiotis, 148, 154, 175, 181 Katharevousa, 136 Kathimerimi, 142 Kavalla, 1 1
1
Kazantzakis, Nikos, 137 Kemalists, 1 1
7
Khrushchev, 165, 175, 177 Khyber Pass, 26 * King of the Hellenes', 103 Kirk-Kilisse, 1 1
1
KKE, 147, 149 attack guerilla forces, 151 demand withdrawal of British troops, 154
195


INDEX
KKE (cont.) form rebel government (i947)» 156-8 formation of EDA, 1 6 revives (1959), 175"^ Klephts, 82, 91, 107 Knights of St John, 70 Kolettis, 94, 99 Kolokotronis, 94 Kondiiis, General, 125-6, 127, 128 Konduriotis, 128 Korais, Adamantios, 89 Korean War, 1 60 Koritsa, 140, 156 Koryzis, Alexander, 141, 143 Kossovo, battle of (1389), 57, 77 Kutchuk, Dr, 1 73 Kutschuk Kainardji, treaty of (1774), 87
Lambrakis, Grigorios, 179 language, Greek, 34, 36, 42 dispute over, 136 Larissa, 51, 58 Lascaris, Theodore, 55 Laurium Silver Mines, 9 Lausanne, treaty of (191 2), no treaty of (1923), 120, 123 League of Nations, 1 30 League of Reservists, 1 1 Lebanon, 172 Lebanon Conference, 150 Leipsos, 109
Lemnos, 18, 19, 69, 77, 121, 130 Leo III, Emperor, 40 Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, Prince, 96-8 Lepanto, 63, 82 Leros, 170
Lesbos, 55, 69, 77 Leukas, 4 Libya, 10 Lie, Trygve, 155 Linear A, 3 Linear B, 3, 5 Literature, early Greek, 13 in the fourth and fifth centuries, 23 Hellenistic, 30 Graeco-Roman, 34 Byzantine, 72-3 modern Greek, 1 35-7
Little Entente, 131-2, 133, 134 Lloyd, Selwyn, 172 Lloyd-George, David, 1 1 Logothetopoulos, 147-8 London Conferences, of 1 92 1, 119 on Eastern Mediterranean, 166 on Cyprus, 173 London, treaties of, 1827, 95-6 1912, 1 1 1915, 114 Louis I, King of Bavaria, 97 Lydia, 10, 15 Lysander, Spartan admiral, 19 Lysicrates, monument of, 21 Lysippus, 23
Macedonia, emerges as power, 19 Macedonian Empire, 25-8 Macedonian Wars, 28 made Roman province, 28 invaded by Slavs, 38-9 colonized, 43, 45 under Turks, 77, 80 different nationalities in, 107 Macmillan, Harold, 172 Maina, 56, 62 revolts against Turks, 83-5 Makarios, Archbishop, 165, 167-8, 170, 1 8 1-2 goes to United Nations, 171 agrees to independence of Cyprus,
173 becomes President of Cyprus, 1 75 Malia, palace of, 3 Marathon, battle of, 1 Marcus Aurelius, 31 Maritza, the, 55 Maritza, battle of (137 1), 57
Mark Antony, 3 Markezinis, Spyros, 163 Markos, 158 Marmora, Sea of, 56, 1 1 Mavrokordato, Alexander, 93, 99 Mavromikhalis, Stavros, 180 Maximos, Dimitrios, 155-6 Mehemet Ali, 90, 94 Melos, 64 Melos, Aphrodite of, 29 Menelaus, King of Sparta, 6
196


INDEX
Merten, Max, 176 Messenia, 4, 95 Metaxas, General John, governs by decree, 128-9 foreign policy of, 133-4, 139-4^ his regime discredited, 145-6 Metternich, 92-3, 96 Miaoulis, Andreas, 93 Midia, 1 1
1
Miletus, 10 Milings, the, 41 Military League of Officers, 1 08 Miller, W., 41 Minoan civilization, 3-4 Minos, King, 3 Missolonghi, 94 Mistra, fortress of, 56, 62 Modon, 61-3, 82, 94 Moldavia, 90-1 Monemvasia, rock of, 56, 62, 82, 84 Monastir, 1 1
5
Montenegro, 1 1 o Montreux Convention, 130 Morea, 79, 82, 84 'Morokampos', 49 Morosini, Francesco, 68, 84 Mosaics, 74-5 Moslems, 37, 49, 80 Mummius, 33
Mussolini, promotes Balkan pacts, 1 3
1
invades Albania, 138 first attacks on Greece, 139-41 Mycenaean civilization, 3, 4-6 Mykonos, 82
Myrivilis, Stratis, 137 Myron, sculptor, 23 Mytilene, 97
Nagy, Imrc, 175 Naples, 64 Napoleon, 89, 91-2 Napoleon III, 103 Nasi, Joseph, 64 national antherh, Greek, 135 National Assembly, 93, 95, loi fourth, 97 'Second Revisionary', 108-9 fifth, 127 national dress, 99
National Museum of Athens, 23
'National Party', 99, 105 nationalism, Greek, 88-90 N.A.T.O., 160-1, 167-8, 170, 173, 177 Nauplia, 63, 82, 98, 100 Navarino, battle of, 96 Navarrese Company, 63 navy, Greek, 130 Naxos, 64, 78 Nero, Emperor, 31, 33 Neuilly, treaty of (1919), 1 16-17, '35
New Zealanders, 143
Nicaea, 53, 54, 55, merged v^ith Constantinople, 56, 58 conquered Salonica, 65 helped by Genoese, 68 Nicholas I, Tsar of Russia, 95 Niketas, historian, 50 Nobel prize, 1 36 Normans, 51
Octavian, 31 Odessa, 90, 91 Odeum, the, 33 Odyssey, 13 Oeniadae, 29 Olympia, 9, 21, 29 Olympip games, 23 orders of architecture, 1
3
Organic Statute, 103, 105 Orloff brothers, 86 Orsini, Matteo, 64 Orthodox Religion, 42, 99 relations with Moslems, 79-80 Russian influence in Greek Orthodoxy, 86-7 Ostrogoths, 38 Otho I, King of Greece, 97-101 Otranto, Straits of, 5
1
palaces, Mycenaean, 3, 5> ^ Palaeologus, family of, 55 Palamas, Kostes, 136 Pallavicini, 58 Palmerston, 97, 99-100 Pangalos, General, 124, 129 Pan-Hellenic Congress, 25 Pan-Hellenic games, 10 Pan-Slav risings, 104-5
197


NDEX
Papagos, General Chief of Staff, 140 Commander-in-Chief, 1 58 misunderstands British, 1 72-3 resigns and forms Greek rally, 160-3 and Cyprus dispute, 165-7 Papanastasion, 124-6, 132 Papandreou, 150-1, I75, ^V^, 180-3 Paris, 108 Parma, 58 Parthenon, 21-3 * Parties ' in the War of Independence,
94 Partsaldis, 158 Patras, 151 Siege of (807), 41 Patriarch of Constantinople, 99, 103-4 Patzinacs, 38, 43 Paul I, King of Greece, 119, 155, 168, 178 State visit to London, 1 79-80 death of, 182 Paul, the Silentiary, 72 Pausanias, geographer, 32 Pax Romana, 30, 32 PEEA, 150 Peirene Fountain, 33 Peisistratus, 8 Peloponnese, in the Byzantine Empire, 56, 57 Prankish influence in, 61 under Turks, 63, 75, 79
and Mehemet Ali, 94, 96 Peloponnesian War, 17-19 Pergamum, 29
Pericles, 16, 18, 129 Perseus, King of Macedonia, 28 Persian Empire, 15, 26 Peter the Great (1689- 1725), 86 Phaestus, palace of, 3 Pharsalus, battle of, 3 Phidias, sculptor, 23 Philip of Macedon (359-336 b.c), 25, 36 Philip V, King of Macedonia, 28 Phocea, 10, 69 Piedmontese, the, 62 Pindar, poet (522-450 B.C.), 23 Pinerolo Division, 149 Pinios, 105 Pipinelis, Panayiotus, 180
piracy, 49, 83 Piraeus, 31, loo-i Pisa, 52 Pisides, George, 72 Plague, Great (746), 41 Plastiras, Colonel, 120, 126-7, 151, 153, 159 Plataea, battle of, 16 Plato, 25 Plutarch, historian (42-120), 34 poetry, modern Greek, 135-7 Poland, 172, 177 political parties in the Republic, 124 Polybius, historian (202-120 B.C.),
16, 30, 34, 73 Polycletus, sculptor, 23 Pompey, 31 population, in the 19th century, loi exchange of Greek and Turkish, 1 1 7, 121 Populist party, 124, 126, 154, 159, 160, 167 Poros, 97 pottery, Helladic, 4 in the Dark Ages, 7 Athenian, 12 Praxiteles, sculptor, 23 Prevelakis, Pantelis, 137 Preveza, 105 Procopius, historian, 39, 73 Propylaea, 21 prose, modern Greek, 137 Protocol, the (1826), 95, (1830), lOI Psaros, Colonel Dimitrios, 148 Psycharis, John,
My Journey^ 136 Ptochoprodromos, 73 Ptolemies, 27 Punic Wars, 28 Pydna, battle of (168 b.c), 28 Pylus, 3, 6 Pythagoras, Greek thinker, 1
Quadruple Alliance, 92
Radcliffe, Lord, 169 R.A.F., 140 Rallis, John, 148 rally, Greek, 161, 162
198


INDEX
Ravenna, 74, 75, 76
refugees (1947), 157 Republican Officers League, 124 Republic, Greek, 124-7 resistance movements, 145-7, 148-9,
revolution of September 1843, 99, loi Rhigas, Constantine (1760-98), 88-9 Rhodes, 109, 121 School of Sculpture, 20 Knights of, 54, 69-70 Roger of Sicily, 5
1
Roidis, Emmanuel, 137 Roman Catholic Church, 64, 71 Romania, Latin empire of, 54
overtures to (1912), no and Treaty of Neuilly, 1 1
6
Greek pact with, 13 1-4 occupied by Germans, 141 post-war reconciliation, 164, 170 Rome, 75, 76, 135 treaty of, 176 Roosevelt, President, 146 Royal Navy, 143 Royal Welfare Fund, 1 78 Russell, Lord John, 100 Russia, influence on Greek affairs, 86-8 and War of Independence, 91-6 and monarchy, 98, 10
1
Germany attacks, 145
refuses to join AMFOGE, 1 54 trade agreement (1958), 172 Russo-Turkish War (1877-8), 104-5
St Demetrius, 40 St Mark's, 76 St Paul, 32 St Sophia, 74, 76, 79 Sakaria, 120 Salamis, Bay of, 15 Salamvrias, 105 Salonica, attacked by barbarians, 40, 43 annexed by Serbs, 56-7 under Boniface of Montferrat, 58-g new Greek Empire of, 65 art and architecture in, 74, 75 under Turks, 77, 79 headquarters of Committee of Union and Progress, 108
Yugoslavian claims on, 1 3
1
free zone, 138 riots over Cyprus question, 166 Pact of, 134
Samos, 10, 55, 97 Assembly of, 112 Samothrace, 69, 77, 121, 130 San Stephano, Treaty of, 1 50 Sanjaks, 79 S^nta Maura, 65, 77, 84 Sanudo Marino, historian, 71 Saracens, 41 Saraphis, Colonel Stephanos, 148, 150 Schacht, Dr, 133 'Sclavinia', 41 Scobie, General, 150 sculpture, early Greek, 1
2
in fourth and fifth centuries, 22 Hellenistic, 29 Graeco-Roman, 33 Byzantine, 75 Scutari, 1 1
1
Scyros, 18-19 Scythians, 38 Seferis, George, 136 Selevcids, 27 Senate (Yerousia), 99 Serbia, 39, 56, 77, 107 revolt against Turks, 90 treaty with Bulgaria, 1 10 Sevres, Treaty of, 117, 119, 121 Seychelles, Islands, 168, 170 Shaft Graves, 5 Shepilov, 168 Sicily, 3, 12, 18, 83 Sikelianos, Angelos, 136 Silkworm, 49 Simeon the Great (893-927), 45 Skaramanga, 174 Slavery, 8 Slavs, 38-43 Slovenes, 39 Smyrna, 69, 117, 120, 167 Socrates, 24-5 Sofia, 79, 117 Solomos, Dionysios, 135 Solon, 8 Sophia, Princess, 178 Sophocles, dramatist, 24 Sophoulis, Themistoklis, 153-4, ^5^-8 Spain, 3, 164
199


INDEX
Sparta, if)-i<> under Romans. 31 Si>crchios, 4 Spcz/ia, 91 Sphrantzcs, liistorian, 73 Spinalonga, 84 Sporades, 82 ' Springtime of Greece ', 1
1
Stalin, 141 Staurakios, General, 41 Stephanopoulos, Stephanos, 167 Strabo, geographer, 31-2 Strategicon, 46 Suda, 84 Sulla, Roman general, 31, 33 ^umeria, 3 Sunium, temple of, 2
1
Sweden, K47 Synod of Athens, 1 03 Syracuse, 10 Syria, Minoan trade with, 3 Seleucid rule, 27 Hellenistic building, 29 French interest, 123
Taranto, 10 Taygetos, Mount, 41, 62 Tegea, temple of, 2
1
temple, Greek, arrangement of, 13 zenith of, 2
1
Tenedos, 121 Tcnos, 68, 77, 82, 84, 139 Thales, Greek thinker, 13 Thasos, 69, 77 theatres, in Ancient Greece, 21 Thebes, 16, 59 silk industry, 49-51 Theocritus, poet, 30 Theotokas, George, 137 Theotokis, Ion, 159 Thermopylae, battle of, 1
5
Theseum, building of, 2
1
Thessalonians, Epistle, 32 Thessaly, prehistory, i, 3 invaded by Slavs, 38 Wallachian, 56, 58
conquered by Turks (1393), 57, 76, 78-9 movements towards treedom, 97, 100, 103 obtained by Greece (1878), 105, 109 Thiamis, 105 Thrace, in Peloponnesian war, 18 Slav conquest, 39, 43 Latin rule, 54 Byzantine rule, 56 Turkish campaign in, 77 ceded to Greece ( 1 9 1 9) , 116-17 frontier revised, 1 2
1
Thucydides, historian, 1 7, 24, 73 Tigris, river, 35 Tilsit, meeting of Napoleon and Tsar (1807), 92 Tito, 158, 165, 174 Titulescu, M., 134 Tocco, family, 61, 65-6, 77 Torcello, 75 'Tower of the Winds', 29 trade, see economy treasury, Athenian, 16 Trebizond, 53 Trikoupis, 99, 105 Tripoli, 109 TripoHtsa, battle of, 86 Trojan war, 6, 13 Truman, President, 155 Tsaldaris, 125-8 Tsaldaris, Constantine, 154-6, 159-60 Tsolakoglou, General, 143, 147 Tsouderos, Emmanuel, 143, 147-50, 159-60 Turks, rise of, 37, 56-7 arrive in Europe (i354)> 57> 77 conquer Greece, 61, 65, 77-8 conquer Archipelago (1566), 57, 64, 69-70 political organization of Greece, 7882 resistance of Greeks and Venetians, 82-6 conflicts with Russia, 86-8, 92 decline of administration, 89-90 and War of Independence, 91-6 fleet destroyed at Navarino, 96 position at independence settlement, 97
200


INDEX
Turks (cont.) declare war on Greece (1897), 106 Peace Treaty (1919), 117-19 reconciliation with Greece (1930), 126, 130-4
escape route in World War II, 145 'Truman Doctrine', 155 join NATO, 160 Balkan Alliance, 164 Cyprus dispute, 165-73, 18 1-3 Tuscany, 83
United Arab Republic, 1 7
1
United Nations, Greece joins, 147 Commission (1947), 155-8 and Cyprus, 165-73, 18 1-2
University of Athens, 31, 36, 100, 129
UNRRA, 151
UNSCOB, 156, 158, 161 U.S.A., in World War II, 146-7, 151 economic aid, 155-7, 160 influences Greek politics, 1 59 votes against Enosis at U.N., 166, 171 bases in Greece, 170-1 agreement with Greece on nuclear weapons, 177 and Cyprus, 182 U.S.S.R.', see Russia Uzes, 43
Valaoritis, Aristoteles, 136 Valerian, Emperor, 32 Valona, 141 Vaphiadis, Markos, 156 Varkiza, 151, 154 Varvaressos, Professor, 153, iCr^ vase painting, 7, 1 1-12 Vassilikos, Vassilis, 137 Velegezetes, 40 Velestino, 58 Velestinon, 40 Veloukhiotis, Aris, see Claras Venezis, Elias, 137 Venice, rise of, 48, 51-3 possessions (1204-1797), 56, 63-8 wars with Turkey, 82-6 extinction of Venetian Republic (1797)^90 culture; 135 Venizelists, 155-6
Venizelos, Eleutherios, premier, Cretan councillor, 107 Prime Minister (1910-20), 108-10, 113-19, 121 Prime Minister (1924), 124 Prime Minister (1928-32), 125-6, 130-2 death, 127-8 Venizelos, Sophoklis, premier, 1 50, 1 54, 159-60, 175, 178, 1 80- 1, 183 Ventris, Michael, 5 Victoria, Queen of England, i o i 'Victory', 30 Vienna, 86 Congress of (181 5), 90, 92 Visigoths, 37 V'lachia, Great and Little, 46 see also Wallachia Vlachs, the, 45-50, 77, 107 Vlakhos, 142 Volos, 166 Gulf of, 97 Voltaire, 79, 85 Voulgaris, Admiral, 153 Vouli, 99
Wallachia, 47, 90-1 'Great W.', 58 Wavell, General, 141 Wellington, Duke of, 95-7 William, Prince of Wied, 1 1
3
William the Conqueror, 51 Wilson, General, 143 World War I, 1 13-16 World War II, 139-51
Xanthe, 1 1
1
Xenopoulos, Gregorios, 137 Xerxes, King of Persia, 1
5
Yerousia, 99 'Young Turks', 108-9 Yugoslavia, formation of, 115 Greek inter-war relations with, 1 3 1-4 in World War II, 138, 141-2, 147 accused of inciting rebellion in Greece, 155, 158 post-war agreements, 160-1, 164 170-2, 174
201


INDEX
Zaccaria, 69 Zervas, Napoleon, General, 148-15 1, Zaimis, 128 ^55-6 Zakhariadis, Nikos, 158 Zeus, Zante, 64, 77, 82 Olympia, statue of Z., 23 Zara, 52 altar to, 29 Zeitoun, Gulf of, 97 Zurich-London agreements, 183
202






%


A SHORT HISTORY OF
GREECE
From early times to 1964
W. A. HEURTLEY H C. DARBY
Professor of Geography in the University of Cambridge
C, W. CRAWLEY
Emeritus Felloe of Trinity Hail, Cambridge
and
The Hon. C. M. WOODHOUSE
An introduction to Greek history from prehistoric times until
the end of 1964. It is based on the historical sections of the Handbooic first issued by the Naval Intelligence Division of the Axlmiiaicy during the war and is a companion volume to the successful series of short histories of France, Germany, Italy and Yugoslavia already pubUshed. The original contributors were the late W. A. Heurtley, Professor H. C. Darby and C. W. Crawley. 7ne final section has been written by the Hon. C. M. Woodhouse, \\\ o was formerly Director-General of the Royal Institute of International Affairs. This history will appeal to general readers and tourists as well
as stud en m universities and schools.
*This ex ^ordinary book compresses into 183 pages of text the history 03 mainland Greece from the earliest times to the end of 1964. \K l.at IS more, it does so from the unfamiUar perspective of the p. '"sent day . . . Anyone would gain by reading this short book; bur most of all, perhaps, those who have attacked Greek historv through the other end of the telescope.* Economist
Also issued in cloth
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
^oad, London N.W.I Ar reet. New York, N.Y. 10022
Standard Book No 5 J f 09454 2