114 BUSINESS HISTORY

Divided into eight chapters of variable length the book is structured to intro-
duce in logical order the principal characteristics of the industry and disassembles
the development of scholarship and debate to fit around these themes. The
first four chapters consider, in chronological sequence, the development of
the industry from medieval bloomeries to late eighteenth-century coal-fueled
blast and refining furnaces, with a brief review of changing methods of steel
production down to the early nineteenth century. Particular attention is given to
the fuel, labour and other cost factors which prompted and shaped the process
of technological change during the period and the effects of these changes on
the industry’s overall level of output. The second half of the volume if mainly
concerned with changing market conditions during the seventeenth, eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries. There is a discussion of the changing balance
of imports and exports and the great surges of demand. consequent on the
Napoleonic Wars and the coming of the railway age. Locational changes are
also considered here as are the technical improvements of the early nineteenth
century and, at greater length, the character, performance and organisation
of the iron masters. The latter section is unusual in a book of this type. As
Professor Harris notes, ‘there would clearly be a serious gap if nothing were
to be said’, but he finds precious little to deal within general terms because of
the ‘lack of research into the group as a whole’. It is not so much a review of
past scholarship as an indicator of profitable fields for future work — and a useful
prompt for business historians. It is pleasing to see an appendix on the industrial
archaeology of the iron industry. Often regarded elsewhere as the unrespectable
and unmentionable cousin of academic iridustrial history, Professor Harris is
correct to draw our attention to the outstanding remains and museums of this
industry and their value in enhancing our understanding and appreciation of its
technical development, geographic distribution, and regional impact.

There is room for one critical word, however, levelled not so much at the
author of this volume as the practitioners of ‘iron industry’ research generally.
The study, we are told, is concerned with the ‘primary iron industry’ ~ not the
manufacturers of iron but those involved'in the production of the basic product.
Nevertheless, there is little mention here, or in the literature on which this vol-
ume draws, of iron mining. Since Ashton’s day very few writers have bothered
to enquire about the sources of the ore used by the iron masters: where and: how
it was mined; the different types of ore produced; their differing influence on
the methods and costs of production; the needs and significance of ore mixing.
Among the historians of non-ferrous metals, the study of ‘primary’ production
is almost entirely taken up with discussions of mining techniques with relatively
little — probably too little — on smelting and refining. There is clearly a case for
a major effort to redress. the balance in both areas.

University of Exeter ROGER BURT

GEORGES B. DeErtTILIS (ed.), Banquiers, Usuriers et Paysans: Réseaux
de Crédit et Stratégies du Capital en Gréce (1780-1930) (Paris: Editions La
Découverte et Fondation des Treilles, 1988. Pp.322 F150.00).

The economic history of nineteenth and early twentieth century Greece has not
received much attention from historians writing in English - an exception is
Lange and Jackson’s Balkan Economic History, 1550-1950, published in 1982.
In a sense this lack of interest is understandable as for much of the nineteenth

BOOK REVIEWS 115

century Greece, as a population unit, was a tiny country. Until the 1860s its
population was barely a million, rising to two million by the 1880s after the
addition of the Ionian islands in 1864 and Thessaly in 1881. Only with the
territories gained as a result of the Balkan wars of 1912-13, which doubled the
population, did the Greek economy apparently become anything of substance.
Yet, as Dertilis and his fellow contributors to this volume of ten essays show,
this is an oversimplification. For the Greeks of the diaspora, a result of the
Turkish occupation of the country, played an important role in the trading and
banking network of the Mediterranean economy. During the second half for the
nineteenth century, however, their power was gradually eroded as bankers and
merchants from western Europe, particularly Britain and France, extended their
influence.

Some of the essays in this book will be of interest only to the specialist, for
example the lengthy piece by Hadziiossif on banking in Alexandria or the case
study of the village of Rapsani by Bournova. However, the three essays by
Dertilis, and those by Bakounis, Kalogri, Agriantoni and Kostis, which discuss
the Greek economy more generally, merit a wider readership. The picture that
emerges is one of an economy which was growing slowly, without undergoing a
radical industrial transformation. The economic role of the state was limited by
a high level of military expenditure undertaken to fulfil its expansionist aims at
the expense of Turkey, and by the crushing burden of debt which this brought
about. Between 1830 and 1913 over half of state expenditure was devoted to the
needs of war. Consequently little money was available for the development of
the infrastructure of the economy. Roads remained poor and there were only
970 kilometres of railway as late as 1897. This hampered the exploitation of
the country’s natural resources. Nor did the country’s banking network serve
the needs of industry, finding it more lucrative to finance trade, public debt
and even large landowners. Furthermore, as Dertilis shows, at local level, the
credit network of the country continued be dominated by ‘notables’, a group
of merchants/moneylenders who had come to prominence in the eighteenth
century. This group found it profitable to borrow at relatively low interest rates
from the banking system, particularly the National Bank of Greece, and to lend,
frequently at usurious levels, to the agricultural community. Only rarely did they
finance industrial activity. Strangely, perhaps, in what was an. underdeveloped
economy, labour for industry was scarce and relatively costly. Greece was
overwhelming a nation of small peasant proprietors and sharecroppers who
were not attracted to factory work. Even those with insufficient land to sup-
port themselves and their families preferred seasonal work on larger farms to
industrial employment. Furthermore, from the late 1890s, emigration, largely to
the United States, increased dramatically: in 1907 no less than 1.4 per cent of the
population migrated. Greece, then, remained an overwhelmingly agricultural
country with over two-thirds of the population living in rural areas in the early
twentieth century. Compared to industry, Greek agriculture saw some progress.
It benefited greatly from the spread of phylloxera elsewhere in Europe — Greece
was miraculously spared the disease - which led to an extension of viticulture in
general and raisin production in particular. There was also some diversification
into cotton and tobacco production. But as with industry, no radical transforma-
tion occurred. Increases in output were achieved largely by an extension of the
area under cultivation.

This is a useful book though it contains some needless repetition and would
have benefited from tighter editorial control. The authors outline. the progress

116 BUSINESS HISTORY

of an economy which, while not stagnant, was changing at a snail’s pace. The
nineteenth century saw political progress in Greece and a considerable extension
of the state’s boundaries. However, until the 1920s, when there was a period of
rapid industrial expansion based on protection, its economy still had more in
common with that of the sleepy Ottoman Empire it had succeeded than with
the states of western Europe which it wished to emulate.

The Queen’s University, Belfast DAVID JOHNSON

PEDRO TEDDE, El Banco de San Carlos, 1782-1829 (Madrid: Banco de
Espafia/Alianza Editorial, 1988. Pp.xii + 395. No price given).

Pedro Tedde’s beautifully written and lavishly illustrated history of the Bank
of St. Charles was originally commissioned by Spain’s central bank in order to
commemorate. the bicentenary' of the foundation of one of its two precursors.
Professor Tedde, a longstanding authority on Spanish financial history, has sifted
through the rich documentation in the archive of the Bank of Spain — a place few
other researchers know better - and made a rigorous use of secondary sources.
Over four decades ago Earl Hamilton published a series of three articles in the
Journal of Political Economy (1945-46) on the foundations and first two decades
of the national bank. Tedde’s magisterial opus builds on that embryonic account
and takes us beyond the death of the bank’s founder, the Conde de Cabarris,
ending with the demise of the institution in 1829.

The background to the formation of the Bank of St. Charles is.to be found in
Spain’s declaration of war on Great Britain in 1779 when the country’s rulers
hoped both to recover Gibraltar and combat British interlopers in her colonial
trade. Charles HI, unwilling to saddle his subjects with further taxation, was
forced to borrow. The authorities accepted a proposal of the French-born
Francisco: Cabarrds for the issue of so-called vales reales, the first paper money
in Spanish history. Cabarrés was, as we know from previous accounts, an amal-
gam of businessman, banker, economist and promoter who had been operating
in Madrid throughout the 1770s. Tedde shows him to have been well connected
with enlightened circles in the Spanish capital. Charles III’s prime minister,
the Conde de Floridablanca, credited him with great talent together with vital
powers of persuasion. It was to Floridablanca: that the young and ambitious
Cabarris presented an elaborate proposal for. the establishment of a national
bank ‘in October 1781. Addressing.his plans to the men of the Enlightenment,
he skilfully played down his monopolistic ambitions and argued that his ‘scheme
would combat usury, promote agricultural, industrial and commercial develop-
ment and revitalise an ailing nation. Such proposals, he already knew, had'the
support of Spain’s leading statesmen and financiers, among them Floridablanca
and Pedro Rodriguez de’ Campomanes. After six months detailed discussion by
financiers, bureaucrats and other interested parties his project was approved.

Tedde’s detailed study, backed up by thorough statistical analysis and:succinct
quotations from hitherto unconsulted sources, charts the fortunes of the Bank of
St. Charles through a half.century of fluctuating fortunes for both Spain.and its
central financial institution. A period of peace ‘and ‘prosperity in the second half
of the 1780s was followed by war with the two strongest European powers, Brit-
ain-and France. Thereafter Spain suffered the loss of her lucrative Empire in the
New World. Enlightenment under Charles HI gave way to absolutism during the

