European Historical Economics Society
EHES Working Paper | No. 274 | March 2025
Teacher-directed scientific change: The case of the English Scientific Revolution
Julius Koschnick, University of Southern Denmark


EHES Working Paper | No. 274 | March 2025
Teacher-directed scientific change: The case of the English Scientific Revolution*
Julius Koschnick1, University of Southern Denmark
Abstract
While economic factors in directed technical and scientific change have been widely studied, the role of teacher-directed scientific change has received little attention. This paper studies teacher-directed scientific change for one of the largest changes in the direction of research, the Scientific Revolution. Specifically, the paper considers the case of the English Scientific Revolution at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge during 1600-1720. It argues that exposure to different teachers shaped students' direction of research and can partly account for the successful trajectory of English science. For this, the paper introduces a novel dataset on the universe of 111,242 students at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge and their publications. Using natural language processing, the paper derives a measure of researchers' direction of research. To derive causal estimates of teacher-student effects, the paper uses an instrumental variable design that predicts students’ choice of college based on their home regions, a stacked differences-in-differences approach based on teachers leaving their college, and a natural experiment based on the expulsion of teachers following the English Civil War. The results illustrate how teacher-directed change can contribute to paradigm change.
JEL Codes: N33, I23, O33, O31, O43, O14
Keywords: Directed Technical Change, Knowledge Diffusion, Innovation, Human Capital, Natural Language Processing
1Corresponding Authors: Julius Koschnick (juko@sam.sdu.dk)
* I am indebted to my PhD supervisors Prof. Max-Stephan Schulze and Dr. Jeremiah Dittmar at the LSE for their invaluable guidance and support. I would further like to thank Joel Mokyr, Walker Hanlon, and other researchers at Northwestern University as well as Ralf Meisenzahl for their much-appreciated comments and encouragement during my stay in fall 2022. I am further grateful for feedback from Erik Hornung, Patrick Wallis, Alexandra de Pleijt, Eric Chaney, David de la Croix, Christian Vedel, Hillary Vipond, Aurelius Noble, James Fenske, and Peter Murrell. I am also grateful for the insightful and most helpful comments I received from seminar participants at the LSE economic history seminar and the RHI seminar at Wageneningen University, as well the EHA conference in La Crosse, the EHS in Warwick and Cambridge, the EHES conference in Groningen, the 4th Monash-Warwick-Zurich Text-as-Data Workshop, and the Bridging Approaches in the Sciences Studying Science workshop in Munich. I would like to give special thanks the British Library for kindly sharing their data from the English Short Title Catalogue. I also gratefully recognize PhD funding by the Economic Social and Research Council (ESRC), Doctoral Training Centre Studentship no. 201825826, that helped to make this paper possible.
Notice
The material presented in the EHES Working Paper Series is property of the author(s) and should be quoted as such. The views expressed in this Paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the EHES or its members


1 Introduction
“whenever I am thinking of a character, in public life it may be, or in literature, I
always ask ‘What was happening in the world when he was twenty?’ (. . . ) To the
twenties I go for the shaping of ideas not fully disclosed: to the forties for the
handling of things already established”
(George Malcolm Young 1949, p. 49 as cited in Hunter, 1995 )
“If I have seen further it is by standing on ye sholders of Giants”
(Isaac Newton, 1675)
Can teachers influence the direction of scientific change? Until recently, the literature on directed
technical and scientific change has focused on economic factors such as factor prices or market size
(Acemoglu, 2002; Allen, 2009). Recently, Acemoglu and Johnson (2023) have argued that the
direction of technical and scientific change also depends on institutional and ideological factors (see
also Acemoglu, 2023). Acemoglu and Johnson (2023) further argue that teachers at universities play
an important role in shaping the direction of technology and science that their graduates will pursue.
While the curriculum at universities is known to be an important factor in shaping the beliefs of
graduates (Cantoni et al., 2017; Acemoglu, He and Le Maire, 2022), the mechanism of teacher
directed scientific change is significantly understudied. Yet, the role-model effect of individual
researchers might be especially important for the adoption of new ideas and new paradigms that
are not part of the official curriculum yet.
As an ideal test case for the role of individual teachers in students’ adoption of new ideas and
new paradigms, the paper studies one of the largest shifts in the direction of research, the Scientific
Revolution. Specifically, the paper studies how university teachers at the English universities of
Oxford and Cambridge who adopted ideas from the Scientific Revolution influenced the direction
of their students’ research. Between 1600 and the early 1700s, these universities educated hundreds
of important innovators in science, such as e.g. Isaac Newton, Robert Hooke, John Flamsteed, or
Edmond Haley. They crucially changed our understanding of natural science by innovating on topics
such as laws of motion, universal gravitation, optics, and the application of early microscopes. Doing
this, they broke with traditional ideas about how to approach nature, how to generate knowledge,
and how to perceive the world. Altogether, the new ideas from the Scientific Revolution laid the
foundation for science driven-growth and industrialization (Mokyr, 2002, 2016; Jacob, 1997, 2014;
Hanlon, 2022).
Yet, the role of the English universities in the Scientific Revolution is heavily debated in the
historical literature. A defining feature of this period is that the universities did not adapt their
curricula to the new ideas of the Scientific Revolution. Therefore, some historians have argued that
the universities were places where one would learn everything but the ideas of the Scientific Revolu
1


tion (Hill, 1965, 1968; Manuel, 1968; Westfall, 1983). Richard Westfall even described seventeenth
century Cambridge as “fast approaching the status of an intellectual wasteland” (Westfall, 1983,
p. 190). However, other historians have argued that the curriculum itself was less important than
teachers’ academic interests and real-life interaction with their students in the colleges (Curtis,
1959; Shapiro, 1969; Jacob and Jacob, 1980; Gascoigne, 1985, 1990; Jacob, 1997; Feingold, 1997).
This paper adds quantitative evidence to this old debate, estimating teacher-student effects based
on teacher-student interaction at the colleges. These estimates of teacher-student effects allow us to
re-evaluate whether early modern universities served as catalysts of intellectual change. Thereby,
the paper contributes to our understanding of which institutions mattered for the emergence of
a modern knowledge economy (Jacob, 1999; Mokyr, 2002, 2016, 2024; Dittmar, 2019; Curtis and
De la Croix, 2023).
To quantify teachers’ and students’ direction of research, the paper matches novel data on the
universe of all students at the English universities of Oxford and Cambridge to the universe of all
publication titles in Britain.1 By applying an automatic text-processing routine to the registers of
the university of Oxford and Cambridge compiled by Foster (1891) and Venn and Litt (1952), the
paper has created a novel dataset on the names, degrees, places of origin, and life outcomes of all
the 111,242 students and teachers at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge between 1600 and
1800. The students are then matched to the universe of all ∼470,000 titles that were published in
the British isles and North America from the English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC). The paper
then classifies the ESTC titles into different research fields using state-of-the-art natural language
processing techniques that rely on recent advances in large language models (LLMs) (Vaswani et al.,
2017; Bommasani et al., 2021). Next, the paper matches students to their teachers based on the
college a fellow was teaching at. In seventeenth and eighteenth century Oxford and Cambridge,
university teaching was mainly organized at the college level, where college-employed fellows taught,
dined, and lived with their students. Hence, teacher treatment occurred at the college-level, not at
the university-level.2
To estimate the strength of teacher-directed scientific change, the paper defines a teacher’s and
student’s direction of research, v, as a vector of the researcher’s strength of research, b, across the
dimensions of n research fields, v = (b1/n, b2/n, . . . bm/n). The paper assumes that the Scientific
Revolution took place in the subset of the research fields of astronomy, almanacs, applied physics,
1During the seventeenth and eighteenth century, the universities of Oxford and Cambridge were the only universities in England. There was some competition from dissenting academies that offered a higher education for dissenting students. Dissenting academies were first founded after the Act of Uniformity of 1662 that banned dissenters from attending the universities. Yet, the demand for a higher education of dissenters only really picked up, after the Toleration Act of 1689 that opened a path for dissenters to enter priesthood (Smith, 1954). Still even then, the numbers of students educated at dissenting academies remained small in comparison to the universities (see Queen Mary Centre for Religion and Literature in English, 2023). Furthermore, competition from the Scottish universities before their reforms in the early 1700s appears insignificant (see Gascoigne, 1990, p. 249). 2Since all students went through the same arts degree, teacher assignment also did not depend on students’ choice of degrees or courses.
2


mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments.3 Then, for all
fields of the Scientific Revolution, it estimates the effect of teachers’ strength of research on students’
strength of research in the same field. The average teacher-coefficient across all fields then captures
the strength of teacher-directed scientific change. This setup allows for the inclusion of college-,
time-, topic-, and student-fixed effects. Student-fixed effects absorb all non-topic-specific student
heterogeneity, making this setup ideal for estimating the strength of teacher-directed scientific
change.
Yet, estimating causal teacher student effects faces the major challenge of dealing with students’
self-selection into different colleges. While a student’s choice of college was usually based on non
teacher related factors, such as regional-ties between a student’s place of origin and a college, their
father’s choice of college, a college’s religious leaning, or the number of scholarships offered by a
college, we still cannot rule out that some students self-selected into colleges based on their teacher’s
research interests. This would create a spurious association between teacher and student interests
that would be solely due to sorting. The paper uses three different identification approaches to infer
the causal teacher student effect: 1) an instrumental variable design that exploits the strong-ties
between individual colleges and English regions to predict a student’s choice of college based on
their place of origin, 2) a stacked difference-in-differences approach based on the events of scientific
teachers leaving their college, and 3) a quasi-natural experiment based on the politically forced
expulsion of teachers and the forced appointment of teachers by Parliament following the English
Civil War.
The first identification strategy is based on the historically strong ties between English colleges
and English regions. These ties were based on links between grammar schools and colleges as
well as preferences for cultural uniformity. Based on this pattern, the paper uses an instrumental
variable strategy where a student’s home region is used to predict the college he would attend and,
following from this, the teachers he would face at the college.4 This identification strategy removes
all kinds of agency from students, only using variation from their home place which students would
not have been able to influence themselves.
The second identification approach addresses the possibility that teachers might also have se
lected into colleges with similarly interested students or into colleges with a similar culture. There
fore, the paper exploits variation from teachers leaving their college, a process that did not involve
into-college selection. The paper uses a stacked difference-in-differences approach (Cengiz et al.,
2019) around teacher leaving events.
The third identification strategy exploits quasi-random variation from the forced appointment
of new fellows at the University of Oxford following the end of the English Civil War. During the
First English Civil War (1642-1646), the University of Oxford had sided with the king. Then, after
the king’s defeat in 1646, victorious Parliament set out to clear the teaching body of the university
3Appendix table 20 lists all other research fields within the text data used by this paper. The paper conducts a wide range of robustness tests to show that the empirical results are robust to using other plausible definitions of the fields of the Scientific Revolution. 4Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth century women were excluded from attending university.
3


from any Royal influence by expelling about half of all fellows. In a next step, the visitors needed
to appoint new fellows that were not part of the old Royal university tradition. They were either
selected from outside the university (mainly the University of Cambridge) or from students at
the University of Oxford that were then conferred to fellowships at different colleges. While it
was not random who the visitors appointed, the paper argues that it was quasi-random which
colleges the new fellows were sent to. The paper then uses the share of scientific publications of
the newly appointed fellows as a treatment shock in a difference-in-difference design. The paper
carefully discusses the selection process of new fellows and shows that the distribution of the newly
appointed and scientifically interested fellows was unrelated to the prior distribution of scientifically
interested fellows at the colleges.
Overall, the paper finds significant evidence of teacher-directed scientific change. Increasing
teachers’ publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution by 100% led to a 4% increase in
student publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution at the University of Oxford and a
2% increase at the University of Cambridge.5 The paper further introduces multiplier effects from a
model of intergenerational transmission of knowledge. Multiplier effects are found to range between
1.064 and 1.031 and would have amplified teacher-student effects in the long run. Altogether, the
findings suggest that universities had a modest impact on students’ direction of research. Thus, the
findings fit into the general history of the Scientific Revolution as a slow and gradual process that
developed over a full century while also contradicting the traditional view in history that science
did not matter at the English universities.
Moreover, in interpreting this effect of teacher-directed change, it is important to consider that
teachers publishing on the Scientific Revolution were still a small minority at seventeenth century
Oxford and Cambridge. The chance for an average student to have a teacher in a given field of
the Scientific Revolution ranged between 0.5% and 1%. Average teacher publication shares per
topic amounted to 0.6% at Oxford and 0.57% at Cambridge. Therefore, a 100% increase in teacher
publication shares would have only exposed a small part of students to research on the Scientific
Revolution.
Therefore, the paper also considers a counterfactual policy, where universities would have in
creased teacher publication shares in the Scientific Revolution by one standard deviation leading to
an increase in students’ publication shares in the Scientific Revolution by 13% at Oxford and 6%
at Cambridge.6 Given that 31% of all publications in seventeenth century England were written
by graduates from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, this would also have translated into
a national increase in the share of scientific publications by 3.25%.7 The counterfactual illustrates
5These coefficients are based on results from the stacked difference-in-differences approach. 6A one standard deviation increase would have amounted to a 4.42 percentage points in teacher publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution. This would still have been a modest increase that left the fields of the Scientific Revolution in a minority position and would still be significantly below the share of science in nineteenth or twentieth century research universities. 7The figure is based on the results of matching students and ESTC authors. It refers to all publications by real people — excluding institutional publications such as e.g. acts of Parliament. For the calculation of the average national shares see section 6.
4


the potential impact universities could have had on the English Scientific Revolution had there
been an institutionally stronger focus on the appointment of scientifically interested teachers.
Overall, the paper contributes to the literature on teacher-directed scientific change, the role
of universities in early modern science, and the literature on teacher-student effects in educational
economics.
First, the paper provides new insights for the literature on directed scientific change. Up to now
we lack quantitative evidence on teacher-directed scientific or technical change. This is surprising
since teacher-effects on students’ quality of research have been widely recognized. One major
contribution to this literature is Waldinger (2010) who uses the dismissal of Jewish scientists from
Nazi Germany as an exogenous shock for department quality. He shows that PhD supervisors have
a causal effect on the quality of their PhD students’ publications. Borowiecki (2022) documents that
within classical music teachers had a strong impact on the style of their students across multiple
generations. Furthermore, the role of the curriculum on students’ ideological beliefs has also been
studied intensively, using textbook reforms (Cantoni et al., 2017; Arold, 2022) and the specific
law-and-economic programs for judges.
Acemoglu and Johnson (2023) further present evidence of the effect of curriculum changes on
students’ direction of technical change. They show that the theory of shareholder value taught at
business schools in the USA and Denmark changed manager’s attitudes towards rent-sharing and
generally depressed labor’s share of income in the USA and Denmark. This paper provides new
evidence of teacher-directed scientific change that can be important even in the absence of changes
in the curriculum. It provides causal estimates of university teacher-effects during one of the largest
shifts in the direction of scientific research, the Scientific Revolution. Therefore, the results of this
paper highlight the potential importance of university teachers in catalyzing ideological shifts and
paradigm change that can shape a society’s direction of research in the long-run.
Additionally, the paper speaks to a growing literature on the general development of university
based science. This literature illustrates how shocks to the institutional settings of university
research can have a large impact on scientific and technical productivity. De la Croix et al. (2024)
show that academic labour markets between 1000-1800 were efficient in allocating human capital
across universities. Dittmar and Meisenzahl (2021) show that the institutional establishment of the
modern research university in the German lands increased inventive activity. Additionally, Chiopris
(2024) shows that changes in scholarly mobility through railroad expansions affected the direction
of innovation in nineteenth century Germany. Abramitzky et al. (2024) study the background of
academics between 1900–1969 and show that fathers’ occupations shaped researchers’ direction
of research. Lastly, Azoulay, Fons-Rosen and Zivin (2019) study the role of senior researchers
in inhibiting the reception of new researcher’s ideas in their field. This paper contributes to this
literature by investigating how teachers affected the direction of their students’ research in the long
run. It suggests that accounting for teachers’ direction of research during university hiring processes
can be important for shaping the direction of research of the next generation of researchers.
5


The paper further integrates questions raised in educational economics. There, the effect of
teacher quality in post-secondary education has been of considerable interest. Borjas (2000), Ehren
berg and Zhang (2005), Bettinger and Long (2004, 2005), Hoffmann and Oreopoulos (2009), and
Feld, Salamanca and Z ̈olitz (2018, 2019) find mixed effects of the value-added effects for different
university teacher quality. However, these studies only study the performance of students within
a fixed sets of standards. However, this paper argues that one of the main virtues of university
education is igniting students’ interest in topics beyond the current curriculum and possibly outside
the prevailing mainstream topics. So far, this outcome has received little interest in educational
studies.
Lastly, the paper contributes to the debate on the role of institutions for early modern knowledge
production (Dittmar, 2019; Mokyr, 2024; Grajzl and Murrell, 2024). Early modern knowledge
production in scientific topics started to increase significantly in the seventeenth century (Koschnick,
2023). Yet, what were the institutions that supported this expansion of the knowledge base,
especially in overcoming forces of tradition (Nunn, 2021; Giuliano and Nunn, 2021)? Scholars have
argued that the printing press (Dittmar, 2011, 2019) and networks of correspondence (Lux and
Cook, 1998) played a crucial role. The paper argues that teacher-student effects at university,
while not sufficient on their own, were an additional institutional factor for transmitting the ideas
of the Scientific Revolution across generations. Ultimately, scientific ideas would enter an ever
increasing base of useful knowledge which, according to Mokyr (2002, 2016), formed the basis for
the Industrial Revolution and self-sustained economic growth.
In what follows, section 2 provides an overview over the historical debate on the universities
and introduces the historical background to the natural experiment of the Parliamentary visitations
used in section 2. Section 3 introduces the data and methods from natural language processing
to calculate students’ direction of research, distance to the research frontier, and innovativeness.
Section 4 presents the empirical framework and baseline results. Section 5 introduces three iden
tification designs, a) an in instrumental variable approach based on historical ties between regions
and colleges, b) a stacked difference-in-differences approach based on the events of teachers leaving
their college, and c) a difference-in-differences approach based on the Parliamentary eviction and
appointment of new teachers. Finally, section 6 provides an interpretative framework of multi
generational teacher-student effects and discusses the counterfactual of higher teacher-shares in
publication on the Scientific Revolution. Section 7 concludes.
2 Historical Background
This section provides an overview over the historical debate on the impact of English universities
on the English Scientific Revolution. It further discusses the historical background of the quasi
natural experiment that exploits the forced appointment of new fellows by Parliament following
the English Civil War. For a detailed discussion of student life at the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge during the seventeenth century, please refer to appendix section A.
6


2.1 The Scientific Revolution and the Universities
The Scientific Revolution was one of the largest shifts in the direction of research in history. It
is usually dated between the fifteenth century and the beginning of the eighteenth century and is
often associated with the names of scientific innovators such as Copernicus, Kepler, Gallilei, Boyle,
or Newton. Following the Scientific Revolution’s early rise on the continent, especially in Italy, it
entered English discourse with the beginning of the seventeenth century (Wootton, 2015).
There are several hypotheses on the origin of the Scientific Revolution. One strain of the
literature stresses the role of European discoveries and increasing commercialization that fuelled
the demand for technical and scientific innovations (Hessen, 1931) and connected the spheres of the
skilled craftsmen with the learned savants of the age (Zilsel and Zilsel, 2003). Another strain of the
literature stresses the role of Protestantism and Puritanism (Merton, 1938; Hill, 1964). Eisenstein
(1980) argues that the printing press increased the rate of the exchange of ideas. In the same spirit,
Dittmar (2019) quantitatively shows that the introduction of the printing press shocked the market
of ideas and led to an increase in the study of scientific subjects. Furthermore, historians argued
that universities were important for intergenerational transmission of innovative ideas (Gascoigne,
1990; Feingold, 1997).
This paper restricts itself to the English Scientific Revolution. There are several factors making
England an ideal case study. First, the extent of records on students, teachers, and publications
is to the best of the author’s knowledge unmatched.8 Second, England was a late-comer to the
intellectual debates of the Scientific Revolution with hardly any progress before 1600, but became
one its intellectual centres and home to the Newtonian synthesis of physics within less than a
century.9 Lastly, throughout the early modern period, England only had two universities, Oxford
and Cambridge, that were institutionally highly similar, thereby making it possible to estimate the
effect of teachers within an homogeneous institutional framework.
Moreover, England and the English universities have stood at the centre of a historical debate
on the importance of the universities for the Scientific Revolution. While it is clear that the English
universities were not a sufficient cause for the Scientific Revolution — after all they had already
existed for about 400 years before the Scientific Revolution — some authors still argue that they
were at least a necessary cause for the English Scientific Revolution (Curtis, 1959; Shapiro, 1971;
Frank Jr, 1973; Gascoigne, 1990; Feingold, 1984, 1997). On the other hand, historians such as
Manuel (1968), Hill (1965, 1968) or Westfall (1983) have doubted that the English universities
were a good place to learn about the new ideas of the Scientific Revolution. They start with the
8In contrast, of the University of Paris’s matriculation records there have only survived the entries for the faculty of arts from 1520–1680, as well as further records for the faculties of law from 1660–1790 and for the faculties of medicine for 1670–1786 (Brockliss, 1978, p. 508). For the Netherlands, records survive for the University of Leyden (Smith and Comrie, 1932; Underwood, 1969). Yet, the use of latinized names in the matriculation list at Leyden makes the list poorly suited for matching it with authorship records. Furthermore, extant material for the German universities of the seventeenth century appears scarce. 9Using text from English publications and natural language processing, Grajzl and Murrell (2023) date the beginning of English innovations in science back to 1615 or 1628. Using quantitiative data from Wikipedia, de Courson, Thouzeau and Baumard (2023) show that by 1700, England had become the European leader in scientific productivity.
7


observation that the official scholastic curriculum remained effectively unchanged since medieval
times and argue that universities were passing on traditional perspectives on the natural world that
were opposed to the world view of Scientific Revolution. Thus, Manuel calls restoration Cambridge
an “intellectual desert” (Manuel, 1968, p. 133), Hill describes the universities as “backwaters so far
as science was concerned” (Hill, 1968, p. 144), and Westfall sees Cambridge as “fast approaching
the status of an intellectual wasteland” (Westfall, 1983, p. 190). Westfall even goes on to argue
that “I am unable to perceive any scientific community in Cambridge. I am not even sure there
was an intellectual community” (Westfall, 1980, p. 147).
In contrast, Gascoigne (1990) and Feingold (1984, 1997) start their argument by focussing on
the interests of teachers at the universities. They concede that the curriculum at the universities
was deeply traditional, but argue that this did not stop teachers from passing on new ideas, both
inside and outside the classroom. With this, they make the case that universities were crucial for the
transmission of research interests to the next generation. Feingold (1984) provides a broad range
of case-studies of teachers who taught scientifically advanced material at university. Gascoigne
(1990) further presents broad evidence that throughout Europe, most eminent scientists had been
educated at university. He finds that 87% of all European scientists listed in the Dictionary of
Scientific Biography born between 1551 and 1650 had received a university education.10
0.0
0.1
0.2
1600 1625 1650 1675 1700 1725
Year
Rate
(a) University of Oxford
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1600 1625 1650 1675 1700 1725
Year
Rate
(b) University of Cambridge
Figure 1: Percentage share of teachers at university who published at least once in the fields of the Scientific Revolution
Notes: The blue line includes the following fields: astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry,
biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The red line includes the following fields: astronomy, applied
physics, mathematics.
These stylized facts from Feingold (1984) and Gascoigne (1990) hold up when compared to
the new dataset produced by this paper. Figure 1 presents the percentage of teachers at the
universities of Oxford and Cambridge who had published at least once within fields of the Scientific
Revolution.11 We see that an average of 10–15% of all teachers had at least some interest in the fields
of the Scientific Revolution. The number even reached 20% during the late restoration period of
10This pattern remained stable over time. For the eighteenth century, Gascoigne (1995) finds that 71% out of 614 scientists were university educated. 11The paper defines the fields of the Scientific Revolution as: astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments.
8


0 .1 .2 .3
Republished ancient author
Pseudonym
Unclear
No lifetime dates for matching

Military
Dissenting academy
Trinity College, Dublin
Grammar school
Jesuit education
Privately educated
Apprenticed
Foreign university
Self-study
University of Cambridge
University of Oxford
% of all innovators
% of all innovators with a recorded background
Figure 2: Educational background of the authors of the top 200 most innovative papers in astronomy, applied physics, and mathematics, 1620–1780
Notes: The figure presents the educational background of the 200 most innovative titles in astronomy, applied physics,
and mathematics. Innovativeness is captued through an innovativeness index based on natural language processing
that is introduced in this paper (see data section 3). The educational background refers to the highest level of education
received. E.g. an entry for “grammar school” means that the highest formal education received was at a grammar
school.
the 1670s. Note however, that this number would have significantly differed by individual colleges.
Still, the aggregate statistics show that although fellows interested in the Scientific Revolution
remained in the minority, their number was high enough to expose a significant number of students
to the ideas of the Scientific Revolution. Appendix figure 16 reports the same graph for students
at their time of matriculation.
Additionally, the paper presents evidence on the educational background of the 200 most in
novative works published in England in the fields of astronomy, applied phyics, and mathematics,
often seen as the core fields of the Scientific Revolution. The measure relies on the innovation index
introduced by this paper (see section 3.5) and on a manual background search of the educational
background of all authors who were not found to be matching to the university records. Figure 2
shows the results. Overall, we see that out of all authors with a known educational background,
49% had attended either the university of Oxford or Cambridge. This number is reasonably close
to the percentage of 71% found by Gascoigne (1990) for the whole of Europe and using a different
methodology. Together, these numbers show that the population of university graduates accounted
for at least half of all publishing activity in the Scientific Revolution. Hence, the potential impact
of universities on the Scientific Revolution appears large.
Lastly, the paper finds that titles by university students on the Scientific Revolution were 4%
more innovative and 19% closer to the research frontier, see appendix table 24. The comparison
is based on all titles in the English Short Title Catalogue within the fields of almanacs, applied
9


physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instrument within the
time period of 1600–1720. Innovativeness and distance to the research frontier are based on natural
language processing measures introduced in section 3.5. The numbers are probably an understate
ment since the control group of non-Oxford and Cambridge students likely includes students who
studied abroad, e.g. at Leyden or Padua. Given that university students also accounted for 31% of
all publications in Britain, the body of university graduates was highly relevant for British discourse
and the Scientific Revolution.12
Yet, these numbers do not show whether these findings are due to university students’ exposure
to new ideas at university (as claimed by Gascoigne and Feingold) or if a university education
did little more than to permit entry into the higher ranks of the scholarly community (as claimed
by Hill and Westfall). Therefore, the paper will contribute to the historical debate by estimating
causal teacher-effects in the Scientific Revolution based on micro-data and exploiting variation at
the college-time level.
2.2 The Oxford visitations: A natural experiment
The history of the University of Oxford offers a unique shock where half of its fellows were expelled
and new fellows appointed by force from outside. The paper uses this shock as the basis for a
natural experiment. This section gives a short overview over the history of the Oxford visitations.
During the English Civil War, the University of Oxford had backed the cause of Charles II.
In 1644, 1645, and 1646 the city of Oxford was besieged by parliamentary troops. Then, in 1648
victorious Parliament chose to reform the royalist institution and sent a board of visitors to the
University of Oxford. The visitors expelled all fellows who would not submit to them and swear
an oath to Parliament. Overall, about half of all Oxford fellows were expelled. The visitors then
intruded new fellows that were deemed to be free of Royalist sympathies. Because the visitors
wanted to break the existing Royalist and Anglican tradition at colleges, new fellows were largely
intruded from outside. Hence, the paper argues that the distribution of newly appointed and
scientifically interested fellows across colleges can be seen as an exogenous shock. This logic is
based on the assumption that the visitors did not match the newly intruded fellows to colleges
based on their research interest. This assumption appears plausible as the visitors, mostly political
men who had never attended the university, would have been in a poor position to judge pre-existing
college traditions. Furthermore, it was in their interest not to perpetuate college traditions, but to
break with the old college traditions altogether.
Yet, it is important to consider who might have been able to influence the visitors’ decisions.
One might imagine that the colleges themselves might have tried to use their political capital
to influence the appointment of new fellows. Yet, the political system had been turned upside
down. The colleges still had hopes of a change of fortunes and until the very last petitioned to
the king. If anything, this only helped to antagonize Parliament further. Overall, it appears that
12This number refers to the period 1600–1720 and excludes publications by non-real persons, e.g. Parliament or newspapers.
10


communication between the existing heads of colleges and the visitors had broken down completely
(Reinhart, 1984; Roy and Reinhart, 1997). The visitors often had to use military force to gain
access to the colleges. Finally, the heads of the colleges together with half of all fellows were
replaced. Appendix section A.2 provides a detailed discussion of the political background of the
Oxford visitation and outlines the process which led to the appointment of new fellows.
We also need to consider the selection process employed by the visitors. The visitors themselves
being outsiders to academia appointed a committee for the examination of candidates for fellowships
and scholarships. While they could not overrule the visitors, they could have leveraged significant
influence on the appointment of new candidates for specific colleges. Appendix table 6 lists the
names of these members of the committee, including their college affiliation during their studies,
their former role at Oxford, and their position at Oxford after the visitations. The list provides
strong evidence that the individuals chosen for the committee presented a clean break to existing
college traditions.
3 Data
3.1 Students at the English Universities
This paper presents a novel dataset on the students of the English universities of Oxford and
Cambridge for the seventeenth and eighteenth century. The universities of Oxford and Cambridge
were the only two universities in England during this timeframe. Overall, the dataset includes
information on 144,748 students from the earliest times to the beginning of the nineteenth century.
For the timeframe of 1600–1800 that is used for this paper, the empirical analysis can draw on 47,043
students at the University of Oxford, and 51,079 students at the University of Cambridge. The data
is based on two detailed compilations of the matriculation and college registers of the the University
of Oxford and Cambridge, the Alumni Oxonienses (Foster, 1891) and Alumni Cantabrigienses
(Venn and Litt, 1952).
The individual micro-level information from the Alumni Oxonienses and Alumni Cantabrigien
ses is extracted using an automatic routine based on regular expression. To avoid OCR errors in
the underlying data, the paper completely relies on manual transcripts. For the Alumni Oxonienses
1500–1714, the paper uses a double re-keyed transcript that was sponsered by American Friends
of the IHR and made available through British History Online. For the Alumni Oxonienses 1715
1886, the paper uses a transcript from Wikidata (2022). Yet, by summer 2021 ca. 5% of the entries
had not been fully transcribed. The author then transcribed these entries from the original. For
the Alumni Cantabrigienses, the paper uses a full transcript made by Ancestry.com and published
online by the ACAD Cambridge Alumni Database (see appendix section B.1). Tables 8 and 11
provide a list of all variables automatically extracted from the text.13
13As the Alumni Oxonienses lack a list of the abbreviations used for status and degrees, a list of the complete and translated status titles has been produced as a side-product of this work (see appendix tables 14 and 15).
11


Overall, Foster’s Alumni Oxonienses and Venn and Litt’s Alumni Cantabrigienses list a stu
dent’s name, place of origin, status, time of matriculation and/or admission to college, all degrees,
and the respective college a student was at for each degree,14 as well as future careers within the
Church, the Inn’s of Court or the Royal College of Physicians. The Alumni Oxonienses and Alumni
Cantabrigienses were compiled almost 50 years apart using slightly different methods. The indi
vidual publishing history, the individual methods used in compiling the original college registers,
as well as the accuracy of these records are discussed in appendix section B.3 and B.4.
In about 3/4 of all cases, the lists provided by Venn and Litt (1952) and Foster (1891) also
include the address of a student’s family. Omissions of a student’s family address appear to have
been more common in earlier periods. However, by the second quarter of the 17th century, recording
the address of a student’s family address seems to have been common practise at matriculation or
admission.
Based on this data, students are matched to teachers based on the college they attended at the
time of matriculation. Overall, there were 28 colleges and halls at Oxford and 16 at Cambridge.
This setup captures the teaching system at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge where the
main bulk of teaching was carried out by the colleges.15 At the same time, this setup captures
the close interaction between teachers and students outside the classroom while living in the same
building. Additionally, all students went through the same arts degree. Hence, teacher assignment
did not depend on students’ choice of degrees or courses.
3.2 The visitation shock of 1648: Quantifying the parliamentary appointment
of new fellows
In order to quantify the expelled and newly appointed fellows by the visitors, we cannot simply
draw on the number of new fellows who arrived between 1648 and 1652. Afterall, there were also
some appointments made by the colleges themselves once the visitors had left. Instead, this paper
draws on a list of fellows intruded by the order of the visitors. For this, the paper draws on a
detailed compilation by Reinhart (1984, pp. 519–610). Reinhart’s list in turn is a revision of a
list compiled by Burrows (1881) that is based on the original visitor’s register Reinhart (1984, p.
519). The paper manually matches the entries in the Reinhart list with the entries in the Alumni
Oxeniensis.
Table 1 presents an overview of the composition of all fellows appointed by the visitors. Al
together, ∼50% of all former fellows at Oxford were expelled and ca. 80% of all newly appointed
fellows were selected from outside their new college. Altogether, one third of the intruded fellows
were recruited from the University of Cambridge (Reinhart, 1984, p. 412). Cambridge had already
been “reformed” in 1644 (Twigg, 1983), thus being a more reliable recruitment pool for fellows
14In the case of a student not switching college, Foster only lists the college at matriculation time. 15There were a few university wide professorships offering classes to all students. However, their numbers were few and the main bulk of teaching was carried out the college-level. Since, classes by university professors were open to all students, this setup does not offer sufficient variation and is hence not further investigated by this paper. However, if professors lived at individual colleges they are included as part of the treatment.
12


Table 1: Overview of intruded fellows
College New fellows Appointed by visitors Appointed by visitors 1648–1652 + from outside their own college 1 All Souls 39 39 39 2 Balliol 9 9 6 3 Brasenose 23 18 17 4 Christ church 52 15 15 5 Corpus Christi 22 19 17 6 Exeter 14 14 9 7 Jesus 16 16 13 8 John 27 14 14 9 Lincoln 10 9 8 10 Magdalen 40 31 26 11 Merton 21 18 16 12 New College 46 37 37 13 Oriel 11 8 8 14 Pembroke 8 8 5 15 Queens 10 6 5 16 Trinity 12 8 7 17 University College 20 17 14 18 Wadham 15 15 12 Sum 395 301 286
Notes: The table shows the number of newly appointed fellows between 1648-1652 compared to
the number fellows intruded by the visitors as well as the number of intruded fellows that were
not appointed to the same college where they had studied before. The list is based on the doctoral
thesis by Reinhart (1984) which presents revised numbers from Burrows (1881).
supporting Parliament. A further 5% came from other universities and another third came from
Oxford colleges, but were appointed at a college different than their own. Lastly, a fifth were ap
pointed at their own college of study, usually coming from the lower ranks of the college (Reinhart,
1984, p. 411).
The visitation shock is defined as the set of all fellows that were a) appointed by Parliament
and b) not appointed at their own college. Thus, the definition of the visitation shock excludes all
appointments that either were made by the colleges themselves or reflected previous appointment
decisions by the colleges.
3.3 Publication titles, 1600–1800, and the direction of research
To capture the content of the British stock of knowledge of the seventeenth and eighteenth century,
the paper uses the universe of 469,962 printed titles in England from the English Short Title
Catalogue (ESTC) that were published between 1600 and 1800. Cleaning for duplicates leaves
329,812 titles (see appendix C.2). The ESTC was kindly shared by the British Library with the
author. Seventeenth and eighteenth century publication titles offer comprehensive information on
the published work, usually using the full space of the book cover and usually taking the form of
13


short abstracts, that can be exploited using natural language processing. An average ESTC title
for the subset of the fields of the Scientific Revolution consists of 48 words (see also appendix figure
10). Appendix C.1 lists a few examples and presents descriptive statistics on the titles.
Students are matched to their publications based on year of death and year of birth inferred
from their time of matriculation. Section C.3 describes the matching approach. Crucially, the
matching results show that all graduates from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge accounted
for ∼31% of all English publications.
The paper then uses the ESTC to construct a measure of teachers’ and students’ direction
of research based on the subject fields teachers and students were publishing in. A researcher’s
number of publications in subject field i is denoted as bi. A researcher’s direction of research, v, is
then defined as a vector of the researcher’s strength of research, b/n, across the dimensions of m
subject classes, v = (b1/n, b2/n, . . . bm/n). For a more detailed definition, e.g. for the definition of
the teachers’ direction of research, see section 4.1.
Furthermore, the paper investigates two other channels for the transmission of research interests
from teachers to students, teacher innovativeness and teacher’s distance to the frontier. Both
measures have been identified in the literature as important factors that shape students’ adoption
of ideas (Waldinger, 2010; Biasi and Ma, 2022). Hence, they are treated as alternative hypotheses
to students’ exposure to teachers’ direction of research.
However, seventeenth century titles create major challenges for the construction of these mea
sures. While studies in the peer-effects literature using modern data can rely on citations and
journal classifications to capture the research fields and innovativeness of publications (Waldinger,
2012; Iaria, Schwarz and Waldinger, 2018), this kind of data is not available for seventeenth cen
tury titles: First of all, during the seventeenth century, modern citation practises did not yet exist.
Second, for the British ESTC data, classifications of individual titles are only available for about a
third of all titles in the dataset. Therefore, the paper adopts an approach of using natural language
processing with state-of-the-art transformer models to derive classifications of research fields, mea
sures of innovativeness, and distance to the research frontier from the content of the ESTC titles.
It is hoped that the new classification- and innovation-measures constructed by this paper will be
of general use for the study of eighteenth century Britain.
3.4 Assigning subject classes
The paper uses a natural-language processing and machine-learning approach to assign subject
classes to the universe of all ESTC titles based on state-of-the-art transformer models. For the
training data, the paper relies on subject classes assigned by the British Library. They cover ∼30%
of the full ESTC dataset. These classes were assigned by the various curators of the dataset (right
now, the British Library) and should be seen as high-quality assignments. The paper uses the
information stored in these assignments to train a state-of-the-art large language model (LLM) to
predict assignments for the rest of the dataset. Using large language models, the paper is able is use
context-sensitive information and vector-space representations of the meaning of text as an input
14


for the machine learning procedure. This way, obvious problems with seventeenth and eighteenth
century text such as bias from changes in language or bias arising from the usage of different words
for the same concepts are avoided. Furthermore, the approach allows for capturing similarities in
the content of complex expositions and arguments.
Appendix section C.6 describes the actual pre-processing of the data, training process, and
model evaluation in detail. The following is a short summary of the process:
1. Titles from other languages were translated into English to standardize the dataset. For this,
the paper relied on the Google Translate API
2. The granular classification system of the British library was aggregated to 47 higher-order
subject classes (see table 20)
3. A DistilBERT transformer model was trained on the classifications of ∼30% of the ESTC
dataset with pre-assigned subject classes
4. The pre-trained model is then used to predict subject classes the missing ∼ 70% of the ESTC
dataset
This process leads to a full classification of the universe of British publications between 1600 and
1800 into 47 higher order subject classes. The full list of 47 higher-order classes is listed in appendix
table 20. Importantly, the paper uses 9 higher-order classes that capture the fields of the Scientific
Revolution: Almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and
scientific instruments.16 By calculating the share of student and teacher publications in each topic,
we can construct a measure of students’ and teachers’ direction of research, see section 4.1.
3.5 Teacher innovativeness and proximity to the research frontier
The previous section has established a measure of students’ and teachers’ direction of research based
on researchers’ strength of research across multiple subject fields. The paper also investigates two
alternative channels for the transmission of research interests from teachers to students, teacher
innovativeness and teacher’s proximity to the research frontier. Both measures have been identified
in the literature as important factors that shape students’ adoption of ideas (Waldinger, 2010; Biasi
and Ma, 2022) and serve as alternative mechanisms for the transmission of ideas from teachers to
students.
Both measures are based on mapping the text of the ESTC titles into text embeddings using a
large language model (LLM). Then, the cosine distances between different vector representations
of titles can be calculated to capture the distance between different titles. With this, the paper
creates two measures of teachers’ research quality, first teachers’ distance to the frontier and second,
teachers’ innovativeness (described in more detail in appendix section C.7):
16The paper conducts a wide range of robustness tests to show that the empirical results are robust to using other plausible definitions of the fields of the Scientific Revolution.
15


Teachers’ distance to the frontier: First, the paper defines the research frontier as all titles
in the Philosophical Transactions, the journal of the Royal Society. During the seventeenth and
early eighteenth century, the Royal Society was Britain’s only scientific society, and would collect
short papers on new findings at the frontier of contemporary science. Second, the paper calculates
an ESTC title’s average cosine similarity to the next forty years of the Philosophical Transactions
as a measure of the research frontier. The calculation is carried out on a subject field by subject
field basis.
Teachers’ innovativeness: The paper uses the logic from Kelly et al. (2021) to calculate
a measure of innovativeness based on the text of the titles. However, in contrast to Kelly et al.
(2021), the paper uses text-embeddings from a large language model as an input for the calculation
of title distances. This approach makes it possible to extract information on documents using
complex and non-technical language as an input. Furthermore, in contrast to Kelly et al. (2021),
this paper calculates the innovativeness index on a field-by-field basis. Intuitively, the paper defines
an innovative publication as being a) novel and b) impactful. Being novel entails using new ideas
and should therefore imply that a title has a high distance to the past of its field. Being impactful
entails changing one’s field and should therefore imply that a title has a high similarity to the future
of its field. Following this logic, the paper calculates measures of 20 year backward similarity, 20
year forward similarity, and an index of innovativeness based on dividing forward similarity by
backward similarity.
Appendix section C.8 validates this innovativeness index, by estimating the association between
innovativeness and author-quality, captured through an entry in the Dictionary of National Biogra
phy or a fellowship in the Royal Society. We find a significant and relevant association between the
innovativeness index and author-quality, proving that the approach captures (some dimensions) of
innovativeness.
4 Empirical results
4.1 Framework — direction of research
The empirical analysis proceeds in three steps. First, this section sets out a framework to estimate
the effect of teachers’ direction of research on the lifetime direction of their students’ research.
Then, the next section presents baseline results for the teacher-effect. Finally, the paper presents
two identification strategies to account for students’ self-selection into colleges; first, an instrumental
variable approach predicting a student’s choice of college based on his place of birth and second, a
natural experiment based on the parliamentary expulsion and intrusion of fellows at the University
of Oxford.
First, we start by defining the measurement of the direction of research with respect to the
Scientific Revolution: Assume that a single author publishes n books across publishing fields Φ =
{f1, f2, . . . , fm}. We further define the number of publications in a given field j as bj. Then the
16


author’s direction of research across all fields is given by the vector v = (b1/n, b2/n, . . . bm/n). We
can further define the average direction of research of a given number of multiple authors, μ as
p = 1/μ · (v1 + v2 + · · · + vm). With this we can define:
1. v: A student’s direction of research
2. p: For all teachers at a college, their average research direction
To simplify the notation, we define the elements of these two vectors as:
1. vj: A student’s relative share of research in field j (b1/n):
2. pj: For all teachers at a college, their relative share of research in field j ((b1,1/n+b1,2/n +
· · · + b1,m)/μ)
By estimating the effect of pj on vj, we can estimate the effect of teacher’s research interest
in field j on student’s research interest in field j. Analogously, by estimating the average effect
of pj on vj for all j ∈ v, we can estimate the average effect of teachers’ direction of research on
student’s direction of research across all fields of v. Using variation across all fields further means
that we can estimate the model with student-fixed effects, thereby absorbing all unobserved student
heterogeneity that is not field specific. The paper estimates the following model that uses variation
across fields j and students i:
vjict = β1pjict + X′
ctβ2 + δi + γc + ζj + αt + εjict (1)
where the dependent variable, vjict, captures student i’s share of research in topic vj ∈ v at
college c and matriculation cohort t. The treatment variable of interest, pjict is the average teachers’
share of research in topic vj at college c at matriculation time t. The treatment happens at the
college level, c, in time, t, where students are exposed to their college’s teaching body. X′
ct is a
vector of control variables for teacher characteristics. This includes the number of teachers at a
college and the number of total teacher publications. The model further includes student-, topic
, college-, and time-fixed effects, δi, γc, ζj, and αt. The model further allows to estimate the
impact of all individual fields of the Scientific Revolution in determining teacher-directed change
by interacting the teacher share, pjict, by each field.
All publication-share vectors are transformed using a natural logarithmic transformation. Fol
lowing Chen and Roth (2024), the logarithmic function over zero is defined as:
f (y) =



m(y) = log(y) if y > 0,
m(0) = −1 if y = 0.
(2)
17


which has the convenient interpretation that an increase from 0 to 1 is the same as a 100% increase
in publication shares (Chen and Roth, 2024).17 The log-transformation captures the intuition that
increasing teachers’ publication shares in a given topic should have marginally declining returns in
teachers’ influence on students. E.g. we assume that a teacher who publishes 1/11th of his publi
cations on science is not 11 times less influential than one who publishes all of his publications on
science. Since this places a large emphasis on the extensive margin, the paper also reports robust
ness checks for smaller values of m(o) as well as other commonly used transformations capturing
decreasing returns.
The model is based on the assumption of conditional exogeneity of teachers’ direction of research
at college c at time t, E(εjict|β1pjict, X′
it, δi, γc, ζj, αt) = 0. This assumption is unlikely to hold as
students interested in field j might have self-selected into a college where many teachers were
working on field j. This issue is mitigated by exposure to teachers at the time of a student’s
matriculation, thereby excluding variation from students that switched their colleges after some
time at university. Thus, the analysis excludes all selection into colleges that was based on students’
first-hands knowledge on the learning culture at other colleges. However, it is still possible that some
students might have learned about teachers at different colleges even before coming to university and
would have chosen their college accordingly. The paper addresses this concern using an instrumental
variable strategy approach based on the observation that students’ mainly chose colleges based on
their place of origin.
It is also possible that teachers might have selected into colleges either based on students’ interest
or the general research culture at a college. To account for teacher-selection, the model adopts two
strategies. First, section 5.2 introduces a stacked-difference-in-differences approach of teachers
leaving their college. While joining a college allows for selection into specific colleges, leaving a
college is uniform across colleges and therefore free of selection-bias. Additionally, section 5.3
introduces a difference-in-difference approach that is based on the dismissal and new appointment
of fellows following the English Civil War at the University of Oxford. There, the University of
Oxford had sided with losing Royalist side. Therefore, Parliament evicted half of all fellows and
appointed new fellows from outside the colleges. The paper argues that this shock constitutes a
quasi-random distribution of fellows across colleges.
The following section starts by presenting baseline results for model 1 for the full sample.
Section 5.1 then introduces the instrumental variable approach, section 5.2 introduces the stacked
difference-in-differences approach based on fellows leaving their college, section 5.3 introduces the
eviction and new appointment of fellows shocks. Lastly, section 6 interprets the results in a multi
generational framework and discusses the impact of counterfactual policy choices.
17Following Chen and Roth (2024), it is important to recognize that the log scale (and related functions such as arcsinh) are scale dependent. Following Chen and Roth (2024), we can express the choice of scale as an implicit choice between the importance of the extensive and intensive margin. The ATE for this transformation can be interpreted as an approximate percentage (log point) effect, where an increase from 0 to 1 is valued at 100 log points (Chen and Roth, 2024). Additionally, Chen and Roth (2024) we approximate values < 1% as 1% to retain the original interpretation of the coefficient (in this case, this only occurs for authors with more than 100 publications who only publish one publication in a given topic — so this is a rare occurrence).
18


4.2 Basic patterns: Teachers’ and students’ direction of research
This section presents a first set of associations between teachers’ and students’ direction of research
at the English universities between 1620–1720. The section starts by providing basic associations
between teachers’ direction of research on students’ direction of research in the Scientific Revolution
for the full sample of teachers and students. Then, it offers a simple decomposition of the teacher
effect by different research fields and compares the magnitude of the effect to other topics important
to seventeenth century academia.
First, table 2 shows the main results of estimating equation 1, regressing teachers’ direction
of research for the fields of the Scientific Revolution on students’ direction of research for the
fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy,
almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific
instruments. The model estimates the average of field-specific teacher-effects on students’ direction
of research across all fields of the Scientific Revolution. It is based on the sample of all students
that ever published.18 Panel A shows the estimated coefficients for the University of Oxford and
panel B shows the estimated coefficients for the University of Cambridge. Column (1) estimates the
model from equation 1 with controls for student- and teacher-characteristics as well as college- and
cohort-fixed effects. Column (2) adds topic-fixed effects. Column (3), further adds student-fixed
effects. Overall, the size of coefficients decreases with a higher number of fixed effects, suggesting
that the model successfully captures positive sorting of teachers and students based on teacher
quality and student skills. Since student-fixed effects absorb all unobserved student heterogeneity,
including students’ general skills and previous education levels, column (3) is used as the preferred
specification (yet sorting might also occur based on field-specific interests — see the next section
for the IV approach and a quasi-natural experiment).
For the University of Oxford, in column (3), increasing the share of teacher’s research in a field
of the Scientific Revolution by 1% is associated with a 0.019% increase of the publication share in
that field for the average student and a 0.013% increase at Cambridge.19 Hence, a 100% increase
in teacher publication shares is associated with a 1.4% increase in student publication shares at
the University of Oxford and a 0.9% increase at the University of Cambridge. In interpreting this
effect, we have to remember that the share of teachers interested in the topics of the Scientific
Revolution was still small in the seventeenth century. Although 25–35% of students would have
had a chance to be exposed to a teacher publishing on any subject of the Scientific Revolution, the
chance of being exposed to a teacher publishing on one specific topic of the Scientific Revolution was
only 0.5% to 1%. Average teacher publication shares per topic amounted to only 0.6% at Oxford
and 0.57% at Cambridge. Therefore, even a 100% increase in teacher publication shares would
18Since the paper’s measure of the direction of research is not defined for students with zero publications, the model can only be estimated on publishing students. The number of students with at least one publication is N = 1, 276 for the University of Oxford and N = 1, 359 for the University of Cambridge. 19Given our weighting of the extensive margin (Chen and Roth, 2024), moving from a college with a zero teachers’ share in the fields of the Scientific Revolution to a college with a 1% teachers’ share in the fields of the Scientific Revolution leads to same effect as a 100% increase.
19


Table 2: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0483*** 0.0211** 0.0194** (0.0135) (0.00851) (0.00907)
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.00839 -0.0000311 (0.00572) (0.00550)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes 
Student publication controls Yes Yes 
Year fixed effects Yes Yes 
College fixed effects Yes Yes 
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.02 0.04 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0417*** 0.0133* 0.0134* (0.0107) (0.00699) (0.00710)
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.00710 0.00338 (0.00685) (0.00579)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes 
Student publication controls Yes Yes 
Year fixed effects Yes Yes 
College fixed effects Yes Yes 
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.02 0.04 0.17
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1. It regresses the share of student publication on the share of teacher publications for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The strength of teachers’ research fields within each of these fields is calculated as the share of all teachers’ publications within field τ of all publications within all fields at college c at time t. The strength of students’ research fields is calculated as the share of student i’s publications in field τ out of all publications from student i. Additionally, the second coefficient reports the teachers’ average share across all these topics. Column 1 estimates results for a baseline specification including teacher and student publication controls with college and college cohort effects. Column 2 adds topic fixed effects. Column 3 adds student fixed effects. Teacher and student shares are transformed using the natural logarithm from equation 2. Teacher controls include the log-transformed number of teacher publications, the log-transformed number of fellows at a college at a student’s time of matriculation, and the log-transformed cohort size at a student’s time of matriculation. Student controls include a student’s log-transformed number of publications, and indicator variables taking the value of one if a student graduated with a B.A. or M.A, as well as a variable capturing the mean of all student publications that were predicted using machine learning. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
20


have been a relatively limited increase — amounting to an increase in teacher publication shares in
the Scientific Revolution from 0.6% to 1.2%. Therefore, the estimated association is economically
highly relevant, with a 0.06 percentage point increase in teacher publication shares leading to a
0.9-1.4% increase in students’ publication shares.
Also note that the model is estimated on the average student at a college. This number likely
includes a high number of never-switchers (imagine e.g. a student who already decided to study the
ology before going to university or a student with a natural aversion to all mathematical subjects).
Estimating the same model on the sub-sample of students who had at least one publication in the
Scientific Revolution returns a significantly larger effect: Increasing teachers’ publication shares by
1% is associated with a 0.1% increase in students’ publication shares at Oxford and a 0.16% increase
in students’ publication share at Cambridge (see appendix table 25).20 Therefore, a 100% increase
in teachers’ publication shares is associated with a 7.2% increase in students’ publication shares at
Oxford and 11.2% at Cambridge. Yet, referring to the coefficients for the average student (table 2)
has the convenient interpretation of capturing the total change in the direction of research of all
graduates and, by extension, the total change in the direction of research in all of England. Given
that graduates from Oxford and Cambridge accounted for ca. 31% of all publications in England,
changes in the direction of research of graduates from the universities were highly relevant for the
nation’s direction of research. Section 6 discusses the short-run and long-run interpretation of the
estimated coefficients in more detail and discusses several counterfactual policy choices in teacher
hiring.
Next, it is notable that the teacher coefficient for Oxford is ∼30% larger than the one for
Cambridge. There are two possible explanations for this difference. First, the results could suggest
that there was a university culture at Cambridge that was less conducive to the transmission of
the ideas of the Scientific Revolution than at Oxford.21 At the same time, the difference in the
strength of the teacher-effect might also be due to a different composition of scientific fields taught
at each university. Appendix figure 17 shows results from interacting the coefficient from equation
1 with individual fields. The results show that teacher-effects at the University of Oxford were
mainly driven by the field of medicine, while for Cambridge we find large coefficient for the fields
of applied physics, biology, mathematics, and medicine. Because, medicine was the largest field out
of these 9, the fact that it has a larger coefficient of ca. 0.04 for Oxford and ca. 0.02 for Cambridge
also points to a purely compositional effect from different field-specializations.
20Hence, a 100% in teacher publication shares would have been associated with a 7.1% increase in publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution at Oxford and an 11.7% increase at Cambridge (see section 6 for an interpretive framework). 21For example, one could speculate that Parliament’s radical reform of the University of Oxford might have contributed to a more open-minded teaching tradition. Furthermore, the the Cambridge Platonists, although an important group for the development of the new sciences, might have laid out a research program that was too theoretical to effectively inspire their students to pick up the new sciences. In contrast, the pragmatic and mechanical science of Boyle, Hooke, and Wilkins at the University of Oxford might have been more conducive to inspiring their students.
21


4.3 Basic patterns: Topics beyond the Scientific Revolution
To further understand the estimated coefficients from table 2 in a broader context, appendix table
26 estimates equation 1 for other topics of British seventeenth century intellectual life, art, religion,
the public sphere, and classical education. The group of art is composed of the topics of poetry,
music, and drama. Religion is composed of theology, dissenting theology, Catholic theology, Jewish
theology, sermons, church administration, prophecies, and supernatural occurrences. The public
sphere is composed of administration, the law, reports of current events, and moral tales. Finally,
classical learning is composed of philosophy, political philosophy, classical education (Greek and
Roman), rhetoric, foreign languages, and pedagogical education. Appendix table 26 reports the
results. It shows that, apart from the fields of the Scientific Revolution, we only find a significant
teacher-effect for the topics within religion. This strong teacher-effect in religion corresponds well
to the overbearing role of religion on British society throughout the seventeenth century.
Hence, the fields of religion afford themselves as a good comparison group to interpret the
strength of the teacher-effect in the Scientific Revolution. It is clear that religion was important for
students and that teachers could have strongly influenced a student’s engagement with religion and
theology. For the University of Oxford, we find that increasing the teachers’ publication share in a
field in religion by 1% was associated with an increase in students’ publication share in that field
by 0.016%, although we should note that the coefficient is insignificant. For Cambridge, we find a
significant association of 0.041%. These are coefficient sizes that are comparable to the ones found
for the fields of the Scientific Revolution, 0.019% and 0.013%. Hence, the results confirm that the
estimated coefficients for the Scientific Revolution are comparable to the estimated coefficients for
religion, the most dominant topic of the seventeenth century.
We can also reflect on the fact that teacher-directed change only seems to have been present for
fields that were discussed divisively at the time. The Scientific Revolution broke with many core
beliefs of the scholastic Aristotelianism that was taught at universities and challenged many beliefs
about nature and humankind’s place in nature. Likewise, the seventeenth century was the century
of religious conflict and religious debates. In contrast, the fields of classical education would have
been part of the old scholastic curriculum and would have been widely accepted in their current
form. Likewise, the material taught at universities that related to the arts and the public sphere
(thinking e.g. about rhetoric, or the study of historical dramata) was not contested, even though
topics in art or the public sphere surely were the subject of politically divisive views. Hence, it
appears that teacher-directed change might have been stronger for areas that were divisive and
strongly contested.22
4.4 Alternative mechanisms and robustness
The paper further conducts a range of exploratory analyses to further investigate the mechanism
between teacher-directed scientific change:
22In Kuhnian (1962) terms, we could say that teacher-directed change was more important for fields in its revolutionary phase and less important for normal science.
22


1. Teacher exposure and publication inclination/success. The paper tests whether ex
posure to teachers publishing on the topics of the Scientific Revolution was associated with
students’ publication outcomes across the dimensions of a) ever publishing, b) students’ total
number of publications, and c) students’ general innovativeness across all fields. Appendix
table 27 presents the results. We do not find evidence that exposure to teachers’ publication
shares in the Scientific Revolution changed students’ overall publication success across all
topics.
2. Alternative mechanisms of teacher influence. Appendix section D.2 investigates al
ternative channels that might have determined students’ direction of research. The paper
considers teacher innovativeness and teachers’ proximity to the research frontier. Both mea
sures are described in appendix section D.2 and formally defined in appendix section C.7.
We find evidence of a positive association between students’ direction of research and teacher
innovativeness and proximity to the research frontier. Yet the association is weaker than for
teachers’ direction of research. We take this as evidence that knowledge transmission might
have happened across multiple dimensions of knowledge production, with teachers’ direction
of research being a major but not singular factor.
3. Career choice as a transmission mechanism. Exposure to teachers publishing on the
topics of the Scientific Revolution could also have influenced students’ career choices that
then would have influenced students’ direction of publishing. E.g. careers in the Church
might have led to higher occupation-related publications of theology or sermons. Careers
in medicine might likewise have increased the number of medical publications. Therefore,
occupational choice might form a part of the mechanism of teacher-influence. Appendix
table 28 shows results for regressing teacher publication shares in the Scientific Revolution on
students’ degrees and career choices in later life. The set of outcomes include medicine and
law, careers as rectors, vicars, prebendaries, physicians, and lawyers, as well as entries in the
Dictionary of National Biography as a proxy for notability (Laouenan et al., 2022). We do
not find evidence of an association between exposure to teacher publication shares and degree
or career outcomes.
The paper further conducts the following robustness checks:
1. Development over time. Appendix table 29 shows how associations between teacher
and student publication shares in the Scientific Revolution changed over time. We find that
the association was strongest for the classical period of the English Scientific Revolution,
1640–1720. After that the coefficient strongly declined. This change was likely driven by
the introduction of scientific subjects into the curriculum of the Scottish universities who
became centres of the new science in the eighteenth century. It is also likely to reflect the
rising opportunities to be exposed to the new science outside the universities, e.g. at public
lectures, provincial scientific societies, or through enlightenment discourse (see Schofield, 1963;
23


Stewart, 1986a, 1992; Mokyr, 2016; Cinnirella, Hornung and Koschnick, 2022; Curtis and De la
Croix, 2023). Lastly, the finding goes hand in hand with the overall decline of the universities
of Oxford and Cambridge in student numbers (see appendix figure 8) and general reputation
(Brockliss, 2016) in the eighteenth century.
2. Functional form specifications. Appendix table 30 reports results for using different values
of m(0) in the Chen and Roth (2024) definition of the logarithm from equation 2. Results are
similar across specifications. We can note that the coefficient size for the University of Oxford
increases slightly when using smaller values of m(0). Appendix tables 31–32 present results
for using log(x + 0.01) or the inverse hyperbolic sine function (arcsinh) instead. Coefficient
sizes are unaffected by the log(x + 0.01) specification. Significance levels are lightly higher in
the log(x + 0.01) specification. Table 33 further present results for a level-level specification.
3. Bias from data quality. Matching between students and authors can introduce type I and
type II errors. The paper adopts a conservative matching strategy on type I errors. Yet,
the matching approach also leads to type II errors in the form of omitted duplicate matches
11% (Oxford) and 8% (Cambridge). Appendix section C.4 provides Monte Carlo results for
a similar data structure and suggests that downward bias from matching is unlikely to be
higher than 20%. Furthermore, for some teachers, the end of their tenure had to be imputed
(see appendix section B.4). Appendix table 34 shows robustness of the results to alternative
imputation values.
5 Identification
5.1 Instrumental variable approach: Predicting students’ choice of college based
on their place of origin
This section introduces an instrumental variable approach that exploits the strong ties between
colleges at the University of Oxford and English regions, see figure 3.23 It uses college-enrollment
shares per hundred (an old administrative unit) to predict a student’s choice of college only based
on the location of a student’s family. The instrumental variable then assigns each student the
expected teacher publications given their place of origin. Thus, predicted exposure to teacher pub
lications should be orthogonal to any student characteristics determined after their birth, especially
a student’s interest in specific topics. Furthermore, since the prediction is based on region specific
college affiliations, it should also be orthogonal to any interests passed on within a family that are
not universal to a region.
To construct the instrument, the paper creates a measure of expected teacher publications given
a student’s place of origin based on regional college shares:
23In contrast, ties between colleges and regions were less pronounced at Cambridge. Note that for Oxford information on students’ place of origin was not recorded from 1648–1659 where the matriculation records omit a student’s place of origin. Hence, unfortunately this approach cannot be combined with the previous difference-in-differences strategy.
24


(a) Exeter College (b) Jesus College (c) Brasenose College
(d) Queen’s College (e) University College (f) Wadham College
Figure 3: Students’ origin from different colleges - as shares per hundred
E(vijct|h)
| {z }
Expected teacher publi. share for student i given place of origin h
=
X
c
P (C = c|H = h)
| {z }
Prob. of student
attending college c given place of origin h
× pjct
|{z}
Teacher publi. share at college c
(3)
where E(vijct|h) is the expected share of student i’s publications in subject j at college c at
time t given student’s place of origin, hundred h. We can calculate it by multiplying the probability
of students attending college c given their place of origin h by teachers’ publication shares at each
college. The probability of the event of a student attending college c given his place of origin c,
P (C = c|H = c), is given by the share of students from county c that originate from hundred h. We
define this as Nh,c
Nh , where Nh,c denotes the number of students from hundred h that attend college
c and Nh denotes the number of all students from county h. We then multiply the probabilities
with teacher shares at college c at time t for topic j and sum over all colleges.
The paper further imposes a uniqueness condition where the instrument is only calculated for
hundreds with more than 5 students and a minimum college-hundred share of 25%. The uniqueness
condition ensures that inference is based on actual college-region ties (and not on information from
a single student per hundred). Appendix table 37-40 show robustness across different values of the
uniqueness condition.
Table 3 presents results of using expected teacher publication shares from equation 3 as an
instrument for teacher publication shares from equation 1. First, table 3 compares the baseline
25


Table 3: Instrumental variable approach based on college-region ties for the University of Oxford
Baseline With geo info First stage IV (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic of teacher publications 0.0194** 0.0397** 0.0746* (0.00907) (0.0183) (0.0434)
Log share of each topic of predicted teacher publications 0.0257* (0.0151)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 3717 3717 3717 R-squared 0.161 0.148 0.147 Kleibergen Paap F-statistic 38.80
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 in an instrumental variable approach. The instrument of expected teacher shares given students’ place of origin is defined in equation 3. The table reports estimates of the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. Column 1 estimates results for the baseline specification from table 2 for the sample of 1600–1720, excluding the period of the Civil War and interregnum 16421660, see appendix B.3 for a description of changes in recording practices of geo-information. Column 2 estimates the same specification for the sub-sample of all students with available geo-information and coming from parishes with strong collegeties. Column 3 presents first stage results for the instrument of predicted teacher publication shares based on a student’s home parish. Column 4 presents the IV coefficients for the instrumental variable regression. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
results from table 2 with the results for the sample of students with geo-information in column 1
and 2.24 Notably, when estimating equation 3 for the geo-sample in column 2, we find a larger
effect than in the baseline in column 1. Studying the balancedness of the geo-sample in appendix
table 36, we find that the geo-sample contains a higher share of students who graduated and a
lower share of higher-rank students.25 However, it is relatively balanced regarding publications on
the Scientific Revolution. Based on narrative evidence (Porter, 1997), it seems that hundreds with
strong college ties are likely to have been older and richer and that students coming from these
parishes are likely to have had a better prior education and better career prospects.26
The next columns present the results for the instrumental variable approach. Column 3 shows
the reduced form results. Column 4 presents the the results from the instrumental variable ap
proach. The IV-model predicts that a 1% change in teachers’ publication shares in the fields of
24The geo-information sample is composed of students with information on places of origin located in hundreds that fulfill the uniqueness condition. Note that geo-information on students’ place of origin is only recorded for a sub-sample of the full student register from Foster (1891). First, there were general omissions on places of origin in the matriculation registers. Second, for the whole period of 1649–1660 information on students places of origin was not recorded. See the discussion in appendix B.3. 25We can only speculate to the origin of this. Noble students might have had a less clearly defined home address. Or it was not deemed necessary to enter them given their prominence. Additionally, matriculation entries might have been double checked for omissions and completed in case of student was graduating. 26Following, the previous discussion following table 2, this means that students from richer hundreds would have had a lower share of never-takers.
26


the Scientific Revolution led to a 0.075% increase in students’ publication shares in the fields of
the Scientific Revolution. Note that the IV coefficient is relevantly larger than the OLS coefficient
in column 2 (with an effect size of 0.04%). This could be evidence of students negatively selecting
themselves into colleges with a large share of scientific interests - or vice versa positively selecting
into colleges with a large share of fellows that were interested in topics that had better job market
prospects, e.g. special branches of theology or law. This seems to fit the discussion in section A.1.1
which suggests that the new scientific topics were held in low esteem by public opinion. However, it
also possible that the IV-approach is able to capture some of the determinants of never-takers. As
discussed before, hundreds with strong ties to colleges appear to be richer and seem to have offered
better education(see the difference between column 1 and 2), thereby plausibly reducing the share
of never-takers. Therefore, the IV approach might also account for the share of never-takers that
are determined by place of origin. The model has a Kleibergen Paap F-statistic of 38.80 indicating
a moderately strong first stage.
The validity of the instrument is based on the exogeneity of the geographical college shares.
Since regional ties of colleges dated back to the earliest times of the university, long before the
emergence of the Scientific Revolution, the assumption appears plausible. Yet, we cannot rule out
the possibility that local development in regions might have co-influenced students’ and teachers’
interest in the Scientific Revolution. Some historians have argued for a link between the Scientific
Revolution and emergent capitalism embedded in highly-skilled craftsmen (Zilsel and Zilsel, 2003).
Therefore, if fast developing regions were associated with faster growing teacher shares in the topics
of the Scientific Revolution, it would pose a violation of the exogeneity of the instrument.
To account for this challenge to the exogeneity of the instrumental variable, the paper tests
whether there was an association between a range of development indicators at the hundred level
and the growth rate of the predicted teacher publication shares at the hundred level (P
c P (C =
c|H = h)·∆pjct). Results for Bairoch (1988) city size, Langton (2000) city size, the number of ports,
and distance to ports are shown in appendix tables 41–45. Table 46 further presents results for
Unitarian congregations as a proxy for radical Protestant beliefs. Overall, these results are mainly
insignificant. Where we find significant effects, the coefficients are small or negatively associated
with development indicators.
5.2 Stacked difference-in-differences based on fellows leaving their college
While the previous section has addressed bias from students selecting into colleges, the next two
sections address bias from teachers selecting into colleges. Bias could arise from teachers’ decision
to join colleges with either a) interested students or b) a specific research tradition. In contrast,
the process of a teacher leaving their college does not involve a selection process. Instead, teachers
join the uniform “out of college” group.
To identify the treatment effect of teachers leaving their colleges, the paper uses a stacked
differences-in-differences approach (Cengiz et al., 2019; Baker, Larcker and Wang, 2022). For this,
we identify stacks around fellows’ leaving events, [Ee − τ, E, E + t], at each college. Treatment is
27


defined as topics covered by the leaving fellow and controls are defined as topics not covered by the
leaving fellow. We impose a clean control condition that specifies that no other fellow publishing
on the topics of the Scientific Revolution joins or leaves the college within the time period of each
stack, [Ee − τ, E, E + t] (see Cengiz et al., 2019). Stacks are estimated separately and then pooled
together. The estimated coefficient is robust to heterogeneous treatment effects (Baker, Larcker
and Wang, 2022). Concretely, we estimate:
vjict =
9
X
τ =−9
X
s∈S
βτ,s · pjct · 1(t − Ee = τ ) + γsc + ζsj + αst + εjict (4)
where the dependent variable vjict, student i’s publication shares in topic j at college c and time
t is similarly defined to equation 1. Likewise treatment pjct is defined as teacher publication shares
in topic j at college c and time t. The stacked difference-in-differences model then defines stacks
S around the event Ee of fellows with publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution
leaving their college.27 Each stack s ∈ S corresponds to a leaving event at a given college c and
defined across the dimension of topic j and students’ matriculation time t. The length of the pre
and post-leaving-event, t length is defined as the median length of fellows’ appointments, which
is 9 years for both Oxford and Cambridge. γsc, ζsj, αst denote field, j, college-, c, and time-, t
fixed effects specific to each stack s. Each stack, s ∈ S is required to fulfill the clean controls
condition (Cengiz et al., 2019), i.e. no other treatments besides Ee occur within [−t, t].28 The
stacked difference-in-difference estimator is then estimated by pooling stacks s ∈ S together and
estimating equation 4 with fixed effects saturated at each stack level. Following (Cengiz et al.,
2019), standard errors are defined at the group × sub-experiment level, the topic-stack level.
Table 4 presents the results. Note that in this setting, the clean control condition is a restrictive
condition, excluding half of all leaving events. After limiting the sample to stacks with clean
controls, equation 4 is estimated on 108 stacks for Oxford and 81 stacks for Cambridge. Column 1
presents results for equation 4 with field, college, and time fixed effects saturated at each stack
level. Column 2 further adds student fixed effects to the specification. Results from column 2 show
that increasing teachers’ publication shares before the leaving event by 1% leads to an increase in
students’ publication shares by 0.059% at Oxford and 0.029% at Cambridge. Therefore a 100%
increase in teachers’ publication shares before the leaving event leads to a 4.25% increase in students’
publication shares at Oxford and a 2.1% at Cambridge. Note that similarly to the results from
the instrumental variable approach in section 5.1, coefficients are larger than in the baseline results
in table 2. We interpret this as further evidence of negative self-selection of students away from
colleges with strong publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution and towards colleges
with fellows publishing on more marketable topics. Section 6 discusses the interpretation of the
effect size against multiple counterfactual increases in teacher shares.
27As before, the topics of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments.
28Other treatments would be constituted by other fellows publishing on topics of the Scientific Revolution either arriving or leaving within [−t, t] at college c.
28


Causal inference rests on the no anticipation and common trends assumptions. The paper
conducts the following set of tests to test the plausibility of these assumptions:
1. No anticipation. A key factor is the determination of leaving event Ee. We would assume
that leaving events would have been determined by job openings at other places.29 While
it would appear difficult to predict job openings years ahead, it is not plausible to believe
that both fellows and students could have predicted some job openings months or even one or
two years ahead of the event itself. To exclude decisions based on this information from the
estimation, appendix table 47 presents results from equation 4 while excluding an expanding
interval around Ee. The results indicate that the estimated coefficients are not sensitive to the
periods around event time Ee, thus mitigating concerns about violations of the no-anticipation
assumption.
2. Measurement error. Additionally, note that since some of the fellowship times had to be
imputed, see appendix section B.4, some of the leaving dates might be inexact. Omitting the
time period around the leaving event further avoids bias from imputed appointment lengths.
3. Common trends. To further test the plausibility of the common trends assumption, table
48-49 present summary statistics across a wide range of covariates for the pre- and post
treatment period. From table 48-49, indicates some minor differences in degrees and status
between the pre- and post-treatment period. However, the differences are small and present
in different categories for Oxford and Cambridge. Altogether, the results from table 48-49
do not indicate that there were large or systematic differences between the pre- and post
treatment period.
29In case of the Church of England, that made up for ca. 50% of all future career paths, job openings were dependent on lucrative parishes becoming available. This could either happen through the death of the incumbent or the incumbent’s appointment to another parish. It appears unlikely that both events could have been predicted multiple years ahead of the events themselves.
29


Table 4: Stacked difference-in-differences results for teachers leaving their college
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0594** 0.0594** (0.0271) (0.0276)
Stack fixed effects Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes
Year x stack fixed effects Yes Yes
Topic x stack fixed effects Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No Yes Observations 1098 1098 R-squared 0.18 0.25
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0314** 0.0294** (0.0136) (0.0138)
Stack fixed effects Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes
Year x stack fixed effects Yes Yes
Topic x stack fixed effects Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No Yes Observations 1394 1394 R-squared 0.14 0.20
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 4. The dependent variable is student publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution. Treatment is defined as teacher publication shares of before the event of a teacher leaving the college. Standard errors are clustered at the topic-stack level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
30


5.3 Quasi-natural Experiment: Forced appointment of Oxford fellows during
the Parliamentary visitations of Oxford
-.5 0 .5 1
Log topic share in student public.
1620-1624
1625-1629
1630-1634
omitted1635-1639
1650-1654
College- and cohort FEs + controls Student and topic FEs + Cohort and topic FEs saturated at the college level
Figure 4: Difference in differences results for the Parliamentary visitation shock
Notes: The figure presents results from estimating equation 5. The dependent variable is defined as student publication
shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution. The treatment is defined as teacher shares in the topics of the Scientific
Revolution based on the set of fellows appointed by Parliament who were appointed outside their own college. See
section 3.2 for a full definition of treatment. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs,
applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Results are shown
for three specification. A baseline model with college- and cohort-fixed effects as well as teacher- and student-control,
a second specification with additional student-, and topic-fixed effects, and a third specification with cohort-, topic-,
and student-fixed effects fully saturated at the college level — similar to equation 4 in section 5.2. The treatment
period is 1650–1654. We exclude the periods overlapping with the Civil War, 1640–1644 and 1645–1650, when the
university was physically besieged. N = 2, 227. Standard errors are clustered at the college × topic level. Confidence
intervals are shown at the 90% level.
This section introduces an identification approach that is based on the sudden and unexpected
dismissal of teachers at the University of Oxford and the sudden and unexpected appointment
of new teachers. This shock is based on the expulsion and forced appointment of fellows at the
University of Oxford by the parliamentary visitors after the end of the English Civil war. The logic
of the approach is outlined in section 2.2. The paper takes the forced appointment of fellows who
published in the fields of the Scientific Revolution as an exogenous shock in a stacked difference
in-differences design
vjict =
1650−1654
X
τ =1620−1624
X
s∈S
βτ,s · ρjct · 1(t − Ee = τ ) + γsc + ζsj + αst + δi + εjict (5)
where the dependent variable vjict measures the share of student i’s publications in research
field j in the fields of the Scientific Revolution. The treatment variable ρjct is defined as teacher
publication shares in the fields of the Scientific Revolution from the set of teachers appointed by
the parliamentary visitors who came from outside their own college. The treatment period is 1650
31


1654, the period following the appointments by the parliamentary visitors. The definition of the
shock is explained in detail in section 3.2. Since the equation is estimated across three dimensions
at the college × topic × cohort level, it is important to clearly define treatment and control groups.
We follow the stacked difference-in-differences approach from section 5.2 by creating stacks at the
college level. Within each individual stack, topics with positive shares in the Scientific Revolution
constitute the treatment and topics with zero shares constitute the control group. Fixed effects,
γsc, ζsj, αst are fully saturated at the college (stack) level. Similar to equation 4, the specification
also includes student fixed effects δi.
First, appendix figure 18 presents results for regressing the publication shares of the full number
of teachers in period τ on the publication shares of the new teachers appointed by the visitors. We
find that a) there were no pre-trends in publication trends before the time of appointment and b)
that increasing publication shares by the fellows appointed by the visitors leads to a > 100% increase
in publication shares of all teachers. This is likely due to initially appointed fellows influencing the
appointment process of later fellows.
Next, figure 4 presents results for equation 5. We find a significant increase in student publica
tions following the visitation shocks. Furthermore, we find no evidence of pre-treatment trends in
student publication shares. Note that equation 5 only captures the reduced form relationship be
tween teachers appointed by the visitors and students, making direct comparisons to the section 5.1
and 5.2 difficult. The reduced form results show that increasing the publication shares of teachers
initially appointed by the visitors by 100% leads to a 31% increase in students’ publication shares.
An intuitive way to compare this finding with previous teacher effects is to increase the publication
shares of teachers initially appointed by the visitors by 0.3 percentage points, the same as a 100%
increase in publication shares of all teachers at the mean for this period. This 0.3 percentage point
increase leads to a 9% increase in students’ publication share in the Scientific Revolution. Thus,
the teacher effect appears larger than in the IV- and leaving-event approach from section 5.1 and
5.2.
Yet, we should note that the treatment of teachers appointed by the visitors might not gener
alize to other times or settings. Initially appointed teachers were structurally different from other
teachers (especially younger, see Reinhart (1984)). They are further likely to have influenced sub
sequent hiring decisions, making inference from the reduced form specification difficult. Overall,
the results from this section support the presence of a positive causal effect of teachers’ direction
on students’ direction of research.
The findings also constitute first empirical evidence on the Merton thesis (Merton, 1938; Web
ster, 1977) which proposed a relationship between Puritan and scientific values. According to the
thesis, the interregnum was a key period where, for a short while, Puritan teachers dominated
university education.30 While we cannot identify the religious beliefs of individual teachers, figure
30This analysis is also reflected in Hill (1968), “Oxford is not only peripheral, it is positively hostile to Baconianism except for the brief period after Oxford, the King’s headquarters in the Civil War, had been conquered by Parliamentarian London” (Hill, 1968, p. 145).
32


18 still provides evidence that within the time period of Puritan Parliamentarism and after the
Royalist cleansing of the university, teachers successfully proliferated science at the universities.
6 Transmission dynamics and counterfactual policy implications
6.1 Multigenerational transmission model
Isaac Barrow (teacher 1649–1669)
Walter Needham
teacher
Francis Brokesby
teacher
Edward Browne
teacher
George Chade
Richard Martin
Isaac Newton (teacher 1667–1702)
William Bisset
Roger Cotes
teacher
James Jurin
teacher
Cayers Helleton
teacher
Gregory Place
James Phillips
Francis Willughby
Figure 5: Illustration of exposure to teachers across student-teacher generations
Notes: The figure presents a snapshot of teacher-student exposures for two influential scientists, Isaac Barrow and
Isaac Newton, both teachers at Trinity College, Cambridge. It connects the teachers to all the students who would a)
publish on a topic of the Scientist Revolution and b) were present at Trinity College during the teaching periods of
either Isaac Barrow or Isaac Newton.
Figure 5 shows teacher-student pairs across two generations. The top layer shows all of Isaac
Barrow’s (1630–1677) students at Christ Church who published in the Scientific Revolution. Out
of these, four became teachers, including the famous Isaac Newton. The next layer then shows the
students of Isaac Newton (1642–1726). Among them, three also became teachers, including, for
example, the famous public lecturer James Jurin and Roger Cotes, who assisted Newton with the
publication of his Principia.
Figure 5 illustrates how teacher-student effects would have been passed on across multiple
generations, giving rise to a multiplier effect: In period t students are treated by teacher publication
shares. Treated students have a higher publication share in the Scientific Revolution. In t + 1 some
proportion γ of students also become teachers. Because of the shock in t these teachers have higher
publication shares and therefore have a larger impact on their students in t + 1. The multiplier
process then reiterates through all following periods.
We can formalize the multi-generational process as a geometric series:
log(st+1) = log(α) + β · log((1 + γ)st) (6)
where st+1 is students’ publication share in the Scientific Revolution in the next time period. We
assume that teachers in t + 1 are recruited from the student population in t. Students interested
in the Scientific Revolution have a 1 + γ chance of becoming a teacher in t + 1. α captures
influences independent of the teacher-student channel that raise students’ publication shares in the
33


Scientific Revolution by α percentage points. β is the estimated teacher-student effect. The natural
logarithm is applied to capture a) decreasing returns and b) to correspond to the empirical model
from equation 1. The steady state of equation 6 is
s∗ = e
log(α)
1−β = α
1
1−β (7)
yielding the following multiplier for α31
Mα = 1
1 − β (8)
and the following multiplier for γ
Mγ = β
1 − β (9)
The multiplier Mγ captures the multiplier effect of any change in the policy of hiring teachers
based on their scientific interest or any change in scientifically interested students’ preferences to
become a teacher. This initial effect increases students’ publication shares and thereby the pool of
prospective teachers. Over multiple generation this converges to β
1−β .
The multiplier Mα captures the multiplier effect of any change in students’ interest in the
Scientific Revolution. This would entail e.g. changes in the university wide curriculum or changes
in university wide library holdings. These effects do not only have a direct effect on students’ interest
in the Scientific Revolution, but are amplified through the multi-generational teacher channel. In
the long-run it converges to 1
1−β . This also means that any nation wide shock that increased
interest in the Scientific Revolution (take e.g. Christiaan Huygen’s discovery of Saturn’s rings or
Otto von Guericke’s vacuum experiments) would have been increased by the graduate share of all
publications in Britain times Mα. Given that university graduates made up 31% of all publications
in Britain, this multiplier channel would also have been relevant on a national level.32 Therefore
universities acted as nationwide multipliers of shocks to the interest in the Scientific Revolution.
6.2 Dynamics in γ
Given the previous discussion, γ is a key parameter in evaluating the institutional openness of
universities with respect to the Scientific Revolution. Here, any discrimination in hiring of scientific
teachers would imply γ < 1 and decrease st.33 Was this the case or did seventeenth century Oxford
and Cambridge have a sufficient degree of intellectual freedom to ensure γ ≥ 1?
To estimate the value of γ, we regress students’ publication shares in the Scientific Revolution
on the event of students becoming teachers. Appendix table 50 shows that between 1600–1720 an
increase in student publication shares by 100% is associated with an average 2.23% probability of
31Assuming |β| < 1 and γ ̸= 0. 32The figure is based on the results of matching students and ESTC authors. It refers to all publications by real people — excluding institutional publications such as e.g. acts of Parliament. See appendix section C.3. 33We would usually assume that since scientific interests did not open other career opportunities (see section A.1.1), the preference of scientifically interested students to become a teacher should have been ≥ 1.
34


-.05 0 .05 .1 .15
Probability of student becoming fellow
1600-1639
1640-1679
1680-1719
1720-1759
1760-1799
(a) University of Oxford
-.05 0 .05 .1 .15
Probability of student becoming fellow
1600-1639
1640-1679
1680-1719
1720-1759
1760-1799
(b) University of Cambridge
Figure 6: Estimating γ over time: Students’ likelihood of becoming a fellow given students’ publication outcomes in the Scientific Revolution
Notes: The graph presents results from equation 1 where teachers’ publication shares in the Scientific Revolution
are interacted by indicator variables for individual fields. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level.
Confidence intervals are shown at the 90% level.
becoming a teacher at Oxford and an average 2.8% probability of becoming a teacher at Cambridge.
Figure 6 presents time trends. We find that γ declined over time, from 7% in the first half of the
seventeenth century, to a factor close to zero during the end of the eighteenth century. Given
that colleges’ hiring policies did not change during this period, the decline in γ most likely reflects
the growing attractiveness of opportunities outside the universities for students interested in the
Scientific Revolution. This would include e.g. the foundation of the Royal Society in 1660, the
success of public lecturers in science (e.g. James Jurin, see figure 1 or John Theophilus Desaguliers)
or the curriculum reforms at the Scottish universities in the early eighteenth century.34 Thus, the
success of the Scientific Revolution would also have lowered the teacher share st+1 at universities
through a smaller γ.
6.3 Multigenerational transmission dynamics
The model in equation 6 allows us to distinguish between different types of teacher-shocks. First,
there are permanent changes to teachers’ interest in the Scientific Revolution, α, that are inde
pendent of the teacher channel. We can interpret this as general factors that exposed prospective
teachers to the Scientific Revolution, e.g. better libraries, publications from abroad, or higher
social prestige of the new sciences. These shocks are permanent and include a multiplier process
over multiple periods of time. Second, there are one-time increases in teachers’ publication shares,
st, without either changing prospective teachers’ interest in the Scientific Revolution, α, or the
teacher-choice parameter γ. For example, we could interpret the appointments by the parliamen
tary visitors from section 5.3 as a one-time increase of teachers with different publication shares
34For the public lectures of James Jurin and Desaguliers, see Stewart (1986b).
35


that did not affect fundamental hiring preferences in the long-run.35 These shocks are transitory
and disappear after two periods. Third, there are changes to students’ likelihood of becoming a
teacher given students’ interest in the Scientific Revolution, γ. γ might either be determined by
by colleges’ hiring preferences or students’ comparative career opportunities. These shocks are
permanent and include a multiplier process over multiple periods of time.
6.4 Counterfactual shocks
Finally, we consider the effect of a set of counterfactual shocks in the permanent appointment of
scientifically interested teachers, γ, on students’ publication shares. We should keep in mind that
the share of teachers interested in the topics of the Scientific Revolution was very small. Although
ca. 25–35% of students would have had a chance to be exposed to a teacher publishing on any
subject of the Scientific Revolution, the chance of being exposed to a teacher publishing on one of the
topics of the Scientific Revolution ranged between 0.5% and 1%. Average teacher publication shares
in the Scientific Revolution per topic amounted to only 0.6% at Oxford and 0.57% at Cambridge.
For the following calculations, we use the estimated β from the stacked difference-in-differences
approach in section 5.2. Readers can easily calculate teacher effects with other βs or γs. For the
sake of brevity, “teacher shares” and “student shares” refer to “publication shares in the topics of
the Scientific Revolution”.36
1. A 100% increase in teacher shares. Although this is a substantive increase in teaching
shares, this only raises average teacher shares from 0.64% to 1.28%. At the University of
Oxford, this would lead to a 4.25% increase in students’ publication shares in the short run
and a 4.52% increase in the long run. At the University of Cambridge, this would lead to a
2.10% increase in students’ publication shares in the short run and a 2.17% increase in the long
run.37 Given that graduates accounted for ca. 31% of all publications in Britain (see appendix
section C.3), this would have translated into a 1.04% increase in national publications shares
in the Scientific Revolution.38
2. A counterfactual world without scientific teachers. If, e.g. a censorship system had
banned teachers who were interested in the Scientific Revolution from teaching positions,
teacher shares would have been close to 0%. We approximate this counterfactual with a
200% decrease in teacher shares. This counterfactual also shows the impact of the teachers
that were present at universities. We see that teachers at the university of Oxford accounted
35One factor that ensured that Parliament’s hires were only temporary was the return of the king in 1660 who then evicted Parliamentary hires. However, as we can see from appendix figure 19 that shows coefficients for regressing actual teacher publication shares on teacher publication shares from appointment by the visitors, the agenda set by the newly appointed fellows already dissipated quickly before 1660.
36The topics of the Scientific Revolution are astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments.
37For Oxford, st0
st1
= 20.06 ≃ 1.0425 and Mγ = 0.06
1−0.06 ≃ 0.064, st0
st1
= 20.064 ≃ 1.0452. For Cambridge, st0
st1
= 20.03 ≃
2.1% and Mγ = 0.03
1−0.03 ≃ 0.031, st0
st1
= 20.031 ≃ 2.17%.
38 4.52%+2.17%
2 · 0.31 ≃ 1.04%.
36


for 7.28% in students’ publication shares in the long-run. At the university of Cambridge,
they accounted for 3.46% in the long-run.39 Overall, they accounted for 1.67% of national
publication shares.
3. A 15% decline in γ due to outside opportunities. This captures the decrease in
students’ likelihood of becoming a teacher given that students were interested in the Scientific
Revolution as shown in figure 6. It appears that at the end of the seventeenth century, teacher
positions became relatively less attractive given students’ interest in the Scientific Revolution,
most likely due to outside opportunities (e.g. the foundation of the Royal Society in 1666 as
well as lucrative opportunities for public lecturers). At Oxford, this change in the opportunity
costs of becoming a teacher, would have led to a secular decline in students’ publication shares
by 0.97% in the short-run and 1.03% in the long-run. At Cambridge it would would have led
to a 0.49% decline in students’ publication shares in the short-run and a 0.5% decline in the
long-run.40 Overall, it would have led to a 0.23% decrease in national publication shares.
4. A one standard deviation increase in teacher shares. Teaching shares at the mean
are 0.64%. An additional standard deviation in teacher shares amounts to a 4.42 percentage
point increase in teacher shares. Therefore, a one standard deviation increase at the mean
corresponds to a 696% increase in teacher shares. While this would have amounted to a
radical change in the composition of the teaching body, a 4.42 percentage point increase in
publication shares would still have left the Scientific Revolution in a minority position and
would have been significantly below publication shares in science of nineteenth or twentieth
century universities.41 It is a change in publication shares that could have been achieved
through selective hiring, even if such a policy appears unlikely within the context of the
seventeenth century. At the University of Oxford, this would have led to a 13.25% increase
in students’ publication shares in the short run and to a 14.20% increase in the long run. At
the University of Cambridge, this would have led to a 6.42% increase in students’ publication
shares in the short run and a 6.64% increase in students’ publication shares in the long run.42
Overall, this would have led to a 3.25% increase in national publication shares.
Overall, the results show that, especially in the early period of the English Scientific Revolution,
universities played an important role as centers of knowledge transmission and acted as multipliers
for other shocks that increased interest in the Scientific Revolution. Altogether, teacher-student
effects accounted for 1.67% of the national publication share in the Scientific Revolution. Yet, the
39For Oxford, st0
st1
= 30.064 ≃ 1.0728. For Cambridge, st0
st1
= 30.031 ≃ 1.0346.
40For Oxford, st0
st1
= 0.850.06 ≃ 0.9903 and st0
st1
= 0.850.064 ≃ 0.9897. For Cambridge, st0
st1
= 0.850.03 ≃ 0.9951 and
st0 st1
= 20.031 ≃ 0.9950.
41See R ̈uegg (2006), Dittmar and Meisenzahl (2021), and Chiopris (2024). One could argue that this counterfactual would correspond to the foundation of the nineteenth century research university (see Dittmar and Meisenzahl, 2021) or potentially the curriculum reform at the Scottish universities in the eighteenth century that incorporated scientific topics into the curriculum.
421 + 696
100 = 7.96. For Oxford, st0
st1
= 7.960.06 ≃ 1.1325, Mγ = 0.06
1−0.06 ≃ 0.064, and st0
st1
= 7.960.06 ≃ 1.1420. For
Cambridge, st0
st1
= 7.960.03 ≃ 6.42% and st0
st1
= 7.960.031 ≃ 6.64%.
37


results also suggest that the potential for teacher-directed change in the Scientific Revolution was
not fully exploited, due to the limited number of teachers interested in the Scientific Revolution.
After all, an average student’s likelihood to meet a teacher at their college with at least one
publication in a given scientific topic still only amounted to 5%. Had there been a larger share of
teachers present at the universities, teacher-student effects could have been much larger. E.g. a
one standard deviation increase would have translated itself into a 3.25% increase in the national
publication share in the Scientific Revolution.
These numbers show that teacher-directed scientific change had a moderate but relevant impact
on all English scientific publications between 1600–1720. This is also a relevant finding since Grajzl
and Murrell (2024) show that two other significant events during this period, the founding of the
Royal Society and the Glorious Revolution, left no visible trace in aggregate English scientific
publications. Yet, given the counterfactual policy examples, the impact of the universities and
teacher-directed change could have been significantly larger.
In the end, this finding sits well with the history of the Scientific Revolution as a slow and
gradual process that covered almost two centuries. Nonetheless, slow but positive growth was the
unique feature that allowed European countries to create a knowledge base sufficient to support
faster scientific and technological growth during the eighteenth century (Mokyr, 2002, 2016). This
paper shows that teacher directed scientific change at universities was one among many factors that
supported this steady growth in the Scientific Revolution.
7 Conclusion
Overall, the paper has shown concrete evidence of teacher-directed scientific change during the
English Scientific Revolution. It has shown that teachers at the English universities of Oxford
and Cambridge had a moderate impact on the research direction of their students for the fields
of the Scientific Revolution. At the same time, in a counterfactual world of a higher share of
scientifically interested teachers, they could have had a stronger impact. These results contribute
to our understanding of teacher-directed scientific change in general as well as to our understanding
of the English Scientific Revolution.
By matching the universe of university students and teachers between 1600–1800 with the
universe of printed titles between 1600–1800 in England, the paper has provided new data on
knowledge production in the early modern period. To classify printed titles, the paper has used
a machine learning approach based on a transformer model and historical training data. It has
further used a transformer-model based modification of the Kelly et al. (2021) approach to create a
measure of the innovativeness of individual titles. By using data on a topic- and sub-student level,
the paper was able to estimate the effect of teachers’ direction of research on students’ direction
of research while applying topic- and student- fixed effects. Thus, the model absorbs all non-topic
specific factors of student heterogeneity, such as talent or economic background.
38


In order to investigate causal effects, the paper has introduced three distinct identification
approaches. First, it has used an instrumental variable approach based on the strong ties between
individual colleges and English regions. Based on this pattern, the paper has predicted a student’s
future college based on his place of origin and then predicted the teachers a student would face at
college. Second, it has used a stacked difference-in-differences approach based on teachers leaving
their college. Lastly the paper has exploited a quasi-natural experiment based on the eviction and
forced appointments of new teachers by victorious Parliament following the English Civil War.
Overall, the paper has shown that teachers’ direction of research is a strong determinant for
students’ direction of research for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. The results indicate that
the teacher-effect is strong and relevant and can account for 7.28% of students’ share of research
within the Scientific Revolution at Oxford and 3.46% at Cambridge.43 Overall, they accounted for
1.67% of the national publication share in the Scientific Revolution. The paper has further argued
that even larger effects had been possible if colleges had hired a larger share of teachers’ interested
in the Scientific Revolution.
The results from this paper contribute to our understanding of teacher-directed technical change.
So far, evidence of teacher directed effects in history has been limited to the case of curriculum
changes at business schools (Acemoglu, He and Le Maire, 2022), with other studies showing teacher
effects in quality Waldinger (2010) or style (Borowiecki, 2022). This paper contributes the literature
by presenting evidence of teacher-directed scientific change during one the largest shifts in the
direction of science throughout history, the Scientific Revolution. It presents evidence that the
future research trajectory of students can be partly determined by their exposure to teachers at
university. Hence, changing the composition of teachers at university can have a long-lasting impact
on society’s research trajectory.
The paper has further contributed to the historical literature on the role of the English uni
versities for the Scientific Revolution that has been severely contested. While some scholars have
argued that the universities were an “intellectual desert” (Manuel, 1968, p. 133) or an “intellectual
wasteland” (Westfall, 1983, p. 190), others have argued that universities were important places for
the transmission of new ideas from teachers to students (Gascoigne, 1990; Feingold, 1984, 1997).
This paper provides a clear quantitative answer by showing that teachers at the English universities
were able to pass on their research interests in the Scientific Revolution.
As a final open question, the paper begs the question of how much of the western take-off
in science can be explained by the institution of the university. For example, China’s education
system was built around a centralized civil service exam that every future civil servant needed to
pass. Hence, the civil service exam might have created incentives for complying with tradition
and against adopting novel ideas (Needham, 1964; Lin, 1995; Ma, 2021). Huff (2003) also argues
that Islamic madrasas were important centres of learning, but were exclusively centred on religion.
Furthermore, early Islamic advances in science often originated in small and short-lived circles of
43Assuming, as in the last section, that a counterfactual world with no teachers can be approximated by a 200% decrease in teacher shares.
39


learning that never managed to achieve a full institutionalization (Huff, 2003) (the same can be
said about early Italian academies). In contrast, the English university system always aimed at
providing a broad education across many fields and fostered the exchange between fellows and
students through living together in a closed college environment. This paper shows that teacher
directed change in the Scientific Revolution had a significant effect on the lifetime direction of
research of the graduates of the English universities. One can speculate that the effects of teacher
directed scientific change at other important European universities of the seventeenth century, such
as Leyden, Padua, or Paris would have been of a similar or larger size. Hopefully, future research can
shed more quantitative evidence on the European scale of teacher-directed change in the Scientific
Revolution. Similarly, it seems that future comparative research could shed further light on the
global importance of European universities for the Scientific Revolution and the great divergence
(Pomeranz, 2000).
40


References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James Feigenbaum, and Santiago P ́erez.
2021. “Automated linking of historical data.” Journal of Economic Literature 59 (3): 865–918.
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. “Europe’s tired, poor, hud
dled masses: Self-selection and economic outcomes in the age of mass migration.” American Economic
Review 102 (5): 1832–1856.
Abramitzky, Ran, Lena Greska, Santiago P ́erez, Joseph Price, Carlo Schwarz, and Fabian
Waldinger. 2024. “Climbing the ivory tower: How socio-economic background shapes academia.” CAGE
working paper no. 739.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Directed technical change.” The Review of Economic Studies 69 (4): 781–809.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2023. “Distorted Innovation: Does the Market Get the Direction of Technology Right?”
AEA Papers and Proceedings 113: 1–28.
Acemoglu, Daron, Alex He, and Daniel Le Maire. 2022. “Eclipse of Rent-Sharing: The Effects of
Managers’ Business Education on Wages and the Labor Share in the US and Denmark.” National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2023. Power and Progress: Our Thousand-Year Struggle Over
Technology and Prosperity. London: Basic books.
Akerlof, George A, and Rachel E Kranton. 2002. “Identity and schooling: Some lessons for the
economics of education.” Journal of economic literature 40 (4): 1167–1201.
Allen, Phyllis. 1949. “Scientific Studies in the English Universities of the Seventeenth Century.” Journal
of the History of Ideas 10 (2): 219–253.
Allen, Robert C. 2009. The British industrial revolution in global perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Alvarez-Palau, Eduard J., and Oliver Dunn. 2019. “Database of historic ports and coastal sailing
routes in England and Wales.” Data in Brief 25: 104188.
Andrade, E N da C. 1965. “The Birth and Early Days of the Philosophical Transactions.” Notes and
Records of the Royal Society of London 20 (1): 9–27.
Arold, Benjamin W. 2022. “Evolution vs. creationism in the classroom: The lasting effects of science
education.” Creationism in the Classroom: The Lasting Effects of Science Education (November 14, 2022).
Azoulay, Pierre, Christian Fons-Rosen, and Joshua S Graff Zivin. 2019. “Does science advance one
funeral at a time?” American Economic Review 109 (8): 2889–2920.
Bairoch, Paul. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the Present. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago press.
Baker, Andrew C, David F Larcker, and Charles C Y Wang. 2022. “How much should we trust
staggered difference-in-differences estimates?” Journal of Financial Economics 144 (2): 370–395.
41


Bennet, J Robert. 2012. “Urban Population Database 1801-1991.” University of Manchester, Department
of Geography.
Bettinger, Eric, and Bridget Terry Long. 2004. “Do college instructors matter? The effects of adjuncts
and graduate assistants on students’ interests and success.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bettinger, Eric P, and Bridget Terry Long. 2005. “Do faculty serve as role models? The impact of
instructor gender on female students.” American Economic Review 95 (2): 152–157.
Biasi, Barbara, and Song Ma. 2022. “The education-innovation gap.” National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bojanowski, Piotr, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, and Tomas Mikolov. 2017. “Enriching word
vectors with subword information.” Transactions of the association for computational linguistics 5: 135
146.
Bommasani, Rishi, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von
Arx, Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, and Emma Brunskill. 2021.
“On the opportunities and risks of foundation models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258.
Borjas, George J. 2000. “Foreign-born teaching assistants and the academic performance of undergradu
ates.” American Economic Review 90 (2): 355–359.
Borowiecki, Karol Jan. 2022. “Good Reverberations? Teacher Influence in Music Composition since
1450.” Journal of Political Economy 130 (4): 991–1090.
Brockliss, Laurence W. B. 1978. “Patterns of Attendance at the University of Paris, 1400-1800.” The
Historical Journal 21 (3): 503–544.
Brockliss, Laurence W. B. 2016. The University of Oxford: A History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burrows, Montagu. 1881. The Register of the Visitors of the University of Oxford, from AD 1647 to AD
1658. Camden Society.
Cantoni, Davide, Yuyu Chen, David Y Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y Jane Zhang. 2017.
“Curriculum and ideology.” Journal of political economy 125 (2): 338–392.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2019. “The effect of minimum
wages on low-wage jobs.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3): 1405–1454.
Cer, Daniel, Yinfei Yang, Sheng-yi Kong, Nan Hua, Nicole Limtiaco, Rhomni St John, Noah
Constant, Mario Guajardo-Cespedes, Steve Yuan, and Chris Tar. 2018. “Universal sentence
encoder.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175.
Chen, Jiafeng, and Jonathan Roth. 2024. “Logs with zeros? Some problems and solutions.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 139 (2): 891–936.
Chiopris, Caterina. 2024. “Spatial networks and the diffusion of ideas.” Manuscript draft.
Cinnirella, Francesco, Erik Hornung, and Julius Koschnick. 2022. “Flow of ideas: Economic societies
and the rise of useful knowledge.” CESifo Working Paper 9836.
42


Clark, Andrew. 1887. Register of the University of Oxford. vol 2. pt. edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Csiszar, Alex. 2016. “Peer review: Troubled from the start.” Nature 532 (7599): 306–308.
Cummins, Neil. 2017. “Lifespans of the European elite, 800-1800.” The Journal of Economic History
77 (2): 406–439.
Curtis, Matthew JD, and David De la Croix. 2023. “Seeds of Knowledge: Premodern Scholarship,
Academic Fields, and European Growth.” Centre for Economic Policy Research, CEPR discussion paper
DP18321.
Curtis, M H. 1959. Oxford and Cambridge in Transition, 1558-1642: An Essay on Changing Relations
Between the English Universities and English Society. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dawson, J. L. 2001. “ACAD – A Cambridge Alumni Database.” Computers in Genealogy 7 (8): 363–375.
de Courson, Benoˆıt, Valentin Thouzeau, and Nicolas Baumard. 2023. “Quantifying the scientific
revolution.” Evolutionary Human Sciences 5: e19.
De la Croix, David, Fr ́ed ́eric Docquier, Alice Fabre, and Robert Stelter. 2024. “The academic
market and the rise of universities in medieval and early modern Europe (1000–1800).” Journal of the
European Economic Association 22 (4): 1541–1589.
Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Dittmar, Jeremiah. 2019. “The Economic Origins of Modern Science: Technology, Institutions, and Mar
kets.” Working Paper.
Dittmar, Jeremiah, and Ralf Meisenzahl. 2021. “The research university, invention, and industry:
Evidence from german history.” mimeo, London School of Economics.
Dittmar, Jeremiah E. 2011. “Information technology and economic change: the impact of the printing
press.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3): 1133–1172.
Downes, Kerry. 2012. “Wren, Sir Christopher (1632-1723), architect, mathematician, and astronomer.” In
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G, and Liang Zhang. 2005. “Do tenured and tenure-track faculty matter?” Journal
of Human Resources 40 (3): 647–659.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. 1980. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni
versity Press.
Feingold, Mordecai. 1997. “The Mathematical Sciences and New Philosophies.” In Seventeenth Century
Oxford, edited by Tyacke Nicholas. Clarendon Press.
Feingold, Mordechai. 1984. The Mathematician’s Apprenticeship: Science, Universities and Society in
England 1560-1640. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Feingold, Mordechai. 1990. Before Newton: the life and times of Isaac Barrow. Cambridge University
Press.
43


Feld, Jan, Nicol ́as Salamanca, and Ulf Z ̈olitz. 2018. “Are professors worth it? The value-added and
costs of tutorial instructors.” Journal of Human Resources 0417–8752r2.
Feld, Jan, Nicolas Salamanca, and Ulf Z ̈olitz. 2019. “Students are almost as effective as professors in
university teaching.” Economics of Education Review 73: 101912.
Foster, Joseph. 1891. Alumni Oxonienses : The Members of the University of Oxford, 1500-1714: Their
Parentage, Birthplace, and Year of Birth, with a Record of Their Degrees. London: Parker and Co.
Frank Jr, Robert G. 1973. “Science, Medicine and the Universities of Early Modern England: Background
and Sources, Part I.” History of science 11 (3): 194–216.
Frank, Robert G. 1973. “Science, Medicine and the Universities of Early Modern England: Background
and Sources, Part 1.” History of Science 11 (3): 194–216.
Funk, Russell J, and Jason Owen-Smith. 2017. “A dynamic network measure of technological change.”
Management science 63 (3): 791–817.
Gascoigne, John. 1985. “The Universities and the Scientific Revolution: The Case of Newton and Restora
tion Cambridge.” History of Science 23 (4): 391.
Gascoigne, John. 1990. “A reappraisal of the role of the universities in the Scientific Revolution.” In
Reappraisals of the Scientific Revolution, edited by David Lindberg and Robert Westman. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Giuliano, Paola, and Nathan Nunn. 2021. “Understanding cultural persistence and change.” The Review
of Economic Studies 88 (4): 1541–1581.
Grajzl, Peter, and Peter Murrell. 2023. “Quiet revolutions in early-modern England.” Public Choice
1–25.
Grajzl, Peter, and Peter Murrell. 2024. “A macroscope of English print culture, 1530–1700, applied to
the coevolution of ideas on religion, science, and institutions.” Social Science History 48 (3): 489–519.
Hanlon, Walker. 2022. “The rise of the engineer: Inventing the professional inventor during the Industrial
Revolution.” NBER Working Paper 29751.
Hartlib, Samuel. 1650. “Hartlib Papers, Sheffield University Library, Ephemerides (transcript) 1648 ff.,
S-T45. S-T6.”
Hehir, Brendan O. 1968. Harmony from Discords - A life of Sir John Denham. Univ of California Press.
Hessen, Boris. 1931. “The social and economic roots of Newton’s Principia.” In The Social and Economic
Roots of the Scientific Revolution, edited by G Freudenthal and P. McLauglin. Dordrecht: Springer.
Hill, Christopher. 1964. “Puritanism, capitalism and the scientific revolution.” Past & Present , (29): 88
97.
Hill, Christopher. 1965. Intellectual Origins of the English Revolution. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hill, Christopher. 1968. “The intellectual origins of the Royal Society - London or Oxford?” Notes and
Records of the Royal Society of London 23 (2): 144–156.
44


Hoffmann, Florian, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “Professor qualities and student achievement.” The
Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1): 83–92.
Huff, Toy E. 2003. The rise of early modern science: Islam, China, and the West. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hughes, David W, and Daniel W E Green. 2007. “Halley’s first name: Edmond or Edmund.” Inter
national Comet Quarterly 29 (1): 7–14.
Hunter, Michael Cyril William. 1995. Science and the shape of orthodoxy: Intellectual change in late
seventeenth-century Britain. Woodbridge: Boydell & Brewer.
Iaria, Alessandro, Carlo Schwarz, and Fabian Waldinger. 2018. “Frontier knowledge and scientific
production: evidence from the collapse of international science.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
133 (2): 927–991.
Jacob, James R, and Margaret C Jacob. 1980. “The Anglican Origins of Modern Science: The Meta
physical Foundations of the Whig Constitution.” Isis 71 (2): 251–267.
Jacob, Margaret C. 1997. Scientific culture and the making of the industrial West. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Jacob, Margaret C. 1999. “Beyond the cultural turn: New directions in the study of society and culture.”
In Beyond the Cultural Turn: New Directions in the Study of Society and Culture, Studies on the History
of Society and Culture, edited by Victoria E. Bonnell, Lynn Hunt, Richard Biernacki and University Lynn
Hunt. University of California Press.
Jacob, Margaret C. 2014. The first knowledge economy: Human capital and the European economy, 1750
1850. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kelly, Bryan, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Matt Taddy. 2021. “Measuring technological
innovation over the long run.” American Economic Review: Insights 3 (3): 303–320.
Koschnick, Julius. 2023. “On the shoulders of science–early science as a driver of innovation during the
early industrial revolution.” PhD diss. London School of Economics and Political Science.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago press.
Langton, John. 2000. “Urban growth and economic change: from the late seventeenth century to 1841.”
In The Cambridge urban history of Britain, Vol. 2, edited by David M. Palliser, Peter Clark and Martin J.
Daunton, 1540–1840. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Laouenan, Morgane, Palaash Bhargava, Jean-Benoˆıt Eym ́eoud, Olivier Gergaud, Guillaume
Plique, and Etienne Wasmer. 2022. “A cross-verified database of notable people, 3500BC-2018AD.”
Scientific Data 9 (1): 1–19.
Lee, Sidney. 1886. “Brent, Sir Nathaniel (1573?–1652).” In Dictionary of National Biography, Vol. VI.,
edited by Leslie Stephen, 263. London: Smith, Elder & Co.
Lin, Justin Yifu. 1995. “The Needham puzzle: why the industrial revolution did not originate in China.”
Economic development and cultural change 43 (2): 269–292.
45


Lux, David S, and Harold J Cook. 1998. “Closed circles or open networks?: Communicating at a
distance during the scientific revolution.” History of science 36 (2): 179–211.
Ma, Chicheng. 2021. “Knowledge Diffusion and Intellectual Change: When Chinese Literati Met European
Jesuits.” The Journal of Economic History 1–46.
Manuel, Frank E. 1968. A portrait of Isaac Newton. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Merton, Robert K. 1938. “Science, technology and society in seventeenth century England.” Osiris 4: 360
632.
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. The gifts of Athena: Historical origins of the knowledge economy. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2016. A culture of growth: the origins of the modern economy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Mokyr, Joel. 2024. “Culture vs Institutions in the Great Enrichment.” In Handbook of New Institutional
Economics, edited by Mary Shirley and Calude Menard. Springer.
Needham, Joseph. 1964. “Science and society in East and West.” Science & Society 385–408.
Newton, Isaac. 1675. “Isaac Newton letter to Robert Hooke.”
Nunn, Nathan. 2021. “History as evolution.” In The handbook of historical economics, edited by Alberto
Bisin and Giovanni Federico, 41–91. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Osborne, Francis. 1689. “The works of Francis Osborn esq; divine, moral, historical, political. In four
several tracts. Viz. I. Advice to a son, in two parts. 2. Political reflections on the government of the Turks,
&c. 3. Memoires on Q. Elizabeth and K. James. 4. A miscellany of.”
Park, Michael, Erin Leahey, and Russell J Funk. 2023. “Papers and patents are becoming less
disruptive over time.” Nature 613 (7942): 138–144.
Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2000. The great divergence: China, Europe, and the making of the modern world
economy. Princeton University Press.
Porter, Stephen. 1997. “University and Society.” In The History of the University of Oxford: Volume IV
Seventeenth-Century Oxford, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Queen Mary Centre for Religion and Literature in English. 2023. “Dissenting Academies Online.”
Reinhart, Thomas. 1984. “The Parliamentary Visitations of Oxford University, 1646-1652.”
Roy, Ian, and Dietrich Reinhart. 1997. “Oxford and the Civil Wars.” In The History of the University
of Oxford: Volume IV Seventeenth-Century Oxford, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ru ̈egg, Walter. 2006. A History of the University in Europe: Volume 3, Universities in the Nineteenth
and Early Twentieth Centuries (1800-1945). Vol. 3 of A History of the University in Europe. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
46


Satchell, M, L Shaw-Taylor, and E A Wrigley. 2017. “1831 England and Wales Ancient Counties
shapefile.” UK Data Archive.
Schofield, Robert E. 1963. The Lunar Society of Birmingham: a social history of provincial science and
industry in eighteenth-century England. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Shapiro, Barbara J. 1969. John Wilkins, 1614-1672: an intellectual biography. Berkeley: Univ of California
Press.
Shapiro, Barbara J. 1971. “The universities and science in seventeenth century England.” Journal of
British Studies 10 (2): 47–82.
Smith, Joe William Ashley. 1954. The Birth of Modern Education: The Contribution of the Dissenting
Academies, 1660-1800. Independent Press.
Smith, R W Innes, and John D Comrie. 1932. English-speaking students of medicine at the University
of Leyden. Oliver & Boyd.
Snae, Chakkrit. 2007. “A comparison and analysis of name matching algorithms.” International Journal
of Computer and Information Engineering 1 (1): 107–112.
Stewart, Larry. 1986a. “Public lectures and private patronage in Newtonian England.” Isis 77 (1): 47–58.
Stewart, Larry. 1986b. “The Selling of Newton: Science and Technology in Early Eighteenth-Century
England.” Journal of British Studies 25 (2): 178–192.
Stewart, Larry. 1992. The rise of public science: rhetoric, technology, and natural philosophy in Newtonian
Britain, 1660-1750. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stone, Lawrence. 1974. “The Size and Composition of the Oxford Student Body 1580-1910.” In The
University in Society, Volume I, Oxford and Cambridge from the 14th to the Early 19th Century, edited
by Lawrence Stone, 3–110. Princeton University Press.
Thompson, Craig Ringwalt. 1959. Universities in Tudor England. Folger Books. Folger Shakespeare
Library. Reprint: 1979.
Twigg, J D. 1983. “The Parliamentary Visitation of the University of Cambridge, 1644-1645.” The English
Historical Review 98 (388): 513–528.
Underwood, E Ashworth. 1969. “English-speaking medical students at Leyden.” Nature 221 (5183): 810
814.
Unitarian Historical Society. 2020. “Bibliography of Unitarian Congregations which have existed since
1800.” Online resource.
Vaswani, Ashish, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. “Attention is all you need.” Advances in neural information
processing systems 30.
Venn, J. A., and D. Litt. 1952. Alumni Cantabrigienses; a Biographical List of all Known Students,
Graduates and Holders of Office at the University of Cambridge - From the earliest times to 1900. I-II
edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
47


Verney, Margaret M. Verney. 1899. Memoirs of the Verney family - from the restoration to the revolution
1660 to 1696. IV edition. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.
Waldinger, Fabian. 2010. “Quality matters: The expulsion of professors and the consequences for PhD
student outcomes in Nazi Germany.” Journal of political economy 118 (4): 787–831.
Waldinger, Fabian. 2012. “Peer effects in science: Evidence from the dismissal of scientists in Nazi Ger
many.” The review of economic studies 79 (2): 838–861.
Ward, S, and J Wilkins. 1654. Vindiciæ Academiarum: Containing Some Briefe Animadversions Upon
Mr Websters Book Stiled, The Examination of Academies. Oxford: Leonard Lichfield Printer to the
University.
Webster, Charles. 1977. The great instauration: science, medicine and reform 1626-1660. London: Duck
worth.
Westfall, Rrichard S. 1980. “Isaac Newton in Cambridge: The Restoration University and Scientific
Creativity.” In Culture and Culture and Politics from Puritanism to the Enlightenment, edited by Perez
Zagorin, 135–164. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Westfall, R S. 1983. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge paperback library. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wikidata. 2022. “Alumni Oxonienses: the Members of the University of Oxford, 1715–1886.”
Wistanley, D. A. 1935. Unreformed Cambirdge - a study of the certain aspects of the university in the
eigteenth century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wootton, David. 2015. The invention of science: a new history of the scientific revolution. London: Allen
Lane.
Wu, Lingfei, Dashun Wang, and James A Evans. 2019. “Large teams develop and small teams disrupt
science and technology.” Nature 566 (7744): 378–382.
Young, George Malcolm. 1949. “Continuity.” In Last essays, 47–68. London: R. Hart-Davis.
Zilsel, P, and Edgar Zilsel. 2003. The social origins of modern science. Vol. 200. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
48


Appendices
A History of the seventeenth and eighteenth century English uni
versity
A.1 Student- and Fellow-Life at Seventeenth Century English Universities
A.1.1 Students
At the English universities of Oxford and Cambridge in the seventeenth century, most of a student’s
learning and social life was centred around the individual colleges. This was before the emergence of
social clubs that would bring students into contact with their peers from other colleges. In contrast,
the social life of students in the seventeenth century was more strictly regulated than in the centuries
to come and it took place at a student’s own college (Brockliss, 2016). Before, lectures had been
held through chairs at the university, but this declined throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth
century. Instead, since the sixteenth century, colleges themselves took up the duty of teaching their
undergraduates, establishing college lectureships and college tutorial systems (Feingold, 1990, p.
8). Hence, educational experiences at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge would have differed
according to the presence of different fellows at different colleges. Furthermore, fellowships were
only held for an average of about 11 years, leading to constant change in the teaching body. In
order to illustrate the working of this college channel, this section will give a short portrayal of
students’ and faculties’ life at the English universities of the seventeenth century.
In the seventeenth century, a student’s decision to go to university could be based on different
motivations. Many boys still came to Oxford for its traditional role as a training ground for the
clergy.44 “William Trumbull instructed his son to concentrate on Greek, Latin, and the ‘liberal arts’
and to ‘learn to make a verse, a theme and an oration’.” (Porter, 1997, p. 27, citing from Berks,
RO Trumbull Add. MS 46, letter 24 August 1622), a list of the humanistic skills valued by higher
society in the seventeenth century. William Trumbull’s list does not include mathematics, nor does
it even touch the areas of the “new sciences”. Such views would have been representative among
student’s parents. Indeed, the historical evidence illustrates that parents did not have an interest in
choosing colleges with a strong reputation in mathematics or the “new sciences”. To the opposite,
Hill (1965, p. 55) provides examples of how some parents disapproved of their students being
exposed to the mathematical “black art” (Osborne, 1689, p. 5) or the “art diabolical” (Ward and
Wilkins, 1654, p. 58).45 Even parents with less strong opinions feared that “the new sciences” would
“either distract them [their sons] from more important studies or adversely affect their cultivation
of good breeding” (Feingold, 1997, p. 428). Feingold (1997, ibid.) further shows how opinions of
44Note that during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, girls were excluded from attending university. Catholic students were excluded as well - these often attended the English college at Douai. Furthermore, non-Anglicans were excluded as well. Further note that before the English Civil War, Puritans were usually seen as reformer within the Anglican Church, not outside the Anglican Church. Hence, before the English Civil War, Puritans were not excluded, although some Puritan students might have been deterred by the Laudian administration. 45Seeing mathematics as a part of the dark arts had a long European history (see e.g. Taylor 1957, p. 90.)
49


the sciences being non-becoming for higher status were mixed with practical considerations. Thus,
we can read how in 1688, Edmund Verney’s father vividly warned his sons against the perils of
studying chemistry:
“I am gladd, you didd not goe through with a course of chymistry. That sort of learning
I do not approve of for you; it is only usefull unto physicians and it impoverisheth often
those that study it, and brings constantly a trayne of beggars along with it.” (Verney,
1899, p. 405)
Instead, seventeenth century parents choosing a college for their son would have been cared about
personal contacts and the regional focus of a college, as well as its religious leaning (Brockliss, 2016,
p. 232).
Once a student had enrolled at a college, he would be fitted into the ranks of the student body.
At Oxford, there were foundationers, whose education was sponsored through college scholarships,
and non-foundationers paying for their own education (Brockliss, 2016, p. 226).46 The foundation
ers themselves were split into different groups. At the top were the fellow commoners, paying the
highest entrance fee and often being of noble descent. Below them came the commoners who also
paid the full tuition. They were followed by battelers, not being supplied with the “commons” at
dinner, but also paying lower fees. At the bottom were the pauperi, performing additional duties
for the college in return for even lower fees, and often taking up the role of servitors to the upper
student ranks or faculty (Brockliss, 2016, p. 227). The different status translated into different
accommodation, gowns, and quality of food (ibid.).
These differences in status also translated themselves into the daily college life. Gentleman
commoners dined at the fellow’s table at the end of the hall, while ordinary commoners and battelers
dined at separate tables. Servitors and the pauperi would wait for the upper ranks to finish, while
the servitors would assist their masters. Only then would they dine on the leftovers from the upper
ranks (Brockliss, 2016, p. 229).
However, the formal ritualization of social ranks does not imply that the fellows did not socially
interact with the lower ranks. Fellows in their capacity as tutors shared their bedchamber with
students and in case a pauperi performed servatory duties to a faculty member, we might even
suspect a closer exchange between servitor and master than with other students. One example is
Robert Hooke serving for the extra-collegial Robert Boyle lodging in Oxford and later becoming
his laboratory assistant. Furthermore, all ranks studied together and had a strong college identity
throughout the ranks (Brockliss, 2016, p. 233).
Within seventeenth century society, a student was not necessarily expected to have taken a
degree at university. Nonetheless, we can see from the student data that 52% of all students took a
bachelor’s degree, while 33% passed on to a master’s degree. Minimal residency for a B.A. were four
years and further three years for an M.A. Beginning his studies, a student pursuing a B.A. would
46The system at Cambridge, split between sizars at the bottom, pensioners, and fellow commoners at the top was, except for naming conventions, almost identical to its sister university. Hence, for brevity’s sake the following discussion will illustrate basic features of 17th century university life by the example of the University of Oxford.
50


have spent his first year studying grammar and rhetoric in order to get his Latin to an academic
level (Clark, 1887, p. 225 f.; Brockliss, 2016, p. 236). After this, he would have succeeded with
ancient logic and ethics, the main pillar of his bachelor’s degree, and would have started to study
Greek and geometry in his third year (Brockliss, 2016, p. 236). Only after having completed a
bachelor’s degree would students have started to study (ancient) natural philosophy, metaphysics,
astronomy, and mathematics (Frank, 1973, p. 201; Brockliss, 2016, p. 236). In Oxford, the award
of a bachelor’s degree depended on the completion of a set of disputations, a public exercise of a
scholasticly formalized debate of a given topic in Latin (see also Thompson, 1959, p. 26), and a
final oral examination.47 The completion of a master’s degree depended on the requisite years of
study and completion of the formal disputations (Allen, 1949; Brockliss, 2016, p. 236).48 For the
late sixteenth and early seventeenth century there survives evidence on students that were refused
their degrees at examination (Clark, 1887, p. 227 f.), proving that examinations were a strict
requirement and not only a formal exercise.
This stands in clear contrast to the eighteenth century, where examination standards declined
at the English universities. To some extent this decline might have already started during the
seventeenth century. Indicators for this were e.g. Cambridge abandoning required residence for
a bachelor’s student’s final Lent term in 1681 (Westfall, 1980 p. 138; Wistanley, 1935, p. 42).
However, most of the changes in examination seem to have started during the “first two or three
decades of the eighteenth century” (Wistanley, 1935, p. 48). Similarly, Frank (1973, p. 206) draws
on additional evidence from questions discussed in the disputations and students’ letters describing
their experience during their disputations. This material leads him to conclude that “disputations
maintained a good portion of their intellectual rigour until well into the 1720s and 1730s” (ibid.).
Afterwards, the universities seem to have to have put less and less weight to an examination mode
that was increasingly seen as outdated (Wistanley, 1935, p. 48–60). Around the 1800s this decline
in the standard of the arts degrees led to institutional change at both, Oxford and Cambridge.
Notably, in 1807 the current-day practice of awarding automatic master’s degrees three years after
the completion of a B.A. was established in Oxford (Brockliss, 2016, p. 237 f.), a practise that
survives up to today and might be well known to many readers. Yet, this was a reform of nineteenth
century Oxbridge, standing in clear contrast to the seventeenth century, where the M.A. was both
a taught and examined degree that fulfilled an important role in introducing students to advanced
materials of study, such as natural philosophy (ibid.).49
47These examinations usually took the form of scholastic “quaestiones”, consisting of the statement of a problem, the presentation of objections, the logical treatment of each objection, and a final synthesis. For Oxford, there exist written records of the contents of these questiones for 1576 and 1622 compiled by (Clark, 1887, p. 169–217). Many of these “quaestiones’ came directly from the treatises of Aristotle (ibid. p. 170) and illustrate the monopoly of scholastic teaching at the university. 48In Cambridge, the requirements for passing a the bachelor and master’s of arts degree were similar (Wistanley, 1935, pp. 41–46). 49One might note that at least in Cambridge, the residency requirements were less strict for master’s degrees than for bachelor’s degrees (Wistanley, 1935, p. 62). However, the biographical material studied for this essays gives no indication that perpetuated absence was a common practice during the seventeenth century.
51


A.1.2 Faculty
On the other side of a college’s body was the faculty consisting of the college’s fellows and senior
administrators, with the college’s head or warden at the very top. A fellowship in the seventeenth
and eighteenth century was situated somewhere between a modern Ph.D. and a faculty position.
They were given to to advanced students, either having passed their master’s degree or being senior
master’s students (Brockliss, 2016, p. 226 f., 281). A fellowship included an annual stipend and
brought teaching obligation with it. It was usually dependent on both, a college examination and
the particular conditions of the specific fellowship, sometimes linking the fellowship to a student’s
county or town of birth. As part of the seventeenth century world of patronage, the influence of
a candidate’s patron could be decisive as well (Brockliss, 2016, p. 230). After being awarded a
fellowship, the award was open-ended, although the compulsory celibacy during a fellowship was
often sufficient motivation to seek employment elsewhere (often becoming a parish priest). In case
a fellow secured himself the position of e.g. a professorship, chaplain, or warden, etc., the fellowship
still continued. For a detailed description of fellowships see Brockliss (2016, p. 281 f.).
The teaching demanded of fellows was either given through lectures at their college or through
tutorial duties. The tutorial system at Oxford evolved parallel to the development of college
specific lectures. A tutor was supposed to oversee his student’s academic development and to give
private lessons. However, he was also a strong personal anchor in a student’s life who would share
his chamber with his tutor. However, during the seventeenth century tutors started to instruct
multiple students at once (Feingold, 1990, p. 8), therefore leading to a decline in the strength of
the tutorship channel over time. See Brockliss (2016, pp. 251–254) for a detailed discussion of the
tutorial system at Oxford. All in all, seventeenth century colleges seemed to have offered students
close contact to teachers and their views, either through interaction after college lectures, through a
student’s tutor, through conversation at dinner or through other informal meetings. Lastly, a short
case study of Christopher Wren will serve to illustrate this channel. Christopher Wren enrolled at
Wadham College in 1650, completed his B.A. already in 1651, his M.A. in 1653 — a speed that
was unusual for this time — and was elected as a fellow of Wadham College in the same year.
He was later elected as a member of the Royal Society in 1660 and would become president of
the Royal Society from 1680 to 1682. Studying Christopher Wren, Downes (2012) argues that his
engagement with the general arts curriculum that was based on a traditional scholastic curriculum
did little to bring Wren into contact with the “new sciences”. However, Downes (2012) explicitly
recognizes the importance of informal acquaintance with the fellows for his learning of the “new
sciences” that Wren could get at Wadham College – e.g. at dinner, where Wren, as a fellow
commoner (the upper-ranks of the student body paying highest fees), could dine at the fellows’
table. Faculty members in return seem to have recognized their promising student. We do not
know which form of indirect contact prevailed in the end, yet, we find that already in 1650, the
year of Wren’s enrolment, word from Wadham College hard reached Samuel Hartlib who noted
Wren’s “fine inventions and contrivances . . . Hee is but 18 years of age and highly commended by
Dr. Wilkins. [and] Mr. Wallis” (Hartlib, 1650, as quoted by Frank 1973, p. 202). Both John
52


Wilkins, John Wallis, and Christopher Wren would be among the founding members of the Royal
Society a decade later.
A.2 The political background of the Oxford visitation and the appointment of
new fellows
When civil war broke out in 1642, the Laudian university sided with the king. It further started
to finance the king’s cause (Roy and Reinhart, 1997, pp. 695, 714). In September 1642, the city
of Oxford was shortly seized by parliamentary troops after which most students left the university
for their homes or joined the war parties (Roy and Reinhart, 1997, p. 698). At the end of October
1642, the city fell back in Royalist hands and soon after the town of Oxford became the king’s
headquarters. Finally, as the king’s campaign dismantled, the city was besieged by parliamentary
troops throughout May and June 1646 until it finally surrendered to Fairfax.
With the king’s cause lost, Parliament was keen on extending its rule to the Royalist university.
Not only did Parliament see Oxford as a dangerous stronghold of Royalist sentiment, but Oxford
and Cambridge were also the training grounds for the next generation of clergymen and thus would
have to be cleansed of all Laudian and suspectedly Arminian influences. In 1647 Parliament sent
out an array of visitors to the university of Oxford (appendix table 5 presents a list of the original
visitor including both, their former role at Oxford and their political role for Parliament). The list
illustrates that the visitors were intentionally chosen as “outsiders” of the existing college tradition.
Thus, the body of the visitors was dominated by parliamentary commissioners and preachers. The
former Oxonians on the committee were mainly ejected heads of the halls. The only head of a
former college was Nathaniel Brent, former warden at Merton, who in 1646 had resumed his role
of warden at Merton college. However, it appears that Nathaniel Brent was fully excluded from
the process of appointing new fellows. In February 1651 he officially sent a protest note to the
visitors complaining that they had “claimed to rule Merton College as they pleased, and, without
consulting the warden, they admitted fellows, masters, and bachelors of arts” (Lee, 1886, p. 263). It
seems that the appointment process was indeed swift and happened without regard for pre-existing
college traditions.
During 1647, the parliamentary visitors proved successful in replacing half of all college heads
with senior academics from outside the university that were known to be loyal to Parliament.50
However, until the spring of 1648, Oxford dons were generally successful in their resistance to
the visitors. They based their resistance on grounds of conscience, their oaths to the king, and
legal arguments that the king being was the only one with authority over the university (Reinhart,
1984, p. 322–346). This strategy played out successfully during a time of internal frictions within
50These new appointments reflected the circumstances of a “fluid” political situation, where Presbyterians and Independents opposed each other in Parliament (Shapiro, 1969, p. 81). Thus, appointments during this time did not follow a general strategy, nor a general Independent or Presbyterian leaning (ibid.). This uncertain climate was exacerbated by the fact that new appointments were sometimes made urgent by the death of old college heads and a subsequent election of a new college head by the existing fellows — elections that Parliament had to undo as timely as possible.
53


Parliament and the uncertain position of the king within the new order (Roy and Reinhart, 1997,
p. 727).
During 1647, Parliament, although victorious, was still in negotiation with the king. Yet, the
position of the university changed drastically with the beginning of 1648: With the Vote of No
Addresses on 17 January 1648, Parliament broke off its negotiations with Charles I. Soon after, in
spring 1648, Royalists rose again and ignited the Second English Civil War. At this point, loyalty
to the king had become synonymous with treason (Reinhart, 1984, p. 378).
Thus, in 1648 Parliament finally enforced its rule on the University of Oxford through drawing
on the military thread of its garrison at Oxford. Parliament ultimately decided to order all Oxford
fellows before the visitors and asked them to swear an oath on the new commonwealth. Absence
or evasive answers were taken as non-submission and non-submitting fellows were removed (Roy
and Reinhart, 1997, p. 729).51 Roy and Reinhart (1997, p. 731) show that 190 fellows out of 379
were effectively expelled, 43 were expelled but nonetheless managed to remain, and 146 submitted
to the oath and remained. Thus, the personal break was not absolute, but severe.
At the same time, the parliamentary commission was overseeing the appointment of new fellows.
Because the purge of old fellows had been a hasty reaction to the political events leading to the
Second English Civil war, preparations for the replacement of expelled fellows were not in place.
In order to maintain the functioning of the university and to leave no doubt that expelled fellows
had no chance of regaining their old positions, the visitors had to act fast. The decision which new
fellows to accept was taken by a committee established by the visitors in July 1648. The main aim
of the visitors was to establish their authority, promote a Calvinist leaning within the fellowship,
and to establish this reform in a very short time frame (Reinhart, 1984, pp. 406 f., 413). Hence, the
focus was mainly political, and the speed of political events did not leave visitors enough time to
choose new fellows that would be acceptable to the traditions and sentiment of individual colleges
- a selection criterion that would have been unlikely either way, given their intention to disrupt
these very college tradition. Hence, the paper argues that the intrusion of fellows constituted an
exogenous shock to the distribution of fellows across colleges.
51Curiously, there remained a significant number of non-submitters who were expelled, but not effectively removed — the reasons for this are not straightforward, especially as it is difficult to categorize all the individual elaborate reasons given for non-submittance (Roy and Reinhart, 1997, p. 729).
54


B Data
B.1 Variable definitions and data sources
Alumni Oxonienses, 1500–1714. Catalogue of the alumni from the University of Ox
ford 1500–1714 as compiled by (Foster, 1891). The catalogue includes detailed information on,
amongst other, the name of a student, year of matriculation and degrees, place of origin, and
status. Note that reliable recording of students only started around ca. 1580. The data source
is discussed in detail in section B.3. The transcript was obtained from British History Online,
https://www.british-history.ac.uk/alumni-oxon/1500-1714, accessed 5 April, 2020. The
book was digitized using double rekeying.
Alumni Oxonienses, 1715–1886. Catalogue of the alumni from the University of Oxford 1715
1886 as compiled by (Foster, 1891). The catalogue includes detailed information on, amongst other,
the name of a student, year of matriculation and degrees, place of origin, and status. The data
source is discussed in detail in section B.3. The transcript was obtained from Wikidata, https:
//www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q19036877, accessed 20 August, 2022. The transcript was carried out
by Wikidata volunteers. Missing sections were transcribed from the original by the author.
Alumni Cantabrigienses, from the earliest times to 1900. Catalogue of the alumni from
the University of Cambridge from the time of its foundation to 1900 as compiled by (Venn and Litt,
1952). The catalogue includes detailed information on, amongst other, the name of a student, year of
matriculation and degrees, place of origin, and status. Note that reliable recording of students only
started around ca. 1580. The data source is discussed in detail in section B.3. The transcript was
obtained from ACAD - A Cambridge Alumni Database, https://venn.lib.cam.ac.uk/ (Dawson,
2001), accessed 11 November, 2020. The paper uses the transcribed raw data from ACAD instead
of the pre-classified text.
English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC). Titles of works printed in 1600–1800 in either England
or in the English language. The catalogue further includes data on publication years, author names,
author lifetime dates, and subject classes. The ESTC 1600–1800 was kindly shared with the author
by the British Library.
Hundreds in 1831. Historical boundaries above the parish-level and below the county-level. The
dataset represents boundaries of hundreds in 1831 before the Counties Act of 1844 and thus should
be a close approximation of hundred boundaries in the preceding centuries. Data obtained from
Satchell, Shaw-Taylor and Wrigley (2017).
Student publication shares. Student i’s publication shares in a given subject j out of all
of student i’s publications. Subject shares across all subjects j constitute student i’s direction
of research. A student’s number of publications in subject field i is denoted as bi. A student’s
direction of research, v, is then defined as a vector of the researcher’s strength of research, b/n,
across the dimensions of m subject classes, v = (b1/n, b2/n, . . . bm/n).
55


Teacher publication shares. Teacher publication shares at college c in time t. Individual
teacher publication shares are analogously defined to student publication shares. Teacher shares at
the college level are defined as an average across all individual teachers (b1,1/n+b1,2/n+· · ·+b1,m)/μ,
where μ denotes the number of teachers.
Teacher publication proximity to Philosophical Transactions. Average similarity of
teachers’ publications to the titles of the articles journal of the Royal Society, the Philosophical
Transaction. Proximity for title i is calculated as cosine similarity to all Philosophical Transactions
articles within the same subject class as title i. For fields without teacher publications, we assume
that the similarity is zero. See section C.7 for formal definition of the measure. To interpret this
measure, we argue that the Philosophical Transactions constituted the scientific frontier. Therefore,
proximity to the Philosophical Transactions can be interpreted as proximity to the scientific frontier
or as an inverse measure of distance to the research frontier.
Teacher publication innovativeness. Maximum innovativeness of teacher publications. Inno
vativeness for title i is calculated as the share of forward similarities (BS) and backward similarities
BS to titles in the same field Ii = F Si
BSi similar to Kelly et al. (2021). Similarities are based on cosine
similarities within the embedding space and calculated for the backward period of [t − 20, t − 1]
and the forward period of t + 1, t + 20]. See section C.7 for formal definition of the measure. The
breakthrough index is normally distributed around zero. For fields without teacher publications,
we assume that teachers neither signal innovativeness nor backwardness and assign and therefore
assign zero values to these teachers. Following Kelly et al. (2021), we can interpret this measure as
the frequency of breakthrough innovations within teacher publications.
Number of teacher publications. Total number of lifetime publications of teachers in college c
and matriculation cohort t.
Cohort size. Size of a matriculation cohort c in a given college and year t.
Student status. Indicator variable of the status of students as recorded during enrollment. For
the historical context of student status see section A.1.1. For a list of status classes and translations
from Latin, see table B.7.
B.2 Geographical proxies for development
Bairoch city size. Population of 62 English towns in 1600 and of 144 towns in 1700. The
Bairoch dataset only records cities of at least 5,000 inhabitants. Population is given in 1,000s.
Data obtained from Bairoch (1988).
Langton city size. Population of English 1,050 English towns at the end of the seventeenth
century from Langton (2000). Population is given in 1,000s. Data obtained from Bennet (2012).
Port cities. The number of historical ports in 1680. Data obtained from Alvarez-Palau and
Dunn (2019).
56


Distance to port cities. Distance to historical ports in 1680 from Alvarez-Palau and Dunn
(2019) in 100km.
Unitarian congregations. The total number of unitarian congregations in a given hundred
between 1618 (the date of the first foundation) and 1720. Data obtained from Unitarian Historical
Society (2020).
B.3 Critical discussion of the Alumni Oxonienses and Alumni Cantabrigienses
The earliest published record of the students at the English early-modern universities was the
Alumni Oxonienses (Foster, 1891). The editor of the Alumni Oxonienses, Joseph Foster, extended
his work beyond the matriculation registers by further drawing on the university archives to compile
all the degrees awarded at Oxford and tried to incorporate a wide array of biographical information
on each student to get additional information about a student’s life after graduating. Foster was in
a good position to do so: He had already spent years on the collection of material on members of the
Inns of Court, knights and members of Parliament (Foster, 1891, pp. i ff.).52 After the completion
of the Alumni Oxonienses by Joseph Foster, mathematician John Venn (who also gave his name
to Venn diagrams) started to compile a similar list for Cambridge, the Alumni Cantabrigienses
(Venn and Litt, 1952). Because the matriculation lists for Cambridge were less complete than the
Oxford ones, Venn additionally resorted to the admission lists of each college (Venn and Litt, 1952,
pp. i ff.). In general, college admission lists have the advantage that they capture the actual date
of enrollment at a college as opposed to the date of the official matriculation that was sometimes
postponed by one or two years after enrolment. Furthermore, admission lists had a less unified
structure than the matriculation list. For example, some colleges only include a student’s county
of origin for his place of origin while others record the actual birth-place (Venn and Litt, 1952, pp.
viii. ff.). Additionally, not all colleges started recording a student’s place of origin at the same time.
Furthermore, some colleges started to keep their admission lists later than others (mainly around
the turn of the sixteenth century) necessitating Venn to still rely on the matriculation register for
some cases.
Furthermore, Foster (1891) and Venn and Litt (1952) include information on students’ outcomes
including students acquiring a priesthood and an incumbents’ position, being mentioned in the
Dictionary of National Biography, joining the Inn’s of Court or being a member of the Royal College
of Physicians. For compiling this information, Foster consulted the Index Ecclesiasticus, Cotton’s
Fasti Ecclesiae Hibernicae, Foster’s Judges and Barristers, Foster’s Inns of Court Reg., Foster’s
Gray’s Inn Register, Foster’s Dictionary of M. P.’s as well as the Munk’s Roll from the College of
Royal Physicians. It further lists membership in the Royal Society. In compiling these outcomes,
Venn closely followed the methodology of Foster. However, Venn’s method for compiling a list
of Anglican incumbents differed significantly from Foster’s. While Foster drew on the Institution
52Foster himself concludes that “In these absolutely unique collections, I possess the materials for illustrating and annotating the Oxford Matriculation Register to an extent and with an accuracy that no one else, not even the authorities of the University themselves, can hope to rival” (Foster, 1891, p. iii)
57


Books at the public Record Office, Venn relied on the more complete County Histories including
compilations of the Episcopal registers of local dioceses (Venn and Litt, 1952, p. xiii). Furthermore,
we should keep in mind that Venn had the privilege of working a few decades after Foster, thus
being able to draw on updated and extended volumes of e.g. the Dictionary of National Biography.
Comparing the summary statistics between Oxford and Cambridge in appendix tables 8 and
11, shows that most variables show little difference between both universities (e.g. comparing 53%
with a bachelor’s degree at Oxford to 55% with a Bachelor’s degree at Cambridge or 35% with
a master’s degree at Oxford to 38% with a bachelor’s degree at Cambridge), a result that would
be expected for these highly similar sister-universities. This speaks both for the accuracy of the
Alumni Oxonienses and Alumni Cantabrigienses as well as the quality of this study’s automatic
extraction of information from the texts. The accuracy of the works of Foster (1891) and Venn
and Litt (1952) have been further recognized by the historical literature. Thus, for the Alumni
Oxonienses, Porter (1997, p. 40 f., 45) argues that the matriculation register is more consistent
than the censuses of 1605, 1611, 1612, 1622, 1634, 1642, 1661, 1667, and the 1690s, while also
containing more information on the student body.
However, these records are necessarily only as good as the original matriculation registers or
admission registers of the universities. Recording practises did vary over time and political shocks
also affected the recording practice: For Oxford, before 1622, a student’s name, status, age, and
county were usually recorded, then after 1622 his father’s name and place of residence would also
be included (Porter, 1997, p. 30). However, we lack information on student’s age, father’s name
and place and county of residence for the interregnum years 1648-1660, as the intruded keeper of
the records was not given the old recordings by his predecessor, forcing him to start anew with
all categories (ibid.). Thus, the completeness of data for Cambridge where Venn and Litt could
additionally rely on the admissions list seems to be superior when it comes to students’ place of
origin and further personal controls.
Furthermore, data before 1580, the time of the formal establishment of the matriculation reg
isters (Stone, 1974, p. 12), seems to be unsystematic and irregularly recorded. Furthermore, ma
triculation dates did not always correspond to the actual date of enrolment at a college, with the
matriculation being a formal act that was only irregularly enforced (Porter, 1997, p. 31 f.). Porter
(ibid.) further suggests that some students not taking a degree could have avoided matriculation
altogether and that there even was a number of students taking a B.A. who had not matriculated
(ibid., Stone, p. 13). Some of the latter, however, are included in the Alumni Oxonienses 1500
1714, although without a matriculation date. Degrees and degree dates were regularly recorded,
however. Again, with respect to matriculation dates, Venn and Litt’s information for Cambridge
that additionally gives the date of admission to a college seem to be more reliable.
There are additionally, a number of degrees not associated with a specific college or hall. While
in the early times before 1620 and especially 1580, this would often have been due to irregular
book-keeping, there are a couple of other reasons for later times where the quality of book-keeping
had increased substantially: Some degrees were conferred by Royal Charter as a reward and were
58


Figure 7: Family’s Geo-Location
(a) Geo-location of origin for Oxford students (b) Geo-location of origin for Cambridge students
not the product of actual studies at Oxford. A high number of these titles fall in the time of
the civil war, when scholars were compensated for lost time in their studies when serving in the
king’s army. Furthermore, the university was always ready to award degrees to figures of political
eminence, or respectively their family or prot ́eg ́e (see e.g. Roy and Reinhart, 1997, p. 727).
B.4 Discussion of data coding and data quality
The previous discussion of the source material raises a few quantitative challenges that need to be
clearly addressed.
1. Especially during earlier times, matriculation was recorded infrequently, with sometimes a
one or two year lag between the actual date of admission to a college.
2. Some degrees were not associated with a specific college.
3. For Oxford, information on students’ places of origin has not been recorded for the period
1648–1660.
4. Teaching was mainly carried out by fellows, but faculty also involved other ranks such as
heads of colleges or university wide professorships.
5. For a significant share of fellows, the records do not include the year a fellowship ended.
6. Matching between the Oxford and Cambridge student registers and the ESTC produced a
number of duplicate matches that were excluded.
The rest of this section will describe these data quality issues in more detail, consider potential
bias, and describe methods used to mitigate the issues. First, figure 8 plots total student numbers
59


at Oxford and Cambridge. The lag in the recording of matriculation years can clearly be seen
in the form of spikes in matriculation years before ca. 1640. After that the quality of recordings
increased at both Oxford and Cambridge. In line with our previous discussion, the figure shows
that overall years of matriculation are more consistently recorded in the Alumni Cantabrigienses
than in the Alumni Oxonienses. In quantifying the size of the potential bias, the figure indicates 8
that lags in recording only affected a small part of the cohort and only exhibited lags of one or two
years. As the previous discussion suggested that lags in recordings were unsystematic, we expect
this to lead to a small downward bias from measurement error.
To further take precaution that delayed matriculation might not overlap with the same person’s
fellowship leading us to a regress a person on themselves, the paper adopts the strict rule that when
ever the matriculation and fellowship year overlap, the fellowship is recorded as the matriculation
year + 1. While this only applies to a few rare cases, this rule guarantees that we never regress a
person on themselves.
0 200 400 600 800 1000
1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 Year of matriculation
Size cohort at matriculation
Moving average with 5 lags and leads
(a) Size of Matriculation Cohorts at Oxford, 1580–1800
0 200 400 600 800 1000
1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 Year of matriculation
Size cohort at matriculation
Moving average with 5 lags and leads
(b) Size of Matriculation/Admission Cohorts at Cambridge, 1580–1800
Figure 8: Development of student matriculation/admission over time
Furthermore, students without a matriculation entry, but only a degree from the university are
excluded from the sample. This is a) due to the necessity to assign treatment at the college and
matriculation level. Furthermore, as we suspect a large number of them to be honorary degrees.
As these would not capture knowledge transmission processes, it is desirable to exclude them.
Additionally, teaching at the seventeenth century universities of Oxford and Cambridge was
almost exclusively carried out by fellows at individual colleges. Yet, there was also a small number
of professors who taught university wide classes — a remnant from medieval times as well as a
few newly endowed chairs. Therefore, we are in need of also assigning treatment from exposure to
professors. We continue to assign professors to the college they were attached to. This captures the
intuition that while these professors would also have taught students outside their classes, it still
appears plausible that the exposure to a professor would be strongest at their own college. In the
following, we define a university teacher as either a fellow, a head of a college (warden or president),
60


or a professor situated at a college. The main intuition behind treatment exposure in this paper
is that students would adopt ideas after getting to know a teacher through repeated interaction at
their own college.
Next, for about 54% of fellows at Oxford and 52% of fellows at Cambridge, the source material
only records the starting date of the fellowship but not the end date. To address this, the paper
imputes fellowship durations by calculating the average length of fellowships with known end dates
and using this average to impute the fellowship duration of fellows with missing end dates. The
approach is based on the intuition that fellows usually only served for a limited period of time.
One of the main motivations to leave the college was a rule that fellows were barred from marrying
(in the seventeenth century, the universities carried as much of the marks of modern universities as
of old monastic institutions). For both of the universities, fellowship durations had a mean of 11
years. The imputation introduces measurement error to the treatment variable, leading to potential
downward bias. However, appendix table 34 documents that results are robust to using a range of
different imputational values for fellowship length. Additionally, since the leaving-fellows approach
in section 5.2 is especially sensitive to the definition of fellowship lengths, appendix table 47 shows
robustness when omitting years around the leaving date.
Lastly, the process of matching students and authors from the ESTC also introduces a source of
measurement error. Basically, in matching procedures are based on a tradeoff between type I errors
(false matching two pairs) and type II errors (not matching two pairs). The concrete matching
procedure, including the rate of excluded non-unique matches, is described in section C.3.
To evaluate the size of potential bias from matching, appendix section C.4 reports Monte Carlo
simulations for type I and type II errors. Results show that even in the presence of 20% type II
errors (similar to the 11% omitted non-unique author-matches at Oxford and 8% at Cambridge
in section C.3), the downwards bias only amounts to less than 20% at the mean. Given that the
paper adopts a matching approach that minimizes type I errors at the cost of type II errors, it is
unlikely that downward bias resulting from matching will be larger than 20%.
61


B.5 The Oxford visitation: Material on visitors
Table 5: Background of Parliamentary Visitors Sent to Oxford
Name Former role at Oxford Political Role Original proposal of visitors Ministers
Edward Corbett Parliamentary preachers Long Harry Wilkinson Parliamentary preachers Edward Reynolds Parliamentary preachers Robert Harris Parliamentary preachers Francis Cheyneel Parliamentary preachers John Wilkinson Sr. Ejected by Charles II. as Head of Magdalen Hall Christopher Rogers Ejected by Charles II. as Head of New Inn Hall John Wilkinson Jr. Master of Magdalen Hall Civilians
Nathanial Brent Warden of Merton and Judge Marshall for Parliament John Mills Advocate of the New Model Army William Prynne
Country gentlemen
Sir William Cobbe Parl. comm. for Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire William Cope Parl. comm. for Oxfordshire George Greenwood Parl. comm. for Oxfordshire John Heylin Parl. comm. for Westminster Thomas Kingt Parl. comm. for Oxfordshire John Packer Parl. comm. for Berkshire William Prynne Parl. comm. for Flintshire John Pulston Parl. comm. for Flintshire William Typping Parl. comm. for Oxfordshire Additions through lobbying of the House of Lords
Gabriel Beck Parl. comm. for Oxfordshire John Cartwright Parl. comm. for Northamptonshire and Oxfordshire William Draper Parl. comm. for Oxfordshire Samuel Dunch Parl. comm. for Berkshire
Notes: The information on the parliamentary visitors is taken from Reinhart (1984, p. 308 f.). Abbreviations: Parl. Comm.: Parliamentary commissioner
62


Table 6: Background of the Committee for the Examination of Candidates for Fellowships and Scholarships Set up 5 July 1648
Name University education Former role at Oxford
New role at Oxford
Intruded heads of colleges
Joshua Hoyle Magdalen Hall, Oxford; Trinity College, Dublin (BA 1610, MA 1618, BD 1625)
— Master of University College since 1648 and Professor Divinity since 1648 Edmund Stanton Matr. at Wadham (9 June 1615), transferred to Corpus Christi (adm. 4 October 1615, BA 1620, MA 1623)
— President of Corpus Christi since 1648
Daniel Greenwood Lincoln College (matr. 1624, BA 1626, MA 1629, BD 1640)
— Principal of Brasenose College since 1648 John Wilkins Matr. at New Inn Hall, transferred to Magdalen Hall (BA 1631, MA 1634)
— Warden of Wadham College since 1648
Preachers sent by Parliament
Mr. Langley Matr. Magdalen College (1627), transferred to Pembroke College (BA 1632, MA 1635)
— One of the seven Preachers of 1646; Master of Pembroke since 1647 Henry Cornish New Inn Hall (matr. 1631, BA 1634, MA 1636-7)
— One of the seven Preachers of 1646; Canon of Christ Church since 1648 John Palmer Queen’s College (matr. 1628, BA 1628, BM 1630)
Warden of All Souls since 1648
Proctors
Robert Crosse Lincoln College (matr. 1622, BA 1625, MA 1628, BD 1637)
Fellow of Lincoln College (16271642), but left the university in 1642, joined the assembly of divines at Westminster
Regius professor of Divinity 1648
Ralph Button Exeter College (matr. 1631, BA 1633), transferred to Merton College (1640)
Fellow of Merton College (16331642), but left the university in 1642 and went to Gresham
Canon of Christ Church 1648, junior proctor since 1648
Remaining loyal fellows
Robert Hancocke Exeter College (matr. 1640) Fellow of Exeter College (16481657)
Delegate of the visitors
Thankfull Owen Exeter College (matr. 1636, BA 1639-40), transferred to Lincoln College in 1642 (MA 1646)
Fellow of Lincoln College (since 1642)
Delegate of the visitors
Edward Copley Exeter College (matr. 1631, BA 1632), transferred to Merton College (MA 1639-40)
Fellow of Merton College (since 1633)
Delegate of the visitors
Anthony Clifford Gloucester Hall (matr. 1634, BA 1637, MA 1640)
Fellow of Exeter College (16411662)
Delegate of the visitors since 1647
Notes: The information on the committee is taken from (Burrows, 1881, p. 141) and (Reinhart, 1984, p. 407). Full names, degrees, and biographical information have been supplemented by drawing on the Dictionary of National Biography and Foster’s Alumni Oxenienses. Degrees refer to the period before 1648 and exclude any degrees awarded by the visitors themselves.
63


Table 7: Overview of Intruded and Reinstituted “Royal Society” Fellows, 1647–50 and 1660
Name College before visitation Start End College during interreg
num
Start End College after restoration Start End
Intruded Fellows
Morley; George (1597 - 1684) Wadham College; Ox
ford
1648 1659
Wallis; John (1616 - 1703) Queen’s College; Cam
bridge
1644 1645 Exeter College; Oxford 1649 1660 Exeter College; Oxford 1660 1703
Pope; Walter (c 1627 - 1714) Wadham College; Ox
ford
1651 1662
Wood; Robert (? 1621 - 1685) Lincoln College, Oxford 1650 1659
Petty; Sir; William (1623 - 1687) Brasenose College; Ox
ford
1648 1652
Pett; Sir; Peter (? 1630 - 1699) All Souls; Oxford 1649 1650
Harley; Thomas (- c 1685) All Souls; Oxford 1648 1659
Croke; Sir; George (- 1680) All Souls; Oxford 1648 1659
Submitted to Visitors
Bathurst; Ralph (1620 - 1704) Christ Church; Oxford 1640 - Christ Church; Oxford - 1660 Trinity Oxford (Presi
dent)
1660 1704
Stayed at Oxford after Visitations
Willis; Thomas (1621 - 1675) Christ Church; Oxford B.Med.
1646
pratised at Oxford; kept
close connections to
Christ Church
1648 1660 Christ Church; Oxford
(Sedleyan Professor)
1660 1675
Expelled by Vistors and Reinsti
tuted Fellows
Morley; George (1597 - 1684) Christ Church; Oxford 1622 1648 Christ Church; Oxford 1660 1660
Birkenhead; John (1616 - 1679) All Souls; Oxford 1639 1648 All Souls; Oxford 1660 1661
Dolben; John (1625 - 1686) Christ Church; Oxford 1647 1648 Christ Church; Oxford 1660 1660
Expelled by Visitors and not Rein
stituted in 1660
Clerke; Henry (c 1622 - 1687) Magdalen; Oxford 1642 1648
Newly Instituted in 1660
Mayow; John (1640 - 1679) All Souls; Oxford 1660 1678
The fellows are compiled drawing on the Raymond and Beverly Sackler Archive Resource Project and Reinhart (1984).
Fellowship dates are coded consistently with the dataset with starting dates are only measured after a fellow’s M.A.
64


B.6 Summary statistics for the Alumni Oxonienses and Alumni Cantabrigienses
Table 8: Descriptive Statistics of Oxford students and faculty, 1580–1720
Mean Std.Dev. Sum Obs Student graduates with B.A. 0.5377 0.4986 20146 37465 Student graduates with M.A. 0.3193 0.4662 11961 37465 Student graduates with doctoral degree 0.0427 0.2023 1601 37465 fellow 0.0538 0.2255 2014 37465 scholar 0.0027 0.0516 100 37465 armiger 0.1307 0.3371 4275 32710 baronet 0.0034 0.0584 112 32710 clerici 0.1020 0.3027 3338 32710 comitis 0.0003 0.0175 10 32710 doctoris 0.0079 0.0888 260 32710 episcopi 0.0001 0.0096 3 32710 eques auratus 0.0061 0.0778 199 32710 equitis 0.0125 0.1113 410 32710 gentilis 0.3039 0.4600 9942 32710 militis fil 0.0056 0.0748 184 32710 militis 0.0081 0.0895 264 32710 pauper puer 0.0494 0.2168 1617 32710 pauper 0.0160 0.1256 524 32710 plebeii 0.3297 0.4701 10783 32710 servus 0.0241 0.1534 789 32710 Cohort size 23.5826 15.6002 883521 37465 Number student publications 0.3339 3.7371 12511 37465 Number teachers 9.7927 9.0555 366885 37465 Number teacher publications 22.3969 36.3513 839100 37465 Observations 37465
65


Table 9: Publication statistics for publishing Oxford students and faculty, 1620–1720
Mean Std.Dev. Min Max Obs Share of each topic in student publications 0.0300 0.1405 0 1 42625 No. student publications 7.9491 16.3708 1 311 42625 Share ML predicted in student publications 0.4204 0.3686 0 1 42625 Student graduates with B.A. 0.6938 0.4609 0 1 42625 Student graduates with M.A. 0.5985 0.4902 0 1 42625 Share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0236 0.0953 0 1 42625 No. teacher publications at college 26.8851 40.4879 0 218 42625 No. teachers at college 10.7949 9.1566 0 59 42625 Cohort size at college 23.0036 15.4439 1 110 42625 Observations 42625
Table 10: Publication statistics for the fields of the Scientific Revolution for publishing Oxford students and faculty, 1620–1720
Mean Std.Dev. Min Max Obs Share of each topic in student publications 0.0070 0.0716 0 1 12375 No. student publications 7.9491 16.3712 1 311 12375 Share ML predicted in student publications 0.4204 0.3686 0 1 12375 Student graduates with B.A. 0.6938 0.4609 0 1 12375 Student graduates with M.A. 0.5985 0.4902 0 1 12375 Share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0068 0.0448 0 1 12375 Teacher innovation index 0.0531 0.2257 0 1 12375 No. teacher publications at college 26.8851 40.4891 0 218 12375 No. teachers at college 10.7949 9.1569 0 59 12375 Cohort size at college 23.0036 15.4443 1 110 12375 Observations 12375
Table 11: Descriptive Statistics of Cambridge students, 1580–1740
Mean Std.Dev. Sum Obs ba 0.5618 0.4962 22276 39653 ma 0.3628 0.4808 14386 39653 fellow 0.0989 0.2985 3921 39653 scholar 0.0000 0.0000 0 39653 fellow commoner 0.1021 0.3028 3844 37641 pensioner 0.4766 0.4995 17938 37641 sizar 0.4213 0.4938 15859 37641 Cohort size 32.2511 18.7545 1278853 39653 Number student publications 0.3121 3.3532 12377 39653 Number teachers 26.8912 18.8449 1066318 39653 Number teacher publications 37.9042 42.2314 1503016 39653 Observations 39653
66


Table 12: Publication statistics for publishing Cambridge students and faculty, 1620–1720
Mean Std.Dev. Min Max Obs Share of each topic in student publications 0.0302 0.1438 0 1 47552 No. student publications 7.3223 15.0851 1 217 47552 Share ML predicted in student publications 0.4035 0.3810 0 1 47552 Student graduates with B.A. 0.7631 0.4252 0 1 47552 Student graduates with M.A. 0.6218 0.4849 0 1 47552 Share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0281 0.1013 0 1 47552 No. teacher publications at college 44.5606 44.6073 0 186 47552 No. teachers at college 29.6696 20.1699 0 77 47552 Cohort size at college 30.5639 18.9679 3 89 47552 Observations 47552
Table 13: Publication statistics for the fields of the Scientific Revolution for publishing Cambridge students and faculty, 1620–1720
Mean Std.Dev. Min Max Obs Share of each topic in student publications 0.0057 0.0634 0 1 13374 No. student publications 7.3223 15.0855 1 217 13374 Share ML predicted in student publications 0.4035 0.3810 0 1 13374 Student graduates with B.A. 0.7631 0.4252 0 1 13374 Student graduates with M.A. 0.6218 0.4850 0 1 13374 Share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0058 0.0308 0 1 13374 Teacher innovation index 0.1091 0.3119 0 1 13374 No. teacher publications at college 44.5606 44.6085 0 186 13374 No. teachers at college 29.6696 20.1705 0 77 13374 Cohort size at college 30.5639 18.9684 3 89 13374 Observations 13374
67


B.7 Status Abbreviations and Degree Titles
Table 14: Overview of status abbreviations — as translated by the Author
Classification in Project
Abbreviation in Original
Full Title Translation
Commoner pauper Pauper Poor p.p. Pauper puer
Poor boy
serv. Servus Servitor (as additional duty performed at the college) pleb. Plebeii Commoner Academic doctoris Doctoris Doctor title Clergy cler. clerici Clerical episcopi. Episcopi Bishop Nobility gent. Gentilis Gentleman (lower nobility)
militis Militis Military (from miles) arm. Armiger Esquire (literally arms-bearer, but for the register strictly limited to esquire — see Hehir (1968, p.14)) eq. equitis Knight (from eques) eq. aur. Eques auratus
Knight Bachelor (literally golden knight) baronet Baronet Baronet comitis Comitis Earl Further extensions
fil. filius Son of
nat. min. natu minimum
The youngest
nat. max. natu maximum
The oldest
68


Table 15: Coding Overview for Degree Titles
General Classification in Project
Sub-classification in Project
Abbreviation in Original
Full Degree Name
Bachelor’s Degree B.A. Bachelor of Arts Clerical Degree B.D. Bachelor of Divinity Medical Degree B.M. Bachelor of Medicine Medical Degree B.Med. Bachelor of Medicine Law Degree B.C.L. Bachelor of Civil Law Law Degree LL.B Bachelor of Law Master’s Degree M.A. Master of Arts Doctoral Degree Clerical Degree D.D. Doctor of Divinity Law Degree D.C.L. Doctor of Civil Law Law Degree L.L.D. Doctor of Law Medical Degree M.D. Doctor of Medicine Medical Degree D.Med. Doctor of Medicine
69


B.8 The spatial distribution of students’ place of origin by college
70


(i) All Soul’s College (ii) Balliol College (iii) Brasenose College
(iv) Christ Church (v) Corpus Christi College (vi) Exeter College
(vii) Harris Manchester College
(viii) Hertford College (ix) Jesus College
(x) Lincoln College (xi) Magdalen College (xii) Mansfield College
Figure 9: Students’ origins from each college (shares per hundred).
71


(xiii) Merton College (xiv) New College (xv) Oriel College
(xvi) Pembroke College (xvii) The Queen’s College (xviii) St Edmund Hall
(xix) St John’s College (xx) Trinity College (xxi) University College
(xxii) Wadham College (xxiii) Worcester College (xxiv) Broadgates Hall
72


(xxv) Hart Hall (xxvi) New Inn Hall (xxvii) St Alban Hall
(xxviii) St Mary Hall (xxix) Magdalen Hall
73


C Data
C.1 ESTC titles
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 Characters
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
Count
Title length in characters
(a) Length in characters
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 Characters
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
Count
Title length in characters
(b) Length in characters (less than 1500)
0 200 400 600 800 1000 Words
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
Count
Title length in words
(c) Length in words
0 50 100 150 200 250 Words
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
Count
Title length in words
(d) Length in words (less than 250)
Figure 10: Histogram for ESTC text length
The following lists a few examples illustrating the amount of information available from seven
teenth and eighteenth century titles. These examples of titles are not meant to be representative
in content, but to illustrate the varying degree of information found in seventeenth and eighteenth
century titles, a format that is usually unknown to the modern reader. Figure 10 shows histogram
plots for title length in either character or word counts.53
Dioptrica nova. A treatise of dioptricks, in two parts. Wherein the various effects
and appearances of spherick glasses, both convex and concave, single and combined, in
telescopes and microscopes, together with their usefulness in many concerns of humane
life, are explained.
or
Moor’s arithmetick. In tvvo books. The first treating of the vulgar arithmetick in all
its parts, with several new inventions to ease the memory, by Nepairs rods, logarithms,
decimals, &c. fitted for the use of all persons. The second of arithmetick in species
53The statistics apply to the translated titles that are cleaned for near duplicates
74


or algebra, whereby all difficult questions receive their analytical laws and resolutions,
made very plain and easie for the use of scholars and the more curious. To which are
added two treatises: 1. A new contemplation geometrical upon the oval figure called
the ellipsis. 2. The two first books of Mydorgius his conical sections analized by that
reverend divine Mr. W. Oughtred, Englished and completed with cuts. By Jonas Moore,
Professor of the Mathematicks. (Jonas Moore, 1660)
or
Arithmetick made easie for the use and benefit of trades-men. Wherein the Nature and
Use of Fractions, both Vulgar and Decimal, are Taught by a New and Exact Method.
Also The Mensuration of Solids and Superficies. The twelfth edition, corrected and
amended. By J. Ayres, late Writing-Master in St. Paul’s Church-Yard, London. To
which is added, A short and easy method; after which Shop-Keepers may State, Post,
and Balance their Books of accompts. By Charles Snell, Writing-Master, and Accomp
tant, in Foster-Lane, London. (John Ayres, 1714)
or
The complete wall-tree pruner; or Principles of Pruning and Training all sorts of Wall
Fruit Trees, and Espaliers, In the most Improved Degree of Perfection and Fruitfulness;
Systematically Explained by a New Scientific Plan, never before attempted. Compre
hending The Completest Practical Directions for performing all the different Operations
of Pruning and Training all Sorts of Wall Trees and Espaliers, in the most successful
Manner, according to their different Modes of Bearing, and in their several Stages of
Growth, from the earliest State of Training to their utmost Maturity, and latest Du
ration, whereby to have them always Prosperous, Beautiful, and abundantly Fruitful.
Consisting of Common Wall Trees, Half Standard Wall Trees, High Standard Wall Trees,
Espalier Trees, &c. comprehensively explaining the respective Orders of Training, dif
ferent Modes of Bearing, several Sorts of Bearers, various Kinds of Branches and Shoots,
Fruit Buds, Fruit Spurs, and all other Parts of the Trees in their different Ways and
Habits of Growth, describing accordingly the peculiar and most effectual Methods of
Pruning, both for occasional and general Practice. With full Explanations of the whole
Process and true Principles of First Pruning and Training, General Pruning, Summer
Pruning, and Winter Pruning. The Whole being Systematically displayed, according to
an eligible New Plan, is peculiarly calculated to render all the different Operations of
Pruning easily comprehended, and successfully practised, that every one may prune his
Wall Trees, &c. with the utmost Facility, and Certainty of having them in the highest
State of Perfection, and Bearing; the Fruit large, fair, and of superior Quality. Also,
A Complete Register of all the different Species and respective Varieties of the best
Fruits, with their Times of ripening, &c. By John Abercrombie, (oxford Street (319.)
75


London.) Author of Every Man His Own Gardener, The British Fruit Gardener, and
other Works no Gardening. (John Abercrombie, 1783)
or
Osteographia elephantina: or, a full and exact description of all the bones of an elephant,
which died near Dundee, April the 27th. 1706. with their several dimensions. To
which are premis’d, 1. An Historical Account of the Natural Endowments, and several
wonderful Performances of Elephants; with the manner of Taking and Taming them.
2. A short Anatomical Account of their Parts. And added, 1. An exact Account
of the Weight of all the Bones of this Elephant. 2. The Method us’d in preparing
and Mounting the Skeleton. 3. Four large Copper Plates, wherein are represented the
Figures of the Stuff’d Skin, and prepared Skeleton, as they now stand in the Publick
Hall of Rarities at Dundee; with the separated Bones in several Views and other Parts
of this Elephant.
76


C.2 Cleaning the ESTC titles
The raw data poses several challenges:
1. Publication titles are written in different languages (especially in Latin)
2. There is a significant number of near duplicates with varying title length
3. Sometimes, editions and publishers are included in the title itself
To deal with foreign languages, this paper adopts an approach where all titles are first translated
to the same language to be comparable. It first identifies foreign languages using Facebook’s fasttext
package. It then uses the Google Translator API for translating titles. This returns high-quality
translations that should be practically indistinguishable from titles of works that were already
translated back in the past (see next paragraph on near duplicates).
The significant number of near duplicates seems to stem from several versions of the book that
have been entered into the database. However, some entries seem to have only included parts of
the title, possibly from different editions with different covers, so that the titles were not spotted
as duplicates. A further challenges arises from different editions with slight changes in the title,
e.g. from translations or different editions:
“A panegyric on our late sovereign lady Mary Queen of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, of glorious and immortal memory. Who died at Kensington, on the 28th. of
December, 1694. By James Abbadie, D.D. minister of the Savoy” (Abbadie, Jacques,
1654-1727)
and
“Panegyric of Mary Queen of England, Scotland, France, &amp; Ireland, of glorious
&amp; immortal memory. Decedie in Kensington on December 28, 1694. By J. Abbadie
D. en T. Minister of Savoy” (Abbadie, Jacques, 1654-1727)
automatically translated from:
“Panegyrique de Marie reine d’Angleterre, d’Ecosse, de France , & d’irlande, de glorieuse
& immortelle memoire. Decedie a` Kensington le 28. Decembre 1694. Par J. Abbadie
D. en T. Ministre de la Savoye” (Abbadie, Jacques, 1654-1727)
Here, the first title is a contemporary translation from the original French work - taking a small
liberties with the original work (adding the late sovereign). Hence, translations give rise to very
similar, but slightly different titles. Furthermore, the automatic translation came to a very similar,
but slightly different translation.
Thus, an algorithm spotting near duplicates should be able to correctly identify duplicates where
the text of both titles almost literally overlaps, however with one of the titles having an attachment
of additional text. It should also be able to ignore small differences in the texts arising from
77


translations or different editions. Furthermore, it should not capture semantically similar titles,
but titles that have a high word-by-word similarity.54 As a solution to this task, the paper uses
Jaccard distances on word-vector representations of titles.55 Jaccard distance is the complement
to Jaccard similarity measuring the size of the intersection of two sets divided by the size of their
unions, J (A, B) = A∩B
A∪B . Jaccard distances are calculated for the matrices of each author’s word
vector representation of their titles. In the case that an author name does not exist, the paper
uses either the corporation name or general title classifier if known. For all titles without any
information on origin, titles are grouped by the first 10 letters of their titles. The Jaccard distances
are calculated for pre-cleaned titles (already removing parts of the title-string that do not belong
to the title, e.g. information on the publisher). All titles below a threshold distance of 0.5 are
identified as near duplicates. Then for each list of similar titles, the algorithm only keeps the title
that was published first. Altogether, the algorithm removes 183,978 near duplicates, reducing the
number of distinct titles to 285,985.
Finally, titles are cleaned by removing information that is not related to its content using regular
expressions. This includes e.g. the name of the publisher or editor, information on the number
of volumes, or the number of the current edition. It also removes information on months and
weekdays, as well as information on attached copper-plates.
54We would expect e.g. authors to publish multiple works on similar topics. These should still be listed as distinct titles. 55Another possible candidate for measuring near duplicates are Euclidean distances between titles. However after practical experimentation with different titles, Jaccard distances seem to outperform Euclidean distance measures with respect to minimizing false positive duplicates.
78


C.3 Matching students and fellows to publishing records
This section describes matching titles from the ESTC catalogue to the catalogue of university
students. Matching between the entries of the ESTC catalogue and the student and fellow entries
from the Alumni Oxenienses (Foster, 1891) and the Alumni Cantabrigienses (Venn and Litt, 1952)
faces a number of challenges. First, seventeenth and early eighteenth century spelling practices were
not yet standardized. Second, years of death are only given for a small subset of students within
the Alumni Oxenienses and Alumni Cantabrigienses. Furthermore, contemporary information on
years of deaths are often inaccurate within a small range (explained in detail below). In case a year
of death was not recorded, the paper has to rely on years of wills or years of birth instead. Here,
years of wills are an imperfect proxy for years of death. Additionally, years of birth are often less
precisely recorded than years of death. Finally, whenever years of birth were not included in the
Alumni Oxenienses and Alumni Cantabrigienses, years of birth had to be extrapolated from the
year of matriculation creating a further source of inaccuracy.
To address these challenges, the paper uses a combination of phonetic matching and matching
on a range of [+1, −1] years of death, whenever years of death are given. Whenever years of death
are not known, the paper matches on a range of [+3, −3] years of wills and if wills are not recorded
on a range of [+3, −3] years of birth. Overall, the matching approach is similar to the Ambramitzky,
Boustan, and Eriksson (ABE) Algorithm (Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson, 2012; Abramitzky
et al., 2021). Yet, in contrast to the ABE method, the paper does not match on the closest match
with the [3-3] year range, but considers these entries as duplicates. By ignoring closest matches
within the [-3,3] year range, the paper minimizes type I errors at the cost of type II errors. The
section continues by first addressing challenges in spelling and date accuracy in detail. It then
describes the matching strategy and presents statistics for matching rates.
First, seventeenth century spellings of names were not yet standardized and it is common to find
contemporary sources referring to the same person with different spellings. Sometimes, people even
changed the spelling of their own name over time. For example, Edmond Halley used the spelling
of “Edmond” and “Edmund” interchangeably in both his letters and publications (Hughes and
Green, 2007). Hence, the paper adopts a phonetic matching procedure that reduces the spelling of
names to their phonetic sounds. It uses the New York State Identification and Intelligence System
(NYSIIS) phonetic code known to combine high accuracy with a low number of false positives
(Snae, 2007). It also seems to successfully capture some basic Latinizations of names. For example,
it matches “Silius Titus” in the ESTC catalogue with “Silas Titus” from the ESTC catalogue.56
Second, any matching of seventeenth and eighteenth century biographical information must
take account of the inaccuracy of lifetime dates during this age. In principle, years of death are
more reliable than years of birth for seventeenth and eighteenth century records. For example,
Cummins (2017) shows that for the European high nobility, years of death did not show significant
56Manually comparing the entry for “Silius Titus” in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography provides the same year of matriculation and name of College as the Oxford register. Hence, it appears that the Oxford entry “Titus, Silas, s. Silas, of Bushey, Herts, gent. Christ Church, matric. 16 March, 1637-8, aged 15” is identical to “Titus, Silius, 1623?-1704”, the author of Killing no Murder.
79


0
3000
6000
9000
0 10 20 30 Age at matriculation
Student count
(a) University of Oxford
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0 10 20 30 Age at matriculation
Student count
(b) University of Cambridge
Figure 11: Distribution of students’ age at matriculation
patterns of age heaping. However, 10–20% of recorded birth years showed patterns of age heaping
in the seventeenth century. The number is likely to be higher for university students from common
backgrounds. Yet, even the accuracy of historical death years, especially for the non-nobility, should
not be taken for granted. A further issue are conversions between the Julian and Gregorian calendar
that was only adopted in England in 1752. Besides the general difference between the Gregorian
and Julian calender of a 10–11 days, the Julian calender started the new year on the 25th of March,
thus creating a difference of about 1/4 of a year. For lifetime entries in the ESTC it is impossible to
know whether lifetime dates are taken at Julian face value or converted to the Gregorian calender
(even in the case of the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography this is not always clear). Hence,
any successful matching of seventeenth and eighteenth century records needs to allow for a certain
degree of fuzziness in the recording of dates.
Given this background on the accuracy of historical dates, years of death within a range of
[+1, −1] years are used for matching. However, the university registers only contain years of death
for about 15% of all students making it necessary to match on birth years for the rest of the sample
For ca. 40% of all students, the age of matriculation is recorded. From this we can calculate the
year of birth. For the rest of students, the age at matriculation is not known. Yet, it is possible to
predict the year of birth based on the year of matriculation (or award of B.A./M.A.) and students’
median age at matriculation.
Figure 11 shows the age distribution of students at the time of matriculation. The median age
at matriculation was 17, with the 10th and 90th percentiles between 15 and 19. Hence, based on the
assumption that the non-recorded age at matriculation followed a similar distribution, a student’s
year of birth can be extrapolated based on a student’s year of matriculation minus medium age
17. For students without information on their year of matriculation, the year of the award of
either their bachelor’s or master’s degree is used with the additional knowledge that based on the
university’s statutes, a bachelor’s degree took four and a master’s degree two years. Figure 12
shows that calculating the differences between known years of birth and extrapolated age from
80


0
3000
6000
9000
−10 −5 0 5 10 Distribution of predicted minus actual age
Student count
(a) University of Oxford
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
−10 −5 0 5 10 Distribution of predicted minus actual age
Student count
(b) University of Cambridge
Figure 12: Distribution of prediction error between predicted and actual age at matriculation for students with recorded age mat matriculation
students’ year of matriculation, bachelor’s degree, and master’s degree is normally centred around
0. Hence, at least for students with information on their age at matriculation, extrapolating years
of birth appears unbiased. Furthermore, it can be seen that the distribution of extrapolated minus
actual years of death’s 5 percentile lies at -3 and its 5th percentile at 3, an inaccuracy that should
be accounted for when matching. Hence, if years of death are not known the paper matches on
birth intervals of [+3, −3].
Table 16: Matching statistics for authors, Oxford
Match on Matched authors Unique matches Dropped dupl. matches % Dupl. of all matches 1 Step 1: Year of death 2713 2664 49 0.02 2 Step 2: Year of will 23 23 0 0.00 3 Step 3: Year of birth 1766 1338 428 0.24 4 Overall 4502 4025 477 0.11
Table 17: Matching statistics for authors, Cambridge
Match on Matched authors Unique matches Dropped dupl. matches % Dupl. of all matches 1 Step 1: Year of death 2891 2778 113 0.04 2 Step 2: Year of will 111 111 0 0.00 3 Step 3: Year of birth 1019 807 212 0.21 4 Overall 4021 3696 325 0.08
Overall, 204,700 entries from the ESTC with information on the author’s name and lifetime
dates are matched against 144,748 students with information on either year of birth, death or the
year of their matriculation or further degrees.57 This yields an overall of 120,225 title matches.
However, a last issue arises from duplicate matches: Being only able to match on names and
57It should be noted that not all names on authorship from the ESTC might be meaningful. Sometimes first names are not fully included. Furthermore, pseudynoms (e.g. “Philosophus” or “Isaac Bickerstaff”, one of Jonathan Swift’s pseudonyms) might further obscure authorships.
81


Table 18: Matching statistics for titles, Oxford
Match on Matched titles Unique matches Dropped dupl matches % Dupl. of all matches 1 Step 1: Year of death 20069 18900 1169 0.06 2 Step 2: Year of will 62 62 0 0.00 3 Step 3: Year of birth 13634 7757 5877 0.43 4 Overall 33765 26719 7046 0.21
Table 19: Matching statistics for titles, Cambridge
Match on Matched titles Unique matches Dropped dupl. matches % Dupl. of all matches 1 Step 1: Year of death 18121 16796 1325 0.07 2 Step 2: Year of will 473 473 0 0.00 3 Step 3: Year of birth 8445 5160 3285 0.39 4 Overall 27039 22429 4610 0.17
lifetime dates, can lead to the presence of duplicate entries for common entries. Table 16–19) show
the number of total and unique matches as well duplicate matches for students from Oxford and
Cambridge. As would be expected, matching on the greater range of [+3, −3] for years of birth
than [+1, −1] for years of death creates more duplicate matches. Overall, 17.32% of all matches are
duplicate matches that are dropped from the matching sample.58 This yields an overall number of
94,378 unique title matches for 3808 students from Oxford and 3464 students from Cambridge.59
Overall, at least 31% of all ESTC titles from 1600 to 1720 that were published under some personal
name (as opposed to institutional publications, e.g. from Parliament or other institutional bodies)
were written by a university graduate.
C.4 Monte Carlo Simulation of matching errors
To assess the robustness of the estimated teacher-student effects under type I and II matching
errors, this section introduces a Monte Carlo simulation on a similar data structure as employed in
the paper. The synthetic panel data comprises 120 matriculation years across 28 colleges. There
fore, it is comparable to the structure of the University of Oxford. For the ease of interpretation
of the Monte Carlo results, the synthetic panel does not include an additional topic dimension.
Each college is assigned sequential teacher presence of 11 years. Teacher publication shares in the
Scientific Revolution are generated such that 75% of teachers have a size of zero and 25% are drawn
from a normal distribution. The teacher distributions are simulated as:
pit = di · |Zi|, Zi ∼ N (0.2, 0.05). (10)
with
di =



1, with probability 0.25,
0, with probability 0.75,
(11)
58Given that the ESRC does not contain additional information on authorship, there is little room for exploiting additional information to decrease the rate of duplicate matches. 59Note that these numbers do refer to raw ESTC titles and not the ones cleaned from duplicates.
82


The student outcomes are assigned as:
yjt = 0.1pjt + εjt, εjt ∼ N (0, 0.025) (12)
Measurement error is introduced via two mechanisms:
1. Type I errors: In each replication, 5%, 10%, or 20% of teachers are randomly re-assigned a
teacher size drawn from the overall teacher distribution.
2. Type II errors: The same percentages of teachers are randomly dropped from the sample (i.e.
their publication share is set to zero).
0
50
100
150
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 r(match5)
Type I error 5%
(a) Type I error 5%
0
20
40
60
80
100
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 r(match10)
Type I error 10%
(b) Type I error 10%
0
20
40
60
80
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 r(match20)
Type I error 20%
(c) Type I error 20%
0
100
200
300
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 r(drop5)
Type II error 5%
(d) Type II error 5%
0
50
100
150
200
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 r(drop10)
Type II error 10%
(e) Type II error 10%
0
50
100
150
Density
0 .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1 .11 .12 r(drop20)
Type II error 20%
(f) Type II error 20%
Figure 13: Distributions of the estimated coefficient on teacher size under (a–c) matching error
and (d–f) dropping error scenarios. Notes: The horizontal line in each subfigure indicates the baseline coeffi
cient.
In 10,000 Monte Carlo replications, the paper estimates the effect of teacher size on y:
yjt = 0.1βpjt + ζj + αt + εjt (13)
where pit denotes teacher shares at college j and matriculation year t. The model further includes
college and time fixed effect j and t.
Figure 13 shows the distributions of the estimated coefficients. Panels (a)–(c) present the
distribution of coefficients for 5%, 10%, and 20% type I errors, respectively; panels (d)–(f) show
the distributions for type II errors. The horizontal line in each figure indicates the baseline (true)
coefficient.
We see that in the presence of up to 10% type II errors, the downwards bias only amounts to
ca. 11% at the mean. Even in the presence of up to 20% type II errors, the downwards bias only
83


amounts to ca. 19.7% at the mean. Matching results from section C.3, show that we have 11%
of duplicate (omitted) author-matches at Oxford and 8% duplicate author-matches (omitted) at
Cambridge. Given that the paper adopts a matching approach that minimizes type I errors at the
cost of type II errors, it is unlikely that, on average, downward bias resulting from matching will
be larger than 20%.
C.5 Classification – Machine Learning
Transformer models are foundation models (Vaswani et al., 2017; Bommasani et al., 2021) trained
on very large corpora of text that cover a large part of human knowledge, e.g. including Wikipedia
and Google Books. Using pre-trained foundation models offers a natural representation of the
meaning embedded in words and sentences. In contrast to word-embedding models that translate
the meaning of individual words into a multi-dimensional vector representation, transformer models
use a self-attention mechanism to capture the meaning of words based on their context in a textual
environment. As in word-embedding models, each input is assigned as an embedding that is stored
in a 512 × 768 dimensional matrix. However, in contrast to word-embedding models, the inputs
are longer periods of text that can be translated into text-specific embeddings. Transformer based
models have set the standard for the current state of natural language models and, as e.g. in the
case of GPT-3 and GPT-4, often approach near-human capabilities of text processing.
Before training a transformer model on the ESTC titles, the data on the titles had to be
processed in order to make them comparable. In a first step, the text data had to be made
comparable across different languages. For this, the language of all titles were identified using the
fasttext library (see Bojanowski et al., 2017) and non-English titles translated using the Google
Translate API. Appendix figure 14 shows the composition of all titles in foreign languages. It can
be seen that Latin titles prevailed, with French coming into more common use during the second
half of the eighteenth century. In a second step, the vary granular subject classes assigned by the
British Library (with about 50,000 different classes)60 had to be turned into higher-order classes.
For this, each of the ∼ 50, 000 classes were hand-assigned to 47 higher-order classes. The list of the
47 higher-order classes was designed to capture scientific fields such as mathematics, astronomy,
applied physics, biology, or chemistry. Appendix table 20 lists all topic names and provides a short
description of each topic.
Next, the higher-order classifications were used to train a transformer model that was then
used to predict classes for the full dataset. The paper uses a DistilBERT transformer model
that provides a good compromise between accuracy and model size. The model uses a standard
set of hyperparameters with a learning rate of 0.005, 3 epochs, and an effective batch size of
32.61 For testing the model, it is first trained on 60,000 observations of titles with higher-order
classes. It is then used to predict a training dataset with 47,650 observations with known subject
classes. The predicted classes are then compared to the true classes. Overall, the model has a
60The number refers to all titles before cleaning for duplicates. 61To save GPU memory, the model uses a batch size of 8 and 3 gradient accumulation steps.
84


Matthews correlation index of 0.66. Furthermore, table C.6 shows that the model is successful in
predicting all kinds of classes, even those that are based on context-sensitive distinctions such such
as Sermons, Catholic, or Sects as contrasted to Religion or Moral tales. Figure 15 presents the
confusion matrix for the DistilBERT model. Larger spillovers mostly occur within related fields
such as Administrative and Legal or Stories and Supernatural, but not between distinct fields such
as Astronomy and Chemistry. Given the successful evaluation of the training dataset, the full
DistilBERT model is then trained on all 75,856 titles with manually assigned higher-order subject
classes.
0 100 200 300
Number of publications in a given language
1600 1620 1640 1660 1680 1700 1720 1740 1760 1780 1800
Greek German Dutch Italian Welsh French Latin
Figure 14: ESTC titles published in foreign languages over time
85


Table 20: Text classification based on ESTC subjects
Category Description
Scientific Revolution
Almanacs All almanacs and calendars
Astronomy The physics of the heavens
Applied physics Mechanical philosophy that is not part of astronomy, e.g.
optics, heat, and mechanical forces.
Biology Natural histories including the study of plants and ani
mals
Chemistry Systematic study of the elements, minerals, metals, etc.
Geography Geography, Cartography, Geology
Scientific Instruments All scientific instruments (including nautrical instru
ments)
Mathematics All mathematical treatments
Medicine Medical studies, incl. anatomy, and surgery
Occult studies
Alchemy Occult studies, purification of materials
Astrology The study of the heavens in relation to signs, omens, and
prophecies
Supernatural All descriptions of magical events, wonders, and ghosts
Prophecies Prophecies of future events
Higher education
Philosophy Philosophical treatises (excludes political philosophy)
Political Philosophy All philosophical treatises on political institutions
Political economy Political economcy, society wide study of improving agri
culture, manufactures, or trade, does not include admin
istrative reasonings on the economy, e.g. famines or other
scarcities62
Classical Education Latin, Greek, ancient mythology, drama and poetry
Pedagogy Pedagogical works on education
Logic and rhetoric Logic and rhetoric as classical categories of education
University matters University administration and politics
Languages Foreign languages as well as English (excluding Latin and
Greek learning, see classical education)
Business, trade, and innovation
Useful techniques in agriculture Technical instructions agriculture
Useful techniques in trades Technical instructions in artisanship, trade, or manufac
turing
Encyclopedias and dictionaries Systematic collections of knowledge on a given topic, usu
ally with lists and explanations of terms or concepts
Navigation Publications on navigation, incl. finding latitude and
longitude at sea and nautical instruments
Business Business endeavours, communication, and advertising
Printing and book trades Anything related to printing and publishing
62A note of warning: By placing a focus on the study of the economy independent of the administrative proceedings of the state, this category might be ill-suited to fully capture early mercantilist ideas as well as some early physiocratic ideas.
86


Architecture Architectural works
Public sphere
Stories and public discourse Descriptions and tales of any kind of notable event or per
sonal experience, pamphlets, periodicals, and discussion
of politics
Moral tales Moral advise often linked to stories with a moral core
Biographies Biographical description of the life of noteworthy indi
viduals
History State history
Curiosities and wonders Strange, phenomena, and sightings
Antiquities and archaeology Antique collections, archaeological findings
Amusements Games, food, and festivities
Travel descriptions Descriptions of foreign (or national) travel
Societies All kind material (statutes, transactions) on all societies
except for economic societies
Economic societies All kind material (statutes, transactions) on economic
societies
Art
Fine arts Visual arts, painting
Drama Drama, excluding classical drama (see classical educa
tion) as well as prosaic fiction
Poetry Poetry and songs
Music Music and music theory
Religion
Religion All religious topics
Religion – Sermons Sermons (often relating other topics to religious themes)
Religion – Catholicism All works on Catholicism
Religion – Judaism All works on Judaism
Religion – Dissenters All works on dissenters (Quakers, Baptists, Methodists
etc.)
Church administration Administration of the worldly body of the church
Public administration
Administrative Administration and politics, proceedings of the House of
Commons and local administrative bodies
Legal Legal questions
Military Management of the military and navy, military strategy
and practises
State affairs Diplomacy, Royal privileges, Treaties, and Peace negoti
ations
Wars Reports on military campaigns, battles, and wars
Colonial exploration Overseas expeditions, including description of natives,
and descriptions of the slave trade
Subject classes are constructed as classifiers for the more than 50,000 subject classes from the ESTC
subject index classification.
87


C.6 Classification – Evaluative statistics
precision recall f1-score support Class no. Class name
0.800000 0.800000 0.700000 12369.000000 0 Administrative
0.100000 0.100000 0.100000 32.000000 1 Alchemy
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 647.000000 2 Almanacs
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 538.000000 3 Amusements
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 134.000000 4 Antiquities
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 245.000000 5 Applied physics
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 135.000000 6 Architecture
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 338.000000 7 Art
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 366.000000 8 Astrology
0.500000 0.500000 0.600000 308.000000 9 Astronomy
0.300000 0.300000 0.400000 207.000000 10 Biography
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 387.000000 11 Biology
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 121.000000 12 Chemistry
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 1268.000000 13 Church administration
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 1089.000000 14 Classical education
0.300000 0.300000 0.300000 123.000000 15 Curiosities and wonders
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 3698.000000 16 Drama
0.000000 0.000000 0.000000 21.000000 17 Economic societies
0.400000 0.400000 0.500000 69.000000 18 Economics
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 561.000000 19 Education
0.500000 0.500000 0.600000 327.000000 20 Encyclopedias and dictionaries
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 782.000000 21 Exploration
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 665.000000 22 Foreign languages
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 240.000000 23 Geography
0.300000 0.300000 0.400000 265.000000 24 History
0.500000 0.500000 0.600000 2786.000000 25 Legal
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 458.000000 26 Mathematics
0.900000 0.900000 0.900000 2875.000000 27 Medicine
0.400000 0.400000 0.400000 1675.000000 28 Mercantile
0.500000 0.500000 0.600000 406.000000 29 Military
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 1030.000000 30 Military Wars
0.400000 0.400000 0.400000 1032.000000 31 Moral tales
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 376.000000 32 Music
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 271.000000 33 Navigation
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 453.000000 34 Philosophy
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 6093.000000 35 Poetry
0.400000 0.400000 0.400000 301.000000 36 Political philosophy
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 1145.000000 37 Printing and book trades
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 259.000000 38 Prophecies
0.800000 0.800000 0.700000 10251.000000 39 Religious
0.400000 0.400000 0.400000 399.000000 40 Religious Catholicism
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 153.000000 41 Religious Judaism
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 2501.000000 42 Religious Sects
0.800000 0.800000 0.800000 3915.000000 43 Religious Sermons
0.500000 0.500000 0.600000 130.000000 44 Scientific instruments
88


0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 206.000000 45 Societies
0.400000 0.400000 0.500000 539.000000 46 State affairs
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 5066.000000 47 Stories
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 206.000000 48 Supernatural
0.700000 0.700000 0.700000 381.000000 49 Technical instructions Agriculture
0.600000 0.600000 0.600000 465.000000 50 Technical instructions Trades
0.000000 0.000000 0.000000 39.000000 51 Travel descriptions
0.500000 0.500000 0.500000 255.000000 52 University learning
0.400000 0.400000 0.400000 71.000000 53 University matters
Administrative
Alchemy
Almanacs
Amusements
Antiquities
Appliedphysics
Architecture Art
Astrology
Astronomy
Biography
Biology
Chemistry
Churchadministration
Classicaleducation
Curiositiesandwonders
Drama
Economicsocieties
Economics
Education
Encyclopediasanddictionaries
Exploration
Foreignlanguages
Geography
History
Legal
Mathematics
Medicine
Mercantile
Military
MilitaryWars
Moraltales
Music
Navigation
Philosophy
Poetry
Politicalphilosophy
Printingandbooktrades
Prophecies
Religious
ReligiousCatholicism
ReligiousJudaism
ReligiousSects
ReligiousSermons
Scientificinstruments
Societies
Stateaffairs
Stories
Supernatural
TechnicalinstructionsAgriculture
TechnicalinstructionsTrades
Traveldescriptions
Universitylearning
Universitymatters
Predicted label
Administrative Alchemy Almanacs Amusements Antiquities Applied physics Architecture Art Astrology Astronomy Biography Biology Chemistry Church administration Classical education Curiosities and wonders Drama Economic societies Economics Education Encyclopedias and dictionaries Exploration Foreign languages Geography History Legal Mathematics Medicine Mercantile Military Military Wars Moral tales Music Navigation Philosophy Poetry Political philosophy Printing and book trades Prophecies Religious Religious Catholicism Religious Judaism Religious Sects Religious Sermons Scientific instruments Societies State affairs Stories Supernatural Technical instructions Agriculture Technical instructions Trades Travel descriptions University learning University matters
True label
9553 0 17 27 9 4 4 4 4 3 3 4 5 53 10 4 63 0 0 28 5 55 1 5 1 510 6 107 280 63 96 48 2 14 1 151 44 35 2 269 45 9 100 62 1 25 64 457 8 40 58 0 2 8 1 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 3 0 1 0 4 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 525 1 0 0 0 0 70 10 0 0 0 0 3 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 8 0 4 0 0 0 0 32 0 4 341 0 0 2 2 1 1 0 10 0 0 0 2 5 0 0 0 5 0 0 1 0 2 2 9 5 5 0 20 3 0 1 32 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 23 0 19 3 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 62 0 4 5 0 0 2 1 0 2 5 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 1 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 3 0 7 3 0 0 0 0 1 5 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 3 0 0 1 0 145 0 1 3 11 0 4 8 0 1 1 2 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 3 15 1 1 0 0 0 6 10 0 0 3 0 4 0 0 0 0 7 3 0 1 0 0 6 0 1 0 10 0 0 4 4 0 94 5 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 6 0 0 0 3 0 0 1 8 2 2 252 0 0 3 2 0 0 4 0 6 0 0 4 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 2 1 0 1 2 0 1 2 9 0 18 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 6 0 3 0 1 0 73 1 0 0 0 0 227 10 1 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 7 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 15 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 6 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 22 0 0 10 0 1 29 165 0 3 0 0 6 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 2 0 9 1 1 0 2 0 0 8 5 1 0 1 4 7 0 0 0 0 10 1 0 2 1 0 2 0 3 0 7 0 0 1 0 1 0 5 0 0 61 0 0 1 6 0 32 0 0 1 0 3 0 1 4 3 0 0 1 1 4 1 0 0 2 8 0 1 1 16 6 0 0 2 0 0 3 34 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 4 1 5 0 0 0 1 0 284 0 0 4 5 1 0 0 1 2 9 0 2 1 1 0 26 1 0 1 0 0 1 5 1 0 1 0 9 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 2 4 10 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 3 75 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 114 0 2 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 620 4 0 3 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 17 0 1 1 2 6 1 0 1 1 5 4 2 0 297 25 0 60 66 0 0 6 19 0 0 0 0 1 2 10 0 0 0 1 6 0 0 0 2 1 1 0 0 744 0 24 0 0 11 5 3 34 3 22 2 2 7 0 0 2 5 1 0 15 107 1 4 0 39 0 1 1 3 0 0 3 11 0 1 0 0 16 1 4 0 0 5 5 1 1 2 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 34 4 0 0 1 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 7 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 1 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16 11 0 0 0 0 0 38 0 0 11 0 0 0 5 6 0 9 0 0 4 42 3 2953 0 0 13 0 11 11 0 6 8 0 8 6 2 2 30 20 0 12 206 2 15 8 78 4 1 6 1 0 4 2 158 6 0 0 0 6 1 500000000000000000000000000010000000000000000500091000 28 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 5 1 0 0 0 11 0 0 5 0 3 0 3 0 0 0 1 0 2 12 0 13 0 0 342 1 1 28 1 2 4 3 3 1 1 0 17 0 0 6 7 0 2 0 51 0 0 5 12 0 1 1 7 0 1 1 0 7 6 10 0 6 6 0 2 1 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 12 1 3 0 0 7 179 1 22 12 5 2 5 6 10 1 0 2 1 4 0 1 0 3 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 5 0 3 1 0 1 0 64 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 6 0 4 1 0 37 0 0 4 2 514 3 6 0 6 0 2 6 0 7 3 0 1 0 14 1 1 1 33 1 1 11 14 1 0 3 30 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 3 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 36 0 10 0 0 25 22 2 508 1 2 3 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 1 9 0 4 0 10 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 7 0 0 1 0 7 1 5 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 4 0 10 1 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 3 4 1 176 0 0 2 2 3 2 1 0 0 10 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 17 0 1 0 3 0 0 1 2 0 8 0 0 6 17 1 9 0 0 1 3 1 2 5 89 2 0 0 1 2 15 2 0 0 3 10 0 3 4 21 5 1 1 1 0 0 8 20 0 0 0 0 0 0 935 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 15 4 2 12 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 2 1494 1 5 23 7 9 22 0 0 1 11 14 7 0 55 3 1 13 2 0 0 6 119 5 0 4 0 2 1 4 0 1 2 0 13 0 0 1 6 0 1 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 3 4 1 3 0 0 0 380 2 3 0 0 0 0 4 5 4 0 1 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 9 0 2 0 82 0 4 3 0 13 1 2 2 3 2 18 13 0 9 5 8 0 0 5 1 5 3 1 2 8 4 2521 12 3 2 9 0 1 11 19 1 6 0 37 0 0 1 4 1 0 0 26 2 16 5 0 3 1 649 0 1 15 13 1 11 5 2 0 0 2 0 0 2 7 19 0 0 6 14 16 3 1 0 33 4 22 612 5 10 5 4 4 1 20 0 77 0 11 1 0 6 4 2 7 2 28 1 11 38 0 0 0 105 0 0 10 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 2 1 2 0 2 0 4 1 3 2 220 23 0 0 5 0 3 0 1 0 5 0 0 1 1 0 0 2 7 0 0 1 0 0 0 97 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 2 0 5 0 0 0 0 15 1 1 1 10 0 0 3 22 638 0 0 0 0 61 1 1 1 27 2 1 5 18 0 0 22 91 0 0 0 0 0 0 71 0 1 8 0 4 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 60 0 0 10 2 5 0 1 1 30 0 12 6 1 5 372 0 0 21 67 0 1 1 164 1 1 5 29 1 2 3 132 2 2 1 0 1 1 3 0 0 8 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 0 38 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 220 0 0 54 0 1 0 34 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 0 4 0 34 0 2 0 0 3 0 0 2 5 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 6 0 0 3 1 0 3 0 0 1 188 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 5 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 8 0 1 0 1 1 5 0 1 17 0 9 0 0 3 2 0 3 0 3 7 1 7 0 0 0 20 0 0 219 6 8 2 0 99 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 10 0 125 0 3 13 3 0 1 4 2 1 2 8 0 5 89 2 237 0 0 1 1 9 4 1 1 12 1 14 11 1 37 42 35 1 7 4697 0 5 3 228 2 2 9 6 0 0 8 453 1 1 1 0 3 1 64 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 13 0 0 0 1 9 2 0 0 6 4 119 0 0 33 2 0 5 6 0 2 15 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 44 0 3 1 6 1 1 20 0 1 1 7 0 1 3 1 4 0 0 1 4 1 5 4 0 8 6 2 27 2 0 0 4 1 0 1 1 932 0 19 0 0 2 2 1 5 2 20 0 0 0 0 0 1 4 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 16 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 146 55 1 2 3 1 0 0 0 10 10 0 0 0 0 0 282 0 4 2 5 2 1 2 9 2 5 5 2 158 26 4 56 0 0 26 1 23 12 1 5 37 1 34 7 2 24 104 25 2 56 209 11 11 37 7811 55 33 367 535 0 5 13 205 16 7 1 0 5 5 49 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 17 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 3 0 0 1 1 2 1 0 0 0 4 0 0 1 86 160 0 13 5 0 0 8 38 1 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 3 42 0 86 2 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 173 0 2 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 74 5 0 5 0 0 7 0 10 3 0 0 17 1 5 2 0 7 9 1 0 0 25 3 3 1 713 52 6 1173 92 0 3 3 98 2 0 0 0 0 2 27 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 38 1 0 1 0 0 18 0 11 0 0 1 5 0 3 0 1 10 11 3 0 0 9 1 2 2 428 1 1 30 3257 0 1 1 49 0 0 0 0 1 0 5 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 15 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 5 4 3 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 67 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 23 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 9 0 11 0 2 0 0 2 4 0 131 0 4 0 1 2 0 1 0 86 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 5 3 1 7 0 0 1 0 9 0 1 6 8 0 1 3 1 34 5 0 0 0 13 22 0 1 28 9 1 6 7 0 0 239 35 0 0 0 0 0 0 559 0 2 14 0 4 1 3 5 2 20 6 0 12 18 9 225 0 1 14 1 21 2 0 3 112 1 63 25 6 57 88 2 1 10 454 11 22 7 244 21 3 63 52 0 6 30 2827 23 2 5 0 4 5 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 35 2 0 3 1 0 0 0 20 126 0 0 0 0 0 21 0 2 21 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 12 0 0 2 0 2 0 5 0 2 2 0 2 0 0 0 13 6 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 269 11 0 0 0 57 0 0 9 1 11 5 12 0 0 0 1 4 0 1 1 0 0 0 6 2 1 0 2 1 0 18 14 17 5 0 2 0 13 0 2 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 5 0 1 1 0 10 259 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 1 18 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 1 0 1 2 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 15 0 12 0 0 5 0 0 7 0 0 4 4 15 0 0 0 3 4 0 15 3 0 3 0 25 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 125 1 9 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 2 0 1 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 6 29
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Figure 15: Confusion matrix – DistilBERT classification
89


0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1600 1625 1650 1675 1700 1725
Year
Rate
(a) University of Oxford
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1600 1625 1650 1675 1700 1725
Matriculation / admission year
Rate
(b) University of Cambridge
Figure 16: Percentage share of students at the time of matriculation/admission who published at least once in the fields of the Scientific Revolution
Notes: The blue line includes the following fields: astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry,
biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The red line includes the following fields: astronomy, applied
physics, mathematics.
C.7 Calculation of teachers’ direction to the research frontier and teachers’
innovativeness
First, the paper introduces a new approach of calculating a researcher’s innovativeness based on
a forward/backward logic introduced in Kelly et al. (2021). It is based on the intuition that an
innovative publication is more similar to the future of its field than to the past of its field. Hence,
one can get a measure of a publication’s innovativeness by dividing its forward similarity (similarity
to future titles in the field) over its backward similarity (similarity to past titles in the field):
Innovativnessi = Forward similarityi
Backward similarityi
(14)
Hence, the measure captures the logic that an innovative publications needs both to be novel and to
have an impact on the future of the field. The index captures novelty through the inverse backwards
similarity and impact on the future of a field through forward similarity.
Kelly et al. (2021) implement this logic in a tf-idf bag-of-words approach. It transforms both
the text of the document and all the text of the corpus into a large vectors of words. With these,
it calculates the frequency of a word in a document compared to its frequency in the whole corpus.
Based on this, it calculates similarities between documents based on the overlap of words that are
infrequent in the whole corpus, hence words that individually characterize the individual title.
However, this approach is more suited to highly technical text with many specific technical
terms, such as modern patents used by Kelly et al. (2021).63 Yet, the scientific literature of the
63The literature on scientific and technical innovation usually defines innovativity as how much a publication changed its field. For example, Funk and Owen-Smith (2017); Park, Leahey and Funk (2023) and Wu, Wang and Evans (2019) measure disruptive publications using citation counts. Funk and Owen-Smith (2017) define disruptive inventions as publications that replace the corpus of citations they cite. Wu, Wang and Evans (2019) compare whether future works are more likely to cite the cited works in an article or the article itself. However, the context
90


seventeenth century uses a more complex language that poses a significant challenge to bag-of
word approaches. Hence, this paper pioneers a new way of applying the basic logic from Kelly
et al. (2021) to more complex corpora of text: It applies a a BERT transformer model to the text
to create context-sensitive text-embeddings and then calculates the textual similarity based on the
text-embeddings.64 This approach offers a powerful approach that is able to capture similarities
in the meaning of documents in contrast to similarities in word-frequencies. Appendix section C.9
illustrates the advantages of transformer models over bag-of-word or word-embedding models by
comparing the performance of different language models for an exemplary set of titles.65
Technically, the index is calculated by taking the mean of a title i’s cosine similarity (cos) to
all other titles in its field within a shifting time-frame. We define backward similarity as a title’s
mean cosine similarity to all titles within a twenty year time interval into the past, Tp.
BSi = 1
N
N
X
j∈Tp
cos(i, j) (15)
Analogously, forward similarity is defined as a title’s mean cosine similarity to all titles with a
twenty year time interval into the future, Tf
F Si = 1
N
N
X
j∈Tf
cos(i, j) (16)
Title i’s innovativeness is then defined as the ratio of its forward similarity (F S) over its backward
similarity (BS):
Ii = F Si
BSi
(17)
Following Kelly et al. (2021) we can interpret this innovation index as a language-based alternative
to a citation index. To the best of the author’s knowledge, it is the first paper within the innovation
literature that uses transformer distances to calculate a publication’s innovativeness.
In a next step, the paper creates a measure for a title’s proximity to the research frontier. The
paper introduces proximity to the Philosophical Transactions, the journal of the Royal Society, as a
proxy for proximity to the research frontier of the Scientific Revolution. Since its foundation in 1665,
the Philosophical Transactions was the only scientific journal in Britain during the seventeenth and
early eighteenth century. It was founded to publish new findings at the frontier of the Scientific
Revolution. Articles that were submitted to the Philosophical Transactions had to pass an early
of the seventeenth and eighteenth century poses the challenge that citations were not yet a common practise within seventeenth and eighteenth century academia. Therefore, the paper adopts a language-based innovation index. Instead of counting citation links, this approach calculates the similarity between the content between titles. 64The paper uses the ll-MiniLM-L6-v2 model that was pretrained on over 1 billion sentence pairs and optimzed as as a sentence and short paragraph encoder. 65Within the context of the ESTC, we should note that Bert uses word piece tokenization that breaks individual words into multiple tokens. This has the advantage that unknown words are broken down into pieces. For most unknown words a representation exists at least for some of its sub-parts reconstructing its original as close as possible. This feature is especially valuable for dealing with different spellings in the seventeenth century.
91


editorial review process that practically ensured that articles were scientifically relevant and of a
sufficiently high quality (Andrade, 1965; Csiszar, 2016). The paper collects all 10,730 titles from
the journal’s articles and uses them as a proxy for the research frontier of the Scientific Revolution.
Calculating the proximity to the Philosophical Transaction rests on two tasks. First, classifying
the Philosophical Transactions into the same subject fields as for the ESTC and second, calculating
the ESTC titles’ proximity to the current research frontier in a given field. The paper solves the
first task of classifying the titles from the Philosophical Transactions by using the DistilBERT
classification model that was pre-trained on the ESTC subject classes in section 3.4. The model
was also trained on scientific texts from the same time period and therefore perfectly applies to the
classification task for the Philosophical Transactions. Furthermore, this approach has the advantage
of applying the same classification system to both datasets. Next, the paper calculates forward
facing cosine similarities of ESTC title i to all titles in the Philosophical Transactions from the
next 40 years in the same field, Tf :
Dist. frontieri = 1
N
N
X
j∈Tf
cos(i, j) (18)
Using proximity to the next forty years is supposed to capture proximity to the concepts that
will be important in the future, i.e. the frontier. The index mainly differs from the innovation
index by a) using proximity to a select group of titles that are seen as high-quality and b) not
requiring a title to be novel. In comparison, the innovation index requires a title to be (one of)
the first in its field to introduce a new concepts and to have a large impact, while the proximity
to the Philosophical Transactions index only captures a title’s use of “cutting-edge” concepts from
the research frontier.
C.8 Validation of innovativeness index
To validate the innovation index, we test whether there is an association between high-quality
authors and high-innovativeness publications. The paper identifies high-quality authors as those
that are listed in the Dictionary of National Biography (D.N.B.), a collection of noteworthy people
in British history, and those that were fellows of the Royal Society. Concretely we estimate:
(max)innovit = β1high-quality authorit + X′
itβ2 + αt + εit (19)
where (max)innovit captures the maximum value of the innovation index from equation 17 across
an author i’s publications at matriculation time t. The main dependent variable, high-quality authorit,
is an indicator variable that captures whether author i either has entry in the Dictionary of National
Biography or was a fellow of the Royal Society. X′
it is a vector of author level controls, including the
total number of publications, year of matriculation and year of matriculation squared. αt captures
matriculation year fixed effects. In the fixed-effects specification, matriculation year controls are
omitted.
92


Table 22 presents the results. We find that having an entry in the Dictionary of National
Biography is associated with a 0.015 points increase in the innovation index (column 2) at Oxford
and a 0.013 points increase at Cambridge. This amounts to a 22% standard deviation increase in
the innovativeness index at Oxford and a 18% standard deviation increase in the innovativeness
index at Cambridge (column 4). Likewise, becoming a fellow in the Royal Society is associated with
a 0.040 points increase in the innovation index (column 4) at Oxford and a 0.022 points increase at
Cambridge (column 4). This amounts to a 59% standard deviation increase in the innovativeness
index at Oxford and a 32% standard deviation increase in the innovativeness index at Cambridge.
Overall, we find a strong association between high-quality authors and publication quality as
captured through the innovation index from equation 18. This is strong evidence that the index
successfully captures (some dimensions of) historical innovativeness.
93


Table 22: Association between students having an entry in the Dictionary of National Biography / members of the Royal Society and the innovation index
Panel A: Oxford (Max) students’ innovation index (1) (2) (3) (4) Innov. Innov. Innov. Innov. Entry in D.N.B. 0.0147*** 0.0146*** (0.00496) (0.00525)
Fellow of the Royal Society 0.0413* 0.0400* (0.0238) (0.0242)
Number publications control Yes Yes Yes Yes
Matriculation year control Yes No Yes No
Matriculation year squared control Yes No Yes No
Year fixed effects No Yes No Yes
cons Yes No Yes No Observations 1564 1562 1564 1562 R-squared 0.14 0.20 0.14 0.20 Mean dep. var. 1.04 1.04 1.04 1.04
Panel B: Cambridge (Max) students’ innovation index (1) (2) (3) (4) Innov. Innov. Innov. Innov. Entry in D.N.B. 0.0123*** 0.0125*** (0.00358) (0.00373)
Fellow of the Royal Society 0.0207*** 0.0221*** (0.00726) (0.00749)
Number publications control Yes Yes Yes Yes
Matriculation year control Yes No Yes No
Matriculation year squared control Yes No Yes No
Year fixed effects No Yes No Yes
cons Yes No Yes No Observations 1696 1696 1696 1696 R-squared 0.15 0.21 0.14 0.21 Mean dep. var. 1.03 1.03 1.03 1.03
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 19. The model tests the association
between the innovativeness index from equation 17 and the notability of authors. Notability
of authors is either captured through having an entry in the Dictionary of National Biography
(D.N.B.) (column 1–2) or being a fellow of the Royal Society (column 3–5). Controls include the
number of publications, matriculation year, and matriculation year squared. Column 2 and 4
further include year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
94


C.9 Comparison of different natural language models for processing distances
In order to illustrate the differences between different ways of measuring sentence similarities, e.g.
bag-of-words methods, word-embeddings, sentence embeddings, and the BERT model, we can take
a look at a stylized example of titles. We compare Isaac Newton’s famous work Opticks: or, A
Treatise of the Reflexions, Refractions, Inflexions and Colours of Light to a work that is known
to have been an important influence for Newton, Christian Huygen’s Treatise on Light: In Which
Are Explained the Causes of That Which Occurs in Reflection and a later work on optics that
was likely inspired by Newton’s work, David Gregory’s Elements of catoptrics and dioptrics. We
further compare Newton’s Optics to a set of unrelated titles that mentions similar words such as
“light” or “reflexions”, but in an unrelated context. Table 23 shows the comparative statistics.
A good measure of sentence similarity should be able to a) identify titles of similar content that
are described with different words and b) distinguish related from unrelated titles using the same
words, but in a different context.
Comparing Newton’s Opticks: or, A Treatise of the Reflexions, Refractions, Inflexions and
Colours of Light and Huygen’s Treatise on Light: In Which Are Explained the Causes of That
Which Occurs in Reflection is relatively straightforward. Both titles essentially describe the same
set of phenomena that are explained, although described slightly differently. However, the challenge
set by David Gregory’s Elements of catoptrics and dioptrics in comparison to Newton’s Opticks is
significant as both works do not have an overlapping technical vocabulary. In order to identify the
similarity between both works we need the additional information that catoptrics deals with the
phenomeon of reflacted light and that dioptrics is the branch of optics studying refraction. Hence,
the similarity exists between the meaning of the words, and not the technical vocabularly itself.
Looking at the unrelated placebo titles, we see that titles such as The words of the everlasting and
true Light, vvho is the eternal living God, and the King of saints or A true and impartial account
of the dark and hellish power of witchcraft use the same technical vocabulary of light and colour,
but in a different context. Thus, distinguishing Newton’s Optics from these placebo titles not
only involves comparing the meaning of words (e.g. “dark” and “colour” might be similar), but
understanding the context of its use.
Table 23 compares a tf-idf bag-of-words approach, word-embeddings in spacy, sentence embed
dings in Google’s Universal Sentence Encoder, and a BERT transformer model.66 It shows that the
bag-of-words tf-idf method succesfully identifies a high similarity between Newton’s and Huygen’s
works, but shows a similarity of 0 between Newton’s and Gregory’s works on optics. Comparing
Newton’s work to a group of unrelated placebo titles, it picks up on the use of “light” and “reflex
ions” in a completely different context, although the similarity scores are still relatively low. In
general, we see that the main shortcoming of bag-of-word methods is its inability to account for
66Before running the similarity measures for Tf-idf and spacy, titles are broken down into only nouns, adjectives, and adverbs – terms that are most likely to capture the relevant topic of the words.This avoids an overweighting of usual stop-words such as “that” or “and” or of verbs with versatile meanings. Nouns, adjectives, and adverbs are identified using spacy. Both USE and BERT use context-information from the whole sentence and thus require the complete use of complete use of the text-structure.
95


the similar meaning of different words, leading to a significant loss of information in comparing
scientific articles.
These shortcomings of bag-of-words methods might lead us to prefer similarity measures based
on word embeddings. Column (2) presents the average of the similarity of word-vectors using
spacy. This method is able to successfully capture the similarity between Newton’s, Huygens’s,
and Gregory’s work. However, the vector representation of words also recognizes a similar meaning
in the unrelated controls that also use phrases of light - although in a religious, or figurative meaning.
The method still gives a higher similarity score to the true works on optics. However, the difference
in similarity scores is less than we might prefer. Thus, the results on word-embedings highlight
the need for a method that can account for different meanings based on context. This leads to
transformer models based on deep neural networks that can compute context-aware representations
(Vaswani et al., 2017). Column (3) shows the results for Google’s Universal Sentence Encoder (Cer
et al., 2018) that uses sentence embeddings from a pre-trained transformer model and column (4)
shows results for the BERT transformer model (Devlin et al., 2018). The results for the USE
are disappointing. It gives a lesser similarity score to Gregory’s work than to The words of the
everlasting and true Light, vvho is the eternal living God, and the King of saints. However, the
BERT model successfully identifies the true works of optics and gives a significantly lower similarity
score to the unrelated placebos. Thus, it is able to distinguish between the context of physical
treatments of light and colours and the context of religious and figurative use of light and colours.
These results indicate that using transformer models can lead to more comprehensive and accurate
similarity measures between book titles than tf-idf bag-of-word models or word-embedding models.
However, it still shows the presence of false positives within a lower probability limit. Hence, this
paper will combine the transformer models for measuring novelty with a prior categorization of
topics. Similarity measures are then only calculated for documents within each topic.
96


Table 23: Comparing title similarities with different NLP methods
Similarity between: Tf-idf Spacy USE BERT Newton’s famous work on optics:
“Opticks: or, A Treatise of the Reflexions, Refractions, Inflexions and Colours of Light”1)
and
Prior works on optics:
“Treatise on Light: In Which Are Explained the Causes of That Which Occurs in Reflection & Refraction”2)
0.24 0.67 0.38 0.64
Later works on optics:
“Dr. Gregory’s Elements of catoptrics and dioptrics. To which is added, I. A method for finding the foci of all Specula as well as Lens’s universally. As also for Magnifying or Lessening a given Object by a given Speculum or Lens in any assign’d Proportion, &c. A particular account of microscopes and telescopes, from Mr. Huygens. With an introduction shewing the Discoveries made by Catoptrics and Dioptrics.”3)
0 0.55 0.21 0.41
Unrelated placebo titles:
“The words of the everlasting and true Light, vvho is the eternal living God, and the King of saints”
0.08 0.46 0.28 0.23
“A true and impartial account of the dark and hellish power of witchcraft”
0 0.47 0.22 0.18
“A new torch to the Latine tongue: so enlightned, that besides the easie understanding of all classical authours, there is also laid open a ready way to write and speak Latine well and elegantly”
0 0.48 0.18 0.12
“Political reflections upon the finances and commerce of France; shewing the causes which formerly obstructed the advancement of her trade”
0.11 0.41 0.19 0.20
1): Isaac Newton, 1704, 2): Christiaan Huygens, 1690, 3): David Gregory, 1715.
List of natural language processing models used: Tf-idf: term frequency-inverse document frequency implemented with Python’s sklearn. Spacy: Word-embeddings implemented in spacy with similarity calculated as average cosine similarity accross words. USE: Universal Sentence Encoder, a sentence embedder based on a transformer model (Cer et al., 2018). The paper uses the TF2-v5 model from Tensorflow. BERT: Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers, a state-of the art transformer model (Devlin et al., 2018). The paper uses the ll-MiniLM-L6-v2 model that was pretrained on over 1 billion sentence pairs and optimzed as as a sentence and short paragraph encoder. The text of the titles is presented in the original spelling. For the presentation of this stylized example the “unrelated controls” titles have been shortened but remain otherwise unchanged.
97


C.10 Trends in scientific fields and innovativity
Table 24: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields
Publication innovativeness / dist. to frontier (1) (2) Log innov. Log frontier 1620–1720 1600–1720 Author went to Ox/Cam 0.00435* 0.0191** (0.00243) (0.00942)
Title lengths control Yes Yes
Publication year fixed effects Yes Yes Observations 4206 4493 R-squared 0.10 0.09
Notes: The table shows results from regressing innovativeness / distance to the fron
tier on the indicator variable of authors having attended the University of Oxford or
Cambridge. The sample are all ESTC authors between 1600–1720 / 1620–1720 who
were real persons (excl. e.g. publications by Parliament). Note that the innovative
ness index compares a [t-20,t] period to a [t,t+20] period. Therefore, with the ESTC
starting in 1600, column 1 is only estimated on the sample of 1620–1720. The model
includes publication year fixed effects and a control variable for title length in charac
ters. Column 1 shows the association between authors having attended university and
author innovativeness, defined in section 3.5 and C.7. Column 2 shows the association
between authors having attended university and distance to the frontier, defined in
section 3.5. Standard errors are clustered at the publication year level and included
in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
and * at the 10% level.
98


D Empirical results
D.1 Additional results from section 4
Almanacs x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Astronomy x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Applied physics x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Biology x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Chemistry x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Geography x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Scientific instruments x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Mathematics x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Medicine x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
-.04 -.02 0 .02 .04 .06
(a) University of Oxford
Almanacs x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Astronomy x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Applied physics x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Biology x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Chemistry x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Scientific instruments x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Mathematics x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
Medicine x Log share of each topic in teacher publications
-.05 0 .05 .1
(b) University of Cambridge
Figure 17: Field-specific impact of teachers on students’ research within the fields of the Scientific Revolution
Notes: The graph presents results from equation 1 where teachers’ publication shares in the Scientific Revolution
are interacted by indicator variables for individual fields. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level.
Confidence intervals are shown at the 90% level.
99


Table 25: Teacher-effect for the fields of the Scientific Revolution estimated on the sub-sample of only students that published in the Scientific Revolution
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.345*** 0.0961* 0.100* (0.0957) (0.0525) (0.0530)
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.165 -0.0918 (0.101) (0.0846)
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 1611 1611 1611 R-squared 0.04 0.20 0.21
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.405*** 0.156** 0.162** (0.114) (0.0667) (0.0700)
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.0536 0.0346 (0.0945) (0.0882)
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 1458 1458 1458 R-squared 0.06 0.25 0.26
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 while limiting the sample only to students who published in any of the topics of the Scientific Revolution. The table then successively uses different definitions of the fields of the Scientific Revolution. In column 2 it uses the standard definition of this paper that includes the fields of astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Next, in column 2 it uses the same definition, but excludes medicine. Lastly in column 3, it uses the “core of the Scientific Revolution” consisting of astronomy, applied physics, and mathematics. It then estimates the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields. The strength of teachers’ research fields within each of these fields is calculated as the share of all teachers’ publications within field τ of all publications within all fields at college c at time t. The strength of students’ research fields is calculated as the share of student i’s publications in field τ out of all publications from student i. The model includes student-, topic-, and cohort fixed effects. Standard errors are multi-way clustered at the college × topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
100


Table 26: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Scientific Revolution Art Religion Public sphere Classical education Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0194** 0.0277 0.00430 0.0302 -0.00392 (0.00907) (0.0232) (0.0185) (0.0197) (0.00621)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 4728 12608 6304 11032 R-squared 0.16 0.44 0.38 0.33 0.20
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Scientific Revolution Art Religion Public sphere Classical education Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0107* 0.0182 0.0307** -0.000409 -0.00424 (0.00558) (0.0209) (0.0125) (0.0144) (0.00580)
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 15408 5136 13696 8560 11984 R-squared 0.17 0.47 0.38 0.33 0.18
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 on different groups of subject fields, the Scientific Revolution, art, religion, and the public sphere, and classical education. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The group of art is composed of the fields of poetry, music, and drama. Religion is composed of theology, dissenting theology, Catholic theology, Jewish theology, sermons, church administration, prophecies, and supernatural occurrences. The public sphere is composed of administration, the law, reports of current events, and moral tales, finally classical learning is composed of philosophy, political philosophy, classical education (greek and roman), rhetorics, foreign languages, and pedagogical education. The strength of teachers’ research fields within each of these fields is calculated as the share of all teachers’ publications within field τ of all publications within all fields at college c at time t. The strength of students’ research fields is calculated as the share of student i’s publications in field τ out of all publications from student i. Student and teacher shares are transformed using the natural logarithm from equation 2. The model includes cohort-, topic- and student-fixed effects. Standard errors are multi-way clustered at the college × topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
101


Table 27: Direction of teachers’ research on students’ general publication success
Panel A: Oxford Student lifetime publishing (1) (2) (3) Ever published Log number publi Innovativeness Log share of teacher publications in the Scientific Revolution -0.000770 0.0193 -0.000550 (0.00159) (0.0366) (0.000838)
Teacher controls Yes Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
College fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Observations 31696 1372 1368 R-squared 0.02 0.11 0.09 Mean dep. var. 0.04 1.29 1.00
Panel B: Cambridge Student lifetime publishing (1) (2) (3) Ever published Log number publi Innovativeness Log share of teachers’ publications in the Scientific Revolution -0.00112 -0.0579 -0.00115 (0.00180) (0.0502) (0.00139)
Teacher controls Yes Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
College fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Observations 32575 1486 1477 R-squared 0.02 0.08 0.09 Mean dep. var. 0.05 1.18 1.00
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 on the college × cohort level. It estimates the effects of the average of teachers’ research fields in the Scientific Revolution on the average of students’ research fields in the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The model applies college- and cohort-fixed effects. Student publication numbers and teacher shares are transformed using the natural logarithm from equation 2. Teacher controls includes the number of teacher publications, the number of fellows, and the cohort size. Column 1 estimates the effect of teachers’ average publication share in the Scientific Revolution on whether a student ever published. Column 2 estimates the effect of teachers’ average publication share in the Scientific Revolution on a student’s log-transformed number of publication. Column 2 estimates the effect of teachers’ average publication share in the Scientific Revolution on a student’s average innovativeness. Standard errors clustered at the college level in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
102


Table 28: Effect of teachers’ research in the Scientific Revolution on lifetime career outcomes
Panel A: Oxford University degrees Career in the church Other careers
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Medicine degr. Law degr. Rector Vicar Prebendary Physician Law D.N.B.
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the S.R. 0.00216 0.00271 0.00201 -0.00259 0.000112 0.000656 -0.00203 -0.000980
(0.00146) (0.00195) (0.00206) (0.00357) (0.000574) (0.000535) (0.00381) (0.00103)
Teacher controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
College fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 31696 31696 31696 31696 31696 31696 31696 31696
R-squared 0.02 0.05 0.18 0.11 0.01 0.01 0.12 0.01
Mean dep. var. 0.016 0.022 0.206 0.145 0.005 0.004 0.146 0.015
Panel B: Cambridge University degrees Career in the church Other careers
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Medicine degr. Law degr. Rector Vicar Prebendary Physician Law D.N.B.
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the S.R. 0.000650 -0.000759 -0.00743** 0.00170 0.00170 0.00102 0.00325 0.00249
(0.00154) (0.00130) (0.00262) (0.00226) (0.00226) (0.00117) (0.00439) (0.00216)
Teacher controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
College fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Observations 32575 32575 32575 32575 32575 32575 32575 32575
R-squared 0.01 0.08 0.19 0.11 0.11 0.03 0.11 0.01
Mean dep. var. 0.019 0.013 0.211 0.158 0.158 0.021 0.126 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the effects of teachers’ publication shares in the Scientific Revolution on students’ choice of advanced degrees, career choices, and lifetime outcomes
based on information in Foster (1891) and Venn and Litt (1952). The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry,
biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Column 1-2 present results for the dependent variable of students taking an advanced degree in either medicine (B.Med.,
M.D., D.Med.) or law (B.C.L., LL.B, D.C.L., L.L.D.). Column 3-7 present results for different realized career choices of students. Column 3-5 present results for careers within the
Church of England as either a rector, vicar, or prebendary. Column 5-6 present results for careers either as a physician or lin law. Finally column 8 presents results for students
being included in the Dictionary of National Biography (D.N.B.) — a measure of upper-tail notability (Laouenan et al., 2022). Teacher shares are transformed using the natural
logarithm from equation 2. Teacher controls includes the number of teacher publications, the number of fellows, and the cohort size. All controls are transformed using the natural
logarithm from equation 2. Student controls include dummies for whether a student graduated with a B.A. or M.A. Standard errors clustered at the college level in parenthesis.
*** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
103


Table 29: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for different time periods
Panel A: Oxford 1600–1640 1640–1720 1720–1780 (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.00861 0.0160* 0.00247 (0.0186) (0.00914) (0.0152)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Observations 4347 9972 9459 R-squared 0.16 0.16 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge 1600–1640 1640–1720 1720–1780 (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.00635 0.0145* -0.0108 (0.0199) (0.00751) (0.0125)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Observations 4788 10719 8577 R-squared 0.18 0.17 0.18
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1. It estimates the effects of teachers’
research fields on students’ research fields for the 9 fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields
of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics,
chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The table reports results
for different time periods. Column 1 reports results for the pre-civil war period, 1600–1640.
Column 2 reports results for the classical period of the English Scientific Revolution in England,
1640–1720, including both the interregnum and restorian period. Column 3 reports results for
the classical enlightenment period, 1720–1780. Teacher and student shares are transformed using
the natural logarithm from equation 2. Teacher controls include the log-transformed number of
teacher publications, the log-transformed number of fellows at a college at a student’s time of
matriculation, and the log-transformed cohort size at a student’s time of matriculation. Student
controls include a student’s log-transformed number of publications, and indicator variables
taking the value of one if a student graduated with a B.A. or M.A, as well as a variable capturing
the mean of all student publications that were predicted using machine learning. Standard
errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
104


Table 30: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields - different m(0) values for equation 2
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top., m(0)=-1 Mean top., m(0)=-0.5 Mean top., m(0)=-0.1 Log share of each topic in teacher publications, m(0)=-1 0.0194** (0.00907)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications, m(0)=-0.5 0.0226** (0.0108)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications, m(0)=-0.1 0.0258** (0.0128)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.16 0.16 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top., m(0)=-1 Mean top., m(0)=-0.5 Mean top., m(0)=-0.1 Log share of each topic in teacher publications, m(0)=-1 0.0134* (0.00710)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications, m(0)=-0.5 0.0137* (0.00735)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications, m(0)=-0.1 0.0136* (0.00767)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.17 0.17 0.17
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 with full student and topic fixed effects. The specification is identitical to column 3 in table 2. It estimates the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the 9 fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Student publication numbers and teacher shares are transformed using the natural logarithm from equation 2 following Chen and Roth (2024). The table reports results for different values of m(0) for the dependent and independent variable. Teacher controls include the log-transformed number of teacher publications, the log-transformed number of fellows at a college at a student’s time of matriculation, and the log-transformed cohort size at a student’s time of matriculation. Student controls include a student’s log-transformed number of publications, and indicator variables taking the value of one if a student graduated with a B.A. or M.A, as well as a variable capturing the mean of all student publications that were predicted using machine learning. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
105


Table 31: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields - log(x+0.01) specification
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0510*** 0.0217** 0.0203** (0.0146) (0.00961) (0.0101)
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.00949 0.000438 (0.00633) (0.00612)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes No
Student publication controls Yes Yes No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.02 0.04 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0460*** 0.0149* 0.0148** (0.0118) (0.00763) (0.00747)
Log share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.00895 0.00342 (0.00816) (0.00687)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes No
Student publication controls Yes Yes No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.02 0.04 0.17
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1. It estimates the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the 9 fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Column 1 estimates results for a baseline specification including teacher and student publication controls with college and college cohort effects. Column 2 adds topic fixed effects. Column 3 adds student fixed effects. Student and and teacher shares are transformed using a log(x + 0.01) transformation. Teacher controls include the log-transformed number of teacher publications, the log-transformed number of fellows at a college at a student’s time of matriculation, and the log-transformed cohort size at a student’s time of matriculation. Student controls include a student’s log-transformed number of publications, and indicator variables taking the value of one if a student graduated with a B.A. or M.A, as well as a variable capturing the mean of all student publications that were predicted using machine learning. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
106


Table 32: Effect of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields - arcsinh specification
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Arcsinh share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0483*** 0.0202** 0.0186* (0.0140) (0.00905) (0.00957)
Arcsinh share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev.
-0.00871 0.000213
(0.00583) (0.00570)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes No
Student publication controls Yes Yes No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.02 0.04 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Arcsinh share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0424*** 0.0136* 0.0136* (0.0112) (0.00718) (0.00700)
Arcsinh share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev.
-0.00758 0.00334
(0.00733) (0.00634)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes No
Student publication controls Yes Yes No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.02 0.04 0.17
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1. It estimates the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the 9 fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Column 1 estimates results for a baseline specification including teacher and student publication controls with college and college cohort effects. Column 2 adds topic fixed effects. Column 3 adds student fixed effects. Student and and teacher shares are transformed using an inverse hyperbolic sine (arcsinh) transformation. Teacher controls include the arcsinh-transformed number of teacher publications, the arcsinh-transformed number of fellows at a college at a student’s time of matriculation, and the arcsinhtransformed cohort size at a student’s time of matriculation. Student controls include a student’s arcsinh-transformed number of publications, and indicator variables taking the value of one if a student graduated with a B.A. or M.A, as well as a variable capturing the mean of all student publications that were predicted using machine learning. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
107


Table 33: Level level specification of baseline specification
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Share of each topic in teacher publications 0.119*** 0.0706** 0.0706** (0.0370) (0.0329) (0.0321)
Share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.0587* -0.0105 (0.0330) (0.0261)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes No
Student publication controls Yes Yes No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.02 0.03 0.13
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Share of each topic in teacher publications 0.103*** 0.0349* 0.0349* (0.0254) (0.0186) (0.0194)
Share of teacher publications in all topics of the Scient Rev. -0.0654 0.00310 (0.0479) (0.0328)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes No
Student publication controls Yes Yes No
Year fixed effects Yes Yes No
College fixed effects Yes Yes No
Topic fixed effects No Yes Yes
Student fixed effects No No Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.02 0.03 0.14
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 in a level-level specification. Standard errors are clustered at college × topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
108


Table 34: Robustness with different imputational values for missing end years of fellowships
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 9) 0.0217* (0.0115)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 10) 0.0191* (0.0113)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 11) 0.0203** (0.0101)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 12) 0.0189* (0.00983)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 13) 0.0178* (0.00975)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 9) 0.0128 (0.00810)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 10) 0.0180** (0.00755)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 11) 0.0148** (0.00747)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 12) 0.0141* (0.00737)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications (imp. length: 13) 0.0129* (0.00734)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1. It estimates the effects of teachers’ research fields with different values for imputed fellowship lengths on students’ research fields for the 9 fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Column 1 estimates results for a baseline specification including teacher and student publication controls with college and college cohort effects. Column 2 adds topic fixed effects. Column 3 adds student fixed effects. For convenience, student and and teacher shares are transformed using a log(x + 0.01) transformation. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
109


D.2 Alternative mechanisms: Teacher innovativeness and distance to research
frontier
Next, the paper considers alternative channels to the direction of research through which teachers
could have influenced their students. First, the paper considers teacher innovativeness. It is
plausible that innovative teachers might have been able to create new research agendas and inspired
their students to follow up on them (Waldinger, 2010). Innovative teachers might also have had a
role model effect on their students (Akerlof and Kranton, 2002; Bettinger and Long, 2005). Second,
the paper considers proximity to the research frontier. In line with the concept of an “education
innovation gap” (Biasi and Ma, 2022), we would expect that teachers who are publishing at the
research-frontier of the Scientific Revolution would increase students’ chances to both publish in
the fields of the Scientific Revolution as well to publish at the frontier of the Scientific Revolution.
To capture proximity to the research frontier we measure students’ and teachers’ textual distance
to the Philosophical Transactions, the journal of the Royal Society and the only scientific journal
in Britain for the period under consideration.
Teachers’ innovativeness in field j is measured as the field-specific maximum of their innova
tiveness index as defined in section C.7. Intuitively, the innovativeness index captures how much
an author’s publication changed the field in the future, by dividing its forward similarity to all
other titles in the future by the backward similarity to all the papers in the past. For calculating
the index, this paper uses a twenty-year period of backward- and forward-comparison. The paper
then adds teachers’ average innovativeness as an additional regressor to the model from equation
1.67 To capture teachers’ proximity to the research frontier (Biasi and Ma, 2022), the paper con
structs an NLP-based measure of the proximity of teachers’ publications to the publications in the
Philosophical Transactions. Section C.8. further evaluates the innovation index by showing that
there is a positive association between students’ innovation index and students’ likelihood of being
included in the Dictionary of National Biography or being a fellow of the Royal Society. Students’
similarity to the Philosophical Transactions is defined analogously in section C.7.
Table 35 presents the results for these alternative channels of knowledge transmission on stu
dents’ direction of research. The table compares four different channels: (1) the extensive margin
of being exposed to at least one teacher who published at least once in a given field of the Scientific
Revolution, (2) teachers’ direction of research as estimated in table 2, (3) teachers innovativeness for
the fields of the Scientific Revolution, and (4) teachers’ proximity to the research frontier. We find
that for Oxford, both teachers’ innovativeness and proximity to the research research frontier are
positively and significantly associated with students’ publication shares in the fields of the Scientific
Revolution. For Cambridge, only teachers’ innovativeness is positively associated with students’
direction of research. However, the coefficients are generally smaller than the effect of teachers’
67Formally, the paper constructs a vector of teacher innovativeness across the dimensions of the fields of the Scientific Revolution. The vector of teacher-innovativeness, ι, is defined as an author’s average innovativeness in field j, ιj, across all fields, f : v = (ι1, ι2, . . . ιn). The vector of teacher innovativeness is then defined as the average of innovativeness in field j across all teachers, analogous to teachers’ direction of research, p in section 4.1. The vector of similarity to the Philosophical Transactions is constructed analogously.
110


direction of research from column (2). Increasing teachers’ innovativeness or teachers’ proximity to
the research frontier by 1% is associated with a 0.01% increase in students’ publication shares at
Oxford. Increasing teachers’ innovativeness by 1% is associated with a 0.006% increase in students’
publication shares at Cambridge. Likewise, increasing teachers’ similarity to the Philosophical
Transactions by 1% is associated with a 0.011% increase at Oxford. The coefficient for teachers’
similarity to the Philosophical Transactions is insignificant at Cambridge.
Altogether, table 35 suggests that for the fields of the Scientific Revolution, teachers’ direction
of research was a stronger predictor of students’ direction of research than teachers’ innovativeness
or teachers’ proximity to the research frontier. Yet, table 35 can also be taken as evidence that
knowledge transmission might have happened across multiple dimensions of knowledge production,
with teachers’ direction of research being a major but not singular factor.
111


Table 35: Effect of teachers’ innovativeness on students’ direction of research
Panel A: Oxford Share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Indicator var for teacher pub. in topic 0.0541** (0.0253)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0194** (0.00907)
Log teacher innovation index 0.00962** (0.00462)
Log teacher proximity to Philosophical 0.0117** (0.00591)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 14184 14184 14184 R-squared 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.16
Panel B: Cambridge Share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Indicator var for teacher pub. in topic 0.0363 (0.0222)
Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0134* (0.00710)
Log teacher innovation index 0.00711* (0.00406)
Log teacher proximity to Philosophical Transactions 0.00862 (0.00523)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 15408 15408 15408 15408 R-squared 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 while further adding a measure of teachers’ average innovativeness. It estimates the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the 9 fields of the Scientific Revolution. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. The strength of teachers’ research fields within each of these fields is calculated as the share of all teachers’ publications within field τ of all publications within all fields at college c at time t. The strength of students’ research fields is calculated as the share of student i’s publications in field τ out of all publications from student i. Likewise, teacher’s average innovativeness in field j, ιj is measured as the field-specific average of the innovativeness index introduced in section 3.5. The model includes student-, topic-, and cohort fixed effects. All main explanatory variables are transformed using the log transformation from equation 2. Standard errors are clustered at the college × topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
112


D.3 Robustness: Instrumental variable approach
D.4 Balancedness and different parameters for uniqueness conditions
Table 36: Balancedness for geo information, 1600–1720
(1) (2) (3) Variable Students without geo info Students with geo predictions Difference Student graduates with B.A. 0.528 0.562 0.035*** (0.499) (0.496) (0.006) Student graduates with M.A. 0.322 0.313 -0.009* (0.467) (0.464) (0.005) Student graduates with doctoral degree 0.044 0.039 -0.006** (0.206) (0.193) (0.002) Cohort size 23.290 24.296 1.006*** (16.014) (14.518) (0.177) armiger 0.137 0.115 -0.022*** (0.344) (0.319) (0.004) baronet 0.003 0.004 0.000 (0.058) (0.061) (0.001) clerici 0.104 0.098 -0.006* (0.305) (0.297) (0.004) comitis 0.000 0.000 -0.000** (0.021) (0.000) (0.000) doctoris 0.009 0.006 -0.003*** (0.094) (0.076) (0.001) episcopi 0.000 0.000 -0.000 (0.011) (0.000) (0.000) eques auratus 0.008 0.002 -0.006*** (0.088) (0.045) (0.001) equitis 0.014 0.009 -0.004*** (0.117) (0.097) (0.001) gentilis 0.310 0.290 -0.019*** (0.462) (0.454) (0.006) militis fil 0.008 0.001 -0.007*** (0.087) (0.025) (0.001) militis 0.009 0.006 -0.003** (0.094) (0.078) (0.001) pauper puer 0.035 0.084 0.049*** (0.184) (0.277) (0.003) pauper 0.014 0.022 0.009*** (0.116) (0.147) (0.002) plebeii 0.316 0.363 0.047*** (0.465) (0.481) (0.006) servus 0.034 0.000 -0.034*** (0.181) (0.018) (0.002) Number of student’s publications’ 0.357 0.277 -0.080* (4.137) (2.506) (0.043) Share of fields of the Scientific Revolution in a student’s publications 0.007 0.006 -0.001 (0.023) (0.023) (0.001) Number fellows 10.049 9.168 -0.880*** (9.350) (8.260) (0.103) Teacher publications 22.307 22.617 0.311 (36.321) (36.425) (0.414) Share of fields of the Scientific Revolution in teacher’s publications 0.006 0.006 -0.001*** (0.016) (0.017) (0.000) Observations 26,576 10,889 37,465
Notes: For an overview of the status categories, see table 14.
113


Table 37: Instrumental variable approach — with minimum numbers of student per hundred >10
Baseline With geo info First stage IV (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic of teacher publications 0.0194** 0.0510** 0.0966* (0.00907) (0.0237) (0.0546)
Log share of each topic of predicted teacher publications 0.0325* (0.0175)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 3051 3051 3051 R-squared 0.161 0.149 0.147 0.001 Centered R-squared Kleibergen Paap F-statistic 30.74
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 in an instrumental variable approach. The instrument of expected teacher shares given students’ place of origin is defined in equation 3. The table shows results when alternatively defining the uniqueness criterion as a college share > 20% and a minimum number of students per hundred as > 10. The table reports estimates of the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. Column 1 estimates results for the baseline specification from table 2 for the sample of 1600–1720, excluding the period of the Civil War and interregnum 1642–1660, see appendix B.3 for a description of changes in recording practices of geo-information. Column 2 estimates the same specification for the sub-sample of all students with available geo-information and coming from parishes with strong college-ties. Column 3 presents first stage results for the instrument of predicted teacher publication shares based on a student’s home parish. Column 4 presents the IV coefficients for the instrumental variable regression. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
114


Table 38: Instrumental variable approach — with minimum numbers of student per hundred >1
Baseline With geo info First stage IV (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic of teacher publications 0.0194** 0.0464*** 0.0736** (0.00907) (0.0158) (0.0315)
Log share of each topic of predicted teacher publications 0.0285** (0.0122)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 5166 5166 5166 R-squared 0.161 0.161 0.159 0.002 Centered R-squared Kleibergen Paap F-statistic 51.73
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 in an instrumental variable approach. The instrument of expected teacher shares given students’ place of origin is defined in equation 3. The table shows results when alternatively defining the uniqueness criterion as a college share > 20% and a minimum number of students per hundred as > 1. The table reports estimates of the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. Column 1 estimates results for the baseline specification from table 2 for the sample of 1600–1720, excluding the period of the Civil War and interregnum 1642–1660, see appendix B.3 for a description of changes in recording practices of geo-information. Column 2 estimates the same specification for the sub-sample of all students with available geo-information and coming from parishes with strong college-ties. Column 3 presents first stage results for the instrument of predicted teacher publication shares based on a student’s home parish. Column 4 presents the IV coefficients for the instrumental variable regression. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
115


Table 39: Instrumental variable approach — with uniqueness condition of college share > 30%
Baseline With geo info First stage IV (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic of teacher publications 0.0194** 0.0638** 0.103** (0.00907) (0.0265) (0.0455)
Log share of each topic of predicted teacher publications 0.0404** (0.0175)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 2727 2727 2727 R-squared 0.161 0.157 0.153 0.005 Centered R-squared Kleibergen Paap F-statistic 34.13
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 in an instrumental variable approach. The instrument of expected teacher shares given students’ place of origin is defined in equation 3. The table shows results when alternatively defining the uniqueness criterion as a college share > 30% and a minimum number of students per hundred as > 5. The table reports estimates of the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. Column 1 estimates results for the baseline specification from table 2 for the sample of 1600–1720, excluding the period of the Civil War and interregnum 1642–1660, see appendix B.3 for a description of changes in recording practices of geo-information. Column 2 estimates the same specification for the sub-sample of all students with available geo-information and coming from parishes with strong college-ties. Column 3 presents first stage results for the instrument of predicted teacher publication shares based on a student’s home parish. Column 4 presents the IV coefficients for the instrumental variable regression. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
116


Table 40: Instrumental variable approach — with uniqueness condition of college share > 40%
Baseline With geo info First stage IV (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic of teacher publications 0.0194** 0.0948* 0.153* (0.00907) (0.0528) (0.0863)
Log share of each topic of predicted teacher publications 0.0585** (0.0287)
Topic fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 14184 1827 1827 1827 R-squared 0.161 0.155 0.150 0.007 Centered R-squared Kleibergen Paap F-statistic 26.21
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 1 in an instrumental variable approach. The instrument of expected teacher shares given students’ place of origin is defined in equation 3. The table shows results when alternatively defining the uniqueness criterion as a college share > 40% and a minimum number of students per hundred as > 5. The table reports estimates of the effects of teachers’ research fields on students’ research fields for the fields of the Scientific Revolution. Column 1 estimates results for the baseline specification from table 2 for the sample of 1600–1720, excluding the period of the Civil War and interregnum 1642–1660, see appendix B.3 for a description of changes in recording practices of geo-information. Column 2 estimates the same specification for the sub-sample of all students with available geo-information and coming from parishes with strong college-ties. Column 3 presents first stage results for the instrument of predicted teacher publication shares based on a student’s home parish. Column 4 presents the IV coefficients for the instrumental variable regression. Standard errors are clustered at the college-topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
117


D.5 Growth of teacher publication shares and regional development
Table 41: Growth rates of teacher publications and Bairoch city size
Almanacs Astronomy Physics Biology Chemistry Geography Instruments Math Medicine (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Log Bairoch city size, 1600 0.0000965 0.00169 0.000329 -0.000219 -0.000873 -0.000134 -0.0000178 -0.00108 -0.00323 (0.0000966) (0.00909) (0.00379) (0.000331) (0.00125) (0.000111) (0.0000206) (0.00220) (0.00448)
Log Bairoch city size, 1700 0.0000779 -0.00678 0.00171 0.000184 0.000526 0.00000224 -0.000000426 0.000214 0.00310 (0.000106) (0.00720) (0.00260) (0.000238) (0.000985) (0.0000941) (0.00000680) (0.00165) (0.00290)
Area, lon, lat controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 R-squared 0.01 0.25 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.06 Mean dep. var. -0.000 0.037 0.023 -0.000 0.007 -0.000 0.000 0.018 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the growth of predicted teacher shares for each hundred and topic from equation 3 on Bairoch city size as a proxy for economic development. Annualized growth in fellows’ publication shares per topic is given in percentage points. City size from Bairoch (1988) transformed using the natural logarithm. To account for zeros, we use the Chen and Roth (2024) definition from equation 2. The table addresses the concern that college shares of teacher publications might have been associated with the economic development of regions that colleges had close ties to. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
Table 42: Growth rates of teacher publications and Bairoch city size
Almanacs Astronomy Physics Biology Chemistry Geography Instruments Math Medicine (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Total growth in city size, 1600–1700 0.0000448 -0.00362 0.00124 0.0000301 0.000228 -0.0000107 -0.00000122 0.000135 0.00119 (0.0000380) (0.00253) (0.00102) (0.0000762) (0.000400) (0.0000340) (0.00000351) (0.000585) (0.00108)
Area, lon, lat controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 R-squared 0.00 0.25 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.06 Mean dep. var. -0.000 0.037 0.023 -0.000 0.007 -0.000 0.000 0.018 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the growth of predicted teacher shares for each hundred and topic from equation 3 on Bairoch city size as a proxy for economic development. Annualized growth in fellows’ publication shares per topic is given in percentage points. City size growth between Bairoch (1988) cities in 1600 and 1700 is given as the absolute difference in population in 1,000s. The table addresses the concern that college shares of teacher publications might have been associated with the economic development of regions that colleges had close ties to. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
Table 43: Growth rates of teacher publications and Langton city size
Almanacs Astronomy Physics Biology Chemistry Geography Instruments Math Medicine (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Log Langton city size, end of 17th cent. -0.0000111 0.00148 0.000742 -0.0000759* 0.0000422 -0.0000151 0.0000119 0.000315 -0.000148 (0.0000346) (0.000908) (0.000578) (0.0000431) (0.000191) (0.0000152) (0.0000119) (0.000444) (0.000646)
Area, lon, lat controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 R-squared 0.00 0.25 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.15 0.06 ymean -0.000 0.037 0.023 -0.000 0.007 -0.000 0.000 0.018 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the growth of predicted teacher shares for each hundred and topic from equation 3 on Langton city size as a proxy for economic development. Annualized growth in fellows’ publication shares per topic is given in percentage points. City size from Langton (2000) is transformed using the natural logarithm. To account for zeros, we use the Chen and Roth (2024) definition from equation 2.. The table addresses the concern that college shares of teacher publications might have been associated with the economic development of regions that colleges had close ties to. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
Table 44: Growth rates of teacher publications and number of ports
Almanacs Astronomy Physics Biology Chemistry Geography Instruments Math Medicine (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Ports in 1680 0.000223* 0.000556 -0.00179 0.0000592 0.000236 -0.0000240 -0.0000564 -0.00379 -0.000549 (0.000122) (0.00419) (0.00346) (0.000164) (0.000864) (0.0000596) (0.0000577) (0.00245) (0.00259)
Area, lon, lat controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 R-squared 0.01 0.25 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.16 0.06 Mean dep. var. -0.000 0.037 0.023 -0.000 0.007 -0.000 0.000 0.018 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the growth of predicted teacher shares for each hundred and topic from equation 3 on the number of ports from Alvarez-Palau and Dunn (2019) as a proxy for economic development. Annualized growth in fellows’ publication shares per topic is given in percentage points. The table addresses the concern that college shares of teacher publications might have been associated with the economic development of regions that colleges had close ties to. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
118


Table 45: Growth rates of teacher publications and distance to ports
Almanacs Astronomy Physics Biology Chemistry Geography Instruments Math Medicine (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Log distance to ports in 1680 -0.0000188 -0.00169 0.00115 -0.0000373 0.000121 -0.0000119 -0.00000455 0.000953* 0.000643 (0.0000237) (0.00159) (0.000748) (0.0000626) (0.000245) (0.0000148) (0.00000545) (0.000489) (0.000801)
Area, lon, lat controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 R-squared 0.00 0.25 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.16 0.06 Mean dep. var. -0.000 0.037 0.023 -0.000 0.007 -0.000 0.000 0.018 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the growth of predicted teacher shares for each hundred and topic from equation 3 on distance to ports from Alvarez-Palau and Dunn (2019) as a proxy for economic development. Annualized growth in fellows’ publication shares per topic is given in percentage points. Distance to ports is transformed using the natural logarithm. To account for zeros, we use the Chen and Roth (2024) definition from equation 2. The table addresses the concern that college shares of teacher publications might have been associated with the economic development of regions that colleges had close ties to. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
Table 46: Growth rates of teacher publications and Unitarian congregations, 1618–1720
Almanacs Astronomy Physics Biology Chemistry Geography Instruments Math Medicine (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Teach. shares Log number of Unitarian congregations 0.000223* -0.0158*** -0.0000864 -0.000394** 0.000145 -0.000164 -0.0000254 0.00361 0.00172 (0.000119) (0.00587) (0.00279) (0.000198) (0.000909) (0.000108) (0.0000272) (0.00233) (0.00308)
Area, lon, lat controls Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 272 R-squared 0.01 0.27 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.16 0.06 Mean dep. var. -0.000 0.037 0.023 -0.000 0.007 -0.000 0.000 0.018 0.034
Notes: The table estimates the growth of predicted teacher shares for each hundred and topic from equation 3 on the count of Unitarian congregations from the Unitarian Historical Society (2020) as a proxy for religious reform. Annualized growth in fellows’ publication shares per topic is given in percentage points. The count of Unitarian is transformed using the natural logarithm. To account for zeros, we use the Chen and Roth (2024) definition from equation 2. The table addresses the concern that college shares of teacher publications might have been associated with the economic development of regions that colleges had close ties to. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
D.6 Robustness: Stacked difference in differences
119


Table 47: Stacked difference-in-differences results for teachers leaving their college — omitting years around leaving event
Panel A: Oxford Full sample omit [0,1] omit [-1,2] omit [-2,3] (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0594** 0.0591** 0.0771** 0.0827** (0.0275) (0.0253) (0.0348) (0.0386)
Stack fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year x stack fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Topic x stack fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes No No No Observations 1098 1035 927 837 R-squared 0.25 0.19 0.22 0.24 Panel B: Cambridge Full sample omit [0,1] omit [-1,2] omit [-2,3] (1) (2) (3) (4) Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Mean top. Log share of each topic in teacher publications 0.0294** 0.0362** 0.0335** 0.0367* (0.0137) (0.0164) (0.0160) (0.0188)
Stack fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Year x stack fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Topic x stack fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes
Student fixed effects Yes Yes Yes Yes Observations 1394 1223 1151 997 R-squared 0.20 0.22 0.23 0.24
Notes: The table shows results from estimating equation 4. The dependent variable is student publication shares in the topics of the Scientific Revolution. Treatment is defined as teacher publication shares of before the event of a teacher leaving the college. The table presents results for omitting time periods around the leaving event. Standard errors are clustered at the stack × topic level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
120


Table 48: Cambridge: Balancedness around leaving event of fellows, Oxford
(1) (2) (3) Variable Pre leaving event Post leaving event Difference Student characteristics
Student graduated with BA degree 0.686 0.682 -0.003 (0.465) (0.466) (0.026) Student graduated with MA degree 0.579 0.638 0.059** (0.494) (0.481) (0.027) Student graducated with doctoral degree 0.252 0.336 0.084*** (0.435) (0.473) (0.026) Cohort size 9.129 9.127 -0.002 (1.069) (1.061) (0.060) Number teachers 11.857 10.887 -0.970** (6.393) (8.384) (0.419) Student status
armiger 0.128 0.067 -0.061*** (0.334) (0.249) (0.018) baronet 0.014 0.000 -0.014*** (0.118) (0.000) (0.005) clerici 0.215 0.181 -0.033 (0.411) (0.385) (0.024) comitis 0.000 0.000 0.000 (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) doctoris 0.000 0.050 0.050*** (0.000) (0.218) (0.009) episcopi 0.000 0.000 0.000 (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) eques auratus 0.016 0.035 0.019** (0.125) (0.184) (0.009) equitis 0.000 0.002 0.002 (0.000) (0.043) (0.002) gentilis 0.270 0.275 0.006 (0.444) (0.447) (0.027) militis fil 0.016 0.017 0.001 (0.125) (0.128) (0.008) militis 0.000 0.033 0.033*** (0.000) (0.180) (0.008) pauper puer 0.032 0.081 0.049*** (0.176) (0.274) (0.014) pauper 0.018 0.000 -0.018*** (0.132) (0.000) (0.006) plebeii 0.277 0.242 -0.034 (0.448) (0.429) (0.026) servus 0.016 0.017 0.001 (0.125) (0.128) (0.008) Unrelated publication topics
Student publication shares in topic Law 0.060 0.055 -0.005 (0.201) (0.200) (0.011) Student publication shares in topic Poetry 0.054 0.049 -0.005 (0.185) (0.158) (0.010) Student publication shares in topic Drama 0.041 0.033 -0.008 (0.164) (0.130) (0.008) Student publication shares in topic Clasical education 0.018 0.022 0.004 (0.120) (0.123) (0.007) Observations 630 639 1,269
Notes: Balancedness of student observations before and post fellow’s leaving events from section 5.2. The sample consists of all publishing students that are part of a leaving-stack. The time frame of the sample is 1600–1720.
121


Table 49: Cambridge: Balancedness around leaving event of fellows, Cambridge
(1) (2) (3) Variable Pre leaving event Post leaving event Difference Student characteristics
Student graduated with BA degree 0.748 0.685 -0.062** (0.435) (0.465) (0.027) Student graduated with MA degree 0.704 0.636 -0.068** (0.457) (0.482) (0.028) Student graducated with doctoral degree 0.294 0.338 0.045 (0.456) (0.474) (0.028) Cohort size 10.373 10.246 -0.127 (3.239) (3.111) (0.190) Number teachers 39.305 37.738 -1.567 (20.594) (20.704) (1.238) Student status
Fellow commoner 0.048 0.083 0.035** (0.215) (0.276) (0.016) Pensioner 0.508 0.519 0.011 (0.501) (0.500) (0.033) Sizar 0.444 0.398 -0.046 (0.497) (0.490) (0.032) Unrelated publication topics
Student publication shares in topic Law 0.041 0.027 -0.014 (0.163) (0.136) (0.009) Student publication shares in topic Poetry 0.047 0.042 -0.005 (0.168) (0.154) (0.010) Student publication shares in topic Drama 0.016 0.012 -0.003 (0.069) (0.056) (0.004) Student publication shares in topic Clasical education 0.015 0.018 0.002 (0.098) (0.125) (0.007) Observations 531 585 1,116
Notes: Balancedness of student observations before and post fellow’s leaving events from section 5.2. The sample consists of all publishing students that are part of a leaving-stack. The time frame of the sample is 1600–1720.
122


D.7 Robustness: Parliamentary visitation shock
0 .5 1 1.5
Log topic share in student public.
1620-1624
1625-1629
1630-1634
omitted1635-1639
1650-1654
College- and cohort-fixed effects + controls + topic fixed effects + student fixed effects
Figure 18: Visitation shock and publication shares by all teachers
Notes: The figure presents results from estimating equation 5 with the teacher publication shares in the topics of the
Scientific Revolution in the dependent variable and visitation shock publication shares as the treatment. The fields
of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs, applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology,
geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Results are shown for three specification. A baseline model with
college- and cohort-fixed effects as well as teacher- and student-control, a second specification with additional student
, and topic-fixed effects, and a third specification with cohort-, topic-, and student-fixed effects fully saturated at the
college level — similar to equation 4 in section 5.2. The treatment period is 1650–1654. We exclude the periods
overlapping with the Civil War, 1640–1644 and 1645–1650, when the university was physically besieged. N = 2, 227.
Standard errors are clustered at the college × topic level. Confidence intervals are shown at the 90% level.
123


0 .5 1 1.5
Log topic share in student public.
1620-1624
1625-1629
1630-1634
omitted1635-1639
1650-1654
1655-1659
College- and cohort-fixed effects + controls + topic fixed effects + student fixed effects
Figure 19: Visitation shock and publication shares by all teachers - extended time period
Notes: The figure presents results from estimating equation 5 with the teacher publication shares in the topics of the
Scientific Revolution in the dependent variable and visitation shock publication shares as the treatment. Results are
shown for the extended period until 1659. The fields of the Scientific Revolution are defined as astronomy, almanacs,
applied physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, geography, medicine, and scientific instruments. Results are shown
for three specification. A baseline model with college- and cohort-fixed effects as well as teacher- and student-control,
a second specification with additional student-, and topic-fixed effects, and a third specification with cohort-, topic-,
and student-fixed effects fully saturated at the college level — similar to equation 4 in section 5.2. The treatment
period is 1650–1654. We exclude the periods overlapping with the Civil War, 1640–1644 and 1645–1650, when the
university was physically besieged. N = 2, 736. Standard errors are clustered at the college × topic level. Confidence
intervals are shown at the 90% level.
124


D.8 Additional material: Intergenerational transmission process
Table 50: Students’ likelihood of becoming a fellow given students’ publication outcomes in the Scientific Revolution
Panel A: Oxford Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) Mean top. Mean top. Indicator variable for student published in the Scientific Revolution 0.0600** (0.0232)
Student publication shares in all topics of the Scientific Revolution 0.0223** (0.00906)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes
Student publication controls Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes
College fixed effects Yes Yes Observations 2794 2794 R-squared 0.23 0.23
Panel B: Cambridge Log share of each topic in student publications (1) (2) Mean top. Mean top. Indicator variable for student published in the Scientific Revolution 0.0609** (0.0267)
Student publication shares in all topics of the Scientific Revolution 0.0281*** (0.00963)
Teacher and college level controls Yes Yes
Student publication controls Yes Yes
Year fixed effects Yes Yes
College fixed effects Yes Yes Observations 2785 2785 R-squared 0.27 0.27
Notes: The table shows results from regressing student’s likelihood of becoming a fellow on students’ publications in the Scientific Revolution. Students’ publication are measured as (1) an indicator variable of whether students published at least one work in the Scientific Revolution and (2) publication shares in the Scientific Revolution. Standard errors are clustered at college level and included in parenthesis. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.
125


European Historical Economics Society
EHES Working Paper Series
Recent EHES Working Papers
2024-2025
EHES 273 The mortality impact of cholera in Germany Kalle Kappner
EHES 272 Milk Wars: Cooperation, Contestation, Conflict and the Irish War of Independence
Eoin McLaughlin, Paul Sharp, Christian Volmar Skovsgaard, Christian Vedel
EHES 271 The Trade Effects of the Plague: The Saminiati and Guasconi Bank of Florence (16261634)
Robert J R Elliott, Fabio Gatti, Eric Strobl
EHES 270 Economic Consequences of the 1933 Soviet Famine Natalya Naumenko
EHES 269 Demographic crises during the Maoist period. A case study of the Great Flood of 1975 and the forgotten famine.
Roser Alvarez-Klee, Ramon Ramon-Muñoz
EHES 268 Flooding Away the Economic Gains from Transport Infrastructure: Evidence from Colonial Jamaica
Joel Huesler, Eric Strobl
EHES 267 Did living standards actually improve under state socialism? Real wages in Bulgaria, 1924-1989
Mathias Morys, Martin Ivanov
EHES 266 How extractive was Russian Serfdom? Income inequality in Moscow Province in the early 19th century.
Elena Korchmina, Mikołaj Malinowski
EHES 265 US and Japan rivalry in Philippine interwar import manufactures market. Power politics, trade cost and competitiveness
Alejandro Ayuso-Díaz, Antonio Tena-Junguito
EHES 264 Impact of Natural Disasters on School Attendance: A Comparative Study from Colonial Jamaica Joel Huesler
All papers may be downloaded free of charge from: http://www.ehes.org/
The European Historical Economics Society is concerned with advancing education in European economic history through study of European economies and economic history. The society is registered with the Charity Commissioners of England and Wales number: 1052680