University of Groningen
Democratic constraints and adherence to the classical gold standard
Kramer, Bert S.; Milionis, Petros
Publishedin: Explorations in Economic History
DOI: 10.1016/j.eeh.2021.101436
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from it. Please check the document version below.
DocumentVersion Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Publicationdate: 2022
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citationforpublishedversion(APA): Kramer, B. S., & Milionis, P. (2022). Democratic constraints and adherence to the classical gold standard. ExplorationsinEconomicHistory, 84, Article 101436. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2021.101436
Copyright Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license. More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverneamendment.
Take-down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.
DownloadedfromtheUniversityofGroningen/UMCGresearchdatabase(Pure):http://www.rug.nl/research/portal.Fortechnicalreasonsthe numberofauthorsshownonthiscoverpageislimitedto10maximum.
Download date: 27-11-2023


Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Explorations in Economic History
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eeh
Democratic constraints and adherence to the classical gold standard
Bert S. Kramer a, Petros Milionis b,∗
a CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, Postbus 80510, 2508 GM Den Haag, The Netherlands b Department of Economics, Econometrics & Finance, Faculty of Economics & Business, University of Groningen, PO Box 800, 9700 AV Groningen, The Netherlands
article info
JEL classification: E42 F33 F50 N40
Keywords:
First globalization era Gold standard Democracy Political institutions
abstract
We study how political institutions affected the decision of countries to adhere to the classical gold standard. Using a variety of econometric techniques and controlling for a wide range of relevant economic and political factors, we find that the probability of adherence to the gold standard before World War I was ceteris paribus lower for countries which were more democratic. This effect can be linked to how open the political process was to different segments of the population and the extent of political competition resulting from that. The effect was particularly relevant for peripheral countries and it influenced both the decision of countries to adopt the gold standard as well as the decision to suspend it.
1. Introduction
Today’s highly globalized world has been the result of systematic efforts over decades to foster economic integration across countries with the aim of promoting international cooperation and development. In recent years, however, the tide of public opinion in many countries has started to turn against globalization and governments have been taking steps to shield their national economies from the competitive pressures of foreign goods, capital or workers flowing across borders.1 According to Rodrik (2011), this political backlash against globalization can be understood in the context of the following trilemma. Out of the three goals of national selfdetermination, economic globalization and a democratic political system, at most two can be pursued at the same time. While Rodrik’s trilemma is motivated by the recent rise of anti-globalization sentiments, this type of tension is not a new phenomenon. Similar arguments have been invoked to explain the retreat from globalization that took place during the interwar period (Eichengreen, 1992; Simmons, 1994; James, 2001; Wolf, 2012). This process undermined international policy coordination and eventually led to the collapse of the global monetary regime at the time, the gold standard. A common narrative for the collapse of the interwar gold standard attributes it to the increased political pressure that policy-makers faced after World War I, from stronger trade unions and a more broadly enfranchised population. In this paper we go further back in time and provide a first systematic exploration of whether these globalization-related tensions were present in the decades before World War I. This era provides an interesting comparison with today’s world, because it was also a period of growing economic and financial integration across borders, often referred to as the first era of globalization (O’Rourke
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: b.s.kramer@cpb.nl (B.S. Kramer), p.milionis@rug.nl (P. Milionis). 1 See for example the evidence presented by Colantone and Stanig (2018), Autor et al. (2020), and Rodrik (2021)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2021.101436 Received 29 January 2018; Received in revised form 7 December 2021; Accepted 9 December 2021 Available online 15 December 2021 0014-4983/© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Fig. 1. Evolution of the gold standard and democracy. Notes: The evolution of the number of independent countries on the gold standard based on our extended classification and the average polity score from the Polity IV database, as a measure of democratization, over the period from 1860 to 1913.
and Williamson, 1999; Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004). Among others it was characterized by the initial emergence of the gold standard as a monetary system after 1870. For our analysis we focus on the gold standard, as it was an essential pillar of early globalization and in order to draw a parallel with its resurrected version established during the interwar period, which only lasted from 1925 to 1936. While the classical gold standard, as the original version of system is often referred to, was abruptly suspended in 1914 with the outbreak of the World War I, retrospective accounts of the system tend to present it in a positive light in comparison with the interwar gold standard (Bordo and Schwartz, 1984; Eichengreen, 1992). This perspective may be consistent with the relative longevities of the system in these two eras, but it can also be deceptive. Crises of convertibility under the classical gold standard were not uncommon, especially in countries on the periphery of the world economy (Mitchener and Weidenmier, 2015; Mitchener and Pina, 2016). These forced several countries to abandon the gold standard already before 1914.2 The gold standard was also politically contested in major economies, such as the United States in the 1890s, where a return to bimetallism was widely debated (Friedman, 1990; Frieden, 1997).3 The existence of such tensions is not surprising if one considers another important development that took place during the decades before World War I. This was the gradual spread of democratic political institutions. This process, which political scientists refer to as the first wave of democratization, began slowly in the 1820s, picked up speed in the second half of the nineteenth century and continued until the 1920s (Huntington, 1991; Capoccia and Ziblatt, 2010). As part of this process many countries in different parts of the world made notable political transitions away from absolutism, which was the dominant system of government until the eighteenth century. They adopted written constitutions that protected fundamental individual rights and introduced a formal separation of powers between the different branches of the government. They further opened up their political systems to broader segments of the population, who gained the right to vote and to have parliamentary representation. The parallel evolution of democracy and the gold standard during the first era of globalization is illustrated in Fig. 1. The figure plots the share of independent countries world-wide that were part of the gold standard system and the corresponding average of the polity score from the Polity IV database, a typical measure of democratic political institutions. The fact that both measures exhibit an upward trend during the years before 1914 raises the question whether the spread of democratic institutions compromised the stability of the gold standard system, as is often argued for the interwar period. If so, is there any evidence for the presence of such tensions during this era? Was adherence to the gold standard harder for more democratic countries? Did countries that suspended the gold standard before 1914 do so in response to domestic political pressures?
2 This happened for instance in Argentina (1876 and 1885), Greece (1885), Portugal (1891) and Chile (1898). 3 See Section 2.4 for more details.
2


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
These are the questions that we address in this paper. Specifically, we focus on the years between 1860 and 1913 and investigate whether the decision of countries to adopt or suspend the gold standard can be partially explained by the democratic or non-democratic nature of their political institutions. For this purpose, we construct a data set for 30 countries containing information regarding gold standard adherence at an annual frequency from the mid-nineteenth century to the start of World War I. The database also includes information on several key economic variables such as GDP per capita, debt levels and trade flows, as well as different political indicators that reflect different aspects of each country’s political regime. The countries in our database cover all major economies of the time and include all documented cases of suspension of the gold standard before 1914. Using this data set we assess the importance of the link between each country’s history of gold standard adherence and its political institutions, employing a variety of econometric techniques and conditioning on several other variables. For our main analysis we consider a dynamic discrete choice model and measure how democratic political institutions were based on the polity score, as we do in Fig. 1. In this context we provide clear evidence that more democratic countries were, other things equal, less likely to adhere to the gold standard. In particular, we find that an increase in the polity score by one standard deviation was associated with a 10 percentage point decrease in the probability of adherence. This effect is comparable to the effects of other key determinants of gold standard adherence, such as the level of development or the extent of trade with other gold standard countries. Moreover, we show that this relationship holds both across countries, when looking at their average differences in the polity score in this period, and over time, when looking at changes in the polity within countries occuring as part of the democratization process. This finding is robust even when we account for potential endogeneity biases. A deeper look at the mechanism behind our results reveals that the negative relationship between democratic political institutions and adherence to the gold standard is largely driven by particular aspects of democratic politics: how competitive the political process was and how open it was to people from different social classes. Other aspects such as the extent of institutional constraints faced by the executive appear less relevant. Comparing the results across different groups of countries, we find a stronger negative relationship when we limit our sample to peripheral countries. We also distinguish further the determinants of gold standard adoptions from those of suspensions, by estimating various duration models for each type of decision, and find that democratic political institutions both decreased the likelihood of adoption and increased the likelihood of suspension of the gold standard. Overall our findings suggest that democratic political institutions, that began to spread globally during the nineteenth century, imposed constraints on policy-makers in adopting and maintaining the classical gold standard. They also resonate with similar conclusions emphasized by Eichengreen (1992) and others regarding the interwar period.
2. The classical gold standard and its historical context
The emergence of the classical gold standard as a global monetary system in the late nineteenth century is often viewed in the literature as a process of diffusion, ignited by the decision of the newly unified Germany to replace its silver-based monetary standard with one backed by gold in 1871 (Gallarotti, 1993). Before that, the only countries using the gold standard were Britain, some members of the British empire, and Portugal. Following the German decision, most of the economically advanced countries in Western Europe and North America gradually adopted the gold standard during the 1870s, while several peripheral countries followed suit during the 1880s and 1890s.4 In all cases, however, the adoption of the gold standard was a complex decision that was influenced by various economic and political considerations. In this section we briefly outline the most important ones.
2.1. Economic determinants of gold standard adherence
Economists often analyze the decision of a country to adopt a rigid monetary regime, such as the gold standard, in terms of the standard Mundell-Fleming model and of the associated policy trilemma between a fixed exchange rate arrangement, free capital flows and an independent monetary policy. As the late nineteenth century was a period of high capital mobility, policy-makers in many countries viewed the exchange rate stability that the gold standard provided as a good way to attract capital inflows from abroad. According to Bordo and Kydland (1995) and Bordo and Rockoff (1996), participation in the gold standard system served further as a credible signal that the government of country was committed to sound fiscal policy and would refrain from monetary financing of budget deficits, which was important for foreign investors. In addition to capital flows, the exchange rate stability provided by the gold standard further benefited trade flows. As documented by López-Córdova and Meissner (2003), over this period trade was subsequently higher between countries that were on the gold standard. Moreover, Meissner (2005) shows that the importance of this consideration varied across countries depending on how many of their trade partners participated in the system and it was one of the key drivers of the diffusion of the gold standard after 1871. Another factor that contributed to the emergence of the gold standard as a monetary system was the increasing value of commercial transactions that came with the second industrial revolution. As silver money is too bulky for large transactions, switching to a goldbased currency should lower the costs of monetary transactions (Eichengreen and Flandreau, 1996). This incentive was stronger for more advanced economies and was further facilitated by improvements in monetary technology for higher-quality token coinage, which eliminated the need of using precious metals like silver or copper for small transactions Redish (1990). These benefits of the gold standard came together with significant constraints in terms of monetary and fiscal policy. In theory, in order to maintain the parity with gold without imposing restrictions on capital flows, the monetary authorities had to constantly
4 See Friedman (1990), Gallarotti (1993), Eichengreen and Flandreau (1996), Flandreau (1996) and Meissner (2005) for further details.
3


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
adjust the money supply and maintain a tight fiscal policy. This limited the ability of the government to stimulate economic activity in the event of an economic downturn or to use monetary finance to cover deficits.5 In addition to the loss of policy independence, the requirement of currency convertibility precluded any adjustments to the nominal exchange rate in the case of imbalances in a country’s current or capital account. This restriction was particularly important for peripheral countries, which were subject to large gyrations in their accounts due to external shocks. In such cases, these countries were forced to restrict credit conditions and even trigger temporary deflation in order maintain convertibility.6,7
2.2. Political determinants of gold standard adherence
Apart from the aforementioned economic considerations, political considerations were also important in the decision of a country to adopt and adhere to the gold standard. Given the important implications that this decision had for the future conduct of economic policy, policy-makers had to weigh the costs and benefits based on their own political objectives. This is the typical approach taken in the literature on the political economy of exchange rates. Within this literature policy-makers are typically assumed to set their targets about the exchange rate with the aim of keeping the electorate satisfied in order to secure their own re-election (Edwards, 1996; Tornell and Velasco, 2000; Méon and Rizzo, 2002). Within the electorate one can further identify different interest groups that put pressure on policy-makers to adopt specific policies. The role of such interest groups in this context has received particular attention in the literature. In all countries that adopted the gold standard, or even considered adopting it, there were different interest groups that lobbied for or against that decision. Gallarotti (1993), Frieden (1993) and Broz (1997) discuss how this was effectively a division between hard- and soft-money interests.8 The role of this division in the decisions of countries to adopt the gold standard is probably best exemplified by the case of the United States, where the gold standard was contested by proponents of a more flexible monetary regime in the form of a silver standard or inconvertible fiat money (Frieden, 1997). Mitchener et al. (2010) highlight a similar pattern with the adoption of the gold standard in Japan, where a coalition of hard-money interests eventually succeeded in overcoming the opposition by soft-money interests. Frieden (2015) further documents how these divisions have played out in other parts of world. Beyond balancing the pressure from domestic interest groups, in their decision to adopt the gold standard policy-makers had to also consider international political developments. Hegemonic aspirations, colonial ties, global alliances and occasional conflicts between countries played their own role in making the gold standard more or less appealing for particular countries. For example, Gallarotti (1993) highlights how the German choice to replace its silver-based currency with the gold mark was largely motivated by an effort to challenge the hegemony of the British pound, whereas Flandreau (1996) argues that the rivalry between France and Germany played a key role in the collapse of bimetallism in the 1870s. Countries allied with Britain, such as Portugal or Japan, had an interest in sharing Britain’s monetary standard and Britain also tried to facilitate that (Pittaluga and Seghezza, 2016). At the same time, Britain, France and other European countries with colonial empires had an interest in promoting monetary ties with their colonies to facilitate trade and capital flows (Ferguson and Schularick, 2006; Mitchener and Weidenmier, 2008). In addition to these general political considerations that applied to all countries independently of their political regime, the literature has recognized how the specific nature of each country’s political institutions could affect its decision to adhere to the gold standard. Eichengreen (1992) emphasizes that adherence to the gold standard required policy-makers to have a minimal level of insulation to avoid political pressure to use the exchange rate and the money supply for stabilization purposes. This pressure would depend on whether policy-makers were elected, who elected them and how exactly the election process took place. Following Eichengreen’s rationale, several authors have explored this relationship quantitatively. Simmons (1994) provides some first evidence that adherence to the interwar gold standard was less likely for democracies. This evidence is complemented by three subsequent studies which focus on suspensions of the interwar gold standard (Wolf and Yousef, 2007; Wandschneider, 2008; Wolf, 2008) and which document that the risk of suspension was higher for more democratic countries. The same pattern can be seen in more recent years. Broz (2002), Carmignani et al. (2008) and Bearce and Hallerberg (2011) present evidence that in the post-Bretton Woods era more democratic countries were, other things equal, less likely to adopt and maintain a fixed exchange rate regime. The above pattern further relates to the typical electoral cycle present in a democracy, which has been shown to affect the ability of the government to maintain a fixed exchange rate arrangement such as the gold standard. As documented by Bernhard and Leblang (1999) and Bromberg et al. (2003) governments prefer to avoid changes to the exchange rate regime before elections. At the same time, frequent elections and resulting political instability are likely to make a fixed exchange rate arrangement less viable (Eichengreen et al., 1995; Klein and Marion, 1997). As we discuss in Section 2.4 below, this is related to the fact that many cases of adoption or suspension to the gold standard were contested at elections.
5 In practice the gold standard did leave some room for discretionary policy due to the fact that gold convertibility and international gold arbitrage involved some real costs. See Bloomfield (1959) and Bazot et al. (2016) for more on how fiscal and monetary policy was conducting particular countries under the gold standard. 6 See Ford (1962), Llona Rodríguez (1997) or Reis (2000) for illustrations of how this type of shocks affected gold standard adherence in Argentina, Chile and Portugal respectively. 7 Deflationary pressures during the classical gold standard were also due to the absence of large gold findings. This limited the size in world’s gold stock, which determined the rate at which the money supply grew in gold standard countries (Capie and Wood, 1997). 8 Gallarotti (1993, pp. 28–29) argues that industrialists, bankers and other urban interest groups were typically more in favor of the gold standard, whereas debtors, agriculturalists and landowners would be relatively more in favor of a more inflationary monetary regime.
4


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
2.3. Institutional changes during the first democratization wave
Although the relevance of political institutions has been discussed in the literature, this has been in the context of the interwar gold standard and more recent exchange rate arrangements. For the classical gold standard period there is no such analysis. This is striking when one considers, as mentioned in Section 1, that the emergence of the gold standard as the global monetary system took place at a time when many countries of the world began to democratize. Following the success of the American and French Revolutions, the nineteenth century sparked increased demands for political rights by people from different social classes. These demands may have been occasionally suppressed, as it happened with the 1848 revolutions. Yet, their broad and persistent appeal eventually led to a series of institutional changes in the political systems of many countries, particularly in Europe and the Americas. The exact process through which these institutional changes came about varied across countries. In most cases they took place in a gradual and incremental fashion, which makes it hard to identify key transition moments (Ziblatt, 2006; Berman, 2019). Sometimes progress was halted and improvements were reversed, as some countries temporarily backtracked. In retrospect, though, it is clear that over time these changes resulted in a clear break with the regime of absolutism that was prevalent throughout the world until the nineteenth century. This is why political scientists refer collectively to this process as the first wave of democratization (Huntington, 1991; Capoccia and Ziblatt, 2010). The institutional changes that took place as part of this democratization wave in different countries altered dramatically the political process and the functioning of government. First and foremost, there was the introduction of formal constitutions, which separated the different branches of the government and prescribed a clear role to each branch. These constitutions guaranteed a set of basic civil rights including equality before the law for all individuals. The right to vote was substantially extended and previous restrictions based on income or property were lifted. An electoral process was designed for the selection of the head of government and the determination of a national parliamentary assembly. Different laws were introduced to ensure that the electoral process was free and fair.9 As a consequence of these changes, by 1913 most countries that were politically independent had established some form of parliamentary representation through direct elections (Przeworski, 2008). While not all adult men had the right to vote in these elections, in the years before World War I there were at least 25 countries where universal male suffrage was already established and 3 which had extended it to women as well (Cook and Paxton, 1978; Engerman and Sokoloff, 2005). Even though this progress was eventually interrupted by the Great Depression and the resulting political backlash, the first wave of democratization led to significant improvements in the political institutions of many countries. As a consequence of these political reforms, in the decades before World War I there was a marked increase in the number of institutionalized democracies. Based on the binary classification of Boix et al. (2013), 18 out of the 55 independent countries in 1913 are classified as consolidated democracies, while this number is only 2 in 1860. Progress was also visible in the countries that did not make the full transition to democracy by 1913. This can be seen by looking at the average global polity score, which we report in Fig. 1 as a broad measure of democratic political institutions. For the same 55 countries we also see in the years between 1860 and 1913 a strong increase in the polity score by approximately 40%. These political changes had a clear impact on how policy was designed and conducted in a wide range of areas. As noted among others by Acemoglu and Robinson (2005) and Berman (2019), the increased political representation of middle and lower classes, that took place over this period, forced policy-makers to become more responsive to the needs of the people.10 In the context of the political economy framework that we outlined in the previous section, this means that the assessment of the costs and benefits of the decision to adhere to the gold standard should change. This is because many of the benefits of adhering to the gold standard, such as exchange rate stability and access to foreign capital, would end up accruing to a relatively small share of the population, active in sectors linked to international trade and investment. On the other hand, the domestic burdens associated with hard money and the lack of policy flexibility would be borne by wider shares of the population. Given this trade-off between policy stability and policy flexibility that will naturally emerge in this context (Frieden, 2015), it is evident that the gold standard would be viewed as a less favorable monetary regime, other things equal, in more democratic countries. Put differently, as a country becomes more democratic the median voter will shift increasingly towards individuals that place more weight on maintaining policy flexibility. This is the main reason why we should expect democratization to make adherence to the gold standard less likely and this should be related to the extent of political representation.
2.4. Historical evidence from different countries
The previous discussion summarizes the major changes in the political environment that took place in many parts of the world as part of the first wave of democratization. Such changes were bound to have an impact on decisions related to economic policy and a country’s choice of monetary regime more specifically. Here we describe briefly how these developments relate to the historical experiences of different countries with the gold standard. The way democratic politics clashed with a country’s decision to adopt the gold standard is most well known in the case of the United States. After a period of monetary inconvertibility, which began with the civil war, the United States eventually demonetized silver in 1873 and adopted the gold standard in 1879 (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). Nevertheless, both decisions where strongly
9 For more detailed accounts on the institutional changes associated with the first wave of democratization see Collier (1999), Tilly (2003), Berman (2019) and Stasavage (2020). 10 See also the empirical evidence about this provided by Aidt et al. (2006) and Pittaluga et al. (2015).
5


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
contested politically by a coalition of populist monetary interests, who first pushed for a return to the previous “greenback” paper money regime in the 1870s, and later in the 1890s for a return to bimetallism (Frieden, 1997). The US Congress largely provided the forum for these long-lasting political battles. It was there where in 1890 the Sherman Silver Purchase Act nearly succeeded in remonetizing silver, if it had not been for the veto by president Cleveland (Rockoff, 1990). Subsequently, in the presidential election of 1896, the Democratic candidate William Jennings Bryan elevated the return to bimetallism as a central point of his campaign. Although he was eventually defeated by Republican candidate William McKinley, he received strong electoral support in many parts of the country and an overall 46.7% of the popular vote. The experience of the United States resonates with that of France after the establishment of the Third Republic in 1870. This led to substantial changes in the distribution of political power, as the newly enfranchised classes began to demand a greater role in political life (Cook and Paxton, 1978). In this process the parliament sought a greater role in monetary affairs and took an active stance in promoting bimetallism (Einaudi, 2000). This created tensions with capitalist groups who pushed for the adoption of the gold standard through their influence on the presidency (Broz, 1997). In newly unified Germany, on the other hand, such pressures were much weaker. The unification of the country under Prussian leadership had endowed the new state with much more autocratic political institutions. This facilitated a strong coalition of agricultural and industrial interests in support of the gold standard (Frieden, 1993). Even though other interest groups had a preference for a less rigid monetary arrangement, these groups were never able to pose a serious threat to the government’s commitment on the gold standard (Gallarotti, 1993).11 In the cases of France and the United States, opposition to the gold standard only managed to delay the adoption process and not derail it. In other countries opposing forces successfully managed to block its adoption. One of these countries was Spain that never officially adopted the gold standard. In the 1870s Spain appeared on track to join the emerging gold standard block, together with the other Western European countries. Following the monetary reforms of 1868, with the introduction of the peseta as the national currency, Spain was transitioning towards the monetary standard of the Latin Monetary Union. Yet, as argued by Martínez-Ruiz and Nogues-Marco (2017), in an environment of competitive central banking Spain lacked the strong government to push through the necessary reforms. During the first decade of the twentieth century there were also several legislative proposals to support the adoption of the gold standard, but none of them were successful (Martín Aceña, 2000). According to the earlier analysis of Sardá (1948), this was partially due to persistent opposition by soft-money interests and partially due to the frequent government changes in the fragmented political environment of the time. In contrast to Spain, which never adopted the gold standard, Portugal had been one of the first countries to adopt it in 1854 and maintain it until 1891, as a result of careful management by the Bank of Portugal (Reis, 2000, 2007). In the 1890s a rapid reversal in the balance of payments necessitated strict monetary and fiscal policies in order to maintain convertibility. The domestic political situation, though, constrained the ability of the government to implement these policies. While Portugal was a constitutional monarchy at the time, with power alternating between the two major political parties, a potential threat to the monarchy by the Portuguese Republican Party led successive governments to try to neuter this new competitor (Livermore, 1976).12 This strategy of neutralizing political competition, which was one of the reasons why the gold standard was suspended in Portugal, appears to have played out in a different way in the case of Japan. Japan adopted the gold standard in 1897, after several years of preparation with the aim of reducing its borrowing costs and aligning its monetary standard with that of its main trade partners. Yet, public opinion was split on the question of the gold standard with some interest groups being in favor and pushing to maintain a silver standard. While Japan was not fully democratic at the time, the decision to adopt the gold standard required the authorization of the Imperial Diet in which there was sufficient opposition to the idea of the adoption. As the analysis of Mitchener et al. (2010) suggests, though, the necessary legislation was eventually approved thanks to a tactical move by the prime minister to secure the support of the main opposition party. The cases described so far highlight the potential of political competition to block the adoption or trigger the suspension of the gold standard. In authoritarian regimes the lack of such competition should have facilitated the adoption process as well. This is illustrated by the case of Russia that adopted the gold standard in 1897 as part of an ambitious industrialization policy. For a country the size of Russia, the adoption of the gold standard required accumulating a large reserve of gold and foreign exchange, which took up about two-thirds of official borrowing abroad between 1885 and 1897 (Gregory, 1979). To this end, successive finance ministers pursued a policy of tight monetary conditions along with heavy taxation of the peasantry, both of which came at the expense of domestic consumption (Barkai, 1973). Contemporary Russians were not blind to the costs that the gold standard and the associated industrialization policies imposed; in fact, there was an active and highly critical debate in Russia on this issue, as shown by von Laue (1953). In spite of this debate, the Russian finance ministry was able to pursue the adoption of the gold standard without paying too much heed to it, as the lack of any democratic institutions effectively shielded the government from popular discontent with its policies.13
11 While for the case of France and Germany the process of adopting the gold standard was also largely influenced by geopolitical considerations, such as the hegemonic interests of both countries and the indemnity paid to Germany after the Franco-Prussian war (Gallarotti, 1993; Flandreau, 1996; Meissner, 2005), it is worth noting here that these considerations can not account well for the patterns of domestic support and opposition for the gold standard. 12 In the words of Reis (2000, p. 97): “In 1891, therefore, there were only two solutions: violent deflation or inconvertibility, in the hope that in time circumstances would allow a return to gold. Political constraints determined that inconvertibility was chosen.” 13 This absence of political constraints on policy making eventually did not last and gave rise to a revolution in 1905. Yet, at that point the transition to the gold standard was effectively completed.
6


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Overall, the different country experiences with the gold standard discussed above, suggest that democratic political institutions did impose constraints on the willingness of governments to commit to the classical gold standard. While opposition to the gold standard typically originated from particular interest groups, the ability of these interest groups to influence the government in the choice of a monetary regime was largely the result of the existing institutional framework. As different institutional settings contributed in exposing or shielding policy-makers to the pressures from interest groups, the exact nature of each country’s political institutions played a crucial role in the eventual outcome. In spite of this suggestive evidence, the nature of the relationship between domestic political institutions and gold standard adherence has never been systematically analyzed for the classical gold standard era. While Meissner (2005) and Esteves and Ploeckl (2016) investigate the role of different factors in affecting the choice of countries to participate in the gold standard, their analyses focus on economic factors. Related work by Ferguson and Schularick (2012), Mitchener and Weidenmier (2015) and Mitchener and Pina (2016) looks at how global markets perceived the probability of different countries abandoning the classical gold standard based on currency risk spreads. They show that for peripheral countries these spreads were sizable and that they followed the movements in the prices of the main commodities exported by these countries. In their analyses, though, they do not link the behavior of these spreads with domestic political institutions either. This leaves open the question whether the type of political tensions witnessed during the interwar operated also during the classical gold standard era, and whether such tensions can likewise explain the patterns of adherence observed by different countries. This is the purpose of our analysis in this paper.
3. Data
To assess the role of democratic political institutions in determining adherence to the classical gold standard, relative to other factors, we construct a data set with annual information on the monetary regime of countries and various economic and political variables (Kramer and Milionis, 2021b). The data set spans the years from 1850 to 1913 and covers 30 major economies of the time. The exact list of countries that we include in our analysis is reported in Table A1. We also classify each of these countries as belonging to a core and a periphery group, based on their participation in the Atlantic economy following O’Rourke and Williamson (1999). The inclusion of countries in the data set was largely based on data availability and on the condition that the country was de facto an independent polity during the years covered in the data.14 In this section we outline the main variables that we use for our analysis and the source based on which we construct them. A more detailed data description is provided in the online appendix (Kramer and Milionis, 2021a) together with all supplementary material. Classifying adherence to the gold standard is not always a clear-cut exercise, since in practice the system’s implementation differed slightly from country to country. For the purpose of our analysis, we consider a country to be on the gold standard if its currency is freely convertible into gold at a fixed rate. We also consider this to be the case if a country’s currency was fully convertible into a gold-based foreign currency, or if a country legally commits to keeping its exchange rate fixed vis-a-vis other gold standard countries. We furthermore require the absence of any significant barriers to importing or exporting gold.15 The exact years during which each country is considered to have adhered to the gold standard based on this classification can be found in Table A1. Based on the same criteria we also classify countries which were on a silver or a bimetallic standard. The exact sources based on which we classify the monetary regimes of each country are listed in the online appendix. To measure the democratic nature of each country’s political institutions, for most of our analysis we focus on the aggregate polity score, reported by the Polity IV project (Marshall et al., 2013). We take this as our baseline measure of political institutions since it provides a broad composite index of domestic political institutions, which is comparable across countries and over time. Its composite nature also enables us to assess separately the explanatory power of the different sub-indices of the polity score. As alternatives to this approach, we employ in our analysis the binary democracy indicator constructed by Boix et al. (2013) and several variables reported by the V-Dem database (Coppedge, 2020). The latter database provides a broad range of indicators that capture specific characteristics of each country’s political institutions. Comparing the relevance of different broad and specific measures, both binary and ordinal, we can shed light on which institutional aspects were most important for gold standard adherence. Beyond measures of political institutions, we also consider other political factors that influenced a country’s decision to adhere to the gold standard discussed in Section 2.2. In particular, to measure the strength of interest groups pushing for a flexible monetary regime, we control for the share of agricultural exports in total exports available from the World Trade Historical Database of Federico and Tena-Junguito (2019). We use this measure as there is an agreement in the literature that agricultural interests were consistently opposed to rigid monetary regimes such as the gold standard (Frieden, 2015). To capture the effect of the electoral cycle we construct a dummy variable indicating the years of elections in which the office of the chief executive was at stake. This variable is constructed from the information reported in Przeworski (2013). In addition to variables reflecting domestic politics, in our analysis we use two other key geopolitical variables. The first of these is a dummy variable which equals one for a country that is involved in any kind of war in a given year. The other is a dummy variable which equals one if a country has some type of formal alliance with Britain in a given year. Both variables are coded based on data provided by the Correlates of War project (Gibler, 2009; Sarkees and Wayman, 2010). The inclusion of the war dummy is driven by the observation that outbreaks of war were often accompanied by fiscal and financial crises that could lead to suspensions of the gold
14 There are a few countries that became de facto independent during the years between 1850 and 1913. These countries enter our data set only in the years post independence. 15 As an alternative we also consider a stricter classification according to which a country is considered to adhere to the gold standard only in the case where its currency is actually convertible to gold at a fixed rate.
7


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
standard. The inclusion of the British ally dummy is motivated by the fact that the adherence of some countries to the gold standard was facilitated by the British government in exchange for geopolitical support, as discussed in Section 2.2. In terms of economic variables, first of all, we control for GDP per capita using data from the Maddison Project (2013). In line with the discussion in Section 2.1, we would expect wealthier countries to be more likely to adhere to the gold standard. We further control for population using data from Maddison (2003). This is based on the argument of Eichengreen and Flandreau (1996) that the adoption of the gold standard would be easier for smaller countries, since these did not have to take into account the general equilibrium effects on global gold- and silver markets of a potential change of their monetary system. Moreover, we include in our analysis the ratio of government debt to GDP from Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). Countries with a higher government debt were less likely to be on the gold standard, since the temptation to default or to rely on seigniorage would be higher and their ability to attract additional foreign capital would be lower. Adherence to the gold standard was also closely linked with the balance of payments of each country. Current account reversals were often the prelude to suspensions of convertibility. As current account information is not widely available for most countries before 1914, we follow the literature and employ data on trade balances, which can be measured consistently across countries. To capture trade linkages, we further consider two additional variables in our analysis. Firstly, we include the overall level of trade openness, measured as the sum of exports and imports over nominal GDP, following Klasing and Milionis (2014). We expect this ratio to be positively associated with gold standard adherence, since more open countries will find exchange rate stability more important. Secondly, using additional information on bilateral trade from Fouquin and Hugot (2016), we measure each country’s share of trade with other gold standard countries. The higher this share was, as emphasized by Meissner (2005), the larger would be the likelihood of a country wanting to be a member of the gold standard.
4. Empirical strategy
For our empirical analysis we focus mainly on the period from 1860 to 1913. Over this period we estimate the effects of the explanatory variables described in the previous section on the probability of adhering to the gold standard for the 30 countries in our data set. In this section we explain the main econometric approaches that we use for this analysis and the rationale for employing them. For our main analysis, we model gold standard adherence as a binary choice: in every year, every country makes a decision whether to adhere to the gold standard or not. We then estimate the adherence probability conditional on the choice made the previous year and the lagged values of all other explanatory variables. This is because a country’s choice regarding its monetary regime is highly inertial and changes in that regime need some time to be implemented. Thus, the choice made in a given year is likelier to depend on the conditions prevailing in the previous year.16 Using lagged values of the explanatory variables also avoids biases due to reverse causality. Formally, we estimate the following dynamic binary choice model:
Pr(GSi,t = 1|Xi,t−1,GSi,t−1) = F (βXi,t−1+γGSi,t−1 + δt + εi,t) (1)
Here GSi,t is an indicator variable equal to one if country i is on the gold standard in year t and zero otherwise.17 Xi,t−1 is a vector of explanatory variables, δt is a year fixed effect and εi,t is a stochastic error term, which we cluster at the country level. For the cumulative probability distribution F (.) our baseline choice is to assume that it is normal, which implies that equation 1 corresponds to a probit model. As part of our robustness analysis, we additionally consider the cases were F (.) is taken to be linear or logistic. In all cases we are interested in the vector of coefficients β, which captures the conditional effects of the different explanatory variables on the probability of adherence to the gold standard in each year, given the choice made in the previous year. This allows us to capture the effect of the lagged level of each variable included in Xi,t−1 on the decision of a country to change its current monetary regime. In Section 6.3, we alternatively consider a setup that uses country fixed effects in order to filter out all timeinvariant characteristics of each country and estimate how changes in the explanatory variables lead to changes in the country’s monetary regime. The relationship between these fixed effects and our main explanatory variables is also estimated as part of the analysis. The main advantages of using the model of Eq. 1 are the relatively straightforward interpretation of the estimated coefficients and the use of all available observations for the estimation. Beyond estimating the probability of adhering to the gold standard, though, it is instructive to estimate separately the determinants of adopting or suspending the gold standard in any given year and to check whether their determinants are symmetric. With that in mind, we estimate the following duration model:
h(t|Xi,t−1) = h0(t) ⋅ exp{βXi,t−1 + εi,t} (2)
Here h(t|Xi,t−1) reflects the instantaneous probability or hazard rate of a particular event occurring, given the baseline hazard h0(t) and the lagged value of the vector of explanatory variables Xi,t−1. In our setup these events are either the adoption or the suspension of the gold standard. εi,t is a stochastic error term, which is again clustered at the country level. Duration models similar to that of Eq. 2 have been used in the literature by Meissner (2005) to study the adoption of the classical gold standard and by Wolf and Yousef (2007), Wandschneider (2008) and Wolf (2008) to study the suspension of the interwar gold standard. Yet, in all of these papers the focus of the analysis is either on the adoption or on the suspension decision. Hence, a formal
16 We have explored the robustness of our results to alternative lag structures. Although the use of first lags appears most appropriate, considering contemporaneous values, second lags, or third lags of the explanatory variables does not qualitatively change our results. 17 In Section 6 we further consider alternative indicator variables which also capture adherence to silver and bimetallic standards.
8


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
comparison of the determinants of these two processes is still absent from the literature. When estimating Eq. 2, our baseline choice is to use a semi-parametric Cox proportional hazard model. For robustness purposes, however, we also employ two parametric models, the exponential and the Weibull. Doing so allows us to obtain estimates for the expected number of years until the typical country will adopt or suspend the gold standard.
5. Main results
Table 1 presents the estimation results for the dynamic binary choice model of Eq. 1, specified as a probit model. The estimation is based on all 30 countries of our sample with the dependent variable indicating adherence to the gold standard in each respective year from 1860 up to 1913. This is regressed on a varying set of explanatory variables including the gold standard adherence indicator lagged by one year. All specifications include a full set of year fixed effects to control for global trends in the appeal of the gold standard system. In column 1 we first present a simple specification where the sole explanatory variable, beyond the lagged dependent variable and the year fixed effects, is the polity score. The estimated coefficient for the lagged dependent variable is positive and statistically significant. As expected, the probability of a country adhering to the gold standard in a given year is higher if this was the case the year before. Conditional on that effect, the effect of the polity score is statistically insignificant. This specification, however, does not control for many important economic and political determinants of gold standard adherence discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. One important such factor is the level of economic development. As emphasized by previous work in the literature, countries that were more developed had a higher probability of adopting the gold standard. To account for this effect, in column 2 we include in our specification the natural logarithm of GDP per capita of each country. As expected, the effect of GDP per capita is positive and statistically significant. Conditional on that effect, we now see that the polity score has a sizable negative and statistically significant effect on gold standard adherence. Given their level of development, countries that had more open and democratic political institutions, had a lower probability of adhering to the gold standard. In column 3 we account for two other important economic determinants of gold standard adherence: country size, proxied by the natural logarithm of the population, and the government’s fiscal position, proxied by the debt to GDP ratio. The estimated effects of both variables are statistically not different from zero, suggesting that the inclusion of these variables does not substantially alter the
Table 1
Determinants of gold standard adherence.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Coefficients Magnitudes
Polity Score 0.0156 -0.0376∗∗ -0.0378∗∗ -0.0360∗∗ -0.0441∗∗ -0.0498∗∗ -0.0159∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0138) (0.0156) (0.0156) (0.0164) (0.0197) (0.0207) (0.00614) GDP per Capita (log) 1.148∗∗∗ 1.140∗∗∗ 1.146∗∗∗ 0.871∗∗∗ 0.891∗∗∗ 0.285∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.232) (0.227) (0.249) (0.309) (0.327) (0.101) Population (log) -0.00375 0.0146 -0.107 -0.0909 -0.0290 (t - 1) (0.0760) (0.0849) (0.0987) (0.103) (0.0334) Debt Ratio -0.112 -0.0941 0.0234 0.137 0.0439 (t - 1) (0.248) (0.257) (0.285) (0.273) (0.0864) Trade Balance -0.352 0.709 0.432 0.138 (t - 1) (1.959) (1.916) (1.958) (0.629) Openness 0.0620 -0.0279 0.00555 0.00177 (t - 1) (0.246) (0.249) (0.244) (0.0780) Gold Block Trade Share 0.593 1.200 1.255 0.401 (t - 1) (0.721) (0.782) (0.775) (0.255) Agricultural Exports (%) -1.567∗∗ -1.795∗∗∗ -0.573∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.706) (0.693) (0.214) Election Year 0.347 0.359∗ 0.108∗ (t - 1) (0.217) (0.216) (0.0631) War -0.818∗∗∗ -0.293∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.208) (0.0805) British Ally -0.0610 -0.0198 (t - 1) (0.223) (0.0736) Gold Standard 4.956∗∗∗ 4.826∗∗∗ 4.820∗∗∗ 4.842∗∗∗ 4.846∗∗∗ 5.042∗∗∗ 0.980∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.312) (0.289) (0.288) (0.279) (0.278) (0.286) (0.00623) Constant -2.716∗∗∗ -11.12∗∗∗ -10.95∗∗∗ -11.44∗∗∗ -7.533∗∗ -7.732∗∗ (0.266) (1.837) (1.949) (2.046) (2.962) (3.212) Observations 1259 1259 1259 1259 1259 1,259 Countries 30 30 30 30 30 30 Pseudo R-squared 0.874 0.885 0.885 0.885 0.889 0.893
Estimates of the baseline probit specification for the full country sample over the period 1860–1913. The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating adherence to the gold standard in the corresponding year. All regressors are lagged by one year. The specifications also include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.
9


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
probability of a given country adhering to the gold standard over our period of interest, given the factors that we already account for. In column 4 we add control variables related to trade. In particular, we control for the trade balance as a share of GDP, the level of openness of a country, in terms of exports and imports relative to GDP, and the share of trade with the countries that are already on the gold standard. Again, we find the estimated coefficients for all three variables to be statistically insignificant, while the inclusion of these variables in the specification does not alter the estimated effects of the other variables.18 In column 5 we further control for two factors emphasized by the political economy literature: the share of agricultural exports and the years of elections. Based on the obtained estimates, the probability of adhering to the gold standard is reduced by a higher share of agricultural exports, while it increases in years following elections.19 While these effects are not surprising, given previous work in the literature, it is interesting to note that the inclusion of these variables leads to an estimated coefficient of the polity score that is even more negative. This suggests that the effect political institutions have on gold standard adherence, as reflected in the polity score, is distinct from that of factors related to agricultural interest groups and the electoral cycle. In column 6 we also control for two dummy variables related to geopolitics: the involvement of a country in a war and the existence of an alliance with Britain. For the former we find a clear negative effect on gold standard adherence. For the latter the effect is statistically insignificant. Interestingly, we see again that the inclusion of these control variables further increases the size of the coefficient estimate for the polity score in absolute terms. Conditional on several key determinants of gold standard adherence, higher values for the polity score are associated with a reduced probability of gold standard adherence. To properly assess how important the polity score and the other variables are in determining the probability of a country adhering to the gold standard, next to the estimated coefficients in column 6 we also report the corresponding implied effects. These effects indicate by how much the probability of adhering to the gold standard would increase following an increase in each respective regressor by one unit, while all other regressors remain at their mean values. For the continuous variables these correspond to the marginal effects and for the dummy variables to the differential effects. For the polity score, which is a discrete variable, we report the differential effect at the average value, which is almost identical to the average differential effect (-0.0156 instead of -0.0159). As the reported effects clearly indicate, the strongest predictor of a country’s status regarding the gold standard in a given year is its status in the previous year. This result is not surprising given the costs involved in the adoption or the suspension of the gold standard. The magnitude of this effect also illustrates the importance of controlling for the lagged value of the gold standard dummy, given the high degree of persistence of the gold standard as a monetary regime. Comparing the implied effects for the remaining variables, we see that the war and election dummies also play an important role in the decision of countries to adhere to the gold standard. The resulting probability of adherence is 29 percentage points lower following the outbreak of a war and 11 points higher in the year after an election. To compare the effects of the continuous variables we need to note their standard deviation, reported in Table A2 in the online appendix. Combining those with the reported magnitudes in column 6 we find the strongest effects for GDP per capita, the agricultural export share and the trade share with the gold block. Specifically, we see that a one standard deviation increase in GDP per capita raises the probability of adherence to the gold standard by 17 percentage points, a one standard deviation increase in agricultural exports lowers it by 15 points, and a one standard deviation increase in trade with the gold block increases it by 10 points. Relative to these effects, which are well-established in the literature, the effect of the polity score is similar in magnitude. A one standard deviation increase in the polity score leads to a reduction of the adherence probability by approximately 10 percentage points.20 An alternative way to look at the results is to compare how the adherence probability changes across different levels of the polity score. This can been seen in Fig. 2 which reports the predicted probability across the full range of values of the polity score, from -10 to +10. As the figure clearly indicates, an increase in the polity score over that range, assuming that the other variables remain at their average values, reduces the probability of gold standard adherence by 31 percentage points from 0.88 to 0.57. While this change in the polity score is too high to be relevant for most countries in our sample, there are several cases of major political transitions that took place over our sample period that resulted in big swings in the polity score.21 Based on our estimates, these transitions should have had a substantial impact on the probability of gold standard adherence. Of course, not all countries experienced such transitions. Yet, even if we focus solely on the average change in polity score or the average within-country standard deviation across the 30 countries of our sample, which correspond to 4.60 and 2.51 points, this implies respectively a 7.3 or a 4.0 points reduction in the probability of adherence to the gold standard. Exploring these effects for different countries in our sample and different points in time also reveals interesting patterns. If we compute the implied effect of a one point increase in the polity score for the core countries, indicated in Table A1, we see that this
18 While it is statistically insignificant in this regression, the estimated coefficient for the trade share with the gold block rises as we include additional control variables and approaches conventional levels of statistical significance. 19 The estimated coefficient for the election year is slightly below conventional levels of statistical significance, but it becomes significant at the 10% level in column 6 when we include the full set of control variables. 20 For the remaining variables the implied effects that we obtain are substantially smaller and statistically insignificant. Hence, we do not discuss them explicitly. We should note here that this is not driven by the high correlation of the different regressors. Pairwise correlation coefficients between our regressors do not exceed 60%. Also, dropping some of the significant controls from the specification does not alter the statistical significance of the other controls. 21 Out of the 30 countries in our sample, 14 experience an increase in their polity score by more than 5 points over our sample period. In most cases, this change happened within a few years.
10


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Fig. 2. Predicted probability of gold standard adherence. Notes: Predicted probabilities of adherence to the gold standard for different levels of the polity score. The prediction is based on our baseline probit model estimates, reported in column 6 of Table 1, with all control variables fixed at their means. The vertical bars indicate a 95% confidence interval.
effect is higher during the earlier years of our sample.22 In 1875 it is around -0.015, but in the later years it drops close to zero. For peripheral countries we see the opposite pattern. The implied effect of a one point increase in the polity score goes up over time from -0.004 in 1875 to -0.018 in 1890 and -0.020 in 1905. These effects very much reflect the pattern of expansion of the gold standard system, which first spread among the core and later to the periphery. To illustrate these effects we can also compare the predicted probabilities of gold standard adherence for some well-known historical cases. One such case would be the contrasting experiences of two major European economies: France and Germany. Germany, whose institutions were more autocratic during the 1870s, adopted the gold standard several years earlier than France, which had more democratic institutions at the time. Our model predicts that if France in 1876 had had the same polity score as Germany, -4 instead of 5, its probability of adhering to the gold standard in that year would have been 11 points higher. Similarly, we can consider the case of Russia, which adopted the gold standard in 1897 at the time when it was an absolute monarchy and had a polity score of -10. After the 1905 revolution and the ensuing political reforms, its polity score goes up to -6. Our model predicts that at this less autocratic level, its probability of adhering to the gold standard would have been 6.4 points lower. While these counterfactual comparisons do not capture fully the historical context, like for instance the role of the gold indemnity after the Franco-Prussian war, they serve as useful illustrations of the magnitude of our main estimate. Overall, these results suggest that domestic political institutions played an important role in a country’s decision to adopt and adhere to the gold standard during the first globalization era. They also resemble the empirical findings obtained for the interwar period as well as for the post-1945 era by authors such as Simmons (1994) or Bearce and Hallerberg (2011). Yet, as the polity score is a broad indicator of a country’s political institutions, this raises the question about which particular aspects of institutions mattered the most during our period of interest. To assess this, we re-estimate the specification of column 6 using more specific institutional measures than the polity score. The results are summarized in the following two figures, which plot the coefficient estimates along with the corresponding confidence intervals. The full estimates for these regressions are reported in Tables A3 and A4 in the online appendix. In Fig. 3 we provide a comparison of how the obtained effect for the polity score changes, if we replace it in our specification with other variables from the Polity IV database.23 The first alternatives that we consider are its two main sub-components, the democracy score (democ) and the autocracy score (autoc).24 The estimated coefficients for these two variables are both statistically significant
22 The implied effects for the countries in the core and periphery groups are computed separately, assuming all other controls are at their mean values in that year for the respective group. 23 See Rota (2016) for a similar approach. 24 We should note here that the polity score reported in the Polity IV database for a given country in a given year is the difference between the separately computed democracy and autocracy scores.
11


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Fig. 3. Estimated coefficients of various institutional indicators. Notes: Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the effect on gold standard adherence of different variables from the Polity IV database and the binary democracy indicator of Boix et al. (2013). The estimates are based on a probit specification with all control variables, analogous to the specification reported in column 6 in Table 1. Full regression results can be found in Table A3 of the online appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
but with opposite signs: negative for the democracy score and positive for the autocracy score. This is not surprising. The presence of strong democratic political institutions in a given country is expected to constraint the ability of the government to maintain a rigid monetary regime, such as the gold standard, while the presence of strong autocratic political institutions is expected to have the opposite effect. Comparing further the magnitudes of the two effects suggests that the latter is stronger than the former. This implies that autocratic elements in a country’s political institutions may have been more important than democratic elements for maintaining the gold standard, by partially shielding the government from political pressure. Then we replace the overall polity score in our baseline specification with three alternative indices from the Polity IV database. These indices are the executive recruitment index (exrec), the executive constraints index (exconst) and the political competition index (polcomp). These indices are constructed in the same way as the polity, democracy and autocracy scores. Each of them reflects different aspects of each country’s political institutions. Specifically, the first rates how competitive, regulated and open the recruitment process is for the country’s chief executive, i.e. its president, monarch or other ruler. The second rates the presence and extent of institutionalized constraints on the decision-making powers of the chief executive. The third rates how open the competition between individuals and parties is in the political arena and in the electoral process. The estimated coefficients that we obtain for these three variables are all negative. This means that the probability of adherence to the gold standard was lowered by a more regulated form of executive recruitment, more institutionalized constraints on the executive, and greater political competition. Nevertheless, only the coefficient on the political competition index is statistically significant at conventional levels. This result suggests that among these different aspects of political institutions, it is the extent of competition by others who could replace them in office that most limited the willingness of policy-makers to maintain their commitment to the gold standard. It also explains why higher values for the autocracy score had a stronger effect on gold standard adherence: political competition was clearly limited in autocratic regimes, while constraints on executive recruitment and executive decision-making were still present. This comparison is evident as well when we replace in our specification the polity score with a dummy variable indicating whether or not a given country in a given year was considered a democracy based on the classification of Boix et al. (2013). Although this binary measure of democracy is correlated with the polity score, the coefficient estimate that we obtain in this case is statistically not different from zero. This suggests that being nominally a consolidated democracy as defined by Boix et al. was not the key thing that affected a country’s probability of adhering to the gold standard.25 While the comparison provided by Fig. 3 is indicative of the mechanism at play in our context, discussed in Section 2.4, in order to shed more light on the key institutional features that were crucial for gold standard adherence before World War I, we consider a set of more detailed institutional indicators provided the V-Dem database (Pemstein et al., 2020). The indicators are also introduced in our main specification instead of the polity score and the estimated effects are shown in Fig. 4. Given the evidence already obtained about the importance of having an open and competitive political process, we first look at three measures of enfranchisement. These are the share of population with the right to vote, which is referred to as the suffrage rate,
25 According to Boix et al. (2013), a country is considered a consolidated democracy if the executive is accountable to a legislature, which is elected in free and fair elections where at least half the male population has the right to vote.
12


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Fig. 4. Estimated coefficients of selected V-Dem indicators. Notes: Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for the effect on gold standard adherence of different variables from the V-Dem database. The estimates are based on a probit specification with all control variables, analogous to the specification reported in column 6 in Table 1. Full regression results can be found in Table A4 of the online appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the country level.
a dummy variable indicating the absence of voting restrictions related to income or property, and an indicator whether votes for the main legislature were counted equally across social groups. In all cases we see a clear negative relationship of gold standard adherence with these variables. This suggests that the opening of the electoral process and the broadening of the electoral base resulting from the first wave of democratization did influence the probability of countries adhering to the gold standard. To assess the importance of having free and fair elections we consider three additional variables from the V-Dem database. These are a dummy variable indicating whether in a given country regularly scheduled national elections were held, which is referred to as the electoral regime, an index variable reflecting legal barriers to party formation, and an index variable which captures the extent of legal protection of ballot secrecy. Introducing these three variables into our specification we find them all weakly negatively related to gold standard adherence. This suggests that more democratic election systems were relevant in our context, but were not the most crucial factor. We then consider a set of variables that reflect the role of the parliament in the political system. These are an index of what type of legislature the country had (unicameral, bicameral, tricameral, etc.) and an index of the extent to which the legislature of the country was directly elected. As the estimates for these indices reveal, the number of chambers appears to be an institutional feature which is not particularly related to gold standard adherence. In contrast, having a legislature where representatives are elected directly is clearly negatively related to gold standard adherence. We also consider other variables from the V-Dem database that capture the importance of checks and balances for a country’s government. In particular we consider a dummy variable indicating whether the head of government has to be selected from the parliament and a measure of the extent to which key government officials (the head of state, the head of government and cabinet ministers) respect the constitution. Having a formally elected executive who was subject to constitutional constraints was an important aspect of nineteenth century democratization. Looking at the resulting coefficient estimates in this case, however, we do not see a clear negative relationship with the probability of gold standard adherence. This is in line with the results that we saw with the Polity IV executive recruitment and executive constraints variables. Finally, to assess the role of civil rights we use two index variables from the V-Dem database which measure the extent to which civil liberties were respected in the country and the rule of law was universally enforced. Despite the fact that there were major changes in these two variables over our period of interest, in both cases we find that these changes did not make gold standard adherence less likely. Taken together these results suggest that, out of the many institutional changes associated with the first wave of democratization, most relevant in our context were changes in the extent of openness of the political process and the accountability of law-makers to the electorate.26 This partially has to do with how broadly extended the franchise was, as higher rates of enfranchisement are bound to create more space for political competition, compared to a political environment where the franchise is limited to smaller groups. However, other electoral rules mattered as well, because they equally affected the ability of different population groups to participate in and influence the political process. In that sense our conclusions echo those of Eichengreen (1992) regarding the interwar period.
26 This is something that we can also document using other databases on political institutions that cover our period of interest such as that of Przeworski (2013). Although we do not report the results here for brevity, based on the corresponding indicators from Przeworski et al., we find that having universal male suffrage and a directly elected legislature negatively affected gold standard adherence.
13


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Table 2
Robustness checks with alternative samples.
Altern. Year Samples Altern. Country Samples
Polity Score -0.0484∗∗ -0.0500∗∗ -0.0461∗∗ -0.0679∗∗ -0.0451∗∗ -0.0656∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0198) (0.0211) (0.0229) (0.0275) (0.0207) (0.0252) GDP per Capita (log) 0.813∗∗∗ 0.914∗∗∗ 0.785∗∗ 0.597∗ 0.899∗∗∗ 0.761∗∗ (t - 1) (0.306) (0.333) (0.343) (0.361) (0.337) (0.368) Population (log) -0.106 -0.0867 -0.113 -0.136 -0.0387 -0.169 (t - 1) (0.0965) (0.104) (0.106) (0.190) (0.119) (0.144) Debt Ratio 0.0720 0.147 0.0869 0.445 0.163 0.256 (t - 1) (0.236) (0.281) (0.317) (0.285) (0.291) (0.275) Trade Balance 0.349 0.473 1.365 2.570 0.943 0.522 (t - 1) (1.905) (1.969) (2.231) (2.401) (2.069) (1.950) Openness -0.00839 0.0175 -0.142 -0.309 0.0121 -0.0507 (t - 1) (0.248) (0.249) (0.260) (0.268) (0.215) (0.249) Gold Block Trade Share 1.712∗ 1.105 0.843 -1.066 0.280 1.297 (t - 1) (0.921) (0.750) (0.831) (1.685) (0.967) (0.876) Agricultural Exports (%) -2.013∗∗∗ -1.757∗∗ -1.574∗ 0.722 -1.266 -2.129∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.645) (0.717) (0.887) (1.950) (1.017) (0.811) Election Year 0.307 0.362∗ 0.229 0.321 0.316 0.383∗ (t - 1) (0.202) (0.218) (0.228) (0.239) (0.236) (0.210) War -0.784∗∗∗ -0.801∗∗∗ -1.156∗∗∗ -1.231∗∗∗ -0.817∗∗∗ -0.829∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.219) (0.207) (0.254) (0.388) (0.211) (0.232) British Ally 0.0655 -0.0946 -0.120 -0.242 -0.296 -0.0570 (t - 1) (0.195) (0.240) (0.265) (0.296) (0.246) (0.225) Gold Standard 5.065∗∗∗ 4.926∗∗∗ 5.018∗∗∗ 4.864∗∗∗ 4.976∗∗∗ 4.933∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.296) (0.314) (0.350) (0.348) (0.295) (0.261) Constant -7.960∗∗ -8.499∗∗ -6.430∗ -6.341 -7.857∗∗ -5.948 (3.320) (3.628) (3.359) (5.272) (3.975) (3.951) Observations 1339 1151 1012 739 989 1090 Countries 30 30 25 19 24 25 Pseudo R-squared 0.896 0.882 0.880 0.859 0.883 0.885 Sample Period 1850–1913 1870–1913 1860–1913 1860–1913 1860–1913 1860–1913 Excluded countries None None Core, narrow Core, broad Mon. Unions British Empire
Robustness checks for the baseline probit specification (column 6 of Table 1). Country sample and time period vary across specifications, as indicated in the bottom of the table. The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating adherence to the gold standard in the corresponding year. All regressors are lagged by one year. The specifications also include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.
In both eras the opening up of the political process to broader segments of the population, which took place as part of the first wave of democratization, resulted in policy-makers being less insulated from political pressures and gradually undermined the ability of countries to commit to the gold standard.
6. Robustness checks
Having established a clear relationship between the probability of a country adhering to the gold standard prior to World War I and how democratic its political institutions were, we proceed to assess its robustness. Specifically, we explore whether this relationship is affected by (a) changes to the composition of our sample, (b) changes to the variables that we employ and (c) changes to the econometric setup. In all cases we find that none of these changes have any major implications for our estimated relationship. In this section we present the details.
6.1. Robustness to sample composition
Table 2 provides a first set of robustness checks for our baseline probit specification by altering the composition of our sample. In column 1 we start by exploring the stability of our estimates when we expand the sample period to the years from 1850 to 1913. This allows us to also capture the determinants of early adoptions of the gold standard such as those of Canada and Portugal. In column 2 we do the opposite and shorten the sample period to the years from 1870 to 1913, the typical periodization of the classical gold standard. In both cases we find similar estimates for most regressors. Looking at the estimated coefficients of the polity score we see that they tend to rise as we exclude the years between 1850 and 1870. This result is not surprising given that most of the transitions in and out of the classical gold standard occur after 1870. Next, we exclude from our sample different groups of core countries in columns 3 and 4. In particular, in column 3 we first exclude a narrow set of core countries, following Morys (2013) and Mitchener and Weidenmier (2015), whose commitment to the gold standard was perceived by international financial markets as steadfast. These countries includes Britain, France and Germany together with Belgium and the Netherlands. In column 4 we proceed to exclude from our sample a broader set of core countries, indicated in Table A1. These are the countries that participated in the Atlantic economy according to O’Rourke and Williamson (1999) and
14


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
were able to borrow abroad in their own currency according to Flandreau and Sussman (2005). In both cases we see that restricting our sample to peripheral countries, defined broadly or narrowly, does not qualitatively alter our main result. Quantitatively, though, we see that the coefficient estimate for the polity score becomes more negative as we exclude from our sample many of the core countries.27 This suggests that the democratic constraints that we are highlighting were particularly important for peripheral countries for which commitment to the gold standard was not as firm as for core countries. This result is in line with the findings of Morys (2013) and Mitchener and Weidenmier (2015) regarding differences in the operation of the gold standard between the core and the periphery. In column 5 we proceed to exclude from our sample the countries that there were part of a monetary union when joining the gold standard. These were the members of the Latin Monetary Union (Belgium, France and Switzerland) and the Scandinavian Monetary Union (Denmark, Norway and Sweden).28 The rationale for doing so is that adherence to the gold standard for these countries involved formally some degree of coordination with other countries. Hence, they were subject to constraints that extended beyond their domestic economic and political conditions. In column 6 we instead exclude from the sample Britain and its former colonies and dominions. Britain had a long history of commitment to the gold standard and the convertibility of the pound was beyond doubt. This legacy may have persisted in former British colonies even after they became independent.29 In both cases we see that excluding these countries leads to qualitatively similar results while the coefficient estimate for the polity score again increases slightly. This suggests that our main result is strengthened as we focus on countries for which a commitment to the classical gold standard was less clear and for which domestic political constraints were potentially more relevant.30
6.2. Robustness to alternative variables
As an additional set of robustness checks for our baseline probit specification, in Table 3 we also consider variations in how we specify the explanatory and the dependent variables. A first check is to include additional lags of the polity score to our specification and check whether the estimated effect of the polity score is driven by recent or past values. Hence, in column 1 we add to the specification the second and third lag of the polity score beyond the first one. Doing so reduces the magnitude of the estimated coefficient for the first lag and increases the standard error. This is not surprising, given that the lagged values for the different years are highly correlated. As the joint F-test reveals, though, the three lags together have a statistically significant effect on gold standard adherence.31 Moreover, despite their high correlation, we still find the estimated coefficient for the first lag to be larger in magnitude than the other two. This indicates that our estimated effect captures mostly the impact of current political institutions rather than those of the past. In addition to time lags we consider the role of spatial lags. This is because the decision of each country to adopt and adhere to the gold standard is likely to be closely related to the decisions of other countries with which there is a high degree of economic interaction.32 These countries could be close neighbors as well as large trade partners. Part of this effect, of course, is already captured by controlling for openness and the share of trade with the gold block countries. Yet, as these variables may not reflect the full extent of spatial interdependencies, in columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 we add to our specification a spatial lag of the gold standard dummy to capture interactions that operate beyond the trade channel. Specifically, in column 2 we include in our specification the lagged gold standard status of each country’s five nearest neighbors from the sample, while in column 3 we include the lagged gold standard status of each country’s five largest trade partners from the sample. In both cases we find that the inclusion of these spatial lags does not alter our main findings. Our main variable of interest, the polity score, retains its magnitude and statistical significance. The same is true for the other significant controls. Moreover, we see that the estimated effect of the lagged gold standard status of each country’s nearest neighbors and that of its largest trade partners has a negative effect on its probability of adhering to the gold standard. At the same time we see in both column 2 and 3 that the estimated coefficient of the trade share with the gold block becomes strongly positive and statistically significant. This suggests that, beyond the effects already captured by our main controls, the role of spatial interactions in the decisions of countries to participate in the gold standard was limited. Another important check to consider is what happens to our results when we classify gold standard adherence in different ways. For our baseline classification we follow the common approach in the literature and treat countries to adhere to the gold standard even if they are simply “shadowing” it by maintaining a fixed exchange rate with the pound or other convertible currencies. In column 4 we instead adopt a stricter classification of gold standard adherence and classify countries as not being on the gold standard if they were only shadowing it. In column 5, on the other hand, we consider all convertible monetary systems, based not only on gold but also on silver or both metals, and distinguish them from systems based on fiat money, in line with Eichengreen and Flandreau (1996). The results that we obtain in these two cases are very similar to our baseline probit specification from Table 1. Our main variable of interest, the polity score, continues to have a negative and statistically significant effect on the probability of adherence both
27 The magnitude of the implied effect in column 4 is -0.0196 instead of -0.0159 in the baseline case. 28 Italy left the Latin Monetary Union in 1868, well before the Union transitioned to the gold standard, and is therefore best seen as monetarily independent for most of the period. See also Tattara (2003). 29 We should note here again that former colonies only enter our sample after independence. 30 In additional regressions that we do not report, we check whether the estimated coefficients for the polity score were systematically different for countries that were part of a monetary union or had colonial ties with Britain, but we do not find strong evidence for that. 31 The associated p-value of joint test is 6.48%. 32 This type of interdependence has also been studied recently by Esteves and Ploeckl (2016) using empirical network analysis.
15


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Table 3
Robustness checks with alternative variables.
Extra lags Spatial Models Altern. Monetary Regime Classifications
Neighbors Trade Partners Strict Class. Convertible Ordered (3) Ordered (4)
Polity Score -0.0480 -0.0595∗∗∗ -0.0446∗∗ -0.0430∗∗ -0.0319∗ -0.0246∗ -0.0285∗ (t - 1) (0.0661) (0.0223) (0.0211) (0.0217) (0.0192) (0.0137) (0.0171) GDP per Capita (log) 0.892∗∗∗ 0.962∗∗∗ 1.079∗∗∗ 0.671∗ 0.256 0.502∗∗ 0.767∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.330) (0.337) (0.332) (0.347) (0.259) (0.204) (0.237) Population (log) -0.0917 -0.0991 -0.142 -0.153 -0.0333 0.0414 0.0319 (t - 1) (0.103) (0.111) (0.111) (0.117) (0.104) (0.0694) (0.0831) Debt Ratio 0.137 0.164 0.0584 0.208 -0.0198 -0.0269 -0.0980 (t - 1) (0.274) (0.245) (0.302) (0.288) (0.208) (0.135) (0.153) Trade Balance 0.397 0.129 0.950 -0.0161 1.229 -0.0413 -0.140 (t - 1) (1.996) (1.986) (1.758) (2.415) (1.505) (1.458) (1.450) Openness 0.00364 0.0493 -0.118 -0.0543 -0.152 -0.0173 0.200 (t - 1) (0.240) (0.267) (0.228) (0.218) (0.215) (0.190) (0.258) Gold Block Trade Share 1.238 1.763∗∗ 2.296∗∗∗ 1.682∗∗ -0.274 0.195 0.267 (t - 1) (0.792) (0.795) (0.850) (0.840) (0.789) (0.551) (0.665) Agricultural Exports (%) -1.808∗∗∗ -2.367∗∗∗ -2.272∗∗∗ -2.221∗∗∗ -1.685∗∗ -0.522 -0.304 (t - 1) (0.687) (0.764) (0.713) (0.825) (0.736) (0.443) (0.572) Election Year 0.359∗ 0.396∗ 0.307 0.324 0.104 0.136 0.104 (t - 1) (0.217) (0.214) (0.223) (0.231) (0.209) (0.155) (0.145) War -0.816∗∗∗ -0.809∗∗∗ -0.748∗∗∗ -0.594∗∗ -0.530∗∗∗ -0.303∗∗ -0.280∗∗ (t - 1) (0.216) (0.214) (0.218) (0.232) (0.173) (0.120) (0.133) British Ally -0.0593 -0.0174 -0.0252 -0.103 -0.265 -0.0886 0.202 (t - 1) (0.221) (0.221) (0.196) (0.287) (0.187) (0.146) (0.181) Polity Score 0.00401 (t - 2) (0.0820) Polity Score -0.00666 (t - 3) (0.0660) Spatial Lag -0.823∗ -2.190∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.493) (0.701) Gold Standard 5.027∗∗∗ 5.140∗∗∗ 5.120∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.279) (0.285) (0.283) Monetary Regime 5.637∗∗∗ 4.362∗∗∗ 2.788∗∗∗ 1.785∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.444) (0.254) (0.158) (0.122) Constant -7.707∗∗ -7.945∗∗ -8.211∗∗ -5.751 1.300 (3.231) (3.331) (3.214) (3.519) (2.925) Observations 1251 1259 1259 1259 1259 1259 1259 Countries 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 Pseudo R-squared 0.892 0.894 0.895 0.910 0.845 0.741 0.677
Robustness checks for the baseline probit specification (column 6 in Table 1). For columns 1–3, the dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating adherence to the gold standard in the corresponding year. The dependent variable of column 4 is an alternative, stricter, classification of adherence to the gold standard. That of column 5 is dummy for any monetary regime with a convertible currency. Columns 6 and 7 use 3-level and 4-level monetary regime classifications, respectively. See main text for more details. All regressors are lagged by one year. The specifications also include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.
to a strict gold standard regime and to any convertible monetary regime. Comparing the coefficient estimates in these cases, we see that the estimated coefficient for the polity score in column 5 is a bit smaller in absolute terms. This suggests that political constraints may have been less important for adherence to silver and bimetallic regimes. This result is not entirely surprising, given the more flexible and inflationary nature of these regimes. Looking at the estimated coefficients of the other variables, the same factors predicting adherence to the gold standard appear to predict also adherence to convertible monetary systems more generally. Only the coefficient of GDP per capita is substantially smaller in column 5. This suggests that a country’s level of development mattered less for adherence to silver and bimetallic regimes, confirming the particular attractiveness of the gold standard for more developed economies, discussed in Section 2. In columns 6 and 7 we go beyond a binary classification of each country’s monetary regime and use instead an ordinal scale following Esteves and Ploeckl (2016). In particular we consider two such scales. For the first one we take the gold standard as being of the highest order (3) followed by a silver or a bimetallic standard (2) and finally an inconvertible paper money regime (1). For the second one we further distinguish between silver and bimetallic regimes and follow the order (4) for the gold standard, (3) for a bimetallic standard, (2) for a silver standard and (1) for paper money. Using these ordered variables we estimate an ordered probit model instead of our binary choice model of Eq. 1. Also in these two cases the estimation reveals qualitatively similar results. A higher value for the polity score, other things equal, reduces the probability of a country adhering to a more strict monetary regime, defined on the basis of either classification. This is reassuring, as it suggests that our results do not hinge on the exact way in which we classify monetary regimes. Comparing also the estimates between the two columns, we see that the coefficient estimates for both the polity score and GDP per capita are larger
16


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Table 4
Robustness checks with alternative econometrics setups.
Linear Prob. Logit Panel Logit Cross-Section Panel Probit IV Probit
Dynamic Static Dynamic Static RE 2nd Stage 1st Stage
Polity Score -0.00196∗∗ -0.104∗∗ -0.382∗ -0.526∗∗∗ -0.0746∗ -0.0691∗∗ -0.0659∗∗ -0.203∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.000931) (0.0466) (0.221) (0.0895) (0.0388) (0.0326) (0.0272) (0.0373) GDP per Capita (log) 0.0389∗∗∗ 1.801∗∗ -0.284 1.301 1.127∗∗ 1.276∗∗∗ 1.182∗∗∗ 1.644∗∗∗ 5.330∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0117) (0.745) (2.955) (1.417) (0.459) (0.414) (0.401) (0.276) (0.369) Population (log) -0.000338 -0.200 6.636 6.039∗∗∗ -0.121 -0.142 -0.120 -0.178∗∗ -0.599∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.00416) (0.221) (4.436) (1.822) (0.160) (0.161) (0.117) (0.0769) (0.129) Debt Ratio 0.00435 0.317 -1.467 -1.881∗∗∗ 0.473 0.168 0.0806 0.166 0.518 (t - 1) (0.0149) (0.592) (1.364) (0.721) (0.533) (0.479) (0.294) (0.159) (0.364) Trade Balance 0.0854 0.746 9.761 10.22∗∗∗ -1.683 -2.195 1.026 -1.284 -10.52∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.103) (4.905) (6.479) (3.727) (4.845) (4.313) (2.278) (1.463) (2.335) Openness 0.00187 0.0435 0.462 9.091∗∗∗ -0.398 -0.425 -0.0987 -0.708∗∗ -4.786∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.00965) (0.539) (4.225) (2.184) (0.680) (0.592) (0.299) (0.322) (0.264) Gold Block Trade Share 0.0257 2.423 3.503 3.778∗∗∗ 0.786 0.994 1.515∗ 0.828 -2.719∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0416) (1.573) (3.213) (1.303) (1.334) (1.212) (0.920) (0.551) (0.891) Agricultural Exports (%) -0.0423∗ -3.640∗∗ -16.63 -2.285 -1.683 -1.408 -2.175∗∗ -2.364∗∗∗ -6.852∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0212) (1.439) (11.47) (3.202) (0.984) (0.974) (0.933) (0.555) (0.711) Election Year 0.0138 0.606 0.810 0.286 -2.669∗ -2.512∗ 0.418∗ 0.309∗ 0.0783 (t - 1) (0.0112) (0.491) (0.620) (0.262) (1.442) (1.364) (0.228) (0.165) (0.270) War -0.0232∗∗ -1.683∗∗∗ -1.707∗ -0.553 -1.695 -1.064 -0.873∗∗∗ -0.664∗∗∗ 0.0560 (t - 1) (0.00922) (0.545) (1.038) (0.349) (1.311) (1.113) (0.258) (0.186) (0.300) British Ally 0.00623 0.246 0.660 0.368 0.135 0.417 0.00290 -0.510∗∗ -2.012∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0109) (0.562) (1.198) (0.489) (0.520) (0.590) (0.241) (0.233) (0.306) Years with Cont. Elections 0.241∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0867) Years since Independence -0.692∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.118) Gold Standard 0.918∗∗∗ 10.21∗∗∗ 10.55∗∗∗ 5.157∗∗∗ 3.229∗∗∗ -2.396∗∗∗ (t - 1) (0.0139) (1.042) (1.552) (0.357) (1.059) (0.295) Constant -0.241∗∗ -15.68∗∗ -5.534 -6.852 -9.358∗∗ -10.97∗∗∗ -24.26∗∗∗ (0.118) (7.219) (4.825) (4.617) (3.701) (2.497) (3.928) Observations 1259 1259 958 958 30 30 1259 1259 1259 (Pseudo) R-squared 0.910 0.893 0.901 0.484 0.609 0.559 0.556 0.556 Countries 30 30 21 21 30 30 30 30 30 Country Effects None None Fixed Fixed - - Random None None
Robustness checks for the baseline specification (column 6 of Table 1) estimated as indicated in the header. The dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating adherence to the gold standard in the corresponding year. Models estimated are a linear probability model, a pooled logit model, a (dynamic and static) fixed-effects logit model, a cross-sectional model as described in Section 6.3, a random-effects probit model, and an IV probit model, respectively. All regressors are lagged by one year. The specifications also include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.
in absolute value as we switch from the three- to the four-level classification. Stricter monetary regimes appear to have been more attractive for more developed economies, but at the same time less attractive for more democratic countries.
6.3. Robustness to econometric setup
Having reported these robustness checks for our baseline probit specification, in Table 4 we explore robustness with respect to alternative econometric setups. In column 1 we estimate our main specification with the full set of controls assuming instead a linear probability model. In column 2 we do the same assuming a logit model. Although the estimated coefficients in these two cases are not directly comparable with those of column 6 of Table 1, qualitatively the pattern that emerges is very similar. The polity score has a negative effect on the probability of adherence to the gold standard, while the rest of the variables have the same effects that we found previously. Looking at the magnitudes of the implied effects across the three models, which we do not report for brevity, we generally see similar patterns for the logit model as for the probit model. For the polity score, in particular, the implied effect is -0.0164 rather than -0.0159. For the linear probability model the corresponding effects indicated by the estimated coefficients for all explanatory variables are quantitatively smaller. Yet, given that the linearity assumption for the equation (1) is not easy to justify given our outcome variable, we only report here the estimated coefficients.33 In columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 we proceed to add country fixed effects to our specification. Given that this can not be done in the context of the probit model, we add these fixed effects to the logit specification of column 2. The only difference between columns 3 and 4 is that in the latter case we drop the lagged dependent variable from the specification. This is because the lagged dependent variable in the presence of cross-sectional fixed effects may lead to biased estimates.
33 See Horrace and Oaxaca (2006) for more on the limits of the linear probability model.
17


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
As we can see in column 3, with the inclusion of country fixed effects the coefficients of all control variables, apart from the war dummy, become statistically insignificant. In spite of that, the coefficient of the polity score is still negative and statistically significant. Once we drop the lagged dependent variable in column 4, as expected, we see that several of the control variables, including the population level, the debt to GDP ratio, the trade balance, the openness ratio and the share of trade with the gold block, are now estimated to have statistically significant effects on the gold standard adherence probability. For the polity score we now obtain an even larger coefficient in absolute terms compared to column 3. Comparing the implied effects of the coefficients from the logit models with country fixed effects from columns 3 and 4 with those of the previous ones is not straightforward, as the approach that we used to compute these effects is not applicable in a setup with fixed effects. Looking at the estimated semi-elasticities from the three logit setups and the probit, we find that both setups with country fixed effects imply much larger effects for the polity score. Compared to a semi-elasticity of about -0.021 obtained from the probit and logit models, the models of columns 3 and 4 imply semi-elasticities for the polity score of -0.168 and -0.231 respectively. While these implied effects may appear as a bit too high, taken together they do clearly suggest that the changes in democratic political institutions did play a role in the decision of countries to adhere to the classical gold standard. In columns 5 and 6 we shift our focus to the cross-sectional relationship between the polity score and the gold standard adherence. For this purpose we first estimate a dynamic or static version of our logit regression, which only includes country and time dummies. Then the estimated value for the country fixed effects are regressed on the average values of our explanatory variables over our sample period. Column 5 presents these estimates when the country fixed effects are obtained from a dynamic logit regression. Column 6 does the same when the country fixed effects are obtained from a static logit regression. In both cases we see a clear negative relationship between the average value of each country’s polity score and the baseline probability of the adhering to the gold standard, as proxied by the estimated country fixed effects. In column 7 of Table 4 we shift back to a probit model, but in this case we use the panel probit estimator which allows for the inclusion of random effects. Given that we can not include cross-sectional fixed effects in our probit specification, the inclusion of random effects may allow us to account for part of the unobserved heterogeneity across our sample countries. Doing so does not qualitatively alter our main results, while quantitatively the estimated effect of polity score that we obtain is clearly larger than in our baseline. In this setup, we can further include lagged values of the polity score, following Wooldridge (2005) to account for potential bias from having a lagged dependent variable. As the estimates that we obtain in this case are very similar we omit them for brevity. The final part of our robustness analysis is to consider the potential endogeneity bias that may be present in our estimated coefficient for the polity score. This bias could be due to the fact that the polity score is an imperfect measure of a country’s political institutions. Alternatively, a bias could arise from the omission of other important determinants of gold standard adherence that may be correlated with the polity score. To correct for this potential bias, we pursue an instrumental variable strategy using two instruments for the polity score: (a) the number of years since each country effectively became an independent polity and (b) the number of years each country has held elections without interruption. The two instruments together should capture variation in the political history of each country as an independent democratic polity. Over our sample period, which spans the first wave of democratization, this variation should correlate with each country’s political institutions, as reflected in the polity score. Yet, they should not relate to the probability of each country adhering to the gold standard, which emerged as a monetary system only in the second half of the nineteenth century, beyond their indirect effect via the country’s political institutions.34 Using this instrumentation strategy, we re-estimate our baseline probit specification in column 8, using instead of the actual polity score the predicted one from the first stage regression reported in column 9. As the second-stage estimates reveal, the instrumented polity score still has a negative and statistically significant effect on the probability of adherence to the gold standard, controlling for all other baseline controls. The estimated coefficient in this case is even larger in absolute value than the one reported in Table 1 and is closer to the ones reported in the fixed effects models of columns 3 and 4. It suggests that our baseline specification from Table 1 provides a conservative estimate of the true effect that democratic political institutions had on gold standard adherence. Inspecting the first stage estimates in column 9 also confirms the strength and the validity of the instruments. Both instruments enter significantly in the first stage with their effects operating in different ways. Countries which have been independent for more years tend to have a lower polity score, while countries that have had a longer experience with elections in the past tend to have a higher polity score. This is not surprising in the context of the first wave of democratization, since countries that became independent during the nineteenth century had more modern and more democratic political institutions. Conditional on that effect, captured by our first instrument, their history of uninterrupted elections, captured by our second instrument, is also important. This is because democratization did not always evolve smoothly, and it was occasionally interrupted by wars, revolutions and coups. Together the two instruments reflect well the key historical forces that shaped the political institutions of countries during our sample period. This is also reflected in the joint F-test for the significance of the two instruments in the first stage. This test yields a value of 27.1, which is safely above the critical threshold of 10 suggested by Staiger and Stock (1997). Furthermore, the Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions supports the validity of our instruments, as it yields a p-value of 0.9, far from the rejection territory. This suggests that assuming the exogeneity of one of our instruments we can safely confirm the exogeneity of the other.35
34 This is the key exclusion restriction for our instruments. In our main specification, which controls for several other determinants of gold standard adherence, it is sufficient if the exclusion restriction holds conditional on this set of controls. We think that this is plausible, as any violation of the exclusion restriction has to come through a channel different than all those captured in our specification. 35 While the Sargan test does not provide a perfect validation for our instruments, this can be further supported by additional tests such as the second-stage Wald test. Repeating the estimation with each instrument separately also results in similar estimates.
18


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
7. Separating adoption and suspension decisions
Having established the robustness of our main results regarding the decision of countries to adhere to the gold standard, we now turn to investigate separately the role of domestic political institutions in the processes of adoption and suspension of the gold standard. For this purpose we estimate the duration model of Eq. 2, for the decision to adopt the gold standard and for the opposite decision to suspend it. Doing so we can assess whether the determinants of adoption and suspension decisions were symmetric and, more specifically, whether democratization contributed both to decreases in the chance of adoption and increases in the chance of suspension. Since a country can only adopt the gold standard if it currently uses an alternative monetary system, in any year the set of countries that are subject to the hazard of adoption— in terms of duration analysis — corresponds to those countries which do not adhere to the gold standard yet. The opposite is true for the case of gold standard suspension: only those countries already using the gold standard are at risk of suspension. Given that, the numbers of observations based on which we perform our estimations in these two setups are substantially smaller than in our baseline probit setup. In the context of this analysis we need to further clarify how to treat countries that drop out of the sample following an adoption or a suspension decision. In the case of an adoption, for example, a country leaves the sample once it has joined the gold standard. The same country, however, may end up in the future being subject to a renewed hazard of adoption, if in the meantime it ends up leaving the gold standard. As a priori it is not certain whether the determinants of adoption are similar for countries that have previously participated in the gold standard to those who never have, we estimate two versions of each hazard ratio: one based on all cases of adoptions or suspensions and one that leaves countries out of the risk-set permanently after their initial adoptions or suspensions.36 Beyond these adjustments to our sample, we also stratify the sample into a core and a periphery group of countries, based on the classification reported in Table A1, to account for potential differences in the baseline hazard rates between these two groups of countries. Like before, we lag all regressors by one year. Thus, our estimates reflect how a change in any of the regressors in a given year would alter the risk of a country adopting or suspending the gold standard during the next year. The estimates of the Cox proportional hazard models for the adoption decisions are presented in Table 5.37 Columns 1 and 2 present the coefficients of the model of equation 2 for the adoption of the gold standard, first only for initial entries (i.e. adoptions) and then for both initial entries and re-entries. The coefficient of our main variable of interest, the polity score, is negative and statistically significant in both specifications, in line with our earlier findings. Thus, the hazard of adoption is lower in countries where the political institutions are organized in a more democratic fashion. In these two versions of the adoption model, we find statistically significant coefficients for the war dummy, for population size (in column 1), and for the debt ratio (in column 2). The signs of these coefficients are the same as those found in the probit model of Table 1. For the other control variables we do not obtain statistically significant coefficients, although in most cases the sign is the same for the two versions. We then proceed to assess the robustness of these results based on a number of alternative specifications.38 Firstly, we test whether the use of contemporaneous rather than lagged values of the independent variables makes a difference, the results of which are presented in column 3. Secondly, we test how our results change when we make alternative stratification choices. To do so, we estimate the model of adoptions by stratifying the baseline hazard in three alternative ways: in column 4 we do not stratify the baseline at all and assume a uniform baseline hazard for all countries, in column 5 we stratify on the basis of the narrow classification of core countries discussed in Section 6.1, and in column 6 we stratify countries on the basis of continent. Thirdly, we estimate two parametric versions of a duration model, which assume respectively an exponential or a Weibull distribution of the baseline hazard h0(t). The drawback of these parametric models is that they are more restrictive than the Cox model, while the upshot is that these models allow us to estimate the average expected time to adoption given levels of the covariates. The results of the exponential and Weibull parametric models are presented in columns 7 and 8. In all specifications the coefficient of the polity score remains negative and statistically significant, with the exception of the exponential model. In some specifications we observe that the coefficient estimates for some additional control variables become statistically significant, such as that of GDP per capita, the trade share with the gold block and the British ally dummy. Across all specifications, though, the size of the coefficient of the polity score is quite stable, varying from -0.103 to -0.165. Thus, we can conclude that our main result is robust to alternative specifications of the adoption model. As this analysis demonstrates, democratic institutions made the adoption of the gold standard less likely, all else equal, which is in line with the result found in Section 5. In terms of magnitude, the estimated effects in this case are somewhat larger than what we found using the probit model of Section 5. The coefficient of the polity score found in column 1 of Table 5 translates into a hazard ratio of 0.89. This means that for a one-point increase of the polity score, the hazard of adopting the gold standard decreases by 10.9%. This is larger than the effect found in Table 1, which estimates that a one-point increase of the polity score decreases the probability of adhering to the gold standard by 1.6 percentage point. One should note, however, that the difference in interpreta
36 A related question here is about the effect that previous participation in the gold standard system might have on the likelihood of re-adoption. Unfortunately, though, the number of cases in which a country adopts or suspends twice is far too limited to analyze this systematically. 37 We also test all Cox proportional hazard models for the validity of the proportional hazard assumption. Proportionality of the full model is not rejected for any of the models of Tables 5 and 6, although the proportionality of the polity score is rejected in one case (column 2 of Table 6). 38 All robustness checks cover only first adoptions, i.e. they are counterparts to column 1 of Table 5.
19


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Table 5
Duration models for gold standard adoption.
Initial Entries Incl. Re-entries Non-Lagged Non-Stratified Stratified by: Parametric
Narrow Core Continent Exponential Weibull
Polity Score -0.115∗ -0.138∗∗∗ -0.165∗∗ -0.107∗∗ -0.116∗∗ -0.129∗ -0.103 -0.153∗ (t - 1) (0.0632) (0.0448) (0.0693) (0.0512) (0.0482) (0.0675) (0.0718) (0.0813) GDP per Capita (log) 1.403 0.949 1.766 2.508∗∗ 2.741∗∗ 2.686∗∗ 2.315∗∗ 2.108∗ (t - 1) (1.252) (0.637) (1.092) (1.121) (1.239) (1.129) (1.064) (1.173) Population (log) -0.582∗∗ -0.321 -0.405 -0.329 -0.263 -0.376∗ -0.131 -0.565 (t - 1) (0.234) (0.203) (0.308) (0.246) (0.250) (0.203) (0.316) (0.363) Debt Ratio 0.965 1.090∗∗ 0.496 0.283 0.580 0.389 0.317 1.419 (t - 1) (0.806) (0.432) (0.911) (0.761) (0.740) (0.770) (0.981) (0.893) Trade Balance -0.943 3.964 -3.520 -2.632 -4.066 -2.548 1.307 1.860 (t - 1) (5.217) (2.968) (5.024) (5.184) (5.554) (5.509) (8.030) (6.865) Openness -0.285 -0.116 -0.338 0.236 0.436 0.893 0.423 -0.241 (t - 1) (0.424) (0.467) (0.506) (0.461) (0.518) (1.121) (0.476) (0.574) Gold Block Trade Share -1.424 -2.460 -2.019 1.625 1.924 2.676∗∗∗ 3.343∗∗ -1.020 (t - 1) (1.525) (1.842) (2.211) (1.216) (1.519) (1.005) (1.413) (2.439) Agricultural Exports (%) 1.415 2.879 1.157 -1.980 -2.268 -2.523 -2.677 4.698 (t - 1) (3.060) (2.794) (2.667) (1.954) (1.660) (2.724) (2.699) (4.820) Election Year 0.348 0.645 0.571 0.355 -0.0279 0.334 0.670 0.646 (t - 1) (0.472) (0.400) (0.643) (0.528) (0.460) (0.495) (0.485) (0.404) War -1.270∗ -1.913∗∗∗ -0.844 -1.399 -1.838∗∗∗ -0.632 -1.473 -1.824∗∗ (t - 1) (0.665) (0.647) (0.699) (0.901) (0.680) (0.850) (0.980) (0.832) British Ally 0.988 -0.387 1.585∗ 1.311∗ 1.193 1.613∗∗ 0.786∗∗ 0.284 (t - 1) (0.926) (0.787) (0.885) (0.739) (0.733) (0.810) (0.385) (0.935) Observations 456 577 472 456 456 456 456 456 Entries 19 23 20 19 19 19 19 19 Countries 22 24 23 22 22 22 22 22 Log-Likelihood -25.27 -42.18 -28.74 -31.51 -26.94 -19.97 -4.661 7.862
Estimates of coefficients (not hazard ratios) of different duration models, where “failure” is the adoption of the gold standard. All models include the full country sample and cover the period 1860–1913. Columns 1–6 are based on Cox proportional hazard models, whereas columns 7 and 8 are based on the parametric duration models indicated in the header. All regressors are lagged by one year, except in column 3 where the contemporanous regressors are used. The baseline hazard is stratified into a core and a periphery group, except for columns 4–6 (which are not stratified, stratified by the alternative core/periphery definition, and by continent, respectively). Standard errors are clustered at the country level. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.
Table 6
Duration models for gold standard suspension.
Initial Exits Incl. Re-exits Lagged Non-Stratified Stratified by: Parametric
Narrow Core Continent Exponential Weibull
Polity Score 0.585∗∗∗ 0.210 0.376∗ 0.107∗ 0.104∗ 0.0670 0.151∗ 0.151∗ (0.155) (0.145) (0.202) (0.0558) (0.0594) (0.170) (0.0799) (0.0800) GDP per Capita (log) -2.618∗ 0.176 -1.457 -2.672∗∗ -2.270∗ -6.816∗ -1.678 -1.688 (1.575) (1.437) (1.273) (1.077) (1.207) (3.910) (1.306) (1.384) Population (log) -0.494 0.322 0.223 -0.247 -0.219 -0.616 -0.169 -0.176 (0.484) (0.425) (0.396) (0.385) (0.376) (0.467) (0.284) (0.419) War 4.608∗∗∗ 2.124 2.191∗ 2.409 2.716∗ 1.567 1.286 1.285 (1.139) (1.353) (1.260) (1.466) (1.498) (1.432) (0.832) (0.834) Agricultural Exports 0.447 2.343 2.333 5.489 3.000 -4.810 2.018 1.992 (4.037) (3.642) (4.919) (3.563) (3.494) (5.019) (4.244) (4.257) Openness 2.963∗∗∗ 3.154∗∗∗ 4.061∗∗ 0.868 1.398∗ 0.372 0.896∗∗∗ 0.888∗ (0.931) (1.065) (1.599) (0.613) (0.740) (0.844) (0.283) (0.505) Observations 668 693 664 668 668 668 668 668 Countries 26 27 26 26 26 26 26 26 Exits 7 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 Log-Likelihood -5.331 -8.146 -7.209 -11.47 -10.74 -5.818 -3.155 -3.155
Estimates of coefficients (not hazard ratios) of different duration models, where “failure” is the suspension of the gold standard. All models include the full country sample and cover the period 1860–1913. Columns 1–6 are based on Cox proportional hazard models, whereas columns 7 and 8 are based on the parametric duration models indicated in the header. In contrast to other models, contemporaneous values of regressors are used, except for column 3 (see main text). The baseline hazard is stratified into a core and a periphery group, except for columns 4–6 (which are not stratified, stratified by the alternative core/periphery definition, and by continent, respectively). Standard errors are clustered at the country-level. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.
20


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Fig. 5. Expected time to adoption. Notes: The estimated expected time until a country adopts the gold standard at different points in time for values of the polity score fixed to -10, 0, or +10. The estimates are based on the non-stratified Weibull model, with all control variables fixed at their cross-country annual means.
tion between these two models lies in the distinction between the probabilities of adhering to the gold standard versus adopting it.39 An alternative way to interpret these magnitudes is to ask what the expected time to adoption of the gold standard would have been for the average country, given its political institutions. As this method requires the use of a parametric model, we use the Weibull model to predict the expected adoption time for different levels of the polity score. We do so as the Weibull model is less restrictive than the exponential in its assumptions regarding the baseline hazard rate. Fig. 5 shows the results of this exercise for three cases. These cases correspond to the average country being: (a) fully autocratic with a polity score of -10, (b) perfectly democratic with a polity score of 10, or (c) an intermediate case with a polity score of 0.40 As is evident from the figure, the expected time to gold standard adoption decreases over the course of our sample period. This is the result of various factors, such as network externalities or the observed growth in GDP per capita, which have positive effects on gold standard adoption and therefore decrease the expected time to adoption. Conditional on these factors, Figure 5 makes clear that the expected time to adoption is also affected by each country’s political institutions. For example, the average country in 1890, had it not adopted the gold standard yet, would have had an expected time to adoption of approximately 51 years if it had been fully democratic, whereas this expected time is only 17 years for a fully autocratic country. In Table 6 we estimate a similar set of duration models for the process of gold standard suspension. However, since the number of cases in which a country suspended the gold standard before 1914 is fairly limited, we cannot include all the explanatory variables when estimating the Cox model for suspensions, since the model would become over-specified. For this reason, in the specification of the suspension model we limit the number of independent variables to six, based on their predictive power. Beyond the polity score, the specification therefore includes as controls only the level of economic development, population size, the war dummy, the share of agriculture in total exports, and the degree of openness.41 Given our focus on suspension decisions, in our baseline setup we use the contemporaneous levels of the explanatory variables rather than their first lags to predict the hazard of a gold standard suspension. The reason for this is that the suspension of the gold standard was in most cases a more short-term decision than its adoption. Especially for matters like political upheaval or the outbreak
39 There are also other reasons why the estimated magnitudes differ between these models. The estimates of the duration model are based on a smaller sample, as countries leave the sample once they have adopted the gold standard. At the same time the inclusion of the lagged dependent variable in our baseline probit setup actually downplays the importance of political institutions by attenuating the magnitude of the polity score’s coefficient, as seen in Section 6.3. 40 All other covariates are fixed at their means. We estimate these curves on the basis of a non-stratified Weibull model, as our interest lies in the effect on the average country across the full sample. 41 We have estimated similar sets of models for other sub-groups of control variables. The result that the polity score’s coefficient is generally positive, but its significance and size varies across models, is also something we find for these other choices of controls.
21


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Fig. 6. Expected time to suspension. Notes: The estimated expected time until a country suspends the gold standard at different points in time for values of the polity score fixed to -10, 0, or +10. The estimates are based on the non-stratified Weibull model, with all control variables fixed at their cross-country annual means.
of a war, it is likely that the effects would have led to an immediate suspension of the gold standard in the same year rather than a year later. Table 6 shows the results of these estimations, where the columns are ordered in an analogous fashion to Table 5. Column 1 provides the estimates when the model uses only initial suspensions, while in column 2 countries are allowed to re-enter the risk set once they adopt the gold standard again. Columns 3–8 test the robustness of the estimates of column 1 to alternative choices of timing (lagged independent variables), stratification, or parametrization of the baseline hazard. Comparing the obtained estimation results across columns, we see that estimated coefficients are a bit more sensitive in this setup. This is not entirely surprising given the small number of gold standard suspensions that took place before World War I. Nevertheless, in all cases we see that the effect of the polity score is always estimated to be positive and in most cases it is also statistically significant. This suggests that countries with more democratic political institutions were ceteris paribus more likely to suspend the gold standard after having adopted it. To interpret the estimated magnitude of our main effect, we follow the same approach as before and estimate the expected time to suspension for the average country in each year given its political institutions. To do so, we use again the Weibull model, for which the estimated coefficient of the polity score is comparatively conservative.42 Based on these estimates, Figure 6 presents the expected time to suspension for the same three hypothetical cases as in Fig. 5. Focusing now on a country which had adopted the gold standard by 1890, if it was perfectly democratic with a polity score of 10, the expectation would be that it would remain on the gold standard for another 39 years. This expectation, however, would increase to 148 years if the country was fully autocratic. While these predictions should be interpreted with caution, given the relative variability of our estimates in Table 6, they clearly suggest that democratic political institutions also played an important role in the decision of countries to suspend the gold standard. Taken together the results of this section indicate a degree of symmetry in the determinants of gold standard adoption and suspension decisions. Overall, participation in the gold standard system was more difficult for countries where domestic political institutions were more democratic and this made an adoption decision in any given year less likely and a suspension decision more likely.
8. Conclusion
In the extensive literature on the classical gold standard, the decision of countries to participate in the system is often analyzed in purely economic terms, with policy-makers balancing the benefits related to trade and capital market access against the costs in terms of monetary and fiscal policy independence. The analysis presented in this paper highlights an alternative political economy
42 According to the estimates of column 8, a one-point increase in the polity score decreases the hazard of suspension by 16.3%.
22


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
mechanism that affected this decision. We document that adherence to the gold standard before World War I was, other things equal, less likely for countries where domestic political institutions were more democratic, as proxied by their polity score. This effect is quantitatively relevant in explaining differences in the adherence probability both across countries and over time compared to the effects of other economic and political factors emphasized by the literature. Moreover, it is shown to be robust to various changes in the employed sample of countries and the econometric setup, including potential endogeneity concerns. Exploring further the mechanism behind our main result, we see that the probability of countries’ adhering to the gold standard can be associated with particular aspects of democratic politics. These relate to the extent of competition in the political process, the extent of representativeness in the key decision-making bodies and the extent of electoral pressure that politicians faced. These aspects all began to change dramatically in the nineteenth century as part of the first wave of democratization, which opened up the political process to broader segments of society. As political systems gradually transitioned in a more democratic direction in the decades before World War I, countries participating in the gold standard were subject to greater constraints. This is because key policy decisions had to be approved by parliamentary assemblies where representatives were directly elected at regular intervals from a broad electorate. Taken together these results suggest that adherence to the classical gold standard was largely facilitated by political institutions that sufficiently shielded the government from political pressure when designing and implementing monetary and fiscal policy. Variation in these institutions, thus, can account for the different patterns of adherence observed before World War I. This conclusion echoes the explanation provided by Eichengreen regarding the collapse of gold standard during the interwar period. Yet, to our knowledge until now it has not been studied systematically in the context of the classical gold standard. In fact, based on these findings, one may wonder whether the classical gold standard system could have survived much longer even in the absence of the World War I.43 What bearings do these findings have on contemporary debates regarding the future of globalization? Would a revived gold standard be a feasible option for the international monetary system in the twenty-first century, as some have advocated? For this system to be credible in the eyes of international financial markets, it would require long-term commitments by policy-makers to exchange rate stability, fiscal discipline and limited control over monetary policy. In democratically organized societies, these longterm policy commitments by governments and policy-makers are generally expected to give rise to the same tensions highlighted by our results. In today’s political environment with open elections and universal suffrage firmly established in many countries of the world, it is questionable whether such commitments will be seen as credible.
Acknowledgements
This paper has benefited from useful comments and suggestions by Rob Alessie, Dirk Bezemer, David Chilosi, Mauricio Drelichman, Rui Esteves, Giovanni Federico, Philip Fliers, Felix Graefenberg, Abe de Jong, Herman de Jong, Christopher Meissner, Pavlos Petroulas, the editors of this journal and several anonymous reviewers. The authors would also like to thank seminar participants at the Bank of Greece, the LSE and the universities of British Columbia, Groningen and Oxford as well as conference participants at the 2016 Summer School on Globalization and Inequality, the 2016 Posthumus RDC Meeting, the 2016 Sound Economic History Workshop, the 2017 EBHS Conference, the 2017 EHES Conference, the 2018 World Economic History Congress and the 2020 WEast Meeting for helpful comments. The authors would further like to declare that they have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper.
Table A1
Country sample.
Country Years on Gold Standard Core / Periphery Country Years on Gold Standard Core / Periphery
Argentina 1867-76, 1883-85, 1900-14 Periphery Japan 1897–1917 Periphery Australia 1821–1915 Periphery Mexico 1905-13 Periphery Austria-Hungary 1892–1914 Periphery Netherlands 1875–1914 Core Belgium 1878–1914 Core Norway 1873–1914 Core Brazil 1888-89, 1906-14 Periphery Ottoman Empire 1881–1914 Periphery Bulgaria 1906-12 Periphery Portugal 1854-91 Periphery Canada 1854–1914 Core Romania 1892–1914 Periphery Chile 1895-98 Periphery Russia 1897–1914 Periphery China - Periphery South Africa 1821–1914 Periphery Colombia - Periphery Spain - Periphery Denmark 1873–1914 Core Sweden 1873–1914 Core France 1878–1914 Core Switzerland 1878–1914 Core Germany 1871–1914 Core United Kingdom 1821–1914 Core Greece 1885, 1910-14 Periphery United States 1879–1917 Core Italy 1883-94 Periphery Uruguay 1876–1914 Periphery
List of countries used in our analysis. Countries in italics are those countries that were a member of a currency union while they were on the gold standard. See main text for details on when we consider countries to be on the gold standard, and for details on the core-periphery distinction.
43 This is the view presented by de Cecco (1974): “T]he tree felled by the [1914] crisis was already rotten” (p. 128).
23


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Supplementary material
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 10.1016/j.eeh.2021.101436
References
Acemoglu, D., Robinson, J.A., 2005. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, U.S.A.. Aidt, T.S., Dutta, J., Loukoianova, E., 2006. Democracy comes to europe: franchise extension and fiscal outcomes 1830–1939. Eur Econ Rev 50, 249–283. Autor, D., Dorn, D., Hanson, G., Majlesi, K., 2020. Importing political polarization? the electoral consequences of rising trade exposure. American Economic Review 110 (10), 3139–3183. Barkai, H., 1973. The macro-economics of tsarist russia in the industrialization era: monetary developments, the balance of payments and the gold standard. Journal of Economic History 33 (2), 339–371. Bazot, G., Bordo, M.D., Monnet, E., 2016. International shocks and the balance sheet of the bank of france under the classical gold standard. Explor Econ Hist 62, 87–107. Bearce, D.H., Hallerberg, M., 2011. Democracy and de facto exchange rate regimes. Economics & Politics 23 (2), 172–194. Berman, S., 2019. Democracy and Dictatorship in Europe: From the Ancien Regime to the Present Day. Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K.. Bernhard, W., Leblang, D., 1999. Democratic institutions and exchange-rate commitments. Int Organ 53 (1), 71–97. Bloomfield, A.I., 1959. Monetary Policy Under the International Gold Standard, 1880–1914. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, U.S.A.. Boix, C., Miller, M., Rosato, S., 2013. A complete data set of political regimes, 1800–2007. Comp Polit Stud 46 (12), 1523–1554. Bordo, M.D., Kydland, F.E., 1995. The gold standard as a rule: an essay in exploration. Explor Econ Hist 32 (4), 423–464. Bordo, M.D., Rockoff, H., 1996. The gold standard as a good housekeeping seal of approval. Journal of Economic History 56 (2), 389–428. Bordo, M.D., Schwartz, A.J., 1984. A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard, 1821–1931. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, U.S.A.. Bromberg, S.B., Frieden, J., Stein, E., 2003. Sustaining fixed rates: the political economy of currency pegs in latin america. J Appl Econ 8 (2), 203–225. Broz, J.L., 1997. The domestic politics of international monetary order. In: Skidmore, D. (Ed.), Contested Social Orders and International Politics. Vanderbilt University Press, Nashville, U.S.A. & London, U.K., pp. 53–91. Broz, J.L., 2002. Political system transparency and monetary commitment regimes. Int Organ 56 (4), 861–887. Capie, F., Wood, G., 1997. Great depression of 1873 deldDel- deliIns–1896. In: Glasner, D., Cooley, T.F. (Eds.), Business Cycles and Depressions: an Encyclopedia. Garland Publishing, New York, U.S.A., pp. 148–149. Capoccia, G., Ziblatt, D., 2010. The historical turn in democratization studies: a new research agenda for europe and beyond. Comp Polit Stud 43 (8–9), 931–968. Carmignani, F., Colombo, E., Tirelli, P., 2008. Exploring different views of exchange rate regime choice. J Int Money Finance 27 (7), 1177–1197. de Cecco, M., 1974. The International Gold Standard: Money and Empire. St. Martin’s Press, New York, U.S.A.. Colantone, I., Stanig, P., 2018. The trade origins of economic nationalism: import competition and voting behavior in western europe. Am J Pol Sci 62 (4), 936–953. Collier, R.B., 1999. Paths Towards Democracy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Cook, C., Paxton, J., 1978. European Political Facts, 1848–1918. Macmillan Press, London, U.K.. Coppedge, M., et al., 2020. V-dem country-year, country-date dataset v10. Varieties of Democracy Project. Edwards, S., 1996. Exchange Rates and the Political Economy of Macroeconomic Discipline. American Economic Review 86 (2), 159–163. Eichengreen, B., 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–1939. Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K.. Eichengreen, B., Flandreau, M., 1996. The Geography of the Gold Standard. In: de Macedo, J.B., Eichengreen, B., Reis, J. (Eds.), Currency Convertibility: The Gold Standard and Beyond. Routledge, London, U.K., pp. 113–143. Eichengreen, B., Rose, A.K., Wyplosz, C., 1995. Exchange market mayhem: the antecedents and aftermath of speculative attacks. Economic Policy 10 (21), 249–312. Einaudi, L.L., 2000. From the franc to the ‘europe’: the attempted transformation of the latin monetary union into a european monetary union, 1865–1873. Economic History Review LIII (2), 284–308. Engerman, S.L., Sokoloff, K.L., 2005. The evolution of suffrage institutions in the new world. Journal of Economic History 65 (4), 891–921. Esteves, R., Ploeckl, F., 2016. Gold and trade: An empirical simulation approach. Mimeo. Federico, G., Tena-Junguito, A., 2019. World trade, 1800–1938: a new synthesis. Revista de Historia Económica, Journal of Iberian and Latin American Economic History 37 (1), 9–41. Ferguson, N., Schularick, M., 2006. The empire effect: the determinants of country risk in the first age of globalization, 1880–1913. Journal of Economic History 66 (2), 283–312. Ferguson, N., Schularick, M., 2012. The ”thin film of gold”: monetary rules and policy credibility. Eur Rev Econ Hist 16 (4), 384–407. Flandreau, M., 1996. The french crime of 1873: an essay on the emergence of the international gold standard, 1870–1880. Journal of Economic History 56 (4), 862–897. Flandreau, M., Sussman, N., 2005. Old sins: exchange clauses and European foreign lending in the nineteenth century. In: Eichengreen, B., Hausmann, R. (Eds.), Other People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, U.S.A.. Ford, A.G., 1962. The Gold Standard: Britain and Argentina. Clarendon Press, Oxford, U.K.. Fouquin, M., Hugot, J., 2016. Two Centuries of Bilateral Trade and Gravity data: 1827–2014. Working Paper. Universitas Económica, Universidad Javeriana - Bogotá. Frieden, J.A., 1993. The dynamics of international monetary systems: international and domestic factors in the rise, reign, and demise of the classical gold standard. In: Snyder, J., Jervis, R. (Eds.), Coping with Complexity in the International System. Westview Press, Boulder, U.S.A., pp. 137–162. Frieden, J.A., 1997. Monetary populism in nineteenth-century america: an open economy interpretation. Journal of Economic History 57 (2), 367–395. Frieden, J.A., 2015. Currency Politics: The Political Economy of Exchange Rate Policy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, U.S.A.. Friedman, M., 1990. The crime of 1873. Journal of Political Economy 98 (6), 1159–1194. Friedman, M., Schwartz, A.J., 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960. Princeton University Press, Princeton, U.S.A.. Gallarotti, G.M., 1993. The scramble for gold: Monetary regime transformation in the1870 deldDel’<dollar> deliIns delpprime<dollar>s. In: Bordo, M.D., Capie, F. (Eds.), Monetary Regimes in Transition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., pp. 85–104. Gibler, D.M., 2009. International military alliances, 1648–2008. CQ Press, Washington DC, U.S.A.. Gregory, P.R., 1979. The russian balance of payments, the gold standard and monetary policy: a historical example of foreign capital movement. Journal of Economic History 39 (2), 379–400. Horrace, W.C., Oaxaca, R.L., 2006. Results on the bias and inconsistency of ordinary least squares for the linear probability model. Econ Lett 90 (3), 321–327. Huntington, S.P., 1991. Democracy’s third wave. Journal of Democracy 2 (2), 12–34. James, H., 2001. The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great Depression. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, U.S.A.. Klasing, M.J., Milionis, P., 2014. Quantifying the evolution of world trade, 1870–1949. J Int Econ 92 (1), 185–197. Klein, M.W., Marion, N.P., 1997. Explaining the duration of exchange-rate pegs. J Dev Econ 54 (2), 387–404. Kramer, B. S., Milionis, P., 2021a. Democratic constraints and adherence to the classical gold standard. Online Appendix. Kramer, B. S., Milionis, P., 2021b. Democratic constraints and adherence to the classical gold standard (dataset). Project openicpsr-156401. von Laue, T.H., 1953. The high cost and the gamble of the witte system: achapter in the industrialization of Russia. Journal of Economic History 13 (4), 425–448. Livermore, H.V., 1976. A New History of Portugal, 2nd Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.. Llona Rodríguez, A., 1997. Chilean monetary history, 1860–1925 an overview. Revista de historia económica 15 (1), 125–157. López-Córdova, J.E., Meissner, C.M., 2003. Exchange-rate regimes and international trade: evidence from the classical gold standard era. American Economic Review 93 (1), 344–353.
24


B.S. Kramer and P. Milionis Explorations in Economic History 84 (2022) 101436
Maddison, A., 2003. The World Economy: Volume 2 - Historical statistics. Development Studies Center, OECD, Paris, France. Maddison Project, 2013. The maddison project, 2013 version. http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm. Marshall, M. G., Gurr, T. R., Jaggers, K., 2013. Polity iv project, data users’ manual. http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/p4manualv2015.pdf. Martín Aceña, P., 2000. The Spanish monetary experience. In: Martín-Aceña, P., Reis, J. (Eds.), Monetary Standards in the Periphery. Macmillan Press, London, U.K.. Martínez-Ruiz, E., Nogues-Marco, P., 2017. The political economy of exchange rate stability during the gold standard. the case of spain, 1874–1914. University of Geneva, Working Paper. Meissner, C.M., 2005. A new world order: explaining the international diffusion of the gold standard, 1870–1913. J Int Econ 66, 385–406. Méon, P.-G., Rizzo, J.-M., 2002. The viability of fixed exchange rate commitments: does politics matter? a theoretical and empirical investigation. Open Economies Review 13 (2), 111–132. Mitchener, K.J., Pina, G., 2016. Pegxit Pressure: Evidence From the Classical Gold Standard. Working Paper. NBER. Mitchener, K.J., Shizume, M., Weidenmier, M.D., 2010. Why did countries adopt the gold standard? lessons from japan. Journal of Economic History 70 (1), 27–56. Mitchener, K.J., Weidenmier, M., 2008. Trade and empire. Economic Journal 118 (533), 1805–1834. Mitchener, K.J., Weidenmier, M.D., 2015. Was the classical gold standard credible on the periphery? evidence from currency risk. Journal of Economic History 75 (2), 479–511. Morys, M., 2013. Discount rate policy under the classical gold standard: core versus periphery (1870s-1914). Explor Econ Hist 50, 205–226. Obstfeld, M., Taylor, A.M., 2004. Global Capital Markets. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.. O’Rourke, K.H., Williamson, J.G., 1999. Globalization and History: The Evolution of a Nineteenth-Century Atlantic Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, U.S.A.. Pemstein, D., Marquardt, K.L., Tzelgov, E., ting Wang, Y., Medzihorsky, J., Krusell, J., Miri, F., von Römer, J., et al., 2020. The V-Dem Measurement Model: Latent Variable Analysis for Cross-National and Cross-Temporal Expert-Coded Data. Working Paper. University of Gothenburg: Varieties of Democracy Institute. Pittaluga, G.B., Cama, G., Seghezza, E., 2015. Democracy, extension of suffrage, and redistribution in nineteenth-century europe. Eur Rev Econ Hist 19 (4), 317–334. Pittaluga, G.B., Seghezza, E., 2016. How japan remained on the gold standard despite unsustainable external debt. Explor Econ Hist 29, 40–54. Przeworski, A., 2008. Conquered or granted? a history of suffrage extensions. Br J Polit Sci 39 (2), 291–321. Przeworski, A., et al., 2013. Political institutions and political events (pipe) data set. Department of Politics, New York University. Redish, A., 1990. The evolution of the gold standard in england. Journal of Economic History L (4), 789–805. Reinhart, C.M., Rogoff, K.S., 2011. From financial crash to debt crisis. American Economic Review 101 (5), 1676–1706. Reis, J., 2000. The gold standard in Portugal. In: Martín-Aceña, P., Reis, J. (Eds.), Monetary Standards in the Periphery. Macmillan Press, London, U.K.. Reis, J., 2007. An ‘art’, not a ‘science’? central bank management in portugal under the gold standard, 1863-87. Economic History Review 60 (4), 712–741. Rockoff, H., 1990. The “wizard of oz” as a monetary allegory. Journal of Political Economy 98 (4), 739–760. Rodrik, D., 2011. The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy. W.W. Norton, New York, U.S.A. and London, U.K.. Rodrik, D., 2021. Why does globalization fuel populism? economics, culture, and the rise of right-wing populism. Annu Rev Econom 13 (1). Rota, M., 2016. Military spending, fiscal capacity and the democracy puzzle. Explor Econ Hist 60, 41–51. Sardá, J., 1948. La Política Monetaria y las Fluctuaciones de la Economía Española en el Siglo XIX. CSIC, Instituto Sancho de Moncada de Economia, Madrid, Spain. Sarkees, M.R., Wayman, F., 2010. Resort to War: 1816 - 2007. CQ Press, Washington DC, U.S.A.. Simmons, B.A., 1994. Who Adjusts? Domestic Sources of Foreign Economic Policy During the Interwar Years. Princeton University Press, Princeton, U.S.A.. Staiger, D., Stock, J.H., 1997. Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments. Econometrica 65 (3), 557–586. Stasavage, D., 2020. The Decline and Rise of Democracy: A Global History from Antiquity to Today. Princeton University Press, Princeton, U.S.A.. Tattara, G., 2003. Paper money but a gold debt: italy on the gold standard. Explor Econ Hist 40, 122–142. Tilly, C., 2003. Contention and Democracy in Europe, 1650–2000 (Cambridge Studies in Contentious Politics). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.. Tornell, A., Velasco, A., 2000. Fixed versus flexible exchange rates: which provides more fiscal discipline? J Monet Econ 45 (2), 399–436. Wandschneider, K., 2008. The stability of the interwar gold exchange standard: did politics matter? Journal of Economic History 68 (1), 151–181. Wolf, H.C., Yousef, T.M., 2007. Breaking the fetters: Why did countries exit the interwar gold standard? In: Hatton, T.J., O‘Rourke, K.H., Taylor, A.M. (Eds.) The New Comparative Economic History: Essays in Honor of Jeffrey G. Williamson. MIT Press, Cambridge, U.S.A., pp. 241–266. Wolf, N., 2008. Scylla and charybdis. explaining europe’s exit from gold, january 1928-december 1936. Explor Econ Hist 45, 383–401. Wolf, N., 2012. Crises and policy responses within the political trilemma: Europe, 1929-36 and 2008-11. European Review of History: Revue européenne d’histoire 19 (6), 855–879. Wooldridge, J.M., 2005. Simple solutions to the initial conditions problem in dynamic, nonlinear panel data models with unobserved heterogeneity. Journal of Applied Econometrics 20 (1), 39–54. Ziblatt, D., 2006. How did europe democratize? World Polit 58 (2), 311–338.
25