Politics in Modern Greece




Politics in Modern Greece
Keith R. Legg
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California 1969


Stanford University Press Stanford, California © 1969 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University Printed in the United States of America L.C. 69-18495 SBN 8047-0705-7


To Sue
135158




Preface
Hopefully, this book will serve two purposes. First, it provides a description
and analysis of the contemporary Greek political system. It is the culmina¬
tion of an interest that goes back to a summer sojourn in 1956. This interest
was rekindled and the present study undertaken in 1963, with the encour¬
agement and guidance of Professor Ernst Haas. Second, a study of modern
Greece may draw attention to a neglected but important category of con¬
temporary political systems. Until recently, political scientists have been
preoccupied with the developing nations of Asia and Africa, or with de¬
veloped industrial states. Greece and similar countries in Europe and Latin
America are set apart from the first group because they have long been in¬
dependent; yet they remain very unlike the developed industrial states in
their levels of economic development or the operation of their political sys¬
tems. Perhaps the framework I have found useful for explaining Greek
politics can be used elsewhere. More important, studies of political systems
in this category can suggest other models of political development and re¬
gression.
Within the relatively short span of research and writing, there have been
tremendous alterations in the Greek political system. The rapidity of polit¬
ical change has provided many opportunities and considerable incentive for
constant reinterpretation and revision. The background work for the study
was largely completed before the electoral victory of George Papandreou
and the Center Union in November 1963. Field research in Greece began
in the late summer of 1964 and was completed a month before the fall of
the Papandreou government in the following summer. The first analysis
of the data was completed before the coup of April 1967, and the original
manuscript was submitted as a dissertation to the Department of Political
Science at the University of California, Berkeley. The present book is a
complete revision of that dissertation.
Field research was made possible through a Foreign Area Fellowship.


viii Preface
Additional assistance was forthcoming from the Graduate School of the
University of California, Berkeley. The research in Greece would have been
impossible without the friendship, guidance, and connections of many
Greek friends. Mr. George Yemenakis, in particular, arranged interviews
with members of parliament and other notables, and also acted as an inter¬
preter. He was an unfailing source of information on contemporary political
and social life in Greece.
I am also grateful to Professor Benjamin Ward, who, along with Profes¬
sor Haas, read and commented on the original manuscript. Several of my
colleagues—James Morrison, Rene Lemarchand, and the late Charles Farris
at the University of Florida, and Joseph Schlesinger and Paul Abramson of
Michigan State University—read and commented on individual chapters.
Mr. Enrique Baloyra of the Political Science Data Lab at the University of
Florida advised on statistical matters. Mr. Bill Brimmer did the map. I am
also grateful to my editor, Mr. James Trosper; he made a sometimes garbled
manuscript readable, and his attention to detail saved me from numerous
errors and inconsistencies. The major typing chores were shared by Lor¬
raine Viscardi at Gainesville and June Black at Berkeley. Mr. Augusto
Quesada assisted in the final preparation of the manuscript.
Finally, special thanks go to my wife, Sue, to whom this book is dedicated.
Her assistance—financial, scholarly, and otherwise—was very great indeed.
Needless to say, I alone am responsible for the contents and the conclusions.
K.R.L.
University of Florida
fune 2j, 7969
N


Contents
Introduction i
I. The Background of Greek Politics
1. The Character of Greek Society 31
2. The Development of the Modern Greek State 41
3. The International Factor 62
II. The Political System
4. Consensus and Dissensus 81
5. Interest Groups 98
6. Political Parties 125
7. Politics at the Parliamentary Level 163
8. Politics at the Extraparliamentary Level 186
9. Military Oligarchy: The Coup of 1967 221
III. Political Recruitment
10. Socialization and the Family 249
11. Occupational Backgrounds and Local Connections 274
12. The Political Elite 296
Appendixes 319
A. Research Methods, 319
B. Classification of Eparchies by Party Competition, 324
C. Abbreviations of Greek Political Parties, 328
Notes 335
Bibliography 349
Index 357




Politics in Modern Greece


x0K*AN
POLITICAL REGIONS OF MODERN GREECE
MACEDONIA Thessaloniki
THESSALY
Larisa
Patras
Piraeus
PELOPONNESUS
a. CVCIADt
Statute Miles


Introduction
Greece hovers on the threshold between Europe and the non-Western world,
between the “developed” and “developing” nations. Greece was the cradle
of Western civilization, yet spent crucial centuries outside the pale of that
civilization. Geographically, it is European, yet Greeks themselves speak
of “going to Europe”; and depending on their purpose, the classifications
imposed by foreigners make Greece a Middle Eastern, Balkan, or Mediter¬
ranean state. Greece possesses all the political institutions of modern demo¬
cratic states. However, these institutions have not operated in the fashion
of their Western European counterparts, and Greek parliamentary politics
seem to be concerned with matters either settled or ignored in contem¬
porary Western political systems. Even more disturbing to Western ob¬
servers have been the periodic suspensions of representative institutions by
the Greek military. On the other hand, Greece can scarcely be considered
a typical “underdeveloped” country. By the usual indices of modernity,
Greece ranks in the upper half of all nations.1 One hundred years ago Greece
was very like many Western countries, and her borrowed political institu¬
tions operated as their Western European prototypes did.
Greece represents a type of political system that emerged from colonial
status or foreign subjugation in the nineteenth century but lagged behind
Western Europe and the United States in economic development, ability to
cope with social change, and the development of strong representative in¬
stitutions. Many countries in Latin America would be included in this cate¬
gory; several Eastern European states (although their independence came
later) would also have qualified before World War II. In a recent volume
that used factor analysis to distinguish international regions, Greece was
placed in a “Western community” category, even though she had a lower
factor score for economic development than any other nation in that cate¬
gory.2 In fact, the Greek score was much closer to the mean scores reported
for a category of “semideveloped” Latins and for the Eastern European


2 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
countries. One finds that descriptions of society and politics in nineteenth
century Greece do not differ substantially from contemporary accounts.
Modern Greece may exemplify a failure of development, a retarded develop¬
ment, or a case of relatively permanent stagnation.
Political development is an elusive concept. It is far easier to note varying
concepts of political development or to list the characteristics of developed
polities than it is to rank actual states in terms of political “modernity.” Some
discussions assume modernization means eventual development of the char¬
acteristics found in a Western political system—rationalization of authority,
orderly legal and administrative processes, differentiation of governmental
structures, particular political infrastructures, widespread political partici¬
pation, and some degree of governmental responsiveness.3 Although these
are very general attributes, the system envisioned is usually an open, con¬
stitutional democracy. However, particular institutional arrangements and
values are not always associated with levels of economic development.4 In
reality, there is a great range of “more or less” in any of these characteristics
in Western political systems, and an even greater range in developing ones.
Most political scientists now recognize that political development is not a
unlinear or inevitable progression toward some predetermined goal, but is
instead just one dimension of social change; the precise relationship of poli¬
tics to other aspects of the social system will vary from system to system. It
is perhaps most useful to view political development, like Alfred Diamant,
as a “generic process of successfully sustaining new demands, goals, and or¬
ganizations in a flexible manner.”5 Using this yardstick, Greece and the
countries in her category are significant variants of the standard Western
political model. Researchers in comparative politics have, until recently,
tended to ignore this class of systems and have constructed their general
models on the basis of experience in Africa, Asia, or the industrial West.
This is unfortunate, since an examination of this class of “transitional” sys¬
tems would be very useful in establishing the theoretical links between “de¬
veloped” and “developing” countries. At the very least, the concepts of
“transition” and “political modernity” could be far more accurately defined.
THE DEVELOPMENTAL PROCESS
There are a number of general models of political development that
should, in theory, be applicable to all political systems, including that of
Greece. However, many of these theoretical efforts are difficult to utilize in
the study of an actual political system. Only a few are worked out in much


Introduction 3
detail; and in most cases there is a chasm between the conceptual framework
and the data that must be organized and explained. More basically, the
Greek political system simply cannot be understood using any single model
of political development advanced thus far. Since the major effort here is
an explanation of Greece rather than model building, I have pursued an
eclectic course. In the following pages, I have derived a very general process
model from the most complete developmental theories—those most directed
toward transitional systems—namely, the theories of Gabriel Almond and
G. Bingham Powell, David Apter, and Fred Riggs.* The elements and
interrelationships of the general model are then refined to reflect the Greek
situation. Recent classifications of the military and of political parties are
used to specify the major actors, and a model proposed by Arend Lijphart
to explain stability in fragmented Western democracies is revised to offer an
explanation for the unstable pattern of Greek politics.
Despite differences in phraseology and emphasis, the three developmental
models have a basically similar definition of development. For Apter, de¬
velopment is a “continuous process of differentiation and increasing com¬
plexity.”6 For Almond and Powell, a principal aspect of the development
or transformation of political systems is also “role or structural differentia¬
tion.”7 Riggs, using optics as a heuristic device, views development in terms
of the degree of “diffraction” in the society—that is, the increasing differ¬
entiation of structures and the number of roles held concurrently by mem¬
bers of the system.8 For each author, differentiation is an index of develop¬
ment in a broad sense only; the major focus in each of the presentations is the
explanation for this development and its ramifications, particularly in its
political aspects.
Writers in comparative politics often distinguish between the develop¬
mental process in older nations and that in the new nations. However, the
class of “transitional” countries that we are concerned with are left in an
ambiguous positions. Apter and Riggs both pose two developmental paths,
one characteristic of the West, the other of “developing” nations. Apter bases
his division on the differences between industrialization and modernization.
Industrialization is a process in which “the expansion of productive enter¬
prises is the integrating factor in social life”; by itself, it creates certain
structural and organizational uniformities. Modernization, a more general
* The discussion here is based on Riggs, Administration in Developing Countries-, Almond and Powell, Comparative Politics-, and Apter, The Politics of Modernization. The more recent for¬
mulation presented by Apter in “Political Systems and Developmental Change” is also used.


POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
4
term, refers to the spread of roles originating in industrial societies to sys¬
tems without industrial infrastructures.9 In this context, pressures for change
do not originate internally, but are produced by the international environ¬
ment or the actions of the governmental elite. Riggs, without making an
explicit distinction between modernization and industrialization, differ¬
entiates the new nations from the older ones by the sources of pressures for
change. Endogenous societies, in his terminology, change because of internal
pressures; exogenous (or exo-prismatic) ones change because of outside
pressures.10 Riggs bases further distinctions on the rate of change.
Almond and Powell also suggest that changes in a political system can be
a response to pressures from the international environment, domestic so¬
ciety, or the local elites themselves.11 However, they seem to consider societal
changes as most crucial. They do not make an explicit distinction between
developmental processes in the old and new nations, although on several
occasions a divergence can be inferred. The system challenges recognized by
these authors—state building, nation building, participation, and resource
distribution, all of which lead to further structural differentiation and cul¬
tural secularization—are all based on European experience.12 Presumably
the same pattern and sequence occurs in non-Western settings. At one point
Almond and Powell do suggest that some new states were provided with
differentiated political infrastructures before they needed them, and before
the new societies were ready for them; but these systems are then described
as “historical accidents.”13
The authors considered here all warn the reader that there is no inevitable
trend in the direction of greater development. To Almond and Powell, it
is “quite clear that regressions, or reversals, occur commonly in the de¬
velopment of political systems.”14 But in general, “When one variable in a
system changes in magnitude or in quality, the others are subjected to strains
and are transformed; the system changes its pattern of performance or the
unruly component is disciplined by regulator mechanisms.”15 There is no
further explanation of regression, and their typology of political systems
only hints at the possibility. They recognize that a system might remain
permanently underdeveloped at one point in their discussion, but this, too,
is not pushed further.16
According to Apter, each level of development has an appropriate political
system. Each political system eventually reaches a “ceiling,” at which point
system change is likely because the resources of development can no longer
be redeployed.17 Presumably, Western political systems “fit” their societies


Introduction 5
at various stages of development, since the political infrastructures de¬
veloped along with the differentiation of roles; however, modern roles will
not “fit” into a nonindustrial setting. “The goal of modernizing societies,
i.e., industrialization, is a simple one, but the political problem, managing
the complexities of role, becomes greater the closer a country moves toward
the goal.”18 Modernization as a process may seem irreversible; but whether
the normal result of Western industrialization can be induced through po¬
litical action remains problematical.
The major burden of Riggs’s work is to delineate one final outcome of
the developmental process: a “prismatic” society that may fall far short of
full economic development or political and social modernity as defined in
Western terms. The prismatic society is usually found in a country where
resources are scarce. It is not merely the midpoint between modern and tra¬
ditional societies, but a special case, possessing unique features found in
neither of the others—although Riggs does not suggest that every prismatic
society must be like every other one. He does suggest several ways out of the
impasse posed by a prismatic society, but he seems to discount the possibility
of escape.* As Lucian Pye has noted, since the “logic of behavior in a ‘pris¬
matic’ or ‘transitional’ society makes so much sense, why should we expect
such societies to seek change and modernization?”19 Riggs, in reality, pro¬
jects a static model; retrogression to a traditional system is as precluded as
advancement to a modern one.
TYPOLOGIES OF POLITICAL SYSTEMS
Logically, typologies as classificatory schemes follow observation and pre¬
cede the devising of general propositions. The comparison that leads to a
general theory is possible only after classification is completed. To be satis¬
factory in logical terms, the categories in any typology must be mutually
exclusive, yet jointly exhaustive. Every object in the classification scheme
must fall into one or another category.20 However, social scientists have
repeatedly argued that “problems and their answers are so closely linked
to the categories and nomenclature adopted by the investigator that all these
elements develop concurrently.”21 Unfortunately, the attributes of exhaus¬
tiveness and exclusiveness must be tied to empirical fact if the classification
•There are four possible strategies: a country could exploit colonial possessions, thus creating funds to use domestically; it might negotiate long-term loans with foreign powers; it might receive outright gifts from the same source; or finally, it might try to counter negative develop¬ ment by changing its economic policies and trying to accumulate internal capital. The very
nature of a prismatic society seems to render any of these strategies hopeless.


6 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
scheme is to lead to useful generalization. Arend Lijphart suggests that a
natural typology of political systems should perform two functions: “(i)
It should facilitate comparison among different types and aid in the dis¬
covery of significant characteristics that are logically independent of the
criteria defining the type but empirically associated with the different types.
(2) It should also facilitate comparison within each type, with the attributes
held in common by all of the systems within the type serving as the ‘control’
variables, or parameters.”22
By and large, a typology that includes all political systems must be at such
a high level of abstraction that its usefulness in classifying empirical systems
is limited. Comparison is also hindered because the operational definition of
the dimensions used in the classification scheme is often unclear. In one way
or another, the political scientists discussed here have all constructed typolo¬
gies to be used in the examination of all political systems, from traditional
to modern. It is from these typologies that the conceptual frameworks asso¬
ciated with these men have been derived. There is relative agreement on the
characteristics associated with “modern” and “traditional” political systems.
However, the different authors vary in their operational definitions of each
type, in the relationship that they acknowledge between types, and in the
degree to which they are willing to make comparisons within each type.
Even so, each theoretician is able to work with “traditional” and “modern”
types. The major problems concern the “transitional” category. It is here
that the specification of types is most difficult; yet it is in this category that
most contemporary regimes in emerging nations seem to fall. Until the
typologies suggested by the scholars discussed here, as well as those proposed
by others, are refined to include this transitional category, comparison with
the polar types and between transitional types will be difficult. All three
systems have shortcomings in this respect. Riggs’s classification scheme sug¬
gests three distinct types of polity, but its details of classification are not too
precise. Apter’s scheme is logically exhaustive and more or less empirically
grounded, but it concentrates on political development and underrates the
possibility of a static society. The model offered by Almond and Powell is
very detailed, but it does not appear to satisfy the requirements of exhaus¬
tiveness and exclusiveness.
The primary concern of Riggs is to examine the particular relationships
between structure and functions that will help us identify the essential dif¬
ferences between traditional, transitional, and modern political systems.23
He places each of these on a scale of increasing “diffraction,” or differ


Introduction 7
entiation, of social structures: the lower extreme is the traditional “fused”
structure, and the upper is the modern “diffracted” system; midway between
the two is the transitional, or “prismatic,” system. The first difficulty arises
in specifying the variables used; another involves spelling out the exact re¬
lationships between the variables, as well as the relationship of each to po¬
litical, social, and economic development.
Riggs views diffraction as the analog of development. Groups of variables
are related in different ways to the degree of diffraction.24 Some, such as
marketization, are not important to development, but have a linear corre¬
lation with it. A distinguishing feature of Riggs’s scheme is the group that
he terms key variables, which both react to and influence development. The
key variables comprise two types: strategic variables, which have an S-curve
relationship to the degree of diffraction, and critical variables, which have
a C-curve relationship. The strategic variables are primarily measures of
individual and institutional behaviors—social mobilization, scope of indi¬
vidual responsibility, the basis of elite recruitment, underlying goals and
myths of the society, the basis and scope of authority, and the level of po¬
litical input and government output. The critical variables are measures of
the relative proportion of traditional and modern elements in the society,
such as the degree of equality, the mix of traditional and modern values, and
the convergence of form and reality in institutions. Together, these key vari¬
ables are measures of the style and performance of political systems. The
fused and diffracted aspects of each dimension combine to produce a unique
condition that is something more than the midpoint between them. The
middle range on any variable is characteristic of a prismatic society. Accord¬
ing to Riggs, the attainment of a high level on the strategic variables and a
minimal level on the critical variables is necessary to political development.
Riggs then uses his selected variables to construct definitional and de¬
velopmental models of both Western and non-Western prismatic systems.
In the Western, or endo-prismatic, case internal pressures cause change. The
differentiation of structures in the society is a general index of this change;
other variables reflect more specific aspects. The impact of change on the
intervening variables causes an advance in political, economic, or social de¬
velopment; the result is a modern, diffracted society. However, Riggs is pri¬
marily interested in the non-Western, or exo-prismatic, case. This has two
major dimensions: a dependency syndrome, which concerns the relation¬
ship between the powerholders and the socioeconomic environment; and
an interference complex, which arises from the mutual interrelations of


8 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
different elite groups.25 In an exo-prismatic society, external pressures cause
change; the index of change remains the same, but the impact of this change
on intervening variables causes retrogressive political, economic, and social
development.
One earmark of a prismatic society is the importance of those occupying
political roles. They are relatively unaccountable to the public at large or to
other elite groups. In fact, they are able to use their political position to con¬
trol wealth and prestige in the society. Economic transactions can be com¬
pleted only through political influence. The entrepreneurial groups (largely
foreign in Riggs’s formulation) transfer wealth from the masses to the bu¬
reaucratic powerholders. The entrepreneurs themselves are unable to accu¬
mulate investment capital, and the powerholders, instead of investing it, use
it for nonproductive purposes. Moreover, the predominant position held by
those with political power retards the process of differentiation because
achievement goals in the society revolve only about political position. In the
prismatic society, there is a movement toward increased differentiation, but
this tendency is associated with others that may disrupt the society: increas¬
ing personal insecurity, growing inequality, declining productivity, and
decapitalization. “Thus, in the prismatic model, economic development is
strongly linked with processes leading to political instability and social dis¬
organization.”26
To summarize, negative political development occurs when governmental
structures expand more rapidly than do institutions of political control.
Negative social development means increased social tensions. Negative eco¬
nomic development results from the failure of the entrepreneurial class or
the elite to utilize wealth for productive purposes. The outcome of these
processes is a prismatic society. However, this formulation is still unsatis¬
factory. For one thing, the division of transitional societies into the two
categories of endo-prismatic and exo-prismatic is a gross oversimplification.
Certainly, many supposedly “internal” pressures for change in European
nations were externally inspired. Likewise, countries outside Europe cannot
be so neatly categorized. For example, pressures for change in Greece were
generated internally, but the country was in a formally subjugated condition
corresponding to the exo-prismatic classification.
David Apter sets out to discover which type of political system is most
appropriate for each level of development.27 By implication, his concern is
with political and economic development and the relationship between
them. He proposes a series of types “deriving from a generalized theory of


Introduction 9
choice based on normative, structural, and behavioral dimensions.”28 These
models are not constructed as ideal types, although they are used as such.
The independent variable in the original formulation was the impact of
modernization; recent reformulations make coercion and information the
independent variables.29 The intervening variables are two, related to the
authority system and the value system found in the society. In the first cate¬
gory a distinction is made between pyramidal and hierarchical systems; in
the second, consummatory and instrumental values are distinguished. These
variables permit the construction of four possible models.* The dependent
variable is the particular type of society. Apter argues that the political
action required for the attainment of modernization goals at each level of
development, given a particular model, will require a different political
system. These systems are distinguished by the extent of coercion required
to meet goals and the amount of information needed for decision making.
Apter suggests that two of his model systems are particularly suited to de¬
veloping societies. The first is a “mobilization” system, involving consum¬
matory values, or ideologies, and hierarchical authority. This system re¬
quires a regime whose leadership is committed to a thorough reorganization
and redirection of society toward new values and loyalties. The other re¬
sponse to social transition is a “reconciliation” system, which combines pyra¬
midal authority and instrumental values. In the reconciliation system, goals
and legitimacy are defined by the representational principle. Here, power is
dispersed among a number of separate units, and there is a tolerance of mul¬
tiple loyalties. Either system may be useful as the framework of a society at
the primary stages of modernization.30 However, a mobilization system is
particularly appropriate during the transition from extensive moderniza¬
tion to early industrialization, when a maximum of coercion is needed to
cope with social disintegration.31 The reconciliation system is more useful
in a post-industrial phase, when information needs require decentralization
of the control structures.32 Each kind of political system—except, apparently,
the reconciliation system in a post-industrial phase—reaches a “ceiling,” at
* The distinction between hierarchical and pyramidal authority is made on the basis of ac¬ countability to the public: low accountability implies the first, high accountability the second. Hierarchical authority implies centralized decision making; pyramidal authority suggests semiautonomous decision-making powers. Consummatory values are defined as empirical means germane to nonempirical ends (ideology), and instrumental values as empirical means ger¬ mane to empirical ends (interest politics). The four possible models are identified as “mobili¬ zation,” “reconciliation,” “theocratic,” and “bureaucratic.” The theocratic model, based on consummatory values and pyramidal authority, is of historical interest only. (Apter, “Political Systems,” p. 15.)


10 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
which point the resources for development at its disposal can no longer be
redeployed.33 For example, in a reconciliation system interest conflicts may
be converted into value conflicts, and the groundwork laid for some alterna¬
tive system.84 If a mobilization system fails to meet the goals of industrial¬
ization for any reason, one of its subsystems may become increasingly cru¬
cial to its existence. At that point, the pattern of consummatory values may
well give way to one of instrumental values.35
After dealing with models at this high level of abstraction, Apter suggests
a different and more operational set of variables. In a reconciliation system,
society now becomes the independent variable, and the government, as a
mediator and coordinator, is the dependent one.36 In a highly industrialized
society, political and economic management requires information undis¬
torted by coercion if the proper decisions are to be made; the major problems
concern the surplus of information and its evaluation. A reconciliation sys¬
tem in a preindustrial setting, particularly one characterized by a low con¬
sensus, is likely to result in stagnation. Here, decision makers have no sure
guide in determining the allocation of rewards, no matter how much infor¬
mation is available. Compromise based on the strength and persistence of
existing blocs is the likely solution.37 Stagnation can be avoided only if there
is a dramatic increase in resources, or if the system has descended from a
previous level that incorporated highly consummatory values, “according
to which a ‘New Jerusalem’ had been defined in ethical terms.”38 In a mo¬
bilization system, government is the independent variable, and society the
dependent.39 Information is restricted, and decision making is easier but less
accurate. A great deal of coercion is necessary if the system’s predetermined
goals are to be realized. Although these conditions may be tolerated at first,
Apter suggests that low-information, high-coercion systems become increas¬
ingly dysfunctional as industrialization progresses. A bureaucratic system,
involving instrumental values and hierarchical authority, is likely to result
if a “ceiling” in the resources available for deployment is reached. In fact,
the bureaucratic systems, although unstable, may be optimal for “intermedi¬
ate” industrialization.40
Apter argues that “political development is no mere reciprocal of eco¬
nomic development, but rather a complex of factors that results in systemic
coherence.” Even if this coherence does not materialize, economic factors
will “most frequently come to serve political and social needs.”41 In the
mobilization model, economic development is the rationale for demanding
complete allegiance; it is the goal of society. Coercion, the hallmark of such


Introduction n
a system, is restricted only to the extent that it may interfere with the pro¬
cesses of economic growth. Hierarchical control ensures concentration on
economic goals, permits tactical flexibility in meeting emerging problems,
and enforces performance. A mobilization system can restrict demands and
channel resources into productive investments. As suggested earlier, how¬
ever, the costs of coercion as development commences may increase and thus
slow economic growth. Eventually, some system change is likely. In the
reconciliation system the public has greater influence in setting goals. A high
proportion of the society’s total resources is available for economic develop¬
ment, but the government cannot dictate resource allocation. Capital in¬
vestment depends on the persuasive powers of the elite and the degree of
self-discipline in the population. In general, reconciliation systems have
slower economic growth than others, and are more liable to suffer social and
political disorders. Another system is the modernizing autocracy, a variant
of the general bureaucratic model, which can promote investment and eco¬
nomic growth for short periods but is not stable over time. Here, custom
and precedent control the activities of both the leaders and the public. How¬
ever, the traditional hierarchy is very flexible in this system, and can take a
predominant role in technological innovation and in channeling resources
to productive purposes. In the long run, this economic growth, resulting in
a more highly differentiated society, creates pressures that undermine the
political position of the modernizing oligarchs.
The two major models suggested by Apter, those of mobilization and
reconciliation, are extremely general. Any number of empirical types might
approximate either one. The intermediate bureaucratic type, though not
spelled out in much detail, could also accommodate a wide range of actual
systems. Both the reconciliation model and the bureaucratic one, as well as
the relationship between them, suggest explanations for the developmental
process in Greece and similar countries. However, if these models are to be
useful, the types of regimes and the conditions of transformation must be
more clearly set forth.
For Almond and Powell, the major sets of variables are conversion func¬
tions, capability functions, and maintenance or adaptation functions.42 Con¬
version functions involve behavior within the system itself, and comprise
the traditional legislative, judicial, and executive functions with new labels,
plus three new functions—political communication, interest articulation,
and interest aggregation. Capability functions relate the system to the en¬
vironment.43 Five types are suggested. The first four functions describe the


12 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
pattern of outputs in the society: extractive capability (system performance
in drawing human and material resources from the environment) ;44 regu¬
lative capability (the political system’s exercise of control over behavior);
distributive capability (the allocation of goods, services, status, and oppor¬
tunities) ; and symbolic capability (the symbol flow from the political system
into the society and the international environment). A fifth function, the
responsive capability, concerns the relationship between political inputs and
governmental outputs. The last set of major variables, system maintenance
and adaptation functions, is concerned with individual behavior.45 Political
socialization and political recruitment are related to the psychological di¬
mension of the political system. This category comprises the political culture,
“the attitudes, beliefs, values and skills which are current in an entire popu¬
lation.”46 These functions are so interrelated that a change in one will affect
the others. Moreover, there is a general association between structural dif¬
ferentiation, cultural secularization, and the expansion of capabilities in a
political system, all of which are involved in the “development” of the
system.
Unlike the other theorists, Almond and Powell set forth an extensive
classification of systems, which they base on differentiation of structures and
degree of secularization; the variable of subsystem autonomy is added, but
it is tied to a particular level of differentiation. Their types are cross sections
taken at particular points on the continuum of development.47 They provide
two modern categories: mobilized and nonmobilized systems, distinguished
by differing degrees of differentiation and secularization. However, they
state that within these classes, and between them, the types merge into one
another. The modern mobilized systems are divided into two sections, dem¬
ocratic and authoritarian, on the basis of variations in subsystem control.
The democratic category is further divided into systems with high sub¬
system autonomy, those with limited autonomy, and those with low auton¬
omy. The Anglo-Saxon states, Italy, and Mexico, respecdvely, are used as
examples of these types. The authoritarian category is subdivided not on
structural lines, but by the extent of mobilization; it includes authoritarian
types and totalitarian types. These two types are subdivided, according to
ideology, into conservative or modernizing authoritarian regimes and radi¬
cal or conservative totalitarian regimes.
Almond and Powell suggest a time sequence of challenges that may lead
to political development—namely, successive crises of state building, nation
building, participation, and distribution. The manner in which these prob


Introduction 13
lems are solved is highly dependent on system capabilities. A system must
have adequate capabilities of extraction before it can begin to distribute re¬
sources. The distribution involves not only economic resources, but also the
structures and procedures of extraction. The regulatory capability involves
intervention in social and economic life; presumably, complete allocation of
resources is possible if this capability is highly developed. Structural differ¬
entiation and secularization are viewed as prerequisites for the development
of higher levels of extraction and regulation. If transitional systems begin
by emphasizing distributive and responsive capabilities, any sudden reversal
is likely to shift the emphasis to regulative and symbolic capabilities.48 This
is similar to the relationship between coercion and information suggested
by Apter; a concept not unlike his notion of “ceiling” is also implied.
The conceptual apparatus put forward by Almond and Powell is in part
useful for our limited purposes here, but it has a number of serious defects.
Although differentiation of structures is widely recognized as an index of
modernization, the use of secularization as the developmental aspect of po¬
litical culture seems dubious. Secularization may indeed be one dimension;
but surely additional dimensions are needed to explain the differences be¬
tween supposedly highly secularized states. Though useful, Almond and
Powell’s conversion variables are primarily descriptive categories drawn
from Western political experience; like the categories of Rigg’s system, they
are essentially dimensions along which traditional, transitional, or modern
systems may be placed. There is no empirical evidence that these variables
are indeed the requisites of a political system, and the relationships between
them are only suggested. Political socialization and recruitment are more
specifically related to the political system as a whole, and seem far more
general in application than the conversion functions. The discussion of capa¬
bility functions, however, is useful, even though these functions are not
logically exhaustive or of equal importance. Few models examine the ques¬
tion of regime performance so explicitly. More disappointing is the typology
of systems.49 The authoritarian-democratic division is much too simplistic.
Some of the types noted seem marginal, some of the examples seem dubious,
and other, more distinct, types are ignored.50 Moreover, the typology lacks
internal consistency. Degrees of subsystem control ought to be as appro¬
priate a distinction among authoritarian regimes as among democratic; and
democratic regimes might as easily be distinguished by political culture, as
are authoritarian regimes.
These shortcomings create problems when system transformation is ana


POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
T4
lyzed. Almond and Powell suggest that elite actions or the impact of the
international or domestic environments create the impetus for change.
These pressures create imbalances in the political system, forcing it to adjust
to meet new challenges. If the change is gradual, increasing differentiation
and secularization will eventually produce a modern society. However, this
is not always the case. Sometimes the existing political system cannot handle
the challenges; it may break down and give way to a new regime. The
authors imply that something less than modernity will result in this case,
although this is not apparent from the conceptual framework itself.51
From the foregoing formulations, a very general process model can be
extracted for use in modern Greece and similar systems. Various pressures
from the international system, the domestic environment, and elite action
unbalance a political system; at the same time, their impact on certain inter¬
vening variables produces a new political system, the dependent variable.
The character of the intervening variables and the rate of change usually
distinguishes the old, developed nations from the several categories of under¬
developed nations. Apter provides logically derived developmental models,
and relates the few variables considered in a satisfactory manner. However,
although his descriptions of the reconciliation, bureaucratic, and mobiliza¬
tion systems are intellectually attractive because of their generality, this same
feature makes their empirical application difficult. Riggs offers a set of de¬
scriptive categories tied to reality, but he is really describing only one of
many possible systems. Modern Greece would fit his model of a prismatic
society, but only for some periods of her history. Therefore, it is most useful
to conceive of Riggs’s model as a detailed explication of one possible pris¬
matic society, and as one possible bureaucratic type of the kind suggested
by Apter. Almond and Powell provide a number of categories that are use¬
ful in relating the political system to the environment. The discussion of
capabilities, in particular, permits judgments to be made about performance
levels and possible system transformations. In addition, these authors set
forth several conditions for development that can be interpreted as inter¬
vening variables.
The reconciliation model, which seems most appropriate for modern
Greece, can, in theory, accommodate bargaining systems of any type.
The reconciliation system, with its pyramidal authority, has retrospective and residual consummatory values that encourage compromise between groups ex¬ pressing prevailing political objectives and views. Since reconciliation systems


Introduction 15
consist of single political units made up of constituent political units that have not lost their political identity, they can be relatively loose confederations that have a recognized structure or much more highly organized parliamentary re¬ gimes.62
It is clear that a variety of actual systems fall into this category. Regimes with
functioning party systems fit, but so do any oligarchical regimes that have
split along family, regional, ethnic, or religious lines. Moreover, any regime
with subsystem autonomy would seem to be in this category. According to
Almond, the major political actors in the type of reconciliation with which
we are concerned are
organizations which perform other social or political functions but which, as corporate bodies or through groups within them (such as legislative blocs, officer cliques, higher or lower clergy or religious orders, departments, skill groups, and ideological cliques in bureaucracies) may articulate their own interests or repre¬ sent the interests of groups in the society.63
Horacio Godoy and Carlos Fortin have described such a system in greater
detail. The modern and the traditional parts of the society belong to the
same economic, social, and political system. The whole system is dominated
by the modern part, whose existence is “made possible by the existence of
the archaic part.” In essence, the traditional oligarchy and the newly emer¬
gent industrial and urban elites are allies. The traditional oligarchs concen¬
trate economic, social, and political power, and the demands of the rural
elements are articulated through them. However, they are less concerned
with politics than with economic and social domination. In the modern part
of society, a center comprised of the traditional oligarchy, the emerging
middle classes, and a growing urban proletariat with varying degrees of
participation is surrounded by a subordinated periphery, both urban and
rural. The peripheral mass is integrated in the sense that it is articulate and
possesses the possibility of direct political action. It may not actually partici¬
pate, but the mere possibility of its political action makes it a potential source
of power for other sectors.54
The bureaucracy and the military often have a dominant political role in
developing countries because they are the only organized elements. Janowitz
has suggested a typology of military types that includes three models rooted
in Western European experience and an additional five drawn from the ex¬
periences of the military in the new nations. One of the second types, the
civil-military coalition, is of interest because the military is an acknowledged
actor in the political arena. “The military serves as an active political bloc in


i6 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
its support of civilian parties and other bureaucratic power groups.... The
military may act as an informal, or even more explicit, umpire between com¬
peting political parties and political groups.”55
A reconciliation system like this, composed of competing power blocs, is
fragile. The political infrastructure is weak, and alliances are unstable.
A military-dominated bureaucratic system is likely to develop because of the
organizational weakness of competing political institutions. The military
may intervene to preserve the system when the balance between competing
political groups is threatened, or when the modernization goals of the non¬
military governing groups are not achieved. Of course, a tradition of politi¬
cal involvement by the military, like that existing in Greece, may provide
an additional excuse.56 Janowitz suggests that even if modernization goals
are met, the military may inherit political power simply because its level of
organization and cohesion is so much higher than that of other social sectors.
However, the same qualities that make the military organization stronger
than its competitors reduce its ability to rule effectively. The military, regard¬
less of its degree of involvement in the system, will be a poor agent of po¬
litical change. Hence a military oligarchy will always be somewhat unstable.
The importance of the military and the bureaucracy in the reconciliation
system we are concerned with is directly related to the impotence of other
political organizations—namely, parties. The political party has become the
central institution of Western politics, and distinctions between systems are
made on the basis of party characteristics, often in terms of the number of
parties.57 These classifications have usually been applied outside the de¬
veloped areas on the assumption that sectors in conflict will organize along
party lines, and that competition between them must take place within a
party system. It is sometimes forgotten that the first parties in Western
Europe simply reproduced a pattern of open competition for power between
the different social sectors that had previously taken place in a different
framework. Only the open competition between different sectors of the
emerging bourgeoisie was actually confined to party struggles in a parlia¬
mentary setting.58 Basically, the party is a creature of modern and modern¬
izing political systems: “The political party emerges whenever the activities
of a political sytem reach a certain degree of complexity, or whenever the
notion of political power comes to include the idea that the mass public must
participate or be controlled.”59 These two conditions are related; only at a
certain degree of complexity are the old authority relationships sufficiently
eroded for new loyalties to take their place.


Introduction
The term “party” is used to describe political organizations in many non
Western countries; it is nonetheless clear that there are few genuine parties
and operating party systems outside the developed areas. Using a definition
of party suggested by Joseph LaPalombara and Myron Weiner, genuine
parties are easily distinguished from the “cliques, clubs and small groups
of notables” that preceded them in the West, and from the small oligarchical
groups that take the name of parties in many less developed countries.60 By
this definition, a party must have: (i) continuity in organization; the
party’s life-span must not be dependent on that of its current leaders; (2) a
presumably permanent organization at the local level, with regular commu¬
nication between local and national units; (3) a conscious determination
of leaders at both national and local levels to capture and hold decision
making power, either alone or in coalition with others; and (4) a concern
on the part of the organization for seeking followers at the polls or in some
manner striving for popular support.
By and large, parties in Greece and in similar countries have not advanced
beyond the clique stage. The factors that were crucial for party development
in Western systems have not been operative. In Western Europe “aristo¬
cratic” parties developed in existing parliaments when the legitimacy of rep¬
resentative institutions was being established.61 In meeting crises of inte¬
gration or participation, these groups developed into complex organiza¬
tions that were genuine parties. Elsewhere representative institutions were
usually accepted as legitimate almost automatically when a country gained
its independence, and were considered a sign of political modernity. The
initial struggles of these countries were directed against colonial regimes
or foreign domination. There was, in most cases, no indigenous monarchical
or aristocratic tradition. The elites that had led a country to independence
could occupy the new parliamentary institutions, along with other seats of
power, without a struggle; these institutions became no more than another
arena for the usual bargaining for power. The elites who staff these parlia¬
ments and bureaucracies have generally not found it necessary to organize
genuine parties. Formal suffrage requirements were often minimal, and
the ruling elites were able to utilize their traditional authority to secure votes
from the rural masses. There was no ground for a crisis of participation.
More important, there were no great social and economic transformations
to alter the existing social structure. Demands for meaningful participation,
i.e., participation in decision making, were not made until relatively recently
simply because economic and social development was slow. The older elites


POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
18
simply transferred their economic and social power to the political sector,
and used their entrenched political position to maintain it.
Occasionally, mass parties that meet the LaPalombara and Weiner criteria
have materialized in non-Western settings.62 These parties are usually ini¬
tiated by an articulate disadvantaged group (or by an elite representing it)
that wants to participate in political decision making, at least to the extent
of being involved in the social bargaining process. If the disadvantaged
groups reach a stage of political awareness “before parties have been estab¬
lished and where the target of participation efforts is a non-party elite,”
they may well reject the existing regime.63 Generally, these “combative”
parties are urban based; they must rely upon organization and ideology to
produce the cohesion and loyalty that the older elites can obtain through
traditional ties to the population. Combative parties are no more likely than
other political groups to view parliamentary institutions as the only center
for the resolution of conflict. Extraparliamentary activities, such as strikes
or demonstrations, are an important part of their quest for a share in political
power. They are not committed to a competitive party system; if they toler¬
ate political opponents, it is probably because they can not yet destroy them.
THE CONSOCIATIONAL SYSTEM AND THE BUREAUCRATIC MODEL
We can further refine the implications of the particular reconciliation sys¬
tem found in Greece by examining the exact relationships between her vari¬
ous political groups and the conditions that may lead to system change. A
formulation proposed by Arend Lijphart to explain stability in the “frag¬
mented” democracies of Western Europe can, I believe, be applied as well to
regimes without party systems.64 He labels as “consociational” those democ¬
racies with subcultural cleavage and with tendences toward immobilism
and instability that are deliberately turned into more stable systems by the
leaders of the major subcultures. He regards the representatives of the major
subcultures as political parties; whether this is true or not, they do represent
cleavages that cannot be managed by ordinary parliamentary methods. In
the consociational democracies, bargaining between the major subcultures
takes place outside the formal constitutional framework, through elite coop¬
eration in the face of tendencies toward system disintegration. Since agree¬
ments are reached informally, or at least outside parliament, there is no
reason to confine this formulation to democratic settings.65 The major power
blocs in the category of countries considered here include the church, the
bureaucracy, and the military, as well as the older elites operating through


Introduction 19
traditional “parties” and the newer political organizations representing ur¬
ban elements. All of these are antagonistic elements, even if they are not
technically subcultures.
Lijphart suggests four prerequisites for the successful practice of consocia
tional democracy, and these seem applicable to transitional systems. A con
sociadonal system can be considered as an empirically grounded type of rec¬
onciliation system, encompassing the civil-military coalition suggested by
Janowitz. If the system is to be successful, the leaders of the rival subcultures
must: (1) be able to recognize the dangers inherent in a fragmented system,
and to follow the initial precedents of cooperation; (2) be at least partly
committed to the maintenance of the system; (3) be able to establish effec¬
tive contacts and communication with each other in spite of subcultural
differences; and (4) develop institutional arrangements and “rules of the
game” to accommodate their differing interests.68
A “consociational” label, however useful for describing a political system
at one point in time, should not imply that the system is permanent. Unlike
the consociational democracies examined by Lijphart, the consociational sys¬
tems do not have a record of stability. Fundamentally, the elites in these
settings do not have the four necessary attributes because their societies are
not yet modern.* In Europe, the subcultures are relatively self-contained;
by contrast, those in the developing countries are not “pillarized” but per¬
form services for the whole system. In Europe, social mobilization is nearly
complete, and each major subculture has a roughly equal chance of at¬
tracting new support. In the countries under consideration here newly
mobilized elements are mostly attracted to only one or two of the major
groups. The balance of power is inherently unstable in this setting. The
leaders of each political group feel they have much to gain or lose by pro¬
moting instability or by blocking the actions of others.
Gerhard Lehmbruch, also concerned with consociational democracies, has
suggested that the division of public offices among competing groups or the
division of the system itself into more or less autonomous spheres of in¬
fluence, on either regional or functional lines, can be useful in resolving
conflicts.67 But any effort on the part of new sectors to take power through
elections is blocked by the old elite; yet these new groups may oppose con
* Lijphart (pp. 25—30) offers a tentative list of social structures and cultural attitudes that favor the development of a consociational democracy: a distinct separation between subcultures, a bal¬ ance of power among them, public toleration of a government by grand coalition, external threats to the system, and a moderate nationalism. Of these, the first two would seem to be the
most important.


20 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
sociational bargaining as “undemocratic.” There are no institutions or
processes through which all the major groups are willing to settle conflicts.
A change in the system, as Leonard Binder pessimistically notes in regard
to the Middle East, depends on “the willingness and the ability of the mili¬
tary and bureaucratic elites... to reject their own institutional orientations
and to decide rationally and consciously to establish and work certain demo¬
cratic institutions.”68 An implicit element in both consociational democracies
and generalized consociational systems is the mutual possession of veto
power, which is necessary if the elite representatives of all groups are to be
induced to participate in bargaining. Essentially, the consociational system
is kept running, as Irving Horowitz notes in reference to Latin America,
only by “the peculiar socioeconomic symmetry in the distribution of power.
... Power is not exclusively lodged within any one social sector, but rather
is so evenly distributed along Falangist lines that a cancellation effect oc¬
curs.”69 The system itself ultimately suffers; demands from newly mobilized
sectors are not met. Economic change threatens the groups wedded to the
status quo, but it is sufficiently impeded by them to retard the fullest ex¬
pansion of system capabilities.
At this point, along the lines suggested by Apter, one sector, generally the
military (with hierarchical organization and instrumental values) or an
ideological political party (with hierarchical organization and consumma
tory values), takes over, either by design or in reaction to the activities of
competing groups. Either one encounters problems. To be successful, the
military generally has to create a mass following among civilians.70 And
up to this point, attempts to take power by ideologically oriented parties have
been successfully resisted in most transitional nations. These lapses from
the consociational system, however, do not solve problems; instead, they
tend to mark readjustments between the political blocs. Eventually, a new
equilibrium reasserts itself, and the consociational system is temporarily
restored.71
THE INTERVENING VARIABLES
According to Lucian Pye, “Different types of systems are likely to have
different patterns of modernization, while conversely, systems that have
gone through different paths of development will be significantly differ¬
ent.”72 This gives great importance to the intervening variables that are part
of the process model of development. This category is not especially well
developed in any of the theoretical efforts discussed here. Riggs mentions


Introduction 11
“insensitive variables,” which set limits to development but are not corre¬
lated with it. He mentions the rate of assimilation, moral values and other
cultural elements, as examples, without further explanation.73 However, the
outcome of the developmental process that he describes is dependent on
very specific intervening variables. Just as the standard Western model is
characteristic of only one or two European states, the prismatic society, in
the exact form Riggs specifies, could only develop in certain South and
Southeast Asian states. Apter suggests that the definition and relative status
of roles in a given system, the institutionalized criteria of the stratification
patterns, and the recruitment patterns to the major groups that comprise
the system must all be known before meaningful statements about change
can be made.'4 Almond and Powell do not make direct reference to inter¬
vening variables, but factors and conditions that might be so classed are
mentioned throughout their book: the kinds of problems faced by the sys¬
tem, the resources upon which the system can draw, development in others
social systems and the international system, the functions of the political
system itself, and elite responses to crises.75 The precise relationship of these
variables, however, is not clear. Finally, political culture itself, as defined
by these authors, might be classed as an intervening variable.
Whether intervening variables are explicitly defined or not, they are cru¬
cial in determining possible models of political development.76 First, the
character of the society into which change is introduced should be fully
examined. A tentative list might include the following: existing values, in¬
stitutional structures, the styles of authority, the character of the economic
and social systems, and the extent of national integration and political par¬
ticipation. Perhaps the most important single consideration, which en¬
compasses many of the above factors, is the degree of domination in a
society by some of its internal social formations. “This domination is deter¬
mined by, and in turn affects, the particular form of dependence of the so¬
ciety as a whole and of the ruling groups on external sources of power.”77
Certain types of stratification systems may be more able to accept par¬
ticular kinds of “modernizing” change. For example, a society like that of
modern Greece, where patterns of reciprocal favors and mutual obligations
between patron and client are common, can more easily be accommodated
to a goal that defines modernity in terms of political structures (e.g., repre¬
sentative institutions) than to a goal of economic development.78
The activities of the elite are also determined by variations in the meaning
of modernization according to time and place, and by the congruence of this


22 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
particular image of modernization with the existing character of society.
In the nineteenth century development was perceived primarily in terms
of political institutions. The act of independence was the beginning and the
end of political development, and modernization could be achieved by the
adoption of a popular constitution and representative institutions. However,
institutional modernization alone did not necessarily or immediately alter
a society’s stratification system. There was no imperative need to mobilize
the entire population to some further end. In the twentieth century it has
generally been assumed that economic development is a prerequisite to po¬
litical development, and that all national elites are genuinely interested in
this goal. As Hoffman notes, this may not be the case: “It is absurd to as¬
sume either that ‘modernization’ is the overriding, necessary concern of all
political leaders or that the techniques of ‘political development’ as so clear
cut and pre-determined that they force statecraft into a necessarily small
number of distinct molds.”79 Obviously, the task of elites in developing so¬
cieties is much greater than it is elsewhere, and the possibilities for failure
are also greater. Of the three formulations considered here, only Apter’s
really stresses this factor.
A country’s existence in an international system cannot be ignored. How¬
ever, the authors whose model we are adapting, in common with many
others, tend to consider each society as a closed system, and rarely mention
the international environment after initial consideration of the origins of
social change. Nevertheless, the existence of a particular type of interna¬
tional system at a given point in time may have severe ramifications on the
internal politics of a state. The extent of government resources, the methods
of mobilizing and distributing them, the parameters of policy, and the gen¬
eral manner of conducting public affairs—even the form of government
or the holders of political office—may be influenced by external factors like
war or international market collapse. James Rosenau has suggested that
some societies may even become permanently “penetrated” systems, in
which nonmembers of the society participate directly in either the alloca¬
tion of resources or in the mobilization of support for national goals.80 Other
authors have paid more attention to this variable. Godoy and Fortin, in a
Latin American context, view external dependence, particularly economic
relationships with the outside world, as particularly crucial.81
A final intervening variable is the physical environment of the political
system. Many theorists have assumed that political and economic develop¬
ment can occur in any geographical location if the proper achievement val


Introduction 23
ues exist or can be inculcated into the population.82 Although it is often
admitted that some region within a given nation may not be worth de¬
veloping, the same attitude is rarely applied to the nation as a whole. This
proposition neglects the fact that the absence of natural resources, and even
a poor location, must be considered as restraints to development. The exis¬
tence of energy resources and minerals is crucial for industrialization. In
their absence, it is not always possible to fall back on a modernized agricul¬
ture. Climate, terrain, fertility of the soil, and population pressures all have
a bearing on the possibilities for commercialization and mechanization of
the agricultural sphere. The lack of resources for industrialization does not
automatically mean that resources for agricultural specialization will exist.
In other words, alternative paths to economic development are not auto¬
matic; not only the motivation for development, but the capacity for de¬
velopment must be considered. When this is recognized, one can see that
some countries may never become “modern.” Economic scarcity exacerbates
traditional mistrust in the society, and this impedes cooperation and associa¬
tion outside of the immediate family. The normal pressures of an increas¬
ingly mobilized population on political institutions are compounded under
these conditions, since all resources in the society must be authoritatively
allocated.
The general model of political development to be used in the following
chapters looks upon the impact of change, whatever its source, as the inde¬
pendent variable; this impacts acts on the intervening variables to produce
a specific kind of system. Both kinds of variables differ from country to
country. Several alternative models that fall into the reconciliation and
bureaucratic categories of Apter have been suggested as especially appropri¬
ate for the analysis of Greece and similar countries: the “prismatic” society
of Riggs is one; military oligarchies are another; and consociational systems
with an unstable equilibrium among various political sectors would be a
third. These do not represent all possible systems that might fit the Apter
formulation. They are simply types that seem particularly appropriate to the
class of countries under discussion, both in terms of description and in terms
of explaining system transformation.83 It must be remembered that these are
fluid systems, most particularly because they are not yet “modern”; and that
the existing constraints on their development may prevent them from ever
being so. Modern Greece provides an interesting focus for the application
of these eclectic models, especially since no systematic investigation of her
politics has yet been attempted. The few works dealing with Greece are con


POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
24
cerned with technical issues of economic development, polemical politics,
or mere summaries of current events. The simplest systematic description
would fill a lacunae in political studies.
POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
The primary focus of this study will be on the way in which the Greek
political system has accommodated change over the long run, and particu¬
larly on the way in which this change is reflected in changing patterns of
socialization and recruitment. The theorists who have provided our model
recognize the importance of these processes, and can again provide some
useful formulations.
The process of socialization can be divided into several parts. The basic
socialization process introduces the individual to the values, skills, role re¬
lationships and common knowledge necessary for all adult roles in his
society. Political socialization introduces the individual to the political
world; specifically political knowledge is imparted, and specifically political
attitudes and values are acquired.84 Political recruitment is the process of
socialization and induction into particular political roles. It both reflects
and affects the political system. On the one hand, it expresses the values
of the society, the system of social stratification, and the actual representa¬
tiveness of the political system; on the other, elite recruitment can affect
political participation, the status hierarchy, and policy making itself.85 The
maintenance of a consociational system as outlined above, is particularly
dependent on the character and attitudes of the political elites.
Political change can arise from many different causes, but it is almost
always reflected in socialization and recruitment.88 New values precipitated
by new religious beliefs, for example, or changes in the economic system
(especially the process of industrialization) have political ramifications that
can easily be charted in this way. Old values are eroded, and new ones take
their places. Old structures atrophy, and new roles and structures appear.
Demands from new groups are directed to political channels. Invariably,
discontinuities occur in the socialization process, as new elites seek entrance
to the political level. The reaction of the political system may range from
cautious adaptation to cataclysmic change.
In some settings, the political elite may manipulate socialization and re¬
cruitment processes directly, in order to promote or retard change from
the beginning. The role of the family or the schools in the socialization
process may be altered. The content of education itself is usually planned


Introduction 25
to inculcate attitudes and values congruent with the goals of the elite. The
basis of eligibility for political roles may be specified. At other times, elite
actions in one sphere may have unplanned consequences elsewhere. For
example, an expansion of educational facilities without the corresponding
development of an economic infrastructure to provide employment may
create serious political problems. In these cases, too, the recruitment patterns
change, but this time in response to the situation.
Almond and Powell separate political socialization and political recruit
ment from other political functions, calling them system maintenance and
adaptation functions, respectively.87 Discontinuities in the socialization
process, provoked by conflicting attitudes and values held by the different
socializing agents, may result in individual role conflicts that eventually
have a disastrous impact on the whole society. The uneven impact of mod¬
ernization or the existence of antagonistic subcultures maintained by sep¬
arate socialization processes can also produce political conflict. For Almond
and Powell, recruitment in any political system is based on some combina¬
tion of achievement and ascription; modern societies stress the first and
traditional the second. Regardless of orientation, recruitment cannot be
wholly separate from socialization because the incumbent of a political
role cannot completely escape his earlier socialization experiences.
Apter handles socialization and recruitment in his discussion of stratifica¬
tion patterns; and the several models he elucidates handles these processes,
or react to them, in different ways.88 In the mobilization model, the strati¬
fication pattern, including the basic values and recruitment criteria, is de¬
termined by the goals of the system, and by the necessity of redefining the
basis of legitimacy. Modernizing autocracies or neo-mercantilist systems,
both variants of Apter’s bureaucratic model, are able to integrate the antag¬
onistic elites. This is done either by dividing labor along functional lines
or by expanding existing roles. However, the acceptance of new values and
of political recruits from sectors holding these values depends on the com¬
patibility of these new values with those already characteristic of the system.
In a reconciliation model, competitive bargaining is likely to lead to the
maintenance of separate socialization processes and the perpetuation of con¬
flict. According to Apter, the modern sectors in this system cannot expand
educational and economic opportunities quickly enough to prevent the
fragmentation of the society. In this model, recruitment to each sector is
ascription oriented in order to prevent the incursions of other sectors. Fi¬
nally, Apter suggests that a complete analysis of stratification patterns, in


26 POLITICS IN MODERN GREECE
eluding socialization and recruitment, must answer the following ques¬
tions. (i) What is the effect of overall government policy on the various
roles in the power and prestige hierarchies ? (2) How are the qualifications
for power and prestige roles altered by specific government actions? (3)
How responsive is the government to demands for social mobility? (4)
How coherent is the hierarchy in terms of ideology?89
Riggs also notes that every society must provide means for socializing its
members and for recruiting them into social and political roles.90 In his pris¬
matic model, the rate of assimilation to the symbol system of the dominant
elite varies. Several communities tend to arise, based either on indigenous
cultural differences or on the uneven impact of modernization, to challenge
the dominant group. These “deviant” communities, because of different
socialization experiences, both natural and imposed, have no way of gain¬
ing elite status and therefore embark on various kinds of hostile action. Re¬
cruitment to the top political roles, which are central and dominating in this
society, is based on ascriptive criteria in the sense that only members of the
dominant community are eligible; however, the actual men in top positions
are selected on a performance basis. Riggs calls this an “attainment” orien¬
tation.
After describing the processes of socialization and recruitment in a pris¬
matic society, Riggs offers several hypotheses about the ability of such a
society to maintain itself. The narrower the communal base of elite recruit¬
ment, the greater the potential base for combative parties led by counter¬
elite groups. Conversely, when the communal basis of elite recruitment is
relatively broad, it is difficult for combative parties to overthrow the regime.
In such contexts, the “parties” become more narrowly communal; demands
tend to focus on autonomy, and on special rights to the maintenance of
non-elite value systems. In this way, the cohesion of the deviant community
is maintained, and there are more opportunities for a man to gain “sub¬
elite” status.
If Greece indeed represents a class of political systems that vacillate be¬
tween the “consociational” variant of a reconciliation system and the mili¬
tary subtype of a more general bureaucratic model, as suggested earlier, my
focus on socialization and elite recruitment is particularly appropriate. In
both these general models, elite behavior is a crucial variable. Discontinu¬
ities in the socialization process, for whatever reason, may fragment the so¬
ciety. The character of the value systems, the size of the various subcultures,
and the resources of the political system as a whole may all determine the


Introduction 27
manner in which the demands of new groups are met. Under certain con¬
ditions, aspiring elite groups are accepted and integrated into the top politi¬
cal roles in the system; in other instances, they are rejected and begin to
work against the established elites and the regime they represent. Many of
these processes are evident in the history of modern Greece.
As a whole, this book is a case study, a description and analysis of sociali¬
zation and recruitment in a country characteristic of those that fall some¬
where between the developed Western nations and the underdeveloped
“new” nations. By the methods outlined in Appendix A (pp. 319-23), speci¬
fic “communities” or subcultures in the Greek system were identified. The
extent and pace of mobilization since 1843 were traced by analyzing the
recruitment data of cabinet members. The more specific patterns of sociali¬
zation and recruitment for political life as a whole in the last several decades
were examined by using records for parliamentary candidates and deputies,
and by a series of interviews with members of the 1964 Parliament. In ad¬
dition to this empirical data, I have offered a general description of contem¬
porary Greek politics and society, and have tried to trace the connections
between the patterns of social mobilization of specific groups and the access
of these groups to the political system. The final chapter suggests some pos¬
sibilities for Greece’s future development.




I. The Background of Greek Politics




i. The Character of Greek Society
A distinguished Greek parliamentarian, in assessing the problems faced by
his nation, said that until Greeks could learn to trust one another, and to
trust the government, political life would continue to be chaotic.1 He might
have added that a pervasive mistrust can cripple economic development as
well. In studies of national development, an absence of trust is most often
blamed on a lack of voluntary associations or cooperative enterprise.2 At the
most general level, it can be argued that the lack of trust often noted in
transitional societies arises from the “juxtaposition of modern organizations
and institutions with a society where a modern system of social roles has
failed to develop.”3 Moreover, the existence of mistrust further inhibits the
development of these modern social roles.
One effect of social mistrust is a strengthening of kinship ties. Edward
Banfield, describing the southern Italian village of Montegrano, suggests
that its extreme backwardness and poverty can be explained “largely (but
not entirely) by the inability of the villagers to act together for their com¬
mon good, or indeed, for any end transcending the immediate, material
interest of the nuclear family.”4 He goes on to suggest that this inability
arises from “amoral familism,” which is produced by a combination of three
factors: a high death rate, local land tenure conditions, and the absence of
the institution of the extended family. But Banfield does not really explain
why the institution of the extended family failed to develop; moreover, he
is apparently describing a special case. Sidney Tarrow has marshaled sub¬
stantial evidence to show that “southern Italians are strongly oriented
toward the extended family as well as the nuclear family.”5 He believes that
nuclear-family solidarity, Banfield’s “amoral familism,” is caused less by
traditional loyalties than by a fear of destitution.6 This formulation ex¬
plicitly ties mistrust, and the resulting importance of the family, to economic
scarcity. Certainly, this connection seems plausible in the case of modern


THE BACKGROUND
32
Greece. However, Tarrow does not explain why the nuclear family is the
focus in some societies, and the extended family in others.
Not all states are equally endowed with natural resources, to be sure, but
this factor alone cannot account for differences in levels of economic de¬
velopment. Almond and Powell argue that there is a logic to the process
of development.7 A system has to have adequate capabilities for resource
extraction and for the regulation of the society before it can begin to dis¬
tribute resources. As modern roles and structures are transplanted into a
society that lacks a supporting infrastructure, a rush of demands for distri¬
bution overwhelms the capabilities of the system. Whatever the potential
supply of resources, those available for immediate distribution are usually
severely limited in any developing political system; and large segments of
the population find their demands unmet and come to believe that the re¬
sources of the society are scanty. The perception of scarcity breeds insecurity,
and ultimately distrust; and this, in turn, diminishes the possibility of co¬
operation for economic betterment or the attainment of other public pur¬
poses. Although there may be a question about the potential for economic
development in Greece over the long run, the Greeks have always believed
that resources were scarce, and this has been a cultural factor of great im¬
portance. An opposite situation also seems to be possible. Banfield, in con¬
trasting Montegrano with St. George, a village in Utah, noted that the
latter had fewer natural resources; yet this did not prevent the community
from flourishing. Community cooperation and association were everywhere
in evidence. The differences in behavior might be attributed to a particular
local ethos; but the fact that the residents of St. George were geographically
mobile and lived in a society of plenty would seem most significant.8 Cer¬
tainly, a major explanation for community cooperation and organizational
proliferation in the United States has been the notion of abundance.9
In a transitional society, the lack of trust and the resulting underdevelop¬
ment of secondary organizations supposedly characteristic of modern so¬
cieties increase the importance of the family or produce an extension in the
form of clientage relationships. The institutions transplanted from modern
societies, as well as demographic pressures, all make life more difficult for
the individual and his family. The old pattern of subsistence agriculture
is altered, peasant attitudes are shattered, and aspirations increase. The prob¬
lem of facing the outside world becomes incomparably greater than before.
Family cohesion in this setting is in the self-interest of every family mem¬
ber, since the identity of each person is established by the family. Moreover,


Gree\ Society 33
family roles predominate in the economic and political spheres: the eco¬
nomic unit is the family; and the individual uses politics, either as a poli¬
tician or as a voter, for family advantage.
Although the immediate future is perceived in family terms, it is recog¬
nized that one cannot realize this future without assistance from outside.
The problem of extending loyalty beyond the family in order to satisfy
family goals has been solved in similar ways by several transitional socie¬
ties. One solution has been to create binding obligations to non-kinsmen
through a spiritual tie, generally that of godfather. Another has been
through friendship ties, especially between individuals of different status.
As J. A. Pitt-Rivers has noted of Andalusia, friendship implies mutual
liking and mutual confidence, but it also involves mutual service.10 Where
there is economic inequality such friendship can be described as a condition
of patronage: “The institution of friendship, based upon the moral notion
of equality and the free exchange of favour, builds up, in situations of ma¬
terial inequality, a structure of patronage which links up the authority of
the state through the economic power of certain individuals to the network
of neighborly relations.”11
In practice the spiritual roles and the less formal connections can coexist.
To quote Pitt-Rivers again: “In the changing kaleidoscope of friendship,
the compadrazgo is an irrevocable tie of mutual trust, stronger than that
of kinship because it owes its existence to the free consent of both parties.”12
Later, he notes a situation where a man is both godfather and patron. It is
the second role that is important; it is, “above all, his relationship to the
powers outside the pueblo which gives him value.”13 Tarrow, although sug¬
gesting that the Italian compare system is less important than its equivalent
elsewhere, notes that “the godfather in southern Italy is usually a friend
of the parent who does not have business ties with the family. He is a pro¬
tector and confidant to the godchild, but his role may extend to eventual
economic or political patronage.”14 In southern Italy the patronage tie be¬
tween landholder and peasant or employer and laborer is more important.
In another village study in the Mediterranean region of France, Laurence
Wylie records that families attempted to secure godparents who might be
of some practical help to the child in later life, but that this quest was rarely
successful.16
Certainly, the social and political system of modern Greece cannot be
understood without a knowledge of family roles and the clientage system.
“Clienteles belonged to the corporate tradition of the Ottoman Empire.”16


THE BACKGROUND
34
During the centuries of Turkish rule, it was customary for a local notable
in Greece to intercede with the authorities on behalf of his fellow citizens.
This role gave him added prestige, power, and wealth; the villagers gained
a sponsor and security. There was some reciprocity, since it was recognized
that the notable had a call on the service or loyalty of those for whom he
did favors. Conversely, the notable had an obligation to protect the interests
of those who entered into this relationship; thus the client maintained a
certain self-respect. Clientage relationships played a predominant role in
nineteenth-century Greece and continue today, particularly in the rural
areas but also among some parts of the urban population.
It seems more appropriate to tie social mistrust in Greece—and the conse¬
quent emphasis on family loyalty mitigated only by clientage relationships
—to a general sense of insecurity, rather than to economic scarcity alone.
In early modern Greece, particularly after the expulsion of the Turkish
landlords, pressures on the land do not seem to have been great; yet the
clientage system flourished in this period.17 Jean Grossholtz, in discussing
the essential role of the family in Philippine society and the importance of
family ties and clientage relationships, does not intimate that this impor¬
tance developed out of a situation of scarcity.18 In the Philippines, appar¬
ently, and more certainly in Greece, the initial impetus for clientage ties
and extended-family solidarity came from a desire to isolate the individual
and the family from extra-community forces. In both cases the political
ruler of the country was alien, although this would not seem to be a crucial
factor. Later, as modern structures and roles entered the society, the ties
that had once served to isolate and protect the family unit were used to
tie the individual to the political system. The patrons found that their client¬
age networks were useful for the acquisition of modern roles in the po¬
litical or social system. For the clients, basic physical security was no longer
the chief concern; but with population changes and greater aspirations,
economic destitution or a reduction in status were greater threats, particu¬
larly since, in a transitional society, aspirations tend to outrun opportuni¬
ties.19 Thus family ties and clientage relationships, which lead to both the
political and economic spheres, are exploited for reasons connected with
social advantage rather than survival in a situation of scarcity.
In Greece, the content of the basic socialization process, although affected
by modern geographical mobility and mass media, seems to have remained
remarkably constant. The elements inculcating a sense of mistrust linger.
As Tarrow suggests for southern Italy, family and local loyalties dominate


Gree\ Society 35
because more extensive ties have been inhibited by the entire structural
development of society.20 The fact of uncertainty, regardless of its cause,
brings an exaggerated belief in fortune, in both rural and urban areas. The
world is in God’s hands; there is nothing for the individual to do but face
his existence.21 Similar attitudes are found elsewhere, as in the Philippines:
“The achievement of personal goals is in the hands of God, luck or higher
authority, and the individual can only maintain good relations with these
sources of help by showing respect and living up to his debts of gratitude.”22
Along with this distrust of the future comes a disregard for time. In this
way, an unpredictable future can be postponed. In Greece, this is most evi¬
dent in the villages, but even in the cities it is rare to find public clocks.
Shopkeepers, housewives, and the government itself seem to operate with
little concern for deadlines or schedules.
Greeks tend to be pessimistic about social change in part because of a sort
of geographical determinism.23 Moreover, attitudes toward politics tend to
parallel the attitudes toward uncontrollable natural phenomena, such as
rocky slopes, poor agricultural weather, occasional earthquakes, and even
the fluctuations of the world market. In such a setting, existence is clearly
seen as a struggle. From his earliest years, the Greek is plunged into a
hostile world. Even in urban areas, an infant is thought to be vulnerable
to evil supernatural forces, and the practice of child swaddling serves to
protect the child physically and mentally. The young child is faced with
similar human threats, even if they take the form of testing and teasing.
Affection and permissiveness are accompanied by punishment and disci¬
pline. However, as in Banfield’s Montegrano, gratification and deprivation
depend on the whim of the one with power.24 The constant use of deception
on the young child soon educates him in its use, and there is no penalty
attached to taking advantage of others in this manner. In essence, the Greek
reaches adulthood well-grounded in the belief that he cannot trust anyone,
or take any action at face value. This is not to imply that love and respect
are not possible between the Greek child and his elders; but the whole pat¬
tern of socialization makes complete trust difficult.25
It is to the elementary family alone that the individual Greek owes his
time, energy, and loyalty; any expenditure of these on outsiders would be
disloyal. After subsistence, the most essential family need is to maintain a
ratio between property and children; the accumulation of land and money
is important, as is the ability to transmit this wealth.26 There must be suffi¬
cient patrimony to provide for a continuation of the farm, form the daugh


THE BACKGROUND
36
ters’ dowries, and perhaps educate several children in a profession or trade.
The family also feels it necessary to protect its members, even if they en¬
gage in admittedly deviant behavior. Freedom and self-dependence are fam¬
ily goals, not those of individuals. A Greek is always tied to his family, and
this is not considered dependence; he is born into a place in the structured
family, and all his associations with the outer world come through the
family and its links to the outside.
The family itself may extend to second and third cousins, and sometimes
relatives by marriage will be very important.* Since the family is the one
stable element, questions of dowry, buying and selling of land, or providing
an education for one of the sons must be discussed and decided by the en¬
tire family. The division of family fields, houses, or water rights often in¬
creases the economic interdependence of the family members.27 However,
since the family and not the individual is the basic unit, there is no effort
at fair apportionment; one university education or one large dowry may
be given, while the rest of the family impoverishes itself. These actions and
the status they may produce will bring honor, and perhaps economic bene¬
fit, to the whole family.28 Even within the family, however, there is distrust.
Villagers take it for granted that impartiality cannot be found when per¬
sonal interest is involved; therefore, when a distribution is made of family
property, a Greek prefers that the decision be left to chance rather than to
human decision.
In referring to Greek society in the first years of the kingdom, John Pe
tropulos notes that “though its role varied from place to place according
to custom, the family constituted not merely the basic social unit, but the
fundamental economic and political unit as well.”29 This description is still
valid today. Family members must join together to meet the threats from
outsiders, and family cohesion is in the self-interest of every individual
member. To deceive the state, strangers, or even associates is accepted, and
often applauded as evidence of cleverness. Villagers do not often attempt
to establish new or direct relationships with strangers, since the Greek is
in a relationship of tension even with associates and neighbors. Other vil¬
lages are described as inhospitable; strangers are equated with thieves. So¬
cial links between a man and his wife’s relatives emerge only after the
marriage contract is made final—in fact, the trickery and fear of treachery
* This differs from the situations in Andalusia and southern Italy described by Pitt-Rivers and Banfield, but is similar to that noted by Grossholtz in the Philippines. The difference may be due to the extent to which the outside world imposes itself on the local community.


Gree\ Society 37
that went along with betrothal and marriage in the past are only now
disappearing in the most conservative areas. Nearly every rural household
has a dog for protection, and even these efforts are not sufficient to guard
unattended orchards and crops.30 Village houses are so placed that events
in all but a few are shielded from the eyes of the rest of the community.81
Ernestine Friedl notes that when a rural Greek is hospitalized, relatives
are in constant attendance to keep a check on the doctor and the treatment
he prescribes.32
This state of affairs makes a genuine community loyalty difficult to
achieve. The important family concerns are not bound up with the com¬
munity, but lead out of the village through links with kinsmen living else¬
where. There are few instances when interests will be the same for every
family; in most cases, it is almost a matter of every family against every
other. There are issues that may provoke village enthusiasm or loyalty
competition with other villages for public works, for example, or commu¬
nity boundary problems. When community efforts are found, they can
usually be attributed to an obvious congruence of public and private interest.
Although the immediate future is perceived in family terms—dowries,
education, and marriage—it is recognized that a family cannot realize this
future without outside assistance. There is a widespread feeling that the
poor resources of Greece cannot supply enough of anything to satisfy the
needs of all. The prosperity and good fortune of one family or person, there¬
fore, threatens the continued existence and well-being of others. Under
such conditions, most Greeks believe that government must ultimately dis¬
tribute resources. However, family loyalty outweighs public feeling; it is
commonly accepted that political office will be used to advance family or
clientage interests. Public office was perhaps more blatantly exploited in
earlier periods of Greek history than it is now, but family loyalties still
seem to predominate. Today, a man who has a favorable position in gov¬
ernment—or in business, for that matter—may not be expected to distribute
income to his less fortunate relatives, or to find places for all his cousins
and nephews. However, he will certainly give special attention to their
demands on the institution of which he is a part, or will transmit their
demands to those institutions with which he has personal ties.33
Politics in Greece, besides being a desirable occupation in a society with
few opportunities, is essential for settling individual economic conflicts and
for tempering administrative exactions. Public office is highly valued for
the advancement of private interests. Naturally, even though favoritism and


THE BACKGROUND
38
nepotism are expected, the distrust of the state as an institution is reinforced.
As the traditional portion of the population diminishes, the political system
is confronted with an increased volume of widely varying demands. More
and more individual demands for prestige and wealth, or aspirations for
power, must be directed at the political system.34 Neither the individual
nor his family can deal with the outside world alone; consequently, in
Greece as in other transitional societies, some links beyond those of kinship
are necessary. The most obvious patron, assuming a person is not related
to someone of prominence in the community, has been the \umbaros, the
godfather to a man’s children and the best man at their weddings. When a
family searches for a kumbaros, although social equals or even relatives may
be selected, the usual choice is a person with wealth and position that will
be a source of potential help for the parents and their children. The patron
client relationship was thus formalized to create an artificial relationship
with a series of mutual obligations built on religious connotations.85 The
kumbari relationship leads from the countryside to the town, and is most
often a relationship of unequals in the social as well as the economic sense.
The kumbaros is not likely to be a person one would exchange labor with
in the local fields; instead, he is most often consulted for advice on activi¬
ties not centered at the village level, such as education, marriages, and
dealings with the state. It is difficult for anyone to refuse the role of kum¬
baros because of its religious implications. In early modern Greece there
was another relationship, called “fraternal friendship,” in which two men
swore to defend each other for life. This formal bond was often used in
the organization of the secret revolutionary society, the Philiki Hetairia.36
In the history of the Greek political system, the traditional ties provided
a basis for the factionalism of the Revolutionary period and the two fol¬
lowing decades, and meshed well with the new representative institutions,
which were introduced in 1844 and further developed in 1863. Local nota¬
bles were able to mobilize support for their political careers on the basis of
mutual obligations; and several nineteenth-century politicians were reputed
to number godchildren in the thousands. Today, it is still useful, both po¬
litically and commercially, to have a large number of clients bound to your
support in this manner. A family well established in politics is likely to
have a traditional involvement with many neighboring villagers. Once a
peasant becomes accustomed to dealing with one prominent family, it is
easier to continue this relationship than to switch one’s ties to another
family. As the rural areas became aware of government—for example, when


Gree\ Society 29
the state imposed taxes and drafted young men—patrons were utilized to
mitigate the effect of these government demands on the individual. This
relationship allowed persons with little knowledge or appreciation of the
political system to become a part of the political process. For his part, a
notable was forced to bargain on the national level to obtain favors for
constituents and to maintain his own position and power; to do so, he
formed similar reciprocal relations with those more influential than he.
The clientage relationship has roots in the Greek notion of philotimo, or
“self-esteem.” This is respect accorded the individual as a person, not be¬
cause of his status or achievements. Self-esteem is the essential element in
undertanding individual actions; in all probability, it is the aspect of Greek
life that is often interpreted as democratic. The individual’s personal being,
his status within a family or village, and his very Greekness rest upon this
self-esteem. In a relationship of leader and followers, there is a division of
responsibility that cannot be understood solely in hierarchical terms. The
essence of philotimo is inviolability and freedom, and it is damaged when¬
ever events or people impose upon the inner emotions of the individual. If
this happens, there is sure to be retaliation. Sanders suggests that Greek
nationalism rests upon this base. Every Greek shares equally in the country’s
glorious past; to equate the low standard of living with backwardness would
violate both the individual philotimo and national self-esteem.87
Greek behavior is limited in many ways by a fear of appearing ridiculous.
Few villagers would become involved in work such as carpentry or me¬
chanics for this reason; few who are not “professional” would dream of
running for public office. Jokes are made even at the expense of people
who run for minor parties that have no chance of winning. This is one
result of the Greeks’ intense individualism. It is not expected that one
should know how to do more than one kind of work, and specialization
is another way of differentiating oneself from one’s neighbor.38
The traditional Greek value of philotimo and the Greek clientage system
have meshed well with the theory and institutions of modern representative
democracy; because of this, tradition is still strong in Greece. A century ago,
Greece was a country with a largely unmobilized peasantry led by a small
elite. There have been changes, but the attitudes and practices described
by early travelers are much like those described by modern sociologists
working in rural Greece. The relatively modest urbanization, the impact
of the refugees, and the events of World War II and after did not dissipate
these rural attitudes. For one thing, scarcity is as important a factor in the


40 THE BACKGROUND
urban as in the rural setting. Large-scale urbanization is a relatively recent
phenomenon in Greece, and may be just as easily thought o£ as a “ruraliza
tion” of the cities. These factors make the rural bias of the sociological
material less crucial. Friedl notes that the rural and urban components of
kinship groups are kept in constant contact because of the practice of mak¬
ing many decisions “family” decisions and spending considerable time in
discussing them. The modern communication network makes continuous
visiting between urban and rural relatives feasible, and thus maintains fam¬
ily ties and traditional values.39 Calliope Moustaka notes that great numbers
of guests from rural areas are found in town dwellers’ apartments.40
Although family ties remain important now, it is possible that second
or third-generation urban dwellers may not maintain them. Patron-client
relationships are most characteristic of the rural areas, but moving to the
city does not entirely extinguish them, even though they are more difficult
to maintain. However, a native urban dweller is less likely to know a suit¬
able patron in the city. His demands will be greater, and more difficult to
satisfy through the usual clientage structures. The decline of traditional,
family-oriented patronage ties is an important cause of change in the Greek
political system.


2. The Development of the Modern Greek State
Today, the Greek War of Independence is commemorated on March 25.
On this day in 1821, Bishop Germanos, the Metropolitan of Patras, raised
the standard of revolt at a monastery in the northern Peloponnesus. This
date, however, is primarily a matter of historical convenience, for the revo¬
lution began as a scattering of largely unconnected outbursts against the
Ottoman rulers. The conditions facilitating and encouraging the insurrec¬
tion, its immediate motivations, and its ultimate goals—insofar as they
were considered—varied with the place and the participants.1 There had
been innumerable abortive outbursts in Greece before, the last important
one in 1770. In 1821, the precise catalysts for individual clashes may not have
been different; but conditions in the first decades of the nineteenth century
facilitated the spread of insurrections. By 1821, the once efficient Ottoman
administration had suffered a marked decline.2 Policies and appointments
at all levels tended to be decided by bribes and favoritism. Administrators
on the periphery of the Empire were almost independent; but since their
tenure was uncertain, they tended to be rapacious and to enrich themselves
as quickly as possible. C. M. Woodhouse notes that in this period, “of the
two elementary functions of government, security and justice, they [the
Greeks] were assured of neither.”3
This situation was not new in itself. In fact, uneven justice had up to this
point helped to prevent concerted action by the Greek people. If conditions
were intolerable in one part of Greece, they were better somewhere else;
moreover, they would probably improve with the next administrator. Ac¬
tually, the Ottoman administration had so far been preferred to others,
probably because traditional institutions were left intact: for example, the
Greek population in the Peloponnesus generally applauded the Turkish
reconquest from the Venetians in 1715.4 In 1821, however the various in¬
justices became intolerable enough to produce armed insurrection, and
other factors intervened to facilitate its continuance.


42 THE BACKGROUND
For several decades before the revolution, foreign influences on Greece
had been growing in diversity and intensity. The Russians, using the ties
of Orthodox Christianity, had early become active agents in Greece. In
fact, the insurrection of 1770 was touched off, in part, by their propaganda
activities, which, if nothing else, acquainted the Greeks with an alternative
to Ottoman rule.6 Western European influence was also significant. Up to
this point, the Greeks within the Empire, smarting from memories of
Western actions in the crusades and the tension between Pope and Patriarch,
had generally been hostile to the West.6
Commerce within the Ottoman Empire had been carried on by the non
Moslem groups—particularly the Greeks, who eventually obtained a near¬
monopoly of shipping in the eastern Mediterranean. On land, professional
corps of agoyates, or mule drivers, led caravans between the areas of Greek
settlement. The commodities they carried were significant, but the news
and ideas they spread were ultimately more important.7 Similarly, the
Orthodox church hierarchy, especially the monks, were a mobile element
during this period. This expansion of commerce brought contact with
Western Europe during a period of intellectual ferment in the West, the
Enlightenment; and trade continued to grow during the period of the
French Revolution. Greeks who were successful in commerce and trade
secured positions in Europe for their sons, financed European educations
for other promising young men, or opened local schools with Western
curricula.8 The renewed European interest in classical literature and art,
assisted by a rash of travel accounts and several archaeological discoveries,
together with the growing influence of German nationalist writers such
as Fichte and Herder, made the Greeks in Europe and their cousins at
home more conscious of their classical heritage and cultural identity.
The French Revolution, the Empire, and the circumstances of the final
French defeat all had consequences for Greece. First, the ideas and practices
of the French Revolution were transmitted through both literary and po¬
litical channels. The intellectual traffic alone was considerable; but for
many Greeks, the experiences of their compatriots in the Ionian Islands
were more important. These islands had been ruled by Venice for some
time, during which a modicum of Western influence had always been
transmitted to the parts of Greece under Ottoman control. They came under
French control for two years following the dissolution of the Venetian
Republic in 1797. From 1799 to 1807, the Russians controlled the islands, at
least nominally; during the liberal period of Alexander I, the first inde


The Development of the Gree\ State 43
pendent Greek state of modern times, the Heptanesian Republic, was
formed. After a short French restoration resulting from the peace of Tilsit,
the islands became a British protectorate.9 Throughout this period, the
Ionian Islands were a place of refuge for Greeks fleeing the Turks; here
they were introduced to European administrative forms, as well as to West¬
ern values and ideals.
Other factors contributed to the widespread dissatisfaction with the status
quo in Greece. There was increasing pressure on the land, especially in the
Peloponnesus. Ownership had become concentrated in the hands of a rela¬
tively few Turkish and Greek landlords. Since the alienation of Turkish
lands was forbidden, the Greek landlords and the land-hungry Greek ten¬
ants, despite basic differences of interest, could combine against the Turks.10
In addition, the maritime dislocations of the Napoleonic period produced
an economic crisis in Greek shipping centers. Although this initially pro¬
duced cleavage along class lines, the opportunities for plunder and enrich¬
ment in a war against the Turks unified the interests of capitalists, captains,
and sailors.11 In continental Greece, there was a long-smoldering conflict
between the landholding notables and bands of irregulars from the moun¬
tains as each competed for Turkish favor. Moreover, since this area was
poorer, Greek tenants were pressed more severely, creating another set of
tensions.12
Events elsewhere also contributed much to the success of the revolution.
The Serbs had revolted in 1804, and had gained, initially, an independent
position within the Empire. More significantly, Ali Pasha, the Lion of Yan
nina, had virtually turned his Ottoman province in the Epirus into an inde¬
pendent state. Not only was his achievement instructive, but the Imperial
effort to subdue him drew Ottoman forces from the Peloponnesus and con¬
tinental Greece, creating an initial advantage for Greek conspirators.13 Fur¬
thermore, there were conflicts in other parts of the Ottoman realm. Upris¬
ings in the Lebanon, a war with Persia, and active incursions into the Sudan
and Arabia by that recalcitrant subordinate of the Sultan, Mohammed Ali
of Egypt kept the Imperial government fully occupied.
The Philiki Hetairia, a secret society for the liberation of Greece, was
founded in 1814 by Greeks in Odessa. The bourgeois founders, with a West¬
ern secular outlook, were hostile to things Byzantine. They looked with
distaste upon the Phanariots, Greeks in the Ottoman administrative service;
they also viewed the church as corrupted because of its association with the
Turks. The Phanariot prince Alexander Ypsilantis, who provoked disorders


THE BACKGROUND
44
in Rumania with the hope of starting a general uprising against the Otto¬
mans, was the formal leader of the movement, which eventually gained a
membership estimated at 200,ooo.14 Its first concern was the freeing of the
Greeks from Ottoman domination, but its ultimate aims were less clear.
One vision included the creation of a modern, independent state, but ap¬
peals to many Greeks promised a reconstructed Byzantium. The goals of
the movement became so diffuse that the organization served as a vehicle
for all Greeks opposed to the Turks, whatever their reasons. The insurrec¬
tionists of 1821 were all affected in some way by the Philiki Hetairia. He
tairist agents had been active in the Peloponnesus and the island shipping
centers; their influence had touched some in the more inaccessible mountain
regions of continental Greece as well. The high clergy, if not actively in¬
volved, at least knew of the organization.
Because of these changes in the intellectual, social, and economic environ¬
ment, tolerance of the Ottoman rule vanished. Petropulos notes that in the
decade prior to the outbreak “virtually no one argued for Ottoman rule.
Opinions differed only on matters of timing and planning.”15 Fundamen¬
tally, there were two incompatible visions of the future Greece. One view
assumed that the Greeks would come to inherit the Ottoman Empire in¬
tact; and that Byzantium would be restored as Greeks came to occupy more
and more of the important state offices. The other favored secession and the
formation of an independent state. Moreover, the partisans of each goal
were a mixture of modern and traditional elements.18 Initially, the incom¬
patibility of these ultimate aims was not always apparent, and the contra¬
dictions among the insurgents were not developed.
Two broad groups within the Greek nation owed their positions to the
Ottoman rulers: the high clergy and the Phanariot Greeks who served in
the central state administration or as governors of various provinces in Euro¬
pean Turkey. The other groups eventually involved in the revolution—the
Peloponnesian notables, the island capitalists, and the mountain chieftains
drew their strength from local connections. Only after the French Revolu¬
tion did a rift develop between the Phanariots and the high clergy. During
the Enlightenment, both had been active importers of Enlightenment ideals,
manners, and knowledge. However, in the wake of the Russian reaction to
the Revolution changes occurred in the Orthodox hierarchy. Ultimately, a
renewed hostility to things Western and an obscurantist educational policy
developed.17 Western influence was again viewed as a threat to the purity
of the faith and the authority of the clergy. The Phanariots, on the other
hand, maintained their Western ties and secular outlooks.


The Development of the Gree\ State 45
The Phanariots had parlayed their knowledge of Europe, gained from
commercial ventures, into high administrative positions. They were indis
pensible once the Ottoman Empire began to interact with Europe on a regu¬
lar basis. As they acquired more importance with the decline of the Empire,
they began to aspire to ultimate control. Although they were modernists,
purveyors of nationalist doctrines, they mistook Orthodoxy for a uniting
force. For example, Alexander Ypsilantis, the Phanariot head of the Philiki
Hetairia, was unable to rouse the Orthodox Rumanian peasantry to enthu¬
siasm for the revolution because Greek prelates and princes were their im¬
mediate oppressors. Once the revolution began, the Phanariots, involved
because the Sultan also assumed that religion was the line of division be¬
tween the loyal and disloyal, were deprived of their influence.
The Ottoman Empire had used religion as an organizing principle. This
assured the preservation of the Greek language and faith, but it was a bar
to specifically Greek national feeling. The Orthodox clergy at this time,
with few exceptions, were not nationalists. The Patriarch of Constantinople
in 1821 ruled a theocratic state within the Ottoman Empire that included
all Orthodox Christians, not merely the Greeks. Within the Christian com¬
munity, however, the Greeks had an acknowledged supremacy. The clergy
had far-reaching judicial, fiscal, and administrative powers; authority in
these spheres, derived from the Ottoman Sultan, was delegated by the Pa¬
triarch to other levels of the religious hierarchy.18 In regions of homogeneous
Greek population, this meant virtual self-government. The clergy were the
cultural and spiritual leaders, as well as the possessors of governing author¬
ity, and thus had enormous influence in the Greek community. But they
were successful only because they were patronized by the Ottoman adminis¬
tration and because they advised and defended the Greek population. The
higher clergy and the monastic orders from which it came were generally
held in low esteem by much of the Greek population. Since the clergy was
charged with carrying out the demands of the Turks, its occasional unpopu¬
larity was not surprising. The church itself was generally corrupt at the
higher levels, since rank here, as elsewhere in Ottoman society, was obtained
by bribery and not ability. At the lower levels the priests were as illiterate
and uninformed as most of their parishioners.
The ecclesiastical interests of the Greek church were more powerful than
national feeling; and for the clergy, the revolution was simply another
round in the struggle of Orthodoxy and Islam. Initially the church expected
deliverance by the armies of Russia, or at least Russian intervention under
the guise of protecting Orthodoxy. The Patriarch of Constantinople de


46 THE BACKGROUND
nounced the Philiki Hetairia when it became evident that the revolution
was not countenanced by the Russian government. In addition, the anti
ecclesiastical opinions and westernizing sentiments of the local hetairist
leaders and some of the military chiefs made influential churchmen feel that
the Sultan was more likely to protect their privileges than any new secular
Greek state. The high clergy and the Sultan had a common purpose in at¬
tempting to separate Greek nationalism from the cause of the Orthodox
church; however, in a system of government by hostage, the clergy paid
with their lives for not preventing the spread of the nationalist virus.
The major groups intent on gaining a new Byzantium lost control of
events. The revolution, after the initial outbreaks had been quelled, lingered
only in parts of the Greek nation over which they had little control. The
clergy, because of its dependence on the Turks, denounced the revolution
and in consequence lost all authority in those areas where fighting still
raged.19 The Phanariots, having confused Orthodoxy with Greek national¬
ism, also suffered a crushing defeat. They were left to trickle into indepen¬
dent Greece as refugees. The Philiki Hetairia faded into the past, although
Demetrius Ypsilantis, the brother of its former chief, became a temporary
rallying point during the revolution. Despite the propagandizing successes
of the Hetairia, the commercial class, concentrated as it was along the coasts
of the Black Sea and Asia Minor, or in Constantinople and the other major
cities of the eastern Mediterranean, was unable to exercise much control over
revolutionary activities in Greece. They provided the impulse to revolution,
but they were unable to lead it. In the long run, the governmental form they
desired was imposed by the Great Powers. However, these same Great
Powers excluded the commercial middle class, the most modern part of the
Greek nation, from the territory of the new Greek state.
The Greeks who merely sought an independent state were divided be¬
tween modernizers and traditionalists. On the one hand were the few mid¬
dle-class elements who admired Western values and institutions: the Greek
graduates of Western schools, the sons of traders, merchants and capitalists,
and several representatives of the traditional notables, who looked forward
to the creation of a modern state on the European model. The westernizers,
who were joined by the Phanariot refugees once the revolution had com¬
menced, favored nationalism, centralization, bureaucratic structures, and
even constitutionalism.20 However, these men were in a small minority, es¬
pecially in the areas that ultimately became the nucleus of the Greek state.
A second group, divided along regional lines, was primarily interested in


The Development of the Gree\ State 47
eliminating the Turk, the cause of their inferior status and insecurity. Since
many of these men enjoyed Ottoman patronage, they were at first hesitant.
However, as Woodhouse notes, they were dragged into the fray by the “en¬
thusiasm of the lower levels of the population,” who were ignorant of the
odds against them.21 These indigenous leaders did not intend that the ex¬
isting power relationships among Greeks should be upset. Ottoman admin¬
istrative forms would remain; only the incumbents would change. They
had no vision of a modern state on the European model, and were largely
hostile to Western values and institutions.
The Peloponnesus, or Morea, was the most important part of insurgent
Greece. It was the primary production unit, and an important source of
taxation. Strictly speaking, there was no aristocracy in Greece; it had been
exterminated by the original Ottoman conquest. There was an equality of
status in that all Greeks and Orthodox Christians were viewed as inferior to
Moslems. Beyond this, the Moslem conquest had improved the condition of
the rural population in the Peloponnesus, since the serfdom inherited from
the Byzantine Empire and continued by the Franks was destroyed. How¬
ever, the fact that the Ottoman government employed Greeks as adminis¬
trators over other Greeks did restore status distinctions. Greek traditions of
local autonomy under elders and notables were continued because they fit
the Ottoman system of indirect government and served the fiscal needs of
the Empire. The tax contribution of each Peloponnesian province—and sub¬
sequently, of every district and commune—was fixed by the Turks. As long
as it was paid, there was little contact with Ottoman authorities. The clergy
and the lay leaders, ordinarily selected by acclamation or election (though
only by a part of the commune), were a buffer between the Greek commun¬
ity and the Ottoman provincial administration, which was continually
modified by policy needs and personality clashes. The village elders selected
men to represent them at the district level; from this assembly, in turn, rep¬
resentatives were sent to the next higher administrative unit. Finally, two
Greeks remained as advisers to the pasha assigned to administer the Pelo¬
ponnesus and two more represented Peloponnesian interests in Istanbul.
The very nature of the positions assigned to the Greeks in the Pelepon
nesus limited the candidates to local notables, men of wealth and stature in
the community. The patronage of the Ottoman administration further en¬
hanced their positions. Ultimately, the major notables, or “primates,” be¬
came an “aristocracy” of tax farmers. They generally adopted the style of
life of their Ottoman overlords, with entourages that occasionally rivaled


THE BACKGROUND
48
those of their masters. The Peloponnesian primates were self-perpetuating
through intermarriage and other bonds, even though challenges at the local
level sometimes caused disruptions.22 Local primates guaranteed tax col¬
lections, and served as hostages for the good behavior of the Greek com¬
munity as well. But in return for these risks they enjoyed a high status
within the community, exercised considerable discretion in local govern¬
ment, and were well-off financially. In addition, since taxes were collected
in kind, the primate class, by the end of the eighteenth century also had a
considerable interest in commerce.23
The local Greek authorities in the Peloponnesus, then, could not agree
completely with the aims of the revolution. However, once the hetairist
agents had roused the peasantry against the small minority of Moslems in
the area, the notables were compelled to assume the leadership of the revolt,
since the Ottomans recognized only religion as a line of cleavage. Once the
first blows had been struck, the primates hastened to assume the authority
of the murdered Moslem officials, and to enhance their own power and po¬
sition with public funds. Once mobilized, they often forced reluctant peas¬
ants to participate also. The primates in authority were faced by challenges
to their continued supremacy from elements in the peasantry, from rival
groups of notables, and especially from the Greek military, the captains
formerly employed for personal and community security.24 During the revo¬
lution, authority finally gravitated to those with military power rather than
formal position.
The military chieftains who formed the elite group in the mountainous
districts of continental Greece did not at first react to the revolution. The
hetairist agents had not been as numerous or as successful in these precincts;
and there was no intermediate layer of Ottoman authorities in these regions,
which were under the direct control of the Imperial government. As early
as the eighteenth century, these areas were described as a “hotbed of chronic
insurgency.”25 There were few Moslems here; the inhabitants, largely of
Albanian stock, were only imperfectly assimilated into the Greek nation¬
ality. At times, the chieftains of the numerous irregular armed groups in
the area had an official role as armatoloi, or military commanders with con¬
trol over armed communities. In this capacity, they were employed to keep
order in the mountain regions. However, when not acting officially, they
were generally characterized as \lephs, or brigands, and were considered to
be enemies of all established authority, Greek and Turkish alike.
The leadership in continental Greece was selected on the basis of personal


The Development of the Gree\ State 49
qualities. Martial values were exalted, and others were depreciated. In the
years prior to the revolution, the Ottoman government had declined to em¬
ploy some of these groups, and instead had favored the local primates. When
this happened, the armatoloi naturally returned to their traditional banditry
and became a scourge to the agricultural population of the plains, Christians
and Moslems alike. The revolution thus allowed the continental military
chiefs to regain a formerly held position; they were accorded the status of
revolutionaries once the rebellion commenced, and several chiefs eventually
achieved national leadership. While some version of national consciousness
eventually penetrated here, the major concerns were only tenuously con¬
nected with the form of future government or the goals of the new state.
Most military chieftains were concerned primarily with extending their per¬
sonal control over adjacent territories.28
The several islands off the Attic coast and individual islands in the Aege¬
an, such as Psara and Kasos, also aided the independence movement. Theo¬
retically, these islands were under the control of the Admiral of the Ottoman
Fleet; in practice, they were left under the local authorities as long as taxes
were paid and peace kept. The local power structures varied from the ex¬
treme oligarchy of Hydra to the democracy of Psara. However, only in
Hydra and Spetsai were merchant capitalists clearly distinguishable from
landed proprietors. In these islands, the outbreak of the revolution coin¬
cided with economic distress; under these conditions, the propaganda
spread by the hetairist agents found fertile ground, especially among the
unemployed sailors. Regardless of the local power structure, the possibility
of plundering vessels and towns belonging to the Turks was enough to
bring many islanders to the side of the revolution. There was no necessity
to eliminate a hostile majority, since no Moslems lived on the islands. On
one island after another, the wealthy oligarchs were forced into revolt, often
against their will.27 Here, the revolution tended to have a democratic char¬
acter, since the wealth gained from plundering the Turks threw up a new
leadership to replace the old. The last years of the conflict found plunder
outweighing national feeling as a motivation, and the islanders became pi¬
rates parading as revolutionaries.
Although each region, and each of the diverse groups within it, often put
self-interest first, the Turks (and later Europeans) viewed them as partici¬
pants in a common enterprise. The longer the revolution lasted, the greater
the sense of nationalism that developed. Even so, the Greeks were divided.
The revolutionary battles were primarily a series of skirmishes under local


THE BACKGROUND
50
leadership; no great national leader appeared. It was impossible to produce
any central institutions with the power to lessen sectionalism; in fact, every
effort was made to retain local autonomy because it was feared that any
central government would merely reinstitute the taxations of the Empire.
Moreover, the thought of subordination to a fellow Greek apparently was
a distasteful one to all the various leaders.
THE FIRST MODERN GREEK STATE
The First Greek National Assembly met at Epidaurus in December 1821.
It was composed of representatives from the regional governments, and pro¬
duced a constitution providing for a central government that did not actu¬
ally disturb the local basis of oligarchical power or mitigate interregional
jealousy.28 The only area in which it could operate, the Peloponnesus, was
firmly in the hands of the local primates. The Second National Assembly,
with a more heterogeneous membership, resolved itself into two camps,
military and civilian. The ensuing feud between the legitimate government
and certain military leaders was soothed by the arrival of a European loan;
but it later flared again, and resulted in the invasion of the Peloponnesus by
armed irregulars from continental Greece.29 Order broke down; Greece’s
military incapacity and the faults of her leadership threatened the success
of the independence movement. Politics and war came to revolve about
regionally based factions with both civilian and military components. A
further complication was the involvement of foreign powers in factional
conflict. The more perceptive rebels recognized that central authority of
some type was necessary to resolve these anarchic conditions, but no in¬
digenous leader could be put in a position of overlordship. In 1827, after
several years of sectional bickering, the Third National Assembly, repre¬
senting a superficially unified country, appointed foreign officers to com¬
mand the naval and military forces. More important, the Assembly invited
an outsider, Count John Capodistrias, a native of Corfu who had served
Alexander I of Russia, to accept the Presidency of the country. This appoint¬
ment reflected the necessity of securing foreign confidence, which in turn
required that internal factionalism be quelled.30
Capodistrias came to Greece as a liberal, as a man imbued with the ideals
of the Enlightenment, and as a friend of Russia. He sought a bureaucratic,
unitary state, “administering an enlightened law code with the concurrence
of the propertied classes in the interests of all the people.”31 Capodistrias
was opposed to both oligarchs and revolutions; his goals and methods


The Development of the Gree\ State 51
seemed most appropriate to a benevolent despot. In contemporary terms, his
was to be a tutelary regime. He had great faith in Western education, but
he also favored adherence to the traditional religious beliefs and cultivation
of the Greek language in order to preserve Greek nationality. The creation
of an internal administration and the general reconstruction of the country¬
side required, in Capodistrias’s opinion, a central authority with absolute
power. However, his assessment of Greek leadership, although it justified
his own assumption of power, did little to advance the cause of unity. He
called the primates “Christian Turks; the military chiefs, robbers; the men
of letters, fools; the Phanariots, children of Satan.”32 Capodistrias asked for
and received a mandate for a constitutional dictatorship from the Third
National Assembly in 1828. After this, he worked to create a centralized
state: first, because it indicated a desirable level of modernity; and second,
because it would undermine the positions of his regional opponents. At the
same time he attempted to transfer the loyalties of the peasants from the
untrustworthy local oligarchs to himself.
However, Capodistrias was unable to overcome regional animosity and
factionalism without creating his own political faction, which was based on
the old Russian-oriented faction of the Peloponnesus and backed by the
bureaucratic machinery of the state, both civil and military. He gave re¬
sponsible positions to Greeks from outside the insurgent areas, who would
be dependent on him alone. He encouraged local opposition in the fiefdoms
of his major regional opponents. Although attempting to modernize and
consolidate the state, he did not alter the usual forms of Ottoman adminis¬
tration (e.g., the system of land tax and the practice of tax farming) in those
regions where the local leaders were personally loyal to him. Beyond this,
he attempted to create some mass support; and even dedicated enemies ac¬
knowledged his popularity.33 He attempted, unsuccessfully, to build a mid¬
dle class that would support his vision of the Greek elite. At the same time,
he hoped to encourage an independent peasantry by distributing to veterans
property seized during the war. The suffrage laws were revised to exclude
a property qualification; universal male suffrage, operating through the
filter of indirect elections, created an Assembly largely subservient to the
President. Eventually Capodistrias’s modernization involved little more
than securing the loyalty of regional chiefs, and if this failed, attempting to
secure the personal loyalty of their clients. Local and disconnected dissatis¬
factions eventually became a widespread opposition to centralization. This
opposition, with the news of the establishment of the July Monarchy in


THE BACKGROUND
52
France, was legitimatized under a “constitutional” label. There is some evi¬
dence that prior to his assassination in October 1831 by a disaffected Pelo¬
ponnesian clan leader Capodistrias may have been planning to “manage
universal suffrage to elect himself sovereign of Greece.”34
The attempts of Capodistrias to create a political system based on personal
loyalty to himself failed. Despite all his efforts, most individual Greeks re¬
mained loyal to more local leaders, since there was no tradition of any more
overriding loyalty. Indeed, the armed masses were not politically aware
enough to take a stand on constitutional issues.35 At this time there may
have been a vague demand for some governmental system; but the options
of a reconstituted Hellenic empire, a resurrected Byzantium, or a modern
state were not part of the consciousness of most Greeks. Greece was defined
in local terms, or in religious terms only; to be a Greek was to be distin¬
guished from a Turk. A modern Greek nationalism had not yet developed,
and personal and factional conflict remained the rule. European politics
provided political labels for the contending factions in Greece, but the ac¬
tual struggles remained traditional.
THE TUTELARY REGIME OF THE BAVARIANS
The demise of Capodistrias gave renewed impetus to international in¬
trigue. A provisional settlement was reached in 1832, when the Great Pow¬
ers guaranteed Greece’s sovereignty, stipulated that the new state would be
a monarchy, and found their own candidate for the throne. Otho, Prince of
Bavaria, became the King of Greece. At this time, the kingdom could hardly
be called a state, for central authority did not exist. From the first, the Ba¬
varian regency for the young king, and later the king himself, attempted
to modernize the Greek political system. They also sought to overcome re¬
gional and party jealousy through a highly centralized administration, and
to substitute loyalty to the monarch for party feeling. However, their efforts,
like those of Capodistrias, did not reduce Greek factionalism. The regency,
and finally the monarch himself, were drawn into factional conflict.
The problems of extending central control in Greece were almost insur¬
mountable. The factions rested on the pervasive clientage structures in
Greek society, and the only way to control them was to create conditions
that would make the patron-client tie unnecessary. In short, Greece needed
a modern political system, with fair and impartial administration in all
spheres of life, as well as a flourishing economy that could provide oppor¬
tunities in other than the governmental sphere. However, a modern system
of this kind could not be created as long as clientage ties existed, for such


The Development of the Gree\ State 53
relationships would by their nature undermine the modern structures. This
paradox was not widely appreciated at the beginning. The Bavarians as¬
sumed that the goals of westernization were widely accepted; they misun¬
derstood the nature of the clientage system, underestimated its consequences,
and glossed over the involvement of the Great Powers in clientage struc¬
tures.
The regency brought in several regiments of highly skilled Bavarian
troops, as well as administrative specialists to man the newly created insti¬
tutions. At the same time measures to undermine the presumed basis of the
indigenous Greek leadership were undertaken. The existing Greek military
establishment was severely shaken up, and the Greek irregulars were dis¬
banded without much attention to pensions or promised land grants. Simi¬
larly, the church was subjected to government authority, and much of its
land was taken over by the state. The government instituted a system of
central appointments down to the provincial and district level, and officials
with no personal ties were preferred at all levels. Finally, a check-and
balance system was created as administrative authority was divided into
competing jurisdictions. There were plans to change the financial system
by eliminating tax farming and basing taxes on land values established by
auction prices rather than productivity.36 More direct moves were made
against the factions themselves. Officially, the state took no notice of the
various parties. The major party figures were removed from their strong¬
holds by requiring them to hold honorific posts in Athens or abroad; there
were further attempts to undermine the authority of party leaders by the
appointment of their lieutenants to official posts. In addition, the original
Bavarian plan included placating the factions by distributing appointments
in proportion to the size and power of each faction. As a last resort, armed
force was to be used against internal opponents.37
The regency’s policies were not successful. First, they were not carried
out; the regency itself favored first one and then another faction or foreign
power. None of the measures to separate the native elite from its clients
were very successful either; in fact, these measures only served to make the
factions more cohesive and to undermine the centralizing policies of the
state. The extension of authority and the staffing of the new administration
was the focus of all political activity. Each faction, with its chain of clients,
was mainly occupied with finding government office, since there were few
other opportunities. Even professional training was preparatory to public
office, from which livelihood, prestige, and protection from the rapacious¬
ness of others in official position could all be acquired.38 Staffing the govern


THE BACKGROUND
54
ment with foreigners created widespread dissatisfaction; yet only foreigners
were deemed immune from factional loyalty. As centralization proceeded,
pressures for office were more severe, because livelihood, prestige, and pro¬
tection were even more dependent on it.
The central administration created on paper never functioned as in¬
tended: clientage groups penetrated the bureaucracy, obliterating the sys¬
tem of checks and balances; subordinates undermined official actions. Be¬
cause it was committed to Western legal norms, the Bavarian regime was
at a loss to deal with the activities deemed permissible by Greek tradition.
Its opponents resorted to rioting, outbreaks of brigandage, and abusive
newspaper campaigns to force the government to change personnel or poli¬
cies.89 The government was in part responsive, but the nature of these de¬
mands was not understood. The Bavarian officials could not operate in the
Greek context; as they adapted their techniques and goals, their original
aims of westernization and modernization were compromised. Many de¬
vices were tried: tax farming; the creation of loyal patrons and clients; the
development of the Royal Phalanx, an organization to occupy dissatisfied
revolutionary veterans; and the distribution of honor, position, and patron¬
age to Greek party figures. Fundamentally, a political machine capable of
ruling was not created—yet any attempts to rule through an existing Greek
faction were avoided.
Otho himself, when he came of age and discarded his Bavarian advisers,
attempted to rule by absolute methods. “The monarchy, rather than a con¬
stitution, would educate the people to exercise their political duties and
would guarantee them, likewise, from the tyranny of their former Greek
masters.”40 Otho was personally popular, and the monarchy itself was a
symbol of unity and a hope for territorial expansion. But Otho, too, was
faced with the problem of creating a central administration in the tradi¬
tional Greek setting; and by and large, his efforts were no more successful
than those of his former advisers. The regency had attempted to use the
factions; Otho tried to balance the existing factions by his distribution of
patronage, and to prevent common action by the factions or the foreign
powers. He appointed Greeks with no local ties; but his appointees often
used the opportunities of public office to create a following of their own.
By the beginning of 1841, it was painfully evident that the Crown had failed in two of its most persistent efforts over the previous eight years. It had not established an efficient and impartial administration. It had not weakened the political parties. If anything, administration had grown progressively worse and the parties even stronger.41


The Development of the Gree\ State 55
At this point, international pressure especially a sudden demand for repay¬
ment by all guarantors of loans to the Greek state, forced a disastrous cur¬
tailment of internal expenditures. The civil service was cut, much of the
military demobilized, and potential sources of political support alienated.
Even worse the united demands of the “protecting” powers unified the in¬
ternal opposition to the government.42
In form, the Greek kingdom was similar to a colonial administration.
Initially, only Bavarians or other foreigners held positions of authority. All
appointments and revenue remained the prerogative of the king; there was
no constitution or representative assembly, and the participation of Greeks
in the formal decision-making structures of the kingdom was negligible.
However, absolute authority in theory could not alter the fact that in prac¬
tice the traditional clientage structure effectively resisted its application.
Any attempt to extend administration to the rural areas, no matter how
minimal or unsuccessful, upset the traditional elites. Temporary loyalty in
the traditional Greek pattern might come from the royal bestowal of public
office or other favors, but as yet there was little loyalty to the Greek kingdom
or to the king himself. The bulk of the population was not aware of either
the kingdom or the king. The state boundaries were arbitrary, and in¬
dividual horizons did not extend beyond the local community. For the
elite elements a king with a different religion, small knowledge of Greek,
and a desire to undermine local bases of control could hardly inspire al¬
legiance. He was necessary because his dynastic connections could be used
to free additional territory from the Turks, and because his throne was
guaranteed by the Great Powers. Now these advantages seemed question¬
able, particularly since the Great Powers had unified to extract the loan
repayment.
Consequently, the old revolutionary elite engineered the bloodless revolu¬
tion of 1843 for its own benefit. The rebellion was confined to Athens, and
the traditional leaders and their retainers were the only participants.43
Threatened by centralization, they wished either to save their positions or
to staff the new central institudons themselves. Otho, however, was a bul¬
wark against anarchy; and although the revolutionary elite could cooperate
against him, they did not want to return to the anarchy of the revolutionary
period.44 The cooperation lasted only long enough to carry out the revolu¬
tion of 1843 and to force a new constitution on Otho. Once the constitutional
crisis was passed, this cooperation ceased. The new constitution itself was
a patchwork; its major provisions involved patronage, appointment, and
matters of secularization. Representative institutions and mechanisms char


THE BACKGROUND
56
acteristic of Western governments were introduced, and Otho’s remaining
Bavarian advisers were replaced by Greeks. Although the constitutional
document had been imposed by an assembly on a recalcitrant monarch, the
king retained substantial power, even in matters of appointment. How¬
ever, the traditional leadership now commanded the central administra¬
tion, and commenced to operate the new institutions in conformity with
traditional values.
At first, Otho competed at the party level, using the constitution of 1844
for his own purposes by nominating candidates, managing elections, and
using extra-parliamentary cabinets. He was able to draw some members of
the revolutionary elite to his side, and others were exiled to distant lega¬
tions. The extension of central authority and the operation of representative
bodies created a greater awareness of the state and its institutions. The gen¬
eral conditions of order encouraged commerce and communications. A sec¬
ond rebellion, in 1862, was also carried out by a united, indigenous opposi¬
tion to Otho; but unlike the earlier coup, it “reflected a nationwide popular
movement.”45 Mutinies and street demonstrations in the major provincial
centers culminated in an outburst in Athens, and Otho was deposed. On this
occasion, not only were veteran politicians and army officers involved, but
students and the provincial intelligentsia as well.46
A number of motives coalesced to bring about the demise of Otho’s re¬
gime. Domestically, Otho’s political opponents were restive under the sys¬
tem of manipulated elections. At the same time, the growth of central in¬
stitutions, an increase in economic capabilities, and the lessons provided by
Otho in manipulation and control were not lost on the most influential of
his subjects. Moreover, the Greek elite and the mobilized population judged
the monarchy as an institution, and the incumbent himself, in terms of
their effectiveness in foreign relations. Whether the goal was a new Hellenic
empire, Byzantium restored, or simply an enlarged kingdom depended on
one’s point of view; however, in each case, Otho and his policies were fail¬
ures. Since the major task confronting the new state was the liberation of
Greeks still within the Ottoman Empire, a goal far beyond the capacity of
the country, international goodwill was essential. Otho’s regime, failing to
meet the test of domestic utility, also forfeited its foreign support because
of its endeavors in behalf of the unredeemed Greeks. To a large extent,
Otho was a victim of the international system of the mid-nineteenth century.
The new democratic constitution of 1863 called for universal male suf¬
frage and a single-chamber parliament. These Western political institutions


The Development of the Gree\ State 57
were operated by an elite most familiar with the non-national traditions of
Byzantium and the Ottoman Empire. As the local notables moved into the
state offices, there was a blending of two Byzantine traditions: the rural tra¬
dition of local autonomy and rule by elders; and the imperial tradition of
great centralization, territorial expansion, and cultural hegemony. The
notables now imposed their parochialism on the central institutions of the
state. Elite status was acquired largely through office-holding, rather than
through intellectual or economic channels. The chamber of deputies be¬
came an arena for the satisfaction of personal and local wants on the pattern
of the clientage system. At the same time, the chamber, as a representative
voice of the Greek nation, could demand the reclamation of the Greek ir¬
redenta. The Greek bureaucracy was not a counter to local elites, but was
utilized by them. The modern institutions, both administrative and po¬
litical, were now operated along traditional lines, and the vision of a modern
system held by Capodistrias, Otho, and the Bavarians was finally lost.
Prince William of Denmark, who ascended the throne as George I, was
selected as the new monarch by the Great Powers. His domestic role was
severely limited by the constitution, even though his powers in foreign
policy remained substantial. However, instead of being titled King of
Greece, as was Otho, he was “King of the Greeks.” The growing nationalist
fervor for expansion had been given at least token recognition; and there
was an attempt to tie loyalty to the monarchy to the Greek nation, rather
than the territorial Greek state. The revolution of 1862, the subsequent
constitutional revision, and the appearance of a new set of personal factions
largely unrelated to the old revolutionary parties marked a new era in
Greek politics.
FORCES FOR CHANGE
Since the mid-nineteenth century, nearly every generation of Greeks has
been confronted with a major disruption of its normal existence. Each event
triggered a sudden mobilization of additional segments of the population.
In addition, there was a normal but gradual mobilization of the popula¬
tion occurring because of the growing penetration of the countryside by
government officials, the expansion of educational facilities, the growth of
the communication infrastructure, and the increasing marketization of the
economy. The impulses for this social mobilization have been varied: war,
foreign pressures, and even occupation, as well as the regular pressures of
modernizadon.


THE BACKGROUND
58
The scale of military activity increased throughout modern Greek history.
There were many irregular military clashes with the Turks from the middle
to the end of the nineteenth century. In 1854 unsuccessful Greek raids took
place in the Epirus and Thessaly. The Greeks gave assistance to the Cretans
during a rebellion in 1866. There was another attempt in Thessaly in 1878,
more disturbances in Crete in 1886, and finally a disastrous formal conflict
with Turkey in 1896-97. These clashes appear to have been largely guerrilla
activities with the exception of the last.47 After the 1897 disaster, the regular
drafting of age-classes began. The Greek forces in the Balkan Wars were
made up of recruits from all over Greece, and even included Greeks who
had returned from the United States. These were national wars in a way
that previous disturbances were not. The confused neutrality of the 1914-17
period, with clashes between the partisans of King Constantine and former
Premier Venizelos, as well as the presence of Allied forces in the Kingdom,
affected much of the Greek population. Similarly, Greece’s ultimate entry
into the conflict on the Allied side, together with the invasion of Anatolia
in 1920, exposed large numbers of Greek males to military discipline and
training, and more important, acquainted them with a world beyond their
own villages.
World War II and the ensuing Civil War had a great impact on the
future political behavior of the Greek people. The resistance movement
reached into the countryside and mobilized townsmen and peasants for
action against the Nazi occupiers; these men were usually ready to respond
to calls for particular political action in the future. The resistance movement
filled the vacuum left by the suppression and exile of the traditional Greek
political leaders; it reached the younger Greeks as no other political move¬
ment had done, and inspired them with a great sense of their own im¬
portance. Not only was the traditional authority of the father over his chil¬
dren questioned, but in many cases, women were called upon to perform
tasks in the name of the nation that might not have been sanctioned by
their husbands and fathers in the past.48 The Nazi forces, with each hostage
shot, increased the size of the mobilized opposition.
The civil struggle that erupted after the occupation also forced many
unmobilized elements into the political world. Often, personal vendettas
were translated into political quarrels. The excesses of the period of left
wing dominance were repeated once the extreme right wing of the country
gained the advantage. Both the activities of the guerrillas and the policy of
the government affected rural Greece. In areas under their control, the


The Development of the Gree\ State 59
guerrillas forced the rural youth into military service and the rest of the
population into active support. The government’s evacuation of the most
isolated areas of the country and the temporary resettlement of the villagers
in the more secure provincial towns increased social mobilization among
the more traditional groups. In many cases, two years of town life gave
women and young people new ideas and new demands that the traditional
peasant world and traditional politics could not satisfy.49
The recent institution of universal military training has also influenced
those living in the rural areas. Although military service has been an obli¬
gation of Greek citizens for many decades, it is only relatively recently that
the army has been a genuine educational institution. Not only have the
armed forces been concerned with the inculcation of particular loyalties,
but they have exposed the recruit to new technical skills and to a new set
of values that contradict those prevalent in a peasant culture. When the
soldiers return home after their military tour, traditional authority struc¬
tures in the villages are often upset; sometimes the traditional patron-client
relationships are strained as well. Further, a class of men no longer satisfied
with rural life and equipped with minimal skills that are often in over¬
abundance in Greek society congregate in the urban areas.
As territories were added to the Greek state throughout its history, the
extension of the new governmental system in itself caused the social mobili¬
zation of some people in the newly acquired provinces. Government affairs
had to be settled in Athens, and local demands had to go through new
channels. Athens, therefore, became the center of political life for the
Greeks, as Constantinople had not been under the Ottomans. However,
the pace of nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century social mobiliza¬
tion was relatively leisurely, and at first only the top local leaders in the
newly acquired areas were mobilized. They made personal demands on the
political system, and transmitted the few demands of the relatively un¬
mobilized peasantry.
The greatest shock to the political system was produced by the popula¬
tion exchanges that marked the end of Greece’s territorial ambitions in
Asia Minor.50 The problems of minority populations in Greek territory
were largely eliminated: northern Greece was hellenized, and only a few
Turkish enclaves were left in Thrace. But in 1928 about one-fourth of the
total Greek population was made up of refugees. Some had come from the
Greek cities of the Ottoman Empire, and had experience in local self
government and far-reaching contacts with the rest of the world. Others,


6o THE BACKGROUND
who came from the more remote areas of Anatolia, had only a limited po¬
litical consciousness. However, the shock of the war, the forceable expulsion
from Turkey and other areas of the Middle East, and the wretchedness of
immediate conditions in Greece created a bond between all refugees and
mobilized them for political action. Refugees were dependent on state or
international assistance for mere survival from the moment of their arrival
in Greece. Even the rural refugee, who had demands of perhaps broader
scope than his native Greek neighbor, was more likely to express these
demands in a political manner. The native Greeks were also affected by the
removal of the Moslem population and the disruptions caused by the refu¬
gees; but the settlement pattern of the refugees, and the consequent reaction
to them, varied in different parts of the country.
In more recent decades, the development of communications and trans¬
portation has had an impact upon the individual Greek. In 1951 there were
2.4 times as many roads as there were in prewar Greece.51 Only three roads
traverse the Pindus Mountains, which form the “spine” of continental
Greece; but only one existed in the prewar period, although none of them
are really all-weather roads even now.52 Many of these roads were built to
open remote and inaccessible parts of the country to the defense forces dur¬
ing the civil war; less threatened areas were less favored. Regardless of
motivation, travel and communication are now much easier than ever be¬
fore. Newspapers and other printed materials, though not abundant, are
now more easily acquired in the rural areas. A network of bus lines reaches
even the most remote parts of the country, connecting the villagers with
their urban relatives. American aid, largely responsible for the roads, was
also instrumental in the development of the power lines and the new gen¬
erating plants that brought electric power to many rural areas. Radios,
formerly scarce in Greece, could now be used almost everywhere, and
peasants could at last hope to use the conveniences seen in the urban centers.
All of these developments have enabled the peasant to see the outside world,
and have raised his expectations accordingly.
In prewar Greece, a relatively small sector of agriculture was devoted to
marketable cash crops. This is no longer the case; and as peasants form
new economic relationships, they find that mutual aid and kinship ties are
not sufficient. New demands must be made upon the state structure, de¬
mands of a different character from the old. Fertilizer, price supports, and
irrigation projects cannot be delivered easily because of a simple tie to some
individual politician in Athens. As agriculture becomes more dependent on


The Development of the Gree\ State 61
world conditions, and as mechanization becomes more common, the short¬
age of land, aggravated by the small size and excessive fragmentation of
farms, is creating political unrest. Peasants no longer accept the situation
with fatalistic resignation, but are dissatisfied with the state itself. Another
effect of the decline of subsistence agriculture is a labor surplus. A study by
Calliope Moustaka indicated that in Greece the search for work was the
strongest factor causing villagers to leave their birthplaces.83 The general
insecurity of employment, and of city life after that in the village, plus the
appearance of new demands, has produced a substantial class of mobilized
urban dwellers.
To summarize, there was little impulse for change in the nineteenth cen¬
tury. The military conflicts, economic changes, and political reforms did
not involve much of the population. Large-scale popular involvement began
with the Balkan Wars and culminated in World War II and the Civil War,
when the whole civilian population was made aware of the political system.
In the interlude, the arrival of the Greek refugees not only provided a
sizeable group of mobilized citizens but provoked similar mobilization in
the native population. The marketization of the Greek economy, the net¬
works of communication and transportation, although initiated in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, were not developed extensively
until after World War II. While the pace of social mobilization has varied
from one part of the country to the other, the comparative data assembled
by Bruce Russett and his associates leaves little doubt that contemporary
Greece is, with the exception of the most remote areas, largely a socially
mobilized society.54


3. The International Factor
The international factor is often neglected in the study of internal politics
in an individual state.1 In the case of Greece, this neglect would seriously
distort any analysis of the political system. True, some international pres¬
sures are not peculiar to Greece; worldwide depressions and wars affect large
and small nations alike. However, Greece’s geographic location, level of
economic development, and unique demographic pressures make her par¬
ticularly vulnerable to the pressures of external events.
Once subsistence agriculture gave way to commercial “luxury” crops for
the European market, the Greek economy became increasingly dependent
on foreign tastes, the vagaries of the international economic system, and
specific tariff and quota pressures from other nations. Tourism, one of the
major sources of foreign exchange in contemporary Greece, is also depen¬
dent on conditions largely beyond the control of the Greek government.
Another major item, remittances from Greeks abroad, has been contingent
on the laws of other nations. The imposition of the quota system in the
United States, for example, severely slowed Greek immigration here; and
as family ties have grown more tenuous, remittances have declined. More
recently, funds sent by Greek workers in Western Europe, particularly Ger¬
many, have become important to the Greek economy. Here again, outside
events—continued prosperity and a continuing labor shortage in Western
Europe—are responsible. Greece, too, has not been insulated from significant
political, social, and cultural currents elsewhere in the world. Many of the
Greek revolutionaries were influenced by the Enlightenment and the French
revolution.2 The exploits of Garibaldi in Italy inspired similar attempts
against the Turks in the nineteenth century; and the Young Turks them¬
selves were models, particularly for the Military League during the crisis of
1909. The image of Mussolini in the 1920’s inspired similar ambitions in
several Greek military officers. Socialist and Communist ideologies in Greece
were likewise inspired by events in Europe.


The International Factor 63
Beyond the influence of specific individuals and events, the Greek politi¬
cal system has always responded to the latest fashions in institutions and
policies. A casual observer might feel that the Greek government in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries ingeniously combined the worst aspects
of French, American, and assorted Latin American regimes.3 Although this
has sometimes been true, there has been a conscious effort to emulate more
acceptable models. The Greek monarchy itself was established, at least in
part, because monarchy was the prevailing institution in early nineteenth
century Europe. The original state apparatus was modeled on the French,
with several Bavarian innovations; and successive Greek governments have
imported foreign missions or individual experts to transform various agen¬
cies into replicas of foreign equivalents. Political parties, too, have sought to
copy their Western European counterparts in organization and program.
Lately, the major emphasis has been on economic development, a goal simi¬
larly borrowed from abroad.
It is not the impact of worldwide cultural, economic, or social influences
that has made the international factor a really significant intervening vari¬
able in Greece. It is not even the fact that self-sufficiency has been impossible,
or that decision makers in every country, large and small, must be in some
degree responsive to world opinion. It is, instead, the direct involvement of
foreign states in the Greek political process. The predominant foreign in¬
fluences, and thus the actual institutional or policy styles in Greece, have
varied as different nations have assumed the protector’s role. In short, Greece
is and has been a penetrated political system. In the Greek system: “Non¬
members of a national society participate directly and authoritatively,
through actions taken jointly with the society’s members, in either the allo¬
cation of its values or the mobilization of support in behalf of its goals.”4
The strategic interests of the Great Powers, either in the eastern Mediter¬
ranean or globally, have long determined the direction of Greek politics.
The Greek peninsula is a borderline area with international significance out
of proportion to its size; from the beginning, international influence has
been exercised through diplomatic and military pressures, and through
financial pressure in the form of loans or outright gifts. The objects of for¬
eign interest have been not only the foreign policy of Greece, but her form
of government, her political leadership, and her specific domestic policy.
There have been few major governmental actions or domestic crises that
were not caused by the interventions or pressures of foreign powers, or de¬
veloped in response to an international crisis that allowed for no other


THE BACKGROUND
64
course. For their part, Greek politicians have never been averse to using
foreign support to crush internal opponents; and the Greeks themselves
have often tried to produce the regime they considered most acceptable to
particular major powers.
THE REVOLUTION AND THE BAVARIAN DYNASTY
In the beginning, much revolutionary fervor in Greece was built on mis¬
placed hopes of assistance from Orthodox Russia. After the Greeks had
demonstrated their staying power the British and French were forced by
strategic considerations to join the Russians in offering assistance.5 Although
many influences, such as the surge of philhellenism, the repugnance of
Turkish atrocities to European opinion, and the commercial disruptions
caused by the rebellion, were involved in this decision, naked balance-of
power calculations were most important. Mutual jealousy was eventually
transformed into the Treaty of London, through which Britain, France, and
Russia became the joint protectors of Greece. These powers determined the
size of the new state, whose original truncated shape was due to British and
French fears that Greece might emerge as a client state of Orthodox Russia.
The protocols that gave Greece sovereignty also prescribed her form of gov¬
ernment and dictated various features of her public law. The guaranteeing
powers were given the right—and, indeed, the obligation—to establish and
maintain internal order, by direct intervention, if necessary.6 As Petropulos
notes, “Britain, France and Russia established a special international status
for Greece, a type of European suzerainty exercised by themselves and dis¬
guised in the more palatable phrase ‘under the guarantee of the three
5 55 7
powers.
Although three powers together legitimized the Greek state, this did not
preclude them from pursuing their separate aims. Each Great Power had a
candidate for the crown of the new state and a following of local politicians.
When Capodistrias, the reputed representative of the Tsar, became the pro¬
visional president, other provincial leaders bristled with armed resistance
encouraged by Britain and France. The protectors eventually selected Otho
of Bavaria as the ruler of their new creation, and a treaty between Bavaria
and the three powers regulated his acceptance of the crown of Greece. The
Greek state, largely unrecognized, and with only the shreds of a govern¬
ment, had no part in the negotiations or the subsequent treaty; Otho, al¬
though proclaimed “by the Grace of God, King of Greece,” was clearly King
by the grace of the major European powers.8 The treaty could not be


The International Factor 65
changed without the consent of the four signatories, who presumably had
the authority to modify any legislation they considered unacceptable.9 In
fact, this treaty made the practice of intervention in Greek domestic affairs
habitual. The first loans to the new kingdom were granted only for particu¬
lar purposes: the civil list, the army, and the bureaucracy. The amounts and
intervals of payment were established, as well as procedures for supervision
of the Greek treasury by the resident ministers of the three powers. The
continued financial dependence of Greece created the conditions for perma¬
nent penetration by the “protecting powers.”
Throughout the reign of Otho, internal controversy over the eventual
form of the Greek government followed the lines of international politics.
In its first years, with a minor prince advised by regents who were subjects
of a foreign monarch and employed imported soldiers and bureaucrats,
Greece was virtually a Bavarian protectorate. In the effort to stabilize royal
authority, only Bavarians were felt to be trustworthy.10 Although the origi¬
nal protocols had made Greece a kingdom, no limits to royal power were
included, and the diplomatic agents of the protecting powers were often the
only counters to royal authority. From the first, the French and British,
through their ministers and their local partisans, urged Otho to grant a con¬
stitution; the Russians, joined by the Austrians, latecomers to Greek politics,
supported his refusal.11 As Otho’s Bavarian retinue disappeared, he became
more dependent on foreign support, either directly or through the local
factions attached to each of the major powers. Even after he reached his
majority, the position of individual regents, and later, of the Greek govern¬
ment members, depended on the goodwill of the ministers of the Great
Powers.
At first the new government was occupied with the establishment of a
national administration. The frustrations and failures in this area were
mounting at the same time that a new series of crises erupted in the Near
East. Finally, irredentist pressures in Greece, combined with domestic frus¬
trations, forced Otho to announce Greek territorial claims.12 Greece was too
weak to press her claims by any means other than diplomacy; and the pro¬
tecting powers refused to countenance Greek demands. King Otho, faced
with international failure and internal opposition, was forced to grant a
constitutional regime in 1843. The revolution of 1862 removed him from
the scene completely. The conspirators were successful not only because of
widespread internal dissatisfactions but because the protecting powers did
not see Otho as useful to them. He could not ignore the demands of do


66 THE BACKGROUND
mestic Greek nationalists, of whatever variety, and no Greek government
could sit idly by once revolts erupted in parts of unredeemed Greece; yet
the interests of the Great Powers, individually and collectively, conflicted
with these aspirations. In his efforts to realize Greek territorial ambitions
and keep his throne, Otho threatened the larger interests of Britain and
France in the Ottoman Empire; his equivocation over his personal faith
alienated the Russians. When Otho’s successor, Prince William of Denmark,
ascended the Greek throne as George I, he did so as the result of treaties be¬
tween Denmark and the Great Powers. Among the treaty clauses was one
in which the new monarch promised not to encourage insurrections against
the Ottoman Empire. The religious problem was solved by George’s mar¬
riage to a Russian princess.
GREECE AND THE NEAR EASTERN BALANCE OF POWER
The success of Greek foreign aspirations was contingent on the interna¬
tional interests of the Great Powers. In the nineteenth and twentieth cen¬
turies, Greece was only one point on the frontier between conflicting Rus¬
sian and British interests. The British, when their shell of classical and
Byronic memories was peeled away, were interested in Greece because of
the necessities of imperial security; this interest continued regardless of
the party makeup of the British government. Likewise, Russian interests,
though often couched in religious terms, were part of larger Russian aims in
southeastern Europe. Greece herself, because she felt more protected by sea
power, and perhaps more menaced by it, was primarily dependent on British
goodwill in this period. The British, for example, had expressed their dis¬
enchantment with the Bavarian regime in 1850, when British warships had
blockaded Piraeus to force Greek acceptance of the relatively dubious claims
of private British citizens against the Greek kingdom. After the fall of Otho,
the Greeks showed their fealty to Great Britain by voting overwhelmingly
for the 18-year-old Prince Alfred as monarch, even though it was understood
that under the Protocols of 1830 a British prince was ineligible for the
honor.13
Greece herself did not have many capabilities for translating her aims into
reality. Her territorial aspirations, and even her program for internal de¬
velopment, dependent as they were on outside financial assistance, could be
pursued successfully only when Greek interests agreed with the interests of
her protectors, especially Great Britain. On the other hand, the Greek gov¬
ernments could not control the activities of guerrilla bands either outside or


The International Factor 67
within the state boundaries, nor contain the periodic nationalist crusades
that appeared in various sectors of the domestic political system. Greece was
not treated with much respect whenever her activities clashed with the in¬
terests of the major powers. Throughout the nineteenth century Britain, and
sometimes France, intervened in the Greek kingdom, not only because of
continuing financial interests, but because of fears that Greek national aims
would upset the carefully wrought balance of the major powers. The most
constant form of pressure was financial, but military action was not un¬
known.
The fulfillment of Greek foreign ambitions could come only when all the
powers agreed or were indifferent, or if one of the major powers favorably
disposed to Greek aims exercised a paramount influence in international
affairs. Time after time, Greek efforts to promote territorial ambitions inde¬
pendently were stillborn because of foreign pressures. During the Crimean
War, the Greek government was under intense domestic pressure to assist
the Russians because of the ties of religion and because Russia’s enemy was
the Ottoman Empire. Her disguised participation in the conflict brought
British and French squadrons to the Piraeus, where they remained until
1857. In 1877, during the Russo-Turkish War, Charilaos Trikoupis, the
anglophile Greek foreign minister, trusted the British government to com¬
pensate Greece, since she restrained her natural impulses and did not attack
Turkey. However, this admirable restraint produced a strong public re¬
action in Greece; a cabinet favoring aggrandizement was soon selected, but
before it could act, the war ended. In 1881, as a reward for her neutrality,
Greece received Thessaly and the province of Arta in the Epirus. The Treaty
of San Stefano that ended the struggle was altered under British pressure
because in this case British interests against Russia coincided with Greek
interests against Bulgaria.
Because of conflicting interests, the Great Powers were continually in¬
volved with Crete; but in their attempts to maintain equilibrium in the
eastern Mediterranean, they merely prolonged instability. In 1867, France
and Russia, for different reasons, advocated Crete’s union with Greece; but
Britain opposed it. Two years later, another Cretan crisis erupted, and this
time general conflict was averted only through the good offices of Bismarck.
In 1886, the Greek government of Theodoros Deliyannis prepared to force
the issue of Crete again, this time in concert with Bulgarian activities against
the Turks. However, the Great Powers presented an ultimatum, and finally
blockaded Piraeus to prevent Greek ventures. At the end of the century the


68 THE BACKGROUND
internal disputes in Crete finally blossomed into armed conflict. The pro¬
tecting powers were unable to deter Greece from going to war with Turkey
in 1897, in part because of divisions in British public opinion. But the war
went badly, and the Greeks were forced to appeal to the Great Powers for
a settlement. An international commission with British, French, Italian, and
Russian members was formed to administer Crete in 1898. Eventually, a
Greek prince was selected to head the island administration; and Greece
officially annexed the island during the Balkan Wars.
A political crisis in 1909 was at least partly caused by Greece’s failure to
make gains in international politics. There was increasing uneasiness among
the newer professional and commercial classes in the growing cities; the old
political leaders, who were remnants of families that had come to power
during the revolution, had not understood the problems of these new groups.
The Military League, an organization of young, professionally oriented
officers, felt that the Crown and the oligarchy of semihereditary politicians
formed during the nineteenth century had mismanaged both foreign and
domestic policy and caused the defeat of Greek nationalist aspirations.14 The
League brought Eleutherios Venizelos, a Cretan representative of the new
political classes of lawyers and petty capitalists, to Athens as Premier. The
first Venizelos government, and several other administrations, did under¬
take important structural changes in Greek government; but the basic eco¬
nomic and cultural factors that vitiated these reforms were not understood.
Foreign policy, in essence the desire to reconstitute Byzantium in the form
of the Greek kingdom, continued to occupy the primary attention of most
Greek officials.
The potential revival of Ottoman fortunes under the Young Turks
prompted the Balkan states to begin their territorial quests promptly. The
great successes of Greece and the other Balkan states against Turkey in the
First Balkan War were symptomatic of changes in the overall European
balance of power. This time the traditional restraints on Greek aggrandize¬
ment were lacking: France was concerned with Italian and Austrian power
in the Mediterranean, and Britain was increasingly occupied with Germany.
The Second Balkan War exposed the essential instability of the Balkan
power balances, a warning that was borne out by World War I.
Greece was an impoverished state, and the question of foreign debts be¬
deviled Greek politics throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
influencing policies of internal development, taxation, and diplomatic align¬
ment. By manipulating their financial demands, foreign powers could force


The International Factor 69
abrupt changes in the allocation of Greek resources for domestic purposes;
the resulting dissatisfactions could cause the overthrow of the Greek govern¬
ment.15 Nearly every governmental upheaval in Greece, apart from those
directly concerned with foreign policy, was connected with the financial
problems of the state. Debts contracted at independence, as well as those
secured later, had been used not for reconstruction but for many less credit¬
able projects. Because of Greece’s unpaid debts, most of her foreign efforts,
whether successful or not, were mounted without sufficient financial re¬
sources. After each such adventure, there was usually an economic crisis, and
both the nation and its bondholders suffered; this ordinarily resulted in
further foreign intervention. Many loans had been unnecessarily contracted;
most, despite safeguards of various kinds, were floated at 30 to 40 per cent
discount, and even these reduced proceeds were generally not directed to any
productive purposes.16 When defaults occurred, bondholders relied on their
home governments to exact payment by measures ranging from simple
protest to active intervention. The Greek solution to default was to bor¬
row additional money to meet the old debt charges and to assign customs
revenue from one more port to the representatives of the creditors, or to
create one more state monopoly and assign its proceeds in the same way.
Between 1879 and 1893, loans of 750 million gold francs were spent, but there
was no essential improvement in the Greek economy.17
Eventually, the Great Powers came to manage Greek finances through an
international control commission, since the Greeks could not “manage their
financial affairs in a manner satisfactory to western tenets of fiscal adminis¬
trative efficiency.”18 In 1898 the international commission set up a Manage¬
ment Company of Greek State Monopoly Goods to handle the distribution
and sale of monopoly goods, such as salt, matches, playing cards, and kero¬
sene. Although this company was under the jurisdiction of the Greek state,
Greece was not permitted to enact any law that encroached on its sources of
revenue.19 The international commission died during World War II. The
Greek government now collects the monopoly revenue, but the Manage¬
ment Company continues to exist as the representative of the largely unpaid
bondholders.
WORLD WAR I AND AFTER
In the periods of great international tension beginning with World War I,
the major powers did not hesitate to intervene directly if the Greek govern¬
ment persisted in pursuing policies they considered contrary to their in


THE BACKGROUND
70
terests. Although King Constantine was reluctant to follow his brother-in
law, the Kaiser, because Greece was at the mercy of the British and French
fleets, his antipathy to the Allied cause eventually cost him his throne. The
internal conflict on constitutional matters between the King and his prime
minister, Venizelos, was exploited by the Allies, and they, in turn, were used
by Venizelos. After the Austro-Bulgarian invasion of Serbia, Greece was
asked to intervene because of treaty obligations. Intricate negotiations be¬
tween Venizelos, the King, and the Allies finally produced a plan for an
Allied landing at Salonika, with the Allies supplying the troops that Serbia
was obligated to produce under the treaty. The Allied divisions landed, but
the agreement fell apart.
The Allied forces assisted Venizelos and several associates in secessionist
moves that removed Crete, the major Aegean islands, and Macedonia from
the authority of the King. In fact, the Allied governments supported the
secessionist regime in Salonika and at the same time maintained relations
with the government in Athens. Both Greek governments were forced to
submit to Allied suggestions in details of troop placement and choice of
government personnel, as well as in such major questions as elections. From
the Athens government, the Allies demanded the demobilizadon of the
Greek army and the cession of the Greek fleet; eventually, Piraeus was
blockaded and occupied. The Allied commanders occupied whatever places
they desired, proclaimed martial law on their own in provincial cities, and
took over control of police activities in Athens.20 The protecting powers had
guaranteed the Greeks a constitutional regime in 1862; this was finally taken
as sufficient reason to demand the abdication of Constantine. This was done
in June 1917 by the French envoy; to enforce compliance, Thessaly was
invaded and the Isthmus of Corinth occupied. The removal of Constantine
reunited Greece and brought Venizelos to the helm once again; Greece
then entered the war on the side of the Allies.
GREAT BRITAIN AS “PROTECTOR”
Greek foreign policy from the time of independence had been directed
toward the creation of a large hellenic state that would include not only
Greeks but all population groups that inhabited areas once part of Byzan¬
tium. The Greeks, though conscious of their own nationality, often assumed
that Orthodox Christianity was synonymous with Greek national feeling.
Although the Ottomans also began with this assumption, they eventually
tried to preserve their regime by recognizing the differences. By creating


The International Factor 71
separate national branches of the Orthodox Church, however, they merely
increased national feeling among the subordinate nationalities; this in itself
made Greek aims in these regions difficult to realize.
Greek territorial aims after World War I were shaped by the decisions of
the Allies, especially Great Britain. Greek ambitions beyond Macedonia
were thwarted by the decisions of the peace conference, and expansion in
Cyprus, northern Epirus, and the Dodecanese was blocked because greater
powers controlled those regions. The one area open for aggrandizement was
Anatolia, and during the war the Allies encouraged Greek aspirations in
that direction. Venizelos embarked on the venture, although faced with
strong internal opposition in Greece. When his opponents came to power,
however, they continued the plan, perhaps to show that not only Venizelos
could be successful in foreign affairs. But Greek sovereignty in Asia Minor
could only have been established with the help of major powers, and after
the war new considerations entered the picture. Russia no longer counted.
The British, and to a lesser degree, the French, feared for the security of
their new mandates in the Near East; this lessened support for Greek moves
against Turkey. Italy had interests that were opposed to a “greater” Greece.
Despite initial successes, the activities and attitudes of the major powers
ordained disaster for the Greek military adventure in Anatolia.21 This fail¬
ure brought ruin to King Constantine, who was again forced to abdicate,
and death to the unfortunate ministers who were guiding the action.22
Further moves in northern Epirus were blocked by Italy, who acted as the
agent for the new Albanian regime. The Corfu Incident of 1923, in which
the Italian fleet bombarded and occupied Corfu in retaliation for the murder
of an Italian official on Greek soil, illustrated, once again, the dependence of
Greece on external support. At the behest of the British and the French, the
Greek government was forced to accede to most of the Italian demands.23
Despite British pressure over the Corfu Incident and the failure of British
support in Anatolia, the keystone of Greek policy in the interwar period was
the maintenance of the most friendly ties with Great Britain. This policy,
on the whole, was dictated by Greece’s extended position in the Mediter¬
ranean. The authoritarian Metaxas regime might have been sympathetic to
Germany or Italy; but Metaxas, too, recognized strategic necessities. In
World War II, after the limits of Axis expansion had been reached, the
exiled government of Emmanuel Tsouderos still conducted policy “in such
a way as to promote the realization of his [Tsouderos’s] assumption that
after the war, Britain would continue playing a preponderant role ... a pa


THE BACKGROUND
72
ternalistic role,” in the affairs of Greece.24 Although the legitimate govern¬
ment considered itself a client of the British, the Greek Communist Party
had quite faithfully followed the twistings of Soviet policy throughout the
interwar period. Later, during the resistance, it became an outright agent of
the Soviet Union. Wartime calculations again placed Greece in the British
sphere of influence; and despite the postwar attempts to break this tie by
force, Greece remained attached to the West.
The Greek government in exile, although a sovereign state according to
international law, was little more than an adjunct of the British Foreign
Office, continually concerned with British support and approval, or with
British intercession with the other major powers.25 On the eve of the Ger¬
man occupation, an Anglo-Greek agreement put military units of the Greek
government, now in exile, under the British High Command. These units
were to maintain their national identity, but would be organized along
British lines and equipped by the British. The exile government was often
kept in the dark, and was generally hostile to British intelligence activity in
Greece during the war. Ultimately, the British were blamed for assisting in
the creation of an underground armed force within Greece that came to be
dominated by Communists hostile to the legitimate regime. However, the
British, operating under the prewar agreement, put down the mutiny among
various Greek units in the Middle East, and felt free to combat the uprising
of December 1944 in liberated Greece as well; for in theory the entire Greek
armed forces, whether belonging to the exiled regime or the elements
fostered by British intelligence activity, were still under the British High
Command.
During the confused period from liberation to the advent of the Truman
Doctrine, Greek governments existed on flimsy constitutional ground, and
with little popular support. British suggestions had force because the Greeks
were completely dependent on the outside for both economic and military
assistance; in fact, the governments, and in the final analysis the political
system itself, were of British making. The intricate maneuvers surrounding
the question of the monarchy reflected British interest. The British pref¬
erence for a “crowned republic with all its constitutional freedoms” could
be traced to Churchill’s close friendship with King George II.26 The provi¬
sions for a plebiscite and subsequent election agreed to at Varkiza in 1944
under the paternalistic gaze of the British were subsequently reversed, in
part through the urgings of the Allied governments. This certainly had some
bearing on the election results, since by that time the question of govern


The International Factor 73
mental form was intricately related with the Communist issue; however,
the Allied commission that observed the elections reported no outstanding
irregularities.
THE UNITED STATES AS “PROTECTOR.”
The United States had so far remained aloof from Greek affairs. After
Yalta, the American government “had indicated its willingness and determi¬
nation to take part in the Allied guarantees designed to safeguard the right
of smaller nations, freed from Axis domination, to choose by peaceful and
democratic means the governments under which they wished to live.”27 It
was generally recognized that American financial aid might be necessary,
since the necessary conditions for peaceful and democratic elections were
linked to economic stability. Early efforts at securing American aid for
Greece had foundered, in part because of the multiplicity of claims on the
American treasury—but more particularly, because of Washington’s distrust
of the economic policies of the Greek government.28 In early 1947, however,
the American government was informed that the United Kingdom could
no longer supply assistance to Greece. Since Greece had to have outside aid
for internal reconstruction and military support, the American government
was forced to assume the responsibility.
The Truman Doctrine made the security of the United States contingent
on a friendly Greece, and the American government supplied much more
material for both military and economic purposes than the British; but it
also went further in “giving advice and in insisting that it was carried out.”29
The American aid program was operated on the assumption that any Greek
program receiving assistance was subject to American approval. Since nearly
any activity required the use of foreign exchange, the American mission had
a controlling position in Greek government. It was assumed that any sug¬
gestions offered by the United States in regard to policy or reform would be
taken very seriously.30 American advisers and supervisors were attached to
the Greek ministries. Military operations were conducted by a joint Greco
American general staff, and there were American observers down to the
divisional level. The Greek forces were almost completely equipped with
American goods, and most decisions on weapons and organization (and,
according to one commentator, promotional policy as well) were made by
the United States.31
The United States felt obligated to intervene in Greek politics whenever
political instability seemed to endanger the larger aims of economic stability


THE BACKGROUND
74
and victory in the civil war. As American involvement grew more extensive,
conflicts within the American establishment also affected Greek politics.
Often the policies promoted by the American mission had purely economic
goals in mind; to some degree these policies exacerbated political instability,
apparently the major concern of the American Embassy. The Greek elec¬
tions in 1950 and 1951 were partly a result of the American quest for sta¬
bility; some of the personnel changes in this period could be ascribed to the
same cause. When instability returned, or when American policy failed, the
Embassy could grandly announce that it did not subscribe to any policy of
interference in the domestic affairs of another nation.
Threats to withhold American aid were constantly advanced if the proper
governmental stability was not reached, or if a suggested policy was not
enacted.32 However, political stability and particular policy suggestions were
often mutually exclusive. Every drive for a particular action made a coalition
shaky, and each attempt to broaden the composition of a government gave
the minority politicians added leverage against the government. Various
sectors of the Greek political world were attached to different parts of the
American establishment. The complexity of relationships between Greece
and her protectors was further increased by internal political pressures, par¬
ticularly liberal pressures, in Britain and America.
Greek foreign policy in the postwar period was conditioned by the seem¬
ing insolubility of domestic problems, plus a desire to embarrass the left
wing groups. These domestic factors, as well as conditions imposed by her
association with the West, led Greek governments throughout the period
to embark on almost irrational and completely ethnocentric foreign policies.
The Dodecanese were acquired because Italy was defeated, and because all
of the powers agreed to the transfer; but advances in Thrace were precluded,
not only because of Greece’s own policy of friendship with Turkey, but be¬
cause good Greco-Turkish relations were in the best interests of the British.
Cyprus continued to be out of reach; the Greek state could do little more
than keep the question open. Greek governments concentrated their terri¬
torial aims to the north, although their dependence on British or American
power created a strategic limit to expansion in this direction, and although
there were no compact Greek populations in the area. Since Greek claims
on historic and ethnic grounds had repeatedly been disallowed for such
areas as northern Epirus, the new claims were tied primarily to strategic
considerations.
When Greece became more dependent on the United States, the question


The International Factor 75
of Cyprus was reactivated.33 However, the termination of British control
over the island did not solve the issue; and as the ultimate resolution of the
problem became more doubtful, American pressures increased. For the
United States, disputes between NATO members had to be subordinated
to the greater interests of the alliance; and the status quo in Cyprus was in
many respects a better solution than one that would rend the southeastern
flank of NATO. According to Stephen Rousseas, American penetration of
the Greek military establishment was so complete, and involvement else¬
where in the Greek political system so extensive, that Greek aims in Cyprus
were shelved for a long period.34
Rousseas even argues that American policy makers, growing increasingly
restive at the seeming independence in foreign policy exhibited by the
Papandreou regime after 1963, actively promoted the downfall of the Papan
dreou cabinet and the split in his political party.35 Of course, if this reason¬
ing is correct, the American government must have had foreknowledge of
the coup in April 1967 as well. The evidence for direct American involve¬
ment seems circumstantial; but nonetheless, since the American government
acquiesced in the military take-over, and because of its acknowledged in¬
volvement in the past, the presumption of active American support is wide¬
spread in Greece. Those involved in the coup apparently expected American
commendation, and not mere acquiescence. The initial American reaction
was hesitant, and some American aid was temporarily halted. This action
was naturally resented. One of the Junta leaders, Brigadier Pattakos, said of
the Americans: “They can do everything they want, they are very strong.
They are stronger than we are. We haven’t given any cause for something
like this.”38
Not only have specific foreign powers intervened in Greek affairs, but
international agencies, beyond those concerned with internal Greek finan¬
cial arrangements, have been able to impinge on Greek sovereignty. The
refugee commission established through the League of Nations to alleviate
the problems caused by the population exchanges that followed World
War I largely ignored the prerogatives and sovereignty of the Greek state.
For example, the laws on land reform, enacted under Venizelos, had never
been completely implemented. The commission secured international loans
on the basis of state-owned land, regulated the distribution of this land, and
in general operated outside the jurisdiction of the Greek authorities.37 When
the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration operated in
Greece after World War II, controversies arose that were finally settled in


THE BACKGROUND
76
favor of the international agency. The Greek government distributed some
relief supplies, mainly to its civil servants; the UNRRA considered this im¬
proper and wanted to secure the power of distribution within Greece. Even¬
tually, the UNRRA was able to force the Greek government to submit to
international inspection of its distribution practices.
SUMMARY
Greeks have been encouraged in an attitude of political irresponsibility
by the tradition of external involvement in Greek affairs. Just as a rural
Greek often expects government assistance to continue indefinitely after a
natural disaster, so the Greek state has come to expect the international mid¬
wives of 1830 to continue their benevolent attentions. That Greece is unique
and deserving of special consideration has been a constant theme in Greek
foreign relations: Greece deserves special consideration because Western
civilization originated there; Greece deserves special consideration because
she has sacrificed herself to prevent barbarism from overwhelming the
world; and so on. A typical statement of this sentiment is that of Premier
Papandreou at the end of World War II: “Because of its services to the
Allied cause, and its sacrifices, Greece expected to be treated as a unique
case.”38 More recently, after the country gained associate status in the Euro¬
pean Common Market, many Greeks became aware of the economic diffi¬
culties that would arise when she became a full member of the organization.
However, it is hoped that the other members will recognize the special situ¬
ation of Greece and make allowances and exceptions for her when the time
comes.
In many cases, Greece has not been able to alleviate her most basic human
problems, such as famine or job security, without the assistance of other
states. Hence Greeks have a habit of assuming that all basic problems must
be solved by outside forces. To be sure, the Greek government does concern
itself with these same questions, but only on the level of the individual.
Politics, instead of being concerned with general policy, is primarily con¬
cerned with patronage. There have been few efforts at innovative policy and
little dynamic leadership; any innovations are assumed to be foreign-spon
sored, and any imaginative politician is assumed to be self-seeking or under
foreign influence. Greek politicians can make extravagant promises; but
ultimately, all blame for any errors can be shifted to the foreign embassies.
Because the pressure of international politics has been close to the Greeks,
they have often magnified die real importance of Greece in world affairs.


The International Factor 77
It has been difficult for Greeks to appreciate that major powers have interests
elsewhere that might dictate policy toward Greece, or that outside powers
do not have to control every internal action.
Although Greeks display a tremendous interest in foreign affairs, it is the
interest of spectators rather than that of activists. In a sample of 55 members
of the 1964 parliament, only three (one a former diplomat) claimed expertise
in international affairs; and only four put international affairs as the subject
in which they were “most interested,” although many more had educational
and occupational backgrounds that might have favored this interest.39
National affairs, which to a Greek include subjects like Cyprus, were the
primary concerns of 34.6 per cent, while purely local affairs were most im¬
portant to only 3.6 per cent. The same number, 34.6 per cent, volunteered
the observation that it was impossible to disentangle local, national, and in¬
ternational issues because, for Greece, all were intimately connected. The
question itself did not make sense to 20 per cent of the sample. When all
problems are perceived as interconnected, and when it is assumed that
Greece can do little about problems at the international level, it is not sur¬
prising that parliamentary deputies concentrate on nonlegislative functions.
Foreign affairs, as such, are rarely debated in parliament. The funda¬
mental underpinnings of the Greek position in the world are rarely dis¬
cussed, and the international background for her internal problems is taken
as given. The left wing has associated ill fortune with the malignant influ¬
ence of the United States and NATO; the other political spokesmen, ignor¬
ing these charges, bring up issues of Communist control or threats of “slavic
barbarianism.” There are a few deputies with Western educations who do
have a personal concern with international affairs, but it is usually based on
domestic political profit. By attending international conclaves and the meet¬
ings of the many European regional associations, they are able to associate
with world notables. If the proper photographs appear in the Greek press,
these connections can raise a deputy’s prestige in his home district.40
A Greek cannot really come to terms with international issues, although
in many cases he is passionately aware of them and poses his own solutions
to them. Because he is aware of the impact of foreign policies of other
nations on internal Greek concerns, the Greek tends to feel that his nation
is the center of all international affairs. However, on the international front,
Greece is much more a pawn than a participant. On the issue of most pas¬
sionate interest, Cyprus, the Greeks can do little, even though every political
figure publicly makes the correct declarations. The broad middle band of


THE BACKGROUND
78
issues—social security, defense spending, and the budget—do not provoke
much interest in the press, the public, or the parliament.
The international factor, then, has impinged on the Greek political system
in two major ways. First, foreign penetration has hindered the creation of
consensus in Greek society for both foreign and domestic goals. Second,
Greek goals have conflicted with those of the major powers. Since Greek
independence, the major powers have been clearly identified with particular
groups in the Greek political system, and conflicts among these groups have
generally reflected the divergent interests of the powers. Legitimate attempts
at national development have often been thwarted by the interests of the
major powers; yet aggressive foreign policies phrased in terms of territorial
expansion have often been supported. Since the limits of the international
system have been well known to the leaders of conflicting groups in Greek
society, much of the furor of virulent nationalism has been used to establish
a new equilibrium among the domestic political groups. When foreign
policy goals are expressed by competing groups in Greek society, they are
usually identified with the goals of a sponsoring great power, both by
domestic opponents and by other international actors. In short, to para¬
phrase a recent discussion of the linkage problem in foreign policy and the
international system, there has been neither consensus on the means and
ends of Greek policy nor compatibility with the structures and opportunities
of the international system.41


II. The Political System




4- Consensus and Dissensus
One commentator on Greece in the mid-nineteenth century noted that “one
might be tempted to look upon Greece as one of the most ideal kingdoms
to govern.”1 As one reason, he cited the lack of enduring cleavage within
the country. It is doubtful that any monarch or prime minister since that
time would echo those sentiments. The last century has been characterized
by intense political conflicts, civil war, and fundamental changes of regime
—all this in addition to crises caused by external events. Basically, there has
never even been consensus on the meaning of “Greece” itself. The revolu¬
tionary elites had heterogeneous backgrounds and conflicting images of the
future. The major difference among them could be described as a conflict
between modern and traditional values, or perhaps more accurately as a
conflict between those with Western, secular views and those clearly identi¬
fying the nation with Orthodox Christianity.
Karl Deutsch notes that nationalities turn into nations when they acquire
the power to back up their aspirations.2 In Greece, the power to unite the
state came from outside; there was barely sufficient common identification,
much less solidarity, to create the nation-state. National identification was
more a presumption of outside powers than an internal reality. It cannot be
denied that Greece does seem remarkably homogeneous when judged by
the usual objective criteria. With a single language, a single religion, and
a common revolutionary past, the Greek kingdom in the mid-nineteenth
century did seem to be an ideal state. However, this appearance was as mis¬
leading then as it is now. The Greek kingdom displayed apparent solidarity
when facing external threat; but when this external stimulus was lacking,
even the elements of national identification were controversial. There were
cleavages in Greek society along the lines of language and culture from the
beginning, and even religion has not been the unifying force it is assumed
to be. Now, there is also a growing tension between the urban and rural
sectors of Greek society; and even within these sectors there is little agree


82 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
ment on the meaning of “Greece” or the nature of the regime. One of the
major requirements for a national consciousness, the existence of mutually
compatible values, has not been met.3
The conflicts that could have erupted initially because of the incompatible
visions of the Greek revolutionary leaders were postponed. First, the area
successfully included in the new state clarified some alternatives. In particu¬
lar, the most “modern” element among the leaders, the commercial class of
the Greek cities in Asia Minor, was excluded. Further, the early leaders were
prevented from pushing their views by the Great Powers. And finally, the
new political institutions themselves imposed some limitations. The energies
of the revolutionary elites were directed to competition for favor and office,
so that their bases of support could be maintained; this, rather than the
future of the state, was their fundamental concern. By the middle of the
century, the children of this diverse elite, because of a common education
furnished by the new national university and because of intermarriage, were
relatively homogeneous in outlook. The penetration of the modern institu¬
tional framework by the traditional social structure was largely accepted.
At this time, the bulk of the Greek population remained unmobilized. The
rural Greek was largely unaware of the Greek state and oblivious to na¬
tionalism of any variety. Insofar as he was connected to the political system
at all, it was through clientage relationships that led to the revolutionary
leaders or their heirs.
From about 1880 on, increasing social mobilization in Greece increased
the problem of national identification; it reinforced the existing differences
instead of obliterating them, and created new lines of cleavage. In this in¬
stance, there was not merely a distinction between the traditional and the
modern in Greek society, or the overlapping of the two in a “transitional”
synthesis, but fragmentation along personalist and group lines. For most
people, the definition of “Greece,” the nature of the regime, and even
obedience to authority had come to depend on the personal ties and clientage
networks that connected the individual to particular political incumbents.
However, as new areas were added to the state, and as new groups with
different backgrounds came to prominence, the accommodations between
modern and traditional elements that had characterized the transitional po¬
litical system, as well as the limitations imposed by the major powers, came
under increased attack. The rate of social mobilization of the traditional
elements from both the old and new areas outran their rate of assimilation
into the dominant value system of the old elite. New groups, particularly on


Consensus and Dissensus 83
the left and within the military, emerged as important but disruptive ele¬
ments in the political system, further impeding the development of common
national values. The outlines of a reconciliation system could be discerned.
GEOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL DIFFERENCES
Karl Deutsch, in his study of nationalism and social communication, notes
that the essential aspect of the unity of a people is the complementarity or
relative efficiency of communications among individuals.4 Geographical fac¬
tors were largely responsible for the original diversity among the Greek
revolutionary leaders; and the same factors have inhibited the development
of those communications networks that might have aided in the creation
of a wider national allegiance. Even more important, the clientage networks,
dependent as they are upon intense localism and insecurity stemming from
economic scarcity, are themselves related to geography; and their existence
has meant that loyalty is rarely accorded to national institutions. The bu¬
reaucracy, the military, the parties, or the monarchy have not been genuinely
national, but have instead been utilized for parochial purposes.
Until recently, a description of Greece as a collection of small, populated
districts separated from each other by more or less impassable barriers of
land and sea was as apt as it had been for ancient Greece.6 The initial areas
of the Greek kingdom, as well as those incorporated later, had never been
treated as a single administrative unit by the Turks. Ottoman rule had
favored sectionalism by “allowing communities and regions a large degree
of autonomy and by never attempting to introduce any widespread uni¬
formity of administration.”6 Each region had different customs, as exempli¬
fied in holidays, dowry requirements, and land tenure. The differences in
administrative frameworks have been discussed previously.
Originally, there was little social diversification within each region, since
the major occupational categories were geographically determined.7 At the
time of the revolution, agrarian pursuits were dominant in the Pelopon¬
nesus and in continental Greece. Farm tenancy was common in the Pelo¬
ponnesus, but on the continent, particularly in mountainous areas, most
peasants were freeholders. The Cyclades and the islands adjacent to the
Peloponnesian coast, although in general contrast to the rest of the new
Greek kingdom, differed among themselves. By and large, the islands had
remained uninhabited during the barbarian invasions commencing in the
declining years of the Roman Empire. They were gradually populated by
refugees from the mainland in the next centuries; however, except for part


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
84
of the island of Andros, the Cyclades were not touched by the Albanian
migrations that engulfed much of the Peloponnesus and continental Greece
in the several centuries before the Ottoman conquest. Differing traditions
and social structures stemming from the Frankish and Venetian periods
often remained intact. Some islands, originally uninhabited, had been popu¬
lated by refugees from Ottoman rule elsewhere in the Aegean littoral. The
islands were largely ignored by the Ottoman authorities.8 Moreover, geog¬
raphy determined the contribution of each section of Greece to the revolu¬
tion: native leadership and revenue from the Peloponnesus, martial skills
from continental Greece, and naval and financial support from the islands.9
Each of the separate regions, and the many communities within them, had
its own ties to local heroes and battles of the revolution. Nationalism, though
encompassing loyalty to a vague notion of the Greek state, could be devoted
to local objects; and in the course of the revolution, the many jealousies and
rivalries based on region illustrated the lack of commitment to a single, over¬
riding national symbol.
Once independence was achieved, the Peloponnesian primates, the moun¬
tain chieftains, and the island leaders each attempted to guide the new state
to their own advantage. Even after the state was organized, there was little
uniformity in policy or administration. The national institutions set up by
the Bavarians were soon penetrated by the separate regional elites, who
operated them for parochial rather than national benefit. Moreover, special
privileges in representation were given to some areas; and the application
of tax laws was also far from uniform. Despite sporadic efforts to increase
the number of individual peasant proprietors, the form of landholding con¬
tinued to vary. By the mid-nineteenth century, individual proprietorship
tended to be the rule in the Peloponnesus; but in parts of old Greece, espe¬
cially Euboea and Boeotia, where conditions for agriculture were relatively
good, large estates were common.10
The first acquisition of the new kingdom, the Ionian Islands, had been
ruled by the Venetians, French, Russians, and British, though never by the
Turks.11 Throughout the Greek revolution, these islands had enjoyed a
peaceful development under the British. The various feudal social structures
on the Venetian model that originally existed throughout the island group
were altered, although not uniformly, by Great Power occupation. Here, a
tenant farmer supplied labor and contributed half the produce of his farm
to the landowner. By contrast with other areas, he could not be dispossessed,
and he could pass on his tenancy to his children. Institutions of representa


Consensus and Dissensus 85
tive government, an extended suffrage, and an extremely free press without
parallel in Europe were developed under British supervision. Education was
encouraged, and the Ionian Academy educated many future officials of the
Greek state at a time when there was nothing comparable in Greece. The
pattern of Ionian politics, entwined as it was with Liberal and Tory groups
on the British political stage, had a vastly different tone than any existing
in Greece at the time.
Thessaly and the province of Arta in the Epirus were finally acquired in
1881, after a certain amount of Greek self-denial and a greater amount of
Turkish procrastination. This region also had significantly different tradi¬
tions and social conditions. The Turks had been relatively secure in this area
during the revolution. The Greek state acquired a region with rich agricul¬
tural resources but with a system of land tenure that differed from the rest
of Greece; in fact, the kingdom acquired a “land question.” The large
estates here had generally been held by Turkish absentee landlords, who
sold their estates to wealthy Greeks after the annexation. This transfer made
the settlement of the land question more difficult. The peasants were obli¬
gated to pay a third of their crop to the owner, as well as the costs of pro¬
duction; given the uncertain weather conditions in this region, they were
perpetually in debt.12 There were no significant traditions of political par¬
ticipation, and whole villages were little more than serfs. Despite the pro¬
ductivity of the new region, the Greek state now had a territory and popu¬
lation outside the major traditions of the kingdom, as well as a chronic
agrarian discontent to add to the other problems confronting the state.
Greece annexed Crete in 1913, as a result of the Balkan Wars. Of all the
indisputably Greek portions of the nation, Crete had the most persistent
tradition of insurgency. There had been insurrections in 1770, outbreaks at
the time of the Greek revolution, and rebellions in 1866, 1889, and 1896. The
Ottoman authorities had worked through many institutions without really
setting up any common administration for the whole island. However, local
assemblies with some competence had existed for short periods in the last
part of the nineteenth century. Finally, the Great Powers stepped in, and an
international administration emerged, with the Russians, French, British,
and Italians applying their own administrative forms and usages to four
separate districts, while a fifth was administered jointly.13 In Crete, as in
other areas, identification with the Greek nation obscured the internal dif¬
ferences engendered by the past.
Aside from Crete, the provinces acquired in the aftermath of the Balkan


86 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Wars had diverse traditions of land tenure and administrative control, and
different historical backgrounds. The Epirus had a long history of relative
autonomy, and its citizens had traditional commercial connections with
Constantinople and Europe that could not be duplicated by Greeks in other
parts of the realm. Moreover, the Epirotes had played a significant role in
the revolution, although Epirus was not initially included in the Greek state.
Macedonia and the Aegean Islands had diverse historical traditions, and, at
the time of their acquisition, sizeable minority populations as well. The
variation was even more significant in some of the smaller areas; for exam¬
ple, Samos had been an independent principality under the suzerainty of
the Porte. Finally, the acquisition of Thrace in 1919 and the influx of refu¬
gees after 1922 added to the diversity of traditions. The refugees had such a
variety of backgrounds, histories, cultural traditions, and dialects that
Greece was truly a foreign country for many of them. This group remained
unassimilated for several decades, and a portion of it is still outside the
Greek political system.
The piecemeal acquisition of new territory ensured the continuation of
parochial attitudes toward the state. There was no particular identification
of the present Greek kingdom with the Byzantine Empire of the past. The
fervor of Greek national spirit that accompanied each annexation was not
directed specifically to the kingdom. The leaders of the kingdom viewed
themselves as representatives of the imperial Byzantine tradition, but the
residents of the newer areas generally differentiated the Empire from the
kingdom centered in Athens. For many, Constantinople remained the puta¬
tive center of the Greek world. The kingdom had been created relatively
rapidly; its boundaries had been marked within the living memory of many
of its citizens. This newness limited the extent of feeling for the state. Asso¬
ciations and habits remained different; customs and preferences varied.
Even today, civics textbooks do not discuss the period after the Balkan Wars
with much thoroughness because at this point everything, including the
form of the state, became controversial.
LANGUAGE
The term “Greek” differentiates the language spoken by inhabitants of
modern Greece from the languages of the surrounding countries; but there
is disagreement on what the Greek language was, is, or should be. At the
time of independence, the range in local dialects was significant; substan¬
tial portions of the population spoke Albanian. The intellectuals among


Consensus and Dissensus 87
early Greek leaders hoped to use language reform to weld the diverse ele¬
ments of the nation together. Unfortunately, the Greek language of 1821
was not rich enough in syntax or vocabulary to communicate effectively
with the West. In exalting Greece as the founder of its own civilization, the
West had taught Greek expatriates to love their own past. These intellec¬
tuals were convinced that by purifying the language the ancient tongue
could be recovered, and perhaps the ancient glories.
In the long run, the purification of the language did not weld the popu¬
lation into one nationality, but widened the gulf between the educated and
the illiterate. The purified language, or katharevusa, differed from everyday
demotic and from the liturgical language of the church. Moreover, differ¬
ences in the spoken language remained. This language differentiation, in¬
troduced early in the nineteenth century, still exists in a tempered form.
Until 1911, katharevusa was the official language of the elite and of those
striving for status; it was the language of the town, of the educated, and of
government. The influx of refugees in the 1920*5, with their many dialects
and little acquaintance with the katharevusa form, created serious problems.
Language became an important political issue from 1911 to World War II,
when demotic and katharevusa vied with each other for inclusion in the
school curricula as regimes changed.
Language is still an important political issue in Greece. The continued
mobilization of those with minimal formal education has in a sense over¬
whelmed those who would make the katharevusa the language of all Greece.
More literature is written in the popular language, and more newspapers
are published in it. However, the katharevusa remains the language of the
university, of the bureaucracy, and of editorials in all but leftist publications.
Advancement is difficult without knowledge of this formal language. Two
communities continue to exist; and language, originally a point of conflict
between westernizer and traditionalist, is now an element in the continuing
struggle of the advantaged versus the disadvantaged, of city versus country¬
side.
CULTURE AND RELIGION
It can be argued that many inhabitans of Greece are not pure Greeks, but
cultural assimilation makes ethnic differences irrelevant. There is no large
minority of those who speak a non-Greek language, although there are local
dialects and a number of very small groups with different linguistic and cul¬
tural backgrounds. There are certain nomads in the Epirus,14 and small


88 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
numbers of Armenians and Jews. The nomads are being forced into a more
sedentary life; the Jews, after near extinction during World War II, no
longer have an autonomous cultural life. The once vigorous Slavic element
has been either expelled or assimilated. The Turkish minority in Thrace,
numbering perhaps 60,000, remains apart from the national life of Greece.
Its community identity is based on religion, so there is also difficulty in
relating to the secular Turkish state. The Turks in Thrace seem to remain
a backward cultural enclave, whose main value is as a counter to those
Greeks who have a similar status in Constantinople. This minority seems
never to have approached the Greek political system as an ethnic bloc; in¬
stead, they have relied on the same pattern of patronage and the same
clientage relationships that exist in the rest of the nation.
The relationship of Greek national feeling to Orthodox Christianity is
well known. The church was the repository of language and culture during
the centuries of Ottoman domination. There are a few Protestant Greeks,
and a few more Roman Catholics; but these religious minorities are over¬
whelmed by the identification of the Greek nation with Greek Orthodoxy.
But religion has not been the binding force one might expect. The Greeks
of the nineteenth century, no less than those of Byzantium, assumed the
complete unification of church and state. Once a political separation was
made between those living within the new Greek state and those outside its
boundaries, it was natural that a separate church should represent the faith¬
ful within Greek territorial limits. The Greek national church separated
from the domain of the Patriarch of Constantinople in 1833; afterwards,
there was a continual tension between the clergy of the kingdom and the
Patriarch, increasing as each new territory was added to the Greek king¬
dom. Even now, Crete and various Aegean Islands are under the authority
of the Patriarch, whereas the rest of Greece is organized under the Church
of Greece. The Greek church is an integral part of the state structure, and is
as subject to politicization as everything else in the society. The government
is involved with the selection of church officials; in fact, education and re¬
ligion are supervised by the same government department. Factionalism
and personalized church politics are common, and splits in the church have
often paralleled political cleavages.15 Because of these characteristics, the
Greek church, though a national one, has been ineffective as a source of
internal unity.
As the state religion, Orthodoxy is secure enough to be tempered with


Consensus and Dissensus 89
secularism and indifference. Under the impact of urbanization, education,
and other forces of modernity, attitudes toward the church are mixed.
Everywhere in Greece there is an attitude of deference toward priests and
the church; but there is also a parallel tradition of viewing priests and monks
as comic figures. For the parochial population, the church is still the most im¬
portant institution; and here the clergy can be more effective than govern¬
ment officials in promoting solutions for social and economic problems. At
this level, religion is often a blend of Christian symbolism and pre-Christian
traditions and superstitions,16 in which the doctrinal content diminishes to
love of religion, love of country, and the inculcation of a certain element of
stoicism. The rural priest is important as an adviser for personal relations
rather than as a counselor for personal faith.
As education has reached the village and as communication with the out¬
side has increased, the priest is no longer as influential as he once was. The
local teacher and others with expertise gained outside the village have be¬
come more important. Today, if a rural priest is praised, it is likely to be for
virtues that make him like other men rather than for religious virtues.17 For
most Greeks, the church is influential only in the sense that a national in¬
stitution is influential. Even in villages, the regular churchgoers are women;
in towns, and more so in urban areas, church attendance is minimal except
for special occasions. Religion is taught in the schools, but largely as one
element of the national ethos rather than as a spiritual force. To many, the
church seems most concerned with formal matters of liturgy and presenta¬
tion. Irwin Sanders suggests that the educated Greek has adapted his Chris¬
tianity to the intellectual traditions of classical Greece.18
The church occupies an equivocal position in modern Greece. For some
persons, Orthodoxy and Greek national identity remain synonymous; for
others, the church and its values are the very antithesis of a modern nation¬
state. For some, religion is an obstacle to change; for others, it is an instru¬
ment through which change can be effected. Some view the church as a
social liability because of its political character; others view the Greek state
as superior because of its religious foundations. The church is able to accom¬
modate the traditional elements devoted to an image of Greece as a nation
of autonomous communal institutions ruled by priests, teachers, and elders,
as well as those who look upon the church as the one surviving element of
Byzantium. Some modernists have purged their religion of its Byzantine
encumbrances and look upon it as a system of ethics and morality relevant


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
90
to the present. Others disregard the church completely, or view it only in
political terms. For most Greeks, the contradictory norms of rationality and
ritualism are held in uneasy separateness.
THE URBAN-RURAL DICHOTOMY
Social mobilization has created a gulf between the rural and urban ele¬
ments of Greek society, marked by differences in religion, language, and
level of education. The barrier between these two communities is related to
conflicting images originally found in the revolutionary elite. Greece has no
equivalent of a Jeffersonian tradition, and there has never been a movement
lauding peasant virtues. On the contrary, classical Greece was an urban
civilization, and the glories of Byzantium were also associated with the city.
Virtually anyone, on whatever social level, would rather live in reduced
circumstances in Athens or another major city than live in prosperity in the
provinces. In the past the concentration of professional men in the urban
areas was partly due to greater opportunities. Now professional positions in
medicine, engineering, or any technical field have a salary differential de¬
signed to encourage settlement in the provinces. These incentives are largely
ineffective: even the graduates of agricultural schools prefer technical posi¬
tions in the Ministry of Agriculture.19
The peasants’ attitudes toward urban areas are ambivalent. The rural
Greek is sure that life in the city is more desirable than life in the country;
but he is also aware of the contempt city people have for those from the
country. Nevertheless, many families strive to make it possible for their
son to secure an education, or for their daughter to catch the husband who
will make urban life possible. One way for a village family to gain prestige
is by having urban connections.20 Villagers try to emulate the standards of
living and taste they perceive as appropriate for urban dwellers. Friedl sug¬
gests that many urban goods find their way to the village not for conve¬
nience, but for the air of urban sophistication they impart.21 On the other
hand, villagers distrust Athens and urban life in general. Perhaps the seduc¬
tive powers of the urban places are feared; more likely this feeling is en¬
gendered by generations of urban indifference to rural problems, and by the
urban origins of authority.
Greek education has been instrumental in inducing this feeling of urban
intellectual superiority. The educational system, at the lower levels, was
originally designed to replace peasant outlooks conditioned by generations


Consensus and Dissensus 91
of foreign occupation with attitudes more appropriate to the citizens of a
free nation. The 1952 constitution reflected this purpose: in Article 16, it
stated that “in all elementary and intermediate schools teaching shall be
aimed at the ethical and intellectual instruction and development of the
national conscience of the youth on the basis of the ideological principles of
the Greek-Christian civilization.”22 An education designed to make the
Greek youth aware of his country’s past is of necessity a literary education,
relying on a curriculum heavily encumbered with ancient language and
culture.-3 There has never been much concern with practical or contempo¬
rary subjects. There is practically no effort to acquaint students with the
state structure, or with the rights and duties of citizens; and vocational or
technical education has a low priority.
The University of Athens, because of its role as a government agent of
national liberation and national integration, has generally had first call on
financial resources, at the expense of education at lower levels. Because of
this, two communities have developed, one a small, educated elite and the
other a mass of poorly educated peasants and workers. The graduates of the
University have always monopolized government employment and political
life. As soon as the University was established, a complete literary educa¬
tion became the standard qualification for government employment. Those
people who received this advanced education developed a general distaste
for contact with the lower orders of society, and direct dealings with the
illiterate peasantry were left to men with less status. Bureaucratic arrogance
of this kind has ensured that the country at large will have little confidence
in the civil service. However, as the peasant becomes politically aware, he
develops greater demands on the urban community; the lower-class urban
dweller reacts similarly, and to an even greater extent. The entire process of
development has widened this gap.
Despite the general contempt for the peasantry and the urban disadvan¬
taged as classes, nearly every member of the urban elite is likely to have
relatives or clients in these categories. The two communities remain apart,
however, because the level of economic development in Greece limits op¬
portunity : the resources of the state are insufficient to make education avail¬
able to all. The brighter young men of the lower classes, in their quest for
higher status, are led by the Greek system of education into a governmental
career. From the elementary grades through the universities, the standard¬
ized literary education leads only to the professions and government service


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
92
—all areas of employment that are overcrowded, temporary, and dependent
on personal connections. Nevertheless, because prestige and status have tra¬
ditionally been conferred chiefly by government employment, it is not
surprising that successful careers in other occupations have nearly always
been sacrificed for political position.
Of course, the educated elite in Greece is not entirely uniform in its atti¬
tudes or its orientation to the norms and goals of the society, even though
its marked separation from the rest of Greek society sometimes produces
that impression. There have always been small minorities with sympathy
for the rural Greek as the “true Greek”; and there have been some urban
intellectuals who have retreated into religious obscurantism. However, most
members of the urban privileged classes do form a community separated
from the rest of Greek society by differences in values, language, culture,
and ease of access to the political system. They see Greece as a modern lib¬
eral state, and their own group as an integral part of Western civilization.
For them, the contrast between the operation of Greek institutions and the
operation of those in “Western” states is caused by the existence of the
“other community.” If pressed, they may offer further reasons—the problem
of scarcity in Greek society, or the long history of foreign intervention. This
part of the elite has accepted the nineteenth-century concept of modernity,
which defined progress in terms of political institutions. There is another
group of urban intellectuals who possess most characteristics of the elite but
reject the dominant symbol system. These people, who generally look at
modernization in economic or social terms, form the leadership of the
“combative” parties that seek adherents among the underprivileged parts
of society.
There is no consensus among the underprivileged in Greek society, either.
In fact, increasing social mobilization has contributed to a growing dissensus
among these elements. Generally, the peasantry is able to exist without
concern for the dominant symbol system in Greek culture, although some
rural Greeks have always been able to acquire it through the educational
process. Others have been acquainted with some variant of the symbol sys¬
tem through the clientage networks. The new urban proletarians, as well
as some rural refugees, though sharing the linguistic, cultural, and educa¬
tional disabilities of the peasantry, have not yet accepted the dominant
values of the community; since they have little access to the dominant elite,
they are ready to identify with some new set of symbols.


Consensus and Dissensus 93
THE POLITICAL FORMULA
Given the disparate visions of the Greek nation and the disagreement on
the underlying norms and goals of Greek society, it is not surprising to find
conflict over the political formula appropriate for the society.24 Generally,
certain institutional forms were implicit in each image of Greece. Those
imbued with Western values looked to a modern state characterized by
constitutionalism, rational-legal bureaucratic forms, and representative in¬
stitutions. For others, centralized bureaucratic forms reminiscent of the
Byzantine tradition were the ideal political system. Some preferred a con¬
tinuation of the traditions of local autonomy that had been observed under
Ottoman rule. But none of these institutional preferences were actually
realized.
The modern institutions imposed by the Bavarians did not at first con¬
form to the expectations of the “Westerners”; although they were eventu¬
ally altered to conform outwardly to the prevailing liberal constitutional
norms of Western Europe, they were soon adapted to the traditions of Greek
society. This has meant that in Greece, perhaps more than elsewhere, there
is a discrepancy between the formal allocation of control and responsibility
according to the contract principle and the effective appropriation of control
according to status. This disparity has been kept somewhat under control
by the pattern of clientage relations, through which the peasantry and the
underprivileged in Greek society have always been connected to the political
system. Today, clientage relationships are found in even the modern sectors
of Greek society, and wherever they exist they have modified Greek atti¬
tudes toward the political formula. This emphasis on human relationships
has hindered the development of loyalty to any impersonal institution, and
there are few positive feelings toward institutions without corresponding
feelings toward the incumbents in those institutions. A politician’s support
depends on his satisfactory performance of obligations—specifically, on his
distribution of public resources through the clientage networks that extend
from the national level down to the individual Greek. Greeks who are not
connected by these relationships to political incumbents can hardly be ex¬
pected to feel any loyalty to the state institutions.
The Greek monarchy has been evaluated in clientage terms. The Greek
people’s commitment to the Bavarian dynasty, and to monarchy as an insti¬
tution, lapsed when Otho was unable to deliver patronage because of ex


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
94
ternal circumstances and personal defects. The Danish House of Gluecks
burg, promoted by the Great Powers, has not been the object of universal
admiration. King George I was not loved early in his reign, during years of
Greek defeats on the diplomatic and military fronts. The controversy be¬
tween Constantine I and Venizelos, the alternation of monarchy and re¬
public in the interwar years, and the referendum on the constitutional ques¬
tion in 1946 are all indicators of disagreement over the proper political
formulas for Greece. These conflicts stem primarily from the intrusion of
personal loyalty as the major factor in the judgment of institutional arrange¬
ments. The concern of an officeholder, whether royal or not, has been for
particular sets of clients rather than for the population at large.
As each new territory was attached to the Greek state, Athens became the
center of its world. Politics in the kingdom had long been confined to the
capital; and the new territories joined the rest of rural Greece outside the
political system. In most Greek provinces a variety of loyalty eventually de¬
veloped as bureaucratic positions were filled with provincial notables and a
network of patronage was extended outward from the capital. But the new
territories found themselves at a disadvantage compared to the older regions
of Greece. The Greeks of the new regions were confronted with a legal sys¬
tem and political institutions whose form and operation were unfamiliar,
as well as with a dynasty as foreign to them as the one from which they had
escaped. Moreover, the representatives of the centralized administration
who dealt with these provinces assumed the air of colonial administrators.
The politicians from the older regions controlled the bureaucracy, which
was staffed by men who owed their positions to political and personal ties
with the established elite. The bureaucracy functioned haphazardly or not
at all; if action was to be obtained, it had to be through personal connection
or political pressure. However, success in these terms was generally impos¬
sible for Greeks residing in the new areas.
The disadvantage, and in a sense the inferiority, of the new provinces was
recognized, and each new territory had a governor-general or a deputy
governor to look after its interests in the period of transition. This arrange¬
ment lasted until just after World War II in all regions except northern
Greece, where a special minister is still assigned. At first, a native of an older
region was generally appointed governor, and often did less for the new
territory than he did for his friends and relatives at the expense of that ter¬
ritory. The new areas had material disadvantages in that improvements
such as roads and schools were few. The priorities of the capital left little


Consensus and Dissensus 95
money for these matters in the rest of the country, and the distribution of
patronage continued to slight the new provinces.
The loyalties of each new region remained with the particular individuals
who had helped to free them from the Turks or other foreign princes. For
example, the areas annexed after the Balkan Wars were loyal to Prime Min¬
ister Venizelos as a person rather than to the Greek state and King Con¬
stantine. The refugees in 1922 were loyal to Venizelos and to several of his
lieutenants but profoundly hostile to the King and the politicians, whom
they deemed responsible for their plight. These patterns of loyalty are re¬
lated to the patterns of support given to the major political factions in the
postwar period.
Since political loyalty is given to the person rather than to the institution,
there can be no unchanging political formula and no standard description
of individual obligation in Greece. The constitutional documents in modern
Greek history have failed to spell out crucial details of authority: there was
no precise description of the obligations and responsibilities of the monarch
with respect to the premier; and even a thing as fundamental as the electoral
system has never been part of the constitutional provisions. Governmental
procedure has never been taken seriously, and the constitutional documents
have been ignored or overruled on many occasions. Usually, the formal con¬
stitution and its political institutions have merely been utilized by competing
constellations of clientage networks for their own purposes. This is the ef¬
fective and expected mode of operation among the dominant elite and the
bulk of the peasantry; however, social mobilization and urbanization have
created an urban proletariat without the necessary clientage relationships.
New “combative” elites in both the left-wing groups and the military have
responded to this by proclaiming a desire to change the existing system by
eliminating clientage relationships, for which modern political institutions
operated along rational, impersonal, and bureaucratic lines would be sub¬
stituted.
WESTERN POLITICAL STYLE
The tradition of accepting ideas and leadership from above as well as
from outside has long prevailed among the modern Greeks. There has never
been much concern with political initiation of action or policy; in fact, many
Greeks were not aware that this was even a political option. The relation¬
ship of the individual to his government was passive, and exhibited many
features of a subject political culture as outlined by Gabriel Almond and


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
96
Sidney Verba.25 The rural Greek, even under democratic conditions, has
had little knowledge of the government. Until recently, with developments
in communications and transportation, issues did not reach him, and poli¬
ticians seldom appeared in his neighborhood. The indifference of the
capital, despite debate and promise, was broken only by occasional cam¬
paigns and minimal legislation. The most apparent connection between the
countryside and the capital was the burden of indirect taxation; and the tax
revenues were most often expended only in Athens. C. A. Munkman reports
that even now there is a feeling that any funds sent to Athens will disappear
“without any benefit to Greece.”26 However, the political system today is
manifested in rural areas by education, military recruitment, and agricul¬
tural supervision, as well as by taxation.
The pattern of traditional clientage relationships has always been oriented
to the output side of the Greek political system. Although Western parlia¬
mentary institutions were adopted early, there is still more emphasis on
easing the effects of government activity than on initiating alternatives. The
deputy is viewed as someone who will intercede in administrative matters
rather than someone who processes political demands. Demands are phrased
in personal terms, they are transmitted through personal relationships, and
the obligation to satisfy them devolves upon particular persons. The villager
expects the government to be unfair in awarding jobs and in distributing
benefits. For most, the possibility of changing the system is inconceivable;
the best that can be hoped for is a newly forged personal tie that might pro¬
vide a new set of privileges for the individual and his family at the expense
of the rest of society. Those with clientage ties know that they stand to
benefit from the formalism engendered by the gap between authority and
control; those without ties hope to secure them.
Laws in general are not looked upon as relevant for the villager, whether
they are based upon resurrected Byzantine codes or imitated from the West.
Often, these laws are not very relevant for even the modern sector of society.
Disobedience is not a crime, and it is expected that a law will be violated or
circumvented if this action might benefit the individual Greek or his family.
This trait of irresponsibility has historical weight. In the earliest years, the
Phanariot leaders continued to elude laws just as they had during the Otto¬
man administration; the primates and bandit chiefs were hardly better as
examples. The prevailing behavior through these centuries was the avoid¬
ance, not the challenging, of authority.


Consensus and Dissensus 97
The cleavage in Greek society as a whole follows the line of privileged
and underprivileged, although neither community is completely homo¬
geneous. The primary criteria differentiating one community from the
other are language, occupational status, and education. For most of the
population vertical clientage structures have connected one level of society
with the other. The rest of the population, primarily composed of urban
labor and refugee groups, is without clientage ties and therefore largely out¬
side the political system. In the following chapters, we will examine the
clientage structures and political system in greater detail, keeping in mind
this background of dissensus and fragmentation.


5- Interest Groups
A glance at the telephone book or a close inspection of a building directory
in downtown Athens will reveal the extent and variety of formal organiza¬
tions in Greece. Any comprehensive listing would include equivalents for
almost every major association found in the United States or Western
Europe: business organizations, a labor confederation, a broadly inclusive
agricultural organization, a myriad of occupational associations, and interest
groups to promote every conceivable economic, social, intellectual, or hu¬
manitarian cause. In addition, as the foregoing chapters have shown, family
influence and clientage networks also abound. Moreover, the bureaucracy
and the military seem to fit easily into the places assigned to them as institu¬
tional interest groups. In other words, if one approaches the Greek political
system armed with the interest-group typology most commonly utilized
that is, associational, nonassociational, institutional, and anomic—examples
of each type are sure to be found.
According to Almond and Powell, an interest group can be broadly
defined as “a group of individuals who are linked by particular bonds of
concern or advantage, and who have some awareness of these bonds.”1 The
specific typology offered by these authors, however, is only tangentially rele¬
vant to the Greek political system. Basically, their formulation, although
noting that all types may be found in any system, assumes that the associa¬
tional type is congruent with a high degree of economic and social differen¬
tiation. Conversely, nonassociational groups are assumed to be more usual
in less “developed” settings. Myron Weiner’s admonition that it is mis¬
leading to make too many assumptions about differences between modern
and traditional groups is appropriate here.2 The usual criteria of differen¬
tiation—the degree of organization, the continuity of activity, and the kind
or style of demands—are not very effective in differentiating types of interest
groups in the Greek political system. The most common categories, the
associational and the nonassociational, will be the focus of this chapter. The


Interest Groups gg
category of anomic interest groups does not lend itself to examination in the
Greek context. Institutional interest groups like the church or the bureau¬
cracy do not operate as independent actors in Greece. The church and the
bureaucracy are both penetrated by clientage networks originating in the
political world. The military does operate as an independent group, but in
a noninstitutional context rather than at the normal parliamentary level.
And even the two major types of interest groups, regardless of their form or
style of operation, do not conform to the pattern alleged to be common in
Western Europe or the United States.
As we have seen, chronic insecurity has sustained the attitudes of distrust
prevalent in Greek society. Association for mutual advantage is difficult.
“Social conflict does not shake down into relatively orderly class or group
conflict, but remains festering in the narrow interstices of personal relation¬
ships.”3 This, in turn, reinforces and perpetuates the traditional social unit,
the family, and its extension, clientage structures based on mutual obliga¬
tion. Under the pressure of an increasingly mobilized and complex society
these structures simply expand to include a wider range of people.
Scarcity has other consequences for Greek interest-group activity. The
political system is called upon to allocate a much broader range of values
than it might in a more affluent setting. In Greece, political resources are
often largely composed of intangibles such as exemptions and exceptions,
personal favors, or special treatment, rather than resources more amenable
to distribution on a group basis. “Modern” associational groups are difficult
to create and sustain in such a setting, and they have little utility. On the
other hand, clientage structures, with a limited and essentially noncompeti¬
tive membership that presents individual demands, seem to work fairly well.
Genuine associational ties are possible only when the governmental con¬
cerns of individuals and firms are not likely to be solved through personal
connections.
The same conditions have limited the development of political organiza¬
tions that could qualify as modern political parties; this, combined with
early independence, has been another factor differentiating Greece from
many other underdeveloped states, in which major mass organizations
grew out of nationalist movements, particularly in the interwar or postwar
periods. In Greece, although the resistance and the civil war produced ex¬
tensive social mobilization, the groups organized during that period did not
develop because they were tagged as subversive after the civil war. Since
modern parties do not exist, with the exception of the left-wing groups,


100 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
party-inspired occupational or social organizations of a mass character have
not touched many Greeks.
The associational interest groups found in Greece, despite their apparent
similarity to those in the West, are in fact different in both structure and
function. This is especially the case if one defines associational groups as
specialized structures that explicitly represent the interests of a particular
group, possessing a full-time professional staff and following orderly pro¬
cedures in the formulation of programs and demands.4 The associational
interest groups in Greece are largely “official” in character, with nonvolun¬
tary membership, a leadership responsive primarily to the state, and explicit
governmental functions, particularly in the realm of regulatory activity. It is
only their official character that makes for continuity or gives them a pro¬
fessional staff. They are examples of a category suggested, but less empha¬
sized, by Almond and Powell: associational groups that do not articulate
the needs felt and perceived by their members but serve to mobilize support
for the existing political system or social institutions.5
Just as governmental institutions and legal forms were borrowed from the
West in the early period of modern Greek history, the associational form
initially developed in the West was also borrowed, before an industrial
infrastructure existed to support it. Although some groups did develop
spontaneously, the Western model, if not followed initially, was imposed
on the fledgling organizations. Foreign pressures forced this course of action
to some extent. Since Greece was forever a debtor nation, the government
had to use all possible techniques for controlling her economy in order to
placate the international financial community. The state machinery alone
could not deal with problems of foreign exchange, import controls, labor
relations, or the tariff. The associational form was a “modern” and con¬
venient method. The corporate character of these economic and occupa¬
tional interests was so well established by 1929 that the revived Greek Senate
could include representatives from the major associations and professional
organizations.* In the 1930’s the government of Ioannis Metaxas reinforced
these corporate associations and extended them to nearly every occupational
group. Governments since 1946 have continued the practice.
Because of their “official” status, Greek associations and their leaders are
* There were corporate groups in the Senate to represent shipowners, the University and Acad¬ emy of Athens, the commercial and industrial divisions of the Chamber of Commerce, the Tech¬ nical Chamber of Commerce, the General Confederation of Labor, the Agricultural Chamber, and a craftsmen’s and handicraftsmen’s organization.


IOI
Interest Groups
regarded with the same distrust as the rest of the state apparatus. There is
little loyalty to the organization, and its regulations are violated as readily
as government prescriptions are. The leadership of a group must inform the
membership of government requests and requirements, and it must advise
political leaders of the sentiments of group members. This last activity is not
so much the articulation of group demands as it is the passing of political
information; the leadership reflects the prevailing political winds, rather
than internal group sentiments. In some cases, the leadership is formally
selected by the state, and high organizational office often brings ex-officio
status on state committees and boards. The desires of group members for
security and for individual attention generally run counter to government
aims, and both members and leaders often take part in unsanctioned
demonstrations.
In Greece, there is also a tendency to endow essentially family-oriented
and nonassociational groups with associational structures. Lawyers, for ex¬
ample, are active founders of associations; in this way they obtain a form of
permanent patronage and increased political influence. Access to govern¬
ment officials and ministers is easier with an organizational title, spurious
or not. Many government officials suspect the validity of organizational
labels but seldom have the time or the resources to investigate them. Most
organizations of this kind come to life sporadically, when the personal plans
of the leadership require activity, or when a particular client demands inter¬
vention on his behalf. In several cases, the founders of these organizations
have been able to use them for personal electoral success.
Regardless of organizational form, continuity, or type of demands, there
is a common thread running through most Greek organizational life: the
tie of mutual obligations that connects each member with the leader. Even
in formal associations, Greek demands on government are channeled
through informal patron-client groups that can include both organization
members and public officials. If clientage ties to the political level are un¬
available, the membership must resort to unsanctioned strikes and demon¬
strations. Although the formal organization may appear to be interested in
group demands, the clientage networks within the organization are pri¬
marily oriented to individual concerns. They want changes in administra¬
tive regulations, or personal exceptions and favors. To gain these ends, they
must deal with the premier or with the minister concerned; in some cases,
the lower-level bureaucrats might be included in the bargaining process.
The strategy of action differs from one general area to another partly be


102 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
cause Greek government is so constructed that responsibility is hard to estab¬
lish. The Greek acts as an individual, through personal or clientage ties; he
does not recognize the existence of a common interest, or the necessity for
organization.6 Whenever modern structures do exist, they are penetrated by
the clientage networks.
Most Greek groups fall most easily into the nonassociational pattern, with
intermittent patterns of articulation, no organized procedures, and little con¬
tinuity in structure.7 The same is true elsewhere. Sidney Tarrow notes that
in southern Italy the system of clientage is “shifting and informal, and has
no institutional recognition in concrete institutions.”8 Binder, describing
Iranian politics, notes that “the extended family stands at the center of Ira¬
nian social organization, and it remains the single most important political
fact.”9 The emphasis on clientage ties in these countries, as in Greece, means
that general interests are rarely enunciated; and legislation is rarely used as
an instrument of social change. By their very nature, individual demands
processed by clientage networks are best satisfied with a minimum of insti¬
tutional disruption.
Political phenomena in large-scale political systems, such as those in the
West, are frequently compared with phenomena in small-scale systems, and
formulations useful on one level are transferred to another. In most in¬
stances, fruitful insights and increased understanding result. However, size
alone may sometimes limit the utility of comparisons. For example, even in
the most advanced sectors of Greek society there are so few individuals and
firms that organizational activity may not be crucial, or even practical. Even
in large-scale systems, especially large firms may often ignore existing asso
ciational groups and intervene directly in the administrative or legislative
processes.10
The pattern of interest-group activity at subnational levels in other large
nations, particularly in federal states, provides one possible comparison with
the Greek case. In these settings, regardless of a country’s level of develop¬
ment, the potential membership for most groups is not as large; and there
are likely to be more connections among the leaders in the various social and
economic sectors. Moreover, the limitations imposed on a small state by the
international system may function in a way very similar to the limitations
imposed by a national government on its constituent elements. For example,
Weiner’s discussion of interest-group activity (or rather the lack of it) at the
state level in India closely parallels the Greek situation. According to him,


Interest Groups 103
organizational activity in the Indian states is inhibited because local ties and
traditions impede cooperative activity; instead, each individual acts to pro¬
tect or serve himself, even if it damages someone with a similar status or
occupation. As in Greece, the focus is on the modification of governmental
action rather than on the formulation of demands for legislative processing.
This pattern of action is successful at the state level because the local admin¬
istrators and deputies, unlike the top echelons of Indian government, are
amenable to personal influence.11
THE INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
It is axiomatic that regardless of organizational form or representation
formulas, interest groups in any society seek those points in the govern¬
mental structure where demands are likely to be satisfied.12 Whether these
points lie in the bureaucracy, a political party, or some point in the formal
representational institutions depends upon the pattern of power in the po¬
litical system. In India, few demands are directed to the members of the
national parliament or the higher bureaucrats: the representatives have little
power to satisfy demands, and the bureaucrats are either hostile or unre¬
sponsive. As a result, interest demands are channeled largely to the leaders
of the Congress Party.13 Below the national level, however, bureaucrats and
deputies may be approached as easily as party leaders. In Italy, according to
LaPalombara, interest groups intervene primarily at the bureaucratic level,
although certain legislative institutions, such as standing committees, can
be important.14 Grossholtz notes that, in the Philippines, “demands have
been handled not by bureaucratic planners, as in other developing countries,
but by politicians with a democratic bargaining spirit.”15 Interest-group
literature for Western Europe and the United States is equally concerned
with problems of access. Even in these modern settings, the kinds of de¬
mands made may make a difference, since individual and “group” demands
may be handled through different institutional channels. Almond and
Powell suggest that personal channels may be utilized in any system, regard¬
less of its level of social and economic differentiation.18
In Greece, demands have tended to remain “individual” in character for
reasons suggested earlier. Modern associational activity is of minor impor¬
tance in the Greek political system. However, individual demands, or even
interest-group demands, are not viewed by most sectors as a threat to the
public interest. Political institutions existed before more complex economic
and social structures developed; and partly because of this, demands of all


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
IO4
kinds tend to go to the political level. Since, with the exception of an occa¬
sional individual, the Greek political parties and bureaucracy are not com¬
mitted to any long-range goals (e.g., modernization), the whole basis of
Greek political organization has been office-holding; in this context, the
satisfaction of individual demands is the normal mode of operation. Weiner
suggests that “only when politics becomes increasingly legislative in charac¬
ter, and when elections and universal suffrage are introduced, do numbers,
and consequently organizational numbers, begin to count.”17 However, the
Greek experience suggests that under certain conditions, if universal suf¬
frage is introduced before social and economic differentiation is far ad¬
vanced, organization and numbers may still not be crucial. In Greece, the
existing clientage structures simply accommodated universal suffrage; this,
in turn, inhibited large-scale interest politics, at least until recently. More¬
over, although the bureaucracy in many countries follows rational-legal
norms and is relatively immune to personal demands, the Greek bureau¬
cracy has been penetrated by political clientage groups from the beginning.
Most political demands in Greece are not “group” demands, and the
points of access in the political process are most amenable to individual pres¬
sure. So much is evident in the responses of the 55 Greek deputies inter¬
viewed in 1964 for this study. They were generally unencumbered with
organizational memberships other than those required by their particular
professional backgrounds. There were some exceptions, particularly on the
Left, but in these cases the organizations were of a literary, international, or
front-organization type. Several deputies said that they tried not to get
mixed up with outside organizations. Most of those interviewed could not
recall representatives of organized groups coming to see them. Others, al¬
though they remembered such visits, seemed to regard them as inevitable
but unproductive; these men came mainly from the urban areas. Two of
those queried had made their reputations as representatives of specific in¬
terest groups: one was a former officer of a civil servants’ union, and the
other was close to various sports organizations in Athens. This kind of
identification has been possible only in areas where adherents of the par¬
ticular organizations were concentrated, and may have depended on an
electoral system that allowed voters’ second and third choices to become
effective. The problem of linkage between society and the state apparatus
in Greece, therefore, is not as severe as it is in countries like India, inasmuch
as the peasantry, the bureaucracy, and the political organizations all operate
by a system of obligations.


Interest Groups 105
POLITICAL RESOURCES AND POLITICAL DEMANDS
There is a substantial gap between the ostensible and real functions of
political institutions in contemporary Greece. The basic public law is the
starting point for any discussion of this phenomenon. The contemporary
legal system, with a civil law based on conflicting Byzantine sources, a nine¬
teenth-century French commercial code ill-adapted to its new environment,
and adaptations of more recent foreign codes masquerading as legal reforms,
is characterized by complexity and intense conflict.18 The codes may have
originally been prescriptive in character; but decades of training in juris¬
prudence have produced a bureaucracy that judges all activity by its con¬
formity to regulations, even contradictory ones. There is a constant need for
new legislative enactments, ministerial decrees, and administrative rulings
to fill in gaps or adjust conflicts in the existing laws. Thorough legislative
reform in any area is discouraged; instead, minor adjustment or alteration
is the rule. These conditions encourage particularistic bureaucratic treat¬
ment and constant political interference in the administrative world. En¬
forcement officials are left with many personalized choices because of this
legal tangle. Access to the political leaders, particularistic riders to legisla¬
tion, and interference in bureaucratic procedures are all useful as induce¬
ments to “sway the specific choices or the strategies of another individual.”19
It is for these things that a voter casts his ballot for a deputy; and it is for
these things that individual firms form connections with particular political
groupings. Although politicians may decry formalism and the poorly func¬
tioning state machinery, these circumstances are the main source of political
capital in Greece.
Formalism, at the same time that it creates political resources for poli¬
ticians and bureaucrats, impedes the formation of genuine interest groups.
Common interests are difficult to detect because the emphasis is always on
the amelioration of individual grievances. Each member of a group or
social category has a better chance to gain an advantage through personal
connections than through legislation of a general character. For example,
the nature of Greek tax policy diminishes the common interests of the busi¬
ness sector.20 Ordinarily, a new government activity is financed by a specific
new levy rather than by general funds; the service and those benefited by it
are determined on political grounds, and may have no relation to the part
of the community that must pay the new tax. Specific business elements
constantly suffer from the almost random imposition of these taxes. In gen


io6 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
eral, the tax position of any individual industry depends on its political in¬
fluence, which is determined by family connections or clientage ties to polit¬
ical leaders. Anyone with a substantial financial interest cannot afford to be
unprotected; if he eschews clientage relationships, his wealth will diminish.
The Greek tax system is not an instrument of general government policy,
but a political resource available for the satisfaction of individual demands.
The various taxes on consumption are levied on such a variety of items and
at such varying rates that no total assessment is possible. There are numer¬
ous exemptions for specific individuals and firms. In general, the taxes fall
hardest on that portion of the population that can least afford to pay them.
The income-tax system has also developed numerous advantages for specific
individuals. The income tax set up in 1950 already has 423 exceptions that
benefit the royal family, members of parliament, shipping companies, mer¬
chant seamen, journalists, artists, and certain agricultural enterprises.21
Only one-twelfth of the working population pays the income tax;22 and
even for those who cannot get exemptions, the rates are hardly confiscatory.
In the 1920’s tariffs were imposed, partly for protection and partly for
balance-of-payments purposes. They, too, have particularistic aspects. Cer¬
tain favored industries, developed in this protected atmosphere, have had
little incentive to improve operational efficiency or to undertake additional
commitments for industrialization; yet they are the beneficiaries of action
supposedly taken in the national interest. As effective as the protective tariff
in eliminating competition has been the postwar government practice of
declaring certain industries “satiated”: this means that no new firms can be
established in a given industry. The first price-fixing laws were established
in 1834; they are still in effect, though with many changes. Laws of unequal
competition have long been a part of the Greek business scene. These mea¬
sures, too, because they can be applied for the benefit of individuals or single
firms, hardly promote collective action. All of these government regulations
and policies have been particularly amenable to personal connections and
family influence; hence they have not affected the business community uni¬
formly.
MAJOR INTEREST GROUPS
There are three major organizations in Greece, each with connections to
the state and each concerned with specific sectors of the business world: the
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Chamber of Craftsmen, and the
Technical Chamber. These organizations advise their membership of gov


Interest Groups 107
ernment actions and report the feelings of their membership to official agen¬
cies. They also have some governmental and regulating functions. For ex¬
ample, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry is an arm of the Ministry
of Commerce. It acts officially in approving applications for import licenses
and in disciplining price-control violators. Various official revenue-collect¬
ing duties are carried on by each of the business organizations.
These business organizations were either created by the Greek state or
were formed with official encouragement. Since the commercial sector of the
Greek nation had been left outside the boundaries of the new state, the state
itself initiated some economic activity and the corresponding associational
activity. Local Chambers of Commerce were set up in the nineteenth cen¬
tury;23 in the early part of the present century, the major business organiza¬
tions in existence today were formed. In theory, these groups are structures
for relating views to policy makers; in practice, they have operated more as
adjuncts to the state administration, without articulating the interests of
their members. From this perspective, such associations can only hinder
Greek political development. However, the precarious character of the
Greek economy, the necessity for government allocation of most resources,
and the deficiencies of Greek public administration have all encouraged the
state to use these groups as levers to control certain economic sectors.
The compulsory character and diverse membership of the business as¬
sociations makes them ineffective as a link between their membership and
the state. As parts of the state apparatus, they are distrusted. The all-inclusive
nature of their membership creates conflict in the Chambers and is a basic
cause of disloyalty in the component organizations. Naturally, there is little
common interest between large and small firms, between importers and
domestic producers, and between the different sectors of commerce and in¬
dustry; there is even a regional conflict between concerns located in the
Athens-Piraeus area and those in the outlying provinces. Yet these diverse
units must all operate under the umbrella of the same business organiza¬
tions. There is no real alternative, since the small total number of firms
means that there are rarely enough in any single business to create a viable
organization.
Collective action is difficult for these organizations because their advan¬
tage to the individual is not always apparent; and support, either financial
or moral, for organizations with long-term aims or deferred prospects is
difficult to obtain. The family nature of most Greek firms and industries
has meant that family values predominate, which also weakens the impetus


io8 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
for formal associational activity. Moreover, ownership and employment in
Greek business are both highly concentrated, and the two are very often
synonymous. In 1963, of the 189,209 persons employed in Greek commercial
establishments, 49.9 per cent were proprietors, and another 13.3 per cent were
unpaid family members.24 At the same time, 70 per cent of all corporations
had fewer than nine shareholders, and 22 per cent fewer than five.25 The
prominence of cottage industry, the small market area, and the emphasis on
service occupations further diminish organizational activity: in such cases,
the family is the economic unit; and it, like the individual, looks upon those
in a similar position as competitors for scarce resources rather than as po¬
tential collaborators. Alec Alexander found that the fathers of most present
day industrialists either had the same status as their sons or came from the
ranks of craftsmen and large merchants; the step to the industrial category
involved expansion of the original activity.26 This development pattern has
produced a large number of relatively inefficient small firms, running more
in response to family values than on principles of economic efficiency. The
focus remains on gaining individual exceptions rather than on presenting
group demands.
The owner of a small business, of course, does not have access to the
highest points in the administration. However, if he has a moderate class
position, monetary resources, or the ability to provide reciprocal favors, he
can work directly with the civil servants. In return for assistance in circum¬
venting government regulations or acquiring wealth, he can furnish a
poorly paid bureaucrat with bribes and gratuities. If this fails, or if the ad¬
ministrative channels are clogged, the small businessman can receive a
prompt hearing from his deputy. In any case, he is likely to be concerned
with information, favorable rulings, or relief from specific enactments; there
is no need for collective action to realize such demands.
There are a great number of occupational interest groups in Greece whose
chief concern is the formation and administration of pension and insurance
funds. These funds were established gradually for individual occupations,
beginning in the nineteenth century; they now number over 150, each with
fiscal and administrative autonomy, and each authorized by the state to
compel contributions.27 Of the total number, about six cover almost all
economically active Greeks. Any change in a fund’s structure of contribu¬
tions, sources of outside revenue, or scale of benefits must be approved by
the government. Although all the funds are legally and organizationally
separate from the occupational groups they cover, many occupational groups


Interest Groups 109
were in fact organized solely as sources of revenue for their funds. And in
most cases the organizational officers play a part in the administration of the welfare fund.
An all-inclusive welfare fund was established in 1937 to provide old-age
pensions and medical insurance; it also administers unemployment and
housing benefits. It covers most nonagricultural workers, and is financed by
contributions from both workers and employers. A social insurance scheme
for agriculture was established in 1961; besides providing medical and old
age benefits, it includes crop insurance. Revenue for this fund comes from a
surcharge on the income tax, a stamp duty, a specific tax on tobacco, and
extra taxes on items such as coffee, cocoa, whiskey, and malt. Another reve¬
nue source is two-thirds of the yield of a 3 per cent tax on the wholesale traf¬
fic in agricultural products. These two are general funds that do not reflect
particular occupational organizations. However, the remaining insurance
funds are closely related to organized interest groups; and they also obtain
revenue from sources beyond actual beneficiary contributions. The fund
covering shopkeepers and self-employed craftsmen has revenue from sev¬
eral stamp duties and surcharges accruing to it. The fund for civil-service
pensions is aided by taxes on the sale of office supplies and the rental of
buildings to the government. The fund for the Seamen’s Union receives
part of a payroll tax, 3 per cent of the gross turnover in marine passenger
transport, and a share in the basic tariff. The medical workers’ fund gets
tax revenue on prescriptions, reports, and examinations of several varieties.
The bakers’ fund levies a tax on each kilo of wheat ground domestically
and a similar impost on imported flour. The social insurance fund for legal
personnel has 21 different sources of contributions and revenue.
Other less important formal organizations exist in the cities, but they are
badly fragmented. Cooperation for common demands is resisted, and each
group pursues its individual purposes in competition with other groups.
Defects in leadership and in membership, characteristic of the larger formal
organizations, are also found here. The excessive fragmentation to be found
even within groups simply illustrates the personalist character of these or¬
ganizations. Veterans’ associations provide an instructive example. There
are separate groups formed along political lines—some stemming from par¬
ticular units and particular wars, and others organized for specific categories
of the disabled. Moreover, there are additional organizations for dependents
of veterans. Potential demands of veterans as a group are passed up in favor
of more specific demands that favor only one small category of veterans. Per


no THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
haps it is recognized that since nearly all Greeks are veterans, only rela¬
tively specific demands are likely to be satisfied. Whatever effect these frag¬
mented organizations have comes from the ties of leaders or individual
veterans to political leaders or bureaucratic officials.
In the larger cities of Greece, there are “origin” associations for those who
come from specific parts of the country. In some respects these organizations
are modern; in other ways they seem to be variants of the traditional client¬
age structures. They attract people who would normally be competing with
each other in the rural setting, and create regional or provincial loyalties;
they communicate with their members by weekly or monthly newsletters;
they tend to promote general group concerns; and they are permanent or¬
ganizations that emphasize formal meetings, social activities, and celebra¬
tions. On occasion, they are useful to recent arrivals from the countryside,
since they can work through traditional channels to provide assistance in
finding employment and housing.
The older origin associations in the Athens area have become mainly so¬
cial and cultural in nature, although they may sometimes still assist new
arrivals. However, they have largely eschewed a political function, and their
usefulness to the recent migrant is less than it used to be. There are similar
origin associations in Thessaloniki. Since this is a newer city, and because
the origins of newcomers are not so diverse, the major provincial origin
associations still have significant political influence. Not only do they satisfy
demands from individual members through clientage channels, but they
act as a group to influence local elections and the selection of deputies to the
national parliament. When origin associations are oriented toward politics
in this way, they also prove useful in the home provinces, through influence
on the members’ relatives who have remained at home.
THE ADVANTAGED
Greeks who are successful in any sector of society usually have personal
connections with individual members of the major political groupings. For
them, the Greek system works well, as long as equilibrium is maintained
between the parliamentary level and the other major groups, such as the
military and the left wing. These men are better able to secure satisfaction of
their personal requirements than those less highly placed. Because Greece
is small, and because Athens is the foremost commercial, financial, and in¬
tellectual center, as well as the capital city, there is constant communication
between one sector and another—between politicians, state officials, leading


Ill
Interest Groups
professors, bankers, publishers, and shipowners. There are few “leading
figures,” and the number of members in any single sector is small. None of
these men need association support. Since they have resources useful in the
political arena, they can press personal demands through the normal chan¬
nels of mutual obligation. A government minister—the source of favors,
special legislation, or support for the status quo—provides the key to suc¬
cess. The minister needs political support; those around him need govern¬
mental favors. Even the most highly placed business or professional men
find it difficult to maintain reciprocity with all important sectors of society,
and a politician can act as a broker for those with insufficient influence in
one sector and a surplus in another.28
Even though corporate power is concentrated in the hands of a relatively
few families, it is clear that the major business interests are far from united.29
The Commercial Bank of Greece, together with its subsidiaries, is con¬
trolled by Stratis Andreadis.30 Although he was closely identified with much
of the economic activity under the Karamanlis regime, Andreadis seemed
eager to express his friendship for the Papandreou government as well. The
National Bank of Greece is more closely tied to the prevailing political
group, since its governor is selected by the Prime Minister. The deputy gov¬
ernor of the bank in recent years has played a role in nonpolitical, caretaker
governments and in negotiations between the political world and the royal
family. Most of the financial aspects of Greek economic development pro¬
grams have involved both banking groups; conversely, each banking group
has members active in both major political groupings.
The directors of the banks, insurance companies, and other major finan¬
cial interests are often selected from the ranks of retired generals and poli¬
ticians. Moreover, each of the major banking and insurance groups has
ties with particular banking houses abroad, and each has its own stable of
industries in Greece. For example, some 70 per cent of the insurance assets
are controlled by six companies, of which the two largest, Ethniki and Astir,
are closely affiliated with the two largest banks.31 Aside from the Bank of
Greece, which is the central bank of issue for banknotes and serves the gov¬
ernment in the realm of monetary policy, these two commercial banking
groups control 96.3 per cent of all assets.32 Other key figures in business and
finance have ties to different banking groups and access to different poli¬
ticians; some are also leading political figures, and so have no need for access
to government through interest-group organization.
Certain other sectors of society are also crucial to the political level. The


112 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
press, because of its importance in the political struggle, has always been
subjected to a good deal of government interference, in the form of both
punishments and rewards. In Otho’s day, newspapers were required to de¬
posit funds to be forfeited in case of libel; but one newspaper was enabled to
exist with only sixteen paying customers because of government subsidies
during the same period.33 A provision in the penal code concerning “insults
against authority” has traditionally been used to discourage journalistic cri¬
ticism of those in power; its wording is vague enough that a minister can
press for its application whenever he wishes, depending upon his personal
whims and the political situation. In the immediate postwar period, many
newspapers were reestablished by government financial assistance. Natural¬
ly, these funds were allotted on political priorities; however, political loyal¬
ties have in some cases changed, even though the loans are outstanding. The
loans are now so old as to be politically uncollectable, but the threat of en¬
forcing them is still a weapon available to any unduly harassed government.
Governments have also manipulated labor legislation to penalize certain
publishers. Nevertheless, publishers have benefited individually and as a
group from their political connections. The state undertook to import and
distribute newsprint because of the foreign exchange problem immediately
after World War II. This practice continues, but now it is a form of financial
subsidy to the newspaper owners. Newspaper owners are exempted from
regular income taxes.34 But these financial benefits also give the government
still another lever to control dissident journals. Even though all Greek pub¬
lishers have privileges and liabilities of a similar kind, they are not united
because the privileges and liabilities can be invoked in a particularistic
manner.
The Union of Journalists, one of the most prestigious and privileged or¬
ganizations in Greece, is composed of about 500 older journalists. The
members of this group have received substantial privileges from the state
because of their crucial role in the political process. An individual deputy
cannot become known without some assistance from the press; except for
major figures given space because of their position, every politician must
forge ties to senior journalists if his name and activities are to be mentioned
in the newspaper columns. Since no Greek newspaper is large enough for
extensive coverage, the journalist has discretion of great political impor¬
tance. Ordinary citizens know of the Union of Journalists through its an¬
nual lottery, a closely guarded prerogative. From this source of revenue,
journalists receive a handsome pension and a large financial settlement upon


Interest Groups
retirement; in fact, the journalists’ lottery, before the 1967 coup, ranked
with those established for such past worthy causes as archeological excava¬
tions and battleships. Journalists (who are defined solely in terms of mem¬
bership in the Union), like members of parliament, are allowed to bring
autos into the country without paying the usual surcharge to Their Maj¬
esties’ Fund, which accounts for about half the cost of an imported car.
The Union of Journalists, because of its privileges, has become an exclu¬
sive organization; but journalism is a popular profession in Greece, and
there are many younger journalists who must remain outside the Union.
A rival journalists’ organization has developed; but since it has acquired no
privileges, it is an organization with no membership solidarity, without pur¬
pose or prospects. Journalists as an occupational category have not benefited
from special privilege, only those with useful ties to the political world. The
senior journalists have made gains not because of their organization, but
because of their crucial role in the political process and their individual ties
to the various political groups.
Shipping interests have won many special considerations in Greece, re¬
gardless of the government in power. Each major political faction on the
parliamentary level has its own shipowners in attendance; of the most well
known, Stavros Niarchos flourished during the Karamanlis regime, and
Aristotle Onassis had close ties with Sophocles Venizelos, one of the leaders
of the Center Union. Personal connection and friendship, not organizational
politics, keep the shipowners in the various political camps. Shipping has
received special consideration because it is crucial to Greek politics. A poli¬
tician from the islands, for instance, must have connections with a major
shipowner not only for personal use, but to transport voters from the main¬
land to their home constituencies. It is not accidental either that members
of parliament and journalists receive free transportation on domestic lines.
In return, shipping has received substantial tax benefits. The lagging devel¬
opment of other kinds of internal transport in Greece may be related to this
state of affairs.
A Greek doctor or dentist is automatically a member of his professional
association. However, these associations are far from united; each contains
all the cleavages prevalent in Greek society, and additional points of conflict
as well. In proportion to the whole population, these fields are not over¬
crowded. However, the high concentration of doctors and dentists in the
Athens-Piraeus area and in several other urban places does make for intense
competition. The province of Attica, with some 37 per cent of the popula


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
H4
tion, has 64 per cent of all general practitioners and 85 per cent of the spe¬
cialists.85 The fact that state-sponsored welfare schemes and the urban
unions are major employers accounts in some measure for this concentra¬
tion. However, the state has been unable to encourage settlement in the
provinces, in spite of government salary incentives and other privileges.
Basically, the professional man is reluctant to leave the metropolitan area.
In addition to efforts to encourage the relocation of medical men, there
are also attempts to limit entry into the field, both by tightening qualifica¬
tions and by putting restrictions on the practice of those with medical de¬
grees earned abroad. Practices often pass from father to son, making it
difficult for a newcomer to become established. The beginning doctor may
be forced to barter his services (an appendectomy, for example) for future
favors from others. Most doctors and dentists must have both private pa¬
tients and several government connections in order to survive. The state, as
usual, is viewed as the major opponent of physicians; and the Ministry of
Health is an adversary rather than a sponsor. In dentistry and medicine, as
in other occupations, competition is so intense that survival and advance¬
ment depend not on the activities of a professional association but on per¬
sonal connection and political friendship. Nevertheless, these professions,
perhaps because of the insecurity of their membership, do not have the
political importance of their Western counterparts.
THE DISADVANTAGED
The sectors of Greek society without clientage ties are at an enormous
disadvantage; and it is in these sectors that the development of modern
associational activity has gone the furthest, especially in the urban areas.
Those without clientage ties have many of the same attitudes of distrust
toward the state, organizations, leaders, and their fellows as other Greeks
do, but the fact that they cannot operate through the traditional relation¬
ships forces them to organize. The groups that have difficulty uniting are
precisely the ones that ultimately pay for the privileges given to more in¬
fluential members of the community. Unfortunately, the mere creation of
associations based on mutual interest and the subsequent formulation of
group demands do not mean that either individual or associational griev¬
ances are likely to be acted on. The major elements in the traditional parties
depend largely on constructing networks of clients, not on the cultivation
of the group vote; in fact, there is no national executive office filled by popu¬
lar vote. Moreover, given the scarcity of resources, sweeping group demands


Interest Groups xx^
are difficult to satisfy; political resources are distributed on an individual
basis not only because they have a greater effect but because there are not
enough to go around.
The Refugees
The population exchanges in the Balkans after 1922 brought more than a
million refugees into Greece. These people, although sharing a common
plight, were originally differentiated by origin, cultural level, education, and
occupation. They had neither the status to work at the highest levels of
politics nor the clientage ties necessary to improve their conditions; at the
same time, they were largely lacking in the mutual trust and hierarchical
authority necessary for cooperation and collective action. Today, the largest
refugee association in Greece is the Pan-Refugee Congress, which primarily
represents refugees who were not permanently resettled or properly housed
prior to World War II.36 The agreements on population exchanges had left
Moslem property in Greece in the hands of the Greek state, just as Greek
property in Anatolia was left to the Turkish state; the Greek government
was to use this property or its income for refugee resettlement. In 1955 about
half of this “exchangeable” property still remained in the hands of the gov¬
ernment. The cost of its administration was nearly equal to the income from
it, since liquidation, when carried out, had provided far less than the prop¬
erty’s appraised value. By and large, refugee demands for increased scholar¬
ship aid, assistance in paying fees demanded in order to obtain clear titles
to refugee homes, and public assistance in general, have been contingent
on the supposed resources of the refugees, the exchangeable property.
Eventually an independent authority for the administration of this property
was set up, but it is unlikely that the demands of the refugees will ever be
fulfilled.
The major problem for the unsettled refugees in 1956 was still housing.
The Karamanlis regime had tried to meet this need by state construction of
housing, and also by providing urban refugees with land and with money
to build their own dwellings. But progress was too slow: already, three gen¬
erations of refugees had appealed for the housing due them; and events
since the mid-thirties had merely intensified their hardships. Since tradi¬
tional political avenues were closed, and since organized group action has
little impact on Greek parliamentary politics, the refugees have turned to
other political forms, particularly to the radical politics of the Left. This
renders a settlement of the refugee problem more difficult than ever: in a


ii 6 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
world of scarcity, no political regime is likely to gamble by placating its
enemies at the expense of its supporters. In addition to this older bloc of
refugees, there are newer groups who were expelled from various Middle
Eastern nations, especially Egypt, after World War II. By and large, these
groups have eschewed connections with any political party. Since these
particular refugees often had wealth, education, and skills, they are better
able to operate within the transitional political milieu. Nevertheless, their
problems in regard to employment, discrimination, taxation, and pensions
have not been completely solved either.
The Worker
For Greeks who are low on the social scale, overcoming the disturbing
effects of formalism is difficult. The recently mobilized urban laborer cannot
influence a bureaucrat except through an intermediary. He has little more
than one vote among thousands; he, his family, and his associates cannot be
significant in an urban electoral district. Even a labor organization has little
impact on the parliamentary level of Greek politics. True, some of the
worker’s needs are recognized. On the surface, Greek labor legislation
appears to be comprehensive and progressive; there is a complete system of
social insurance and a great deal of legislation on working conditions. How¬
ever, the simple fact that the state administers the system means that in
order to benefit the individual has to have access to the bureaucracy. There
is little effort to inform the worker of his rights, and still less attention is
paid to channeling complaints to the proper authority. Violations on the
part of employees and malpractices by union leaders are common. The
Greek worker’s major concern is job security, and he is likely to accept
abuses of the labor legislation passively, since the channels for correcting
them are full of obstructions. Moreover, the Greek state is interested chiefly
in economic stability, and has many weapons to enforce it. A legacy of
restrictive labor regulations from the Metaxas period is available for any
government. Since the government is so involved in the economy, strikes
and disruptions of any kind can be interpreted adversely. Threats of mili¬
tary call-up or dismissals are constant when strikes threaten to curtail es¬
sential services, either public or private. The army has been used to replace
striking workers on several occasions. The police are not very careful when
dealing with labor disturbances. Under these conditions, strikes rarely last
long; one or two days is the usual term, since neither the workers nor their
unions have the financial resources to continue.


Interest Groups ny
To the extent that formal labor demands are made, they seem to be chan¬
neled primarily through the political spokesmen of the Left, and almost
always concern economic benefits or adjustments in job security. These
demands are rarely satisfied; in fact, statistics from the Ministry of Labor
indicate that the most common result of a strike is a “no result.” Most strikes
begin with little notice and end without mediation or negotiations.37 Given
its limited access to the political level through personal ties and its minimal
solidarity, it is not surprising that the Greek working class is at a great dis¬
advantage in the struggle for political favors.
The first labor unions were organized in areas of “unredeemed” Greece
at the beginning of the century, and workers in the tobacco industries were
the first to be involved in union activity. The early unions seem to have had
a personalist rather than an ideological orientation; in fact, they seem to
have been a variety of the traditional Greek social unit. Personal quarrels
among leaders, as well as extreme differentiation of unions by region and
function, inhibited any general organization. The unions first became in¬
volved in politics in the 1920’s, during the controversy over the future of the
regime. The leaders of individual unions, with their membership in tow,
rallied to diverse camps. For example, coastal sailors, drawn mainly from
the Peloponnesus, were intensely royalist, whereas sailors from many of the
islands were republicans.
Large-scale labor organization has had little success in Greece. In 1929
the tenuous General Confederation of Greek Labor split into two parts. A
separate Communist labor group, the United General Confederation of
Labor, was formed, and existed until the Comintern’s united-front period,
when the two confederations were finally reunited. At this point, the advent
of the Metaxas regime brought complete government control of all labor
organizations. After World War II, the General Confederation was recon¬
stituted, and a Communist was elected as the new secretary-general. How¬
ever, the government stepped in to annul the election; consequently, a
provisional secretary-general was appointed. This appointee, whose position
was later ratified by election, remained the spokesman for the labor move¬
ment until 1964, when he was removed by the new Papandreou govern¬
ment. Throughout this time, the official labor leadership cooperated will¬
ingly with government and industry; it was an arm of the state rather than
an independent political actor. Although the Papandreou government ap¬
parently wished to free the labor movement from explicit government con¬
trol, efforts to remodel the General Confederation were delayed. Labor re


n8 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
mained fragmented, with separate union groups tied to individual poli¬
ticians and diverse sectors of Greek political life. Basically, the dispute was
not only over formulas for representation, but over the ultimate relation
of this labor organization to the state itself. The military coup of April 1967
postponed any solution of the problem.
The dominance of agriculture in Greece (it involves over 53 per cent of
the economically active population) and the multitude of occupations in
which self-employment has been the rule have fatally limited the scope of
union organization.88 The proportion of the Greek labor force employed
in manufacturing actually dropped between 1929 and 1961, from 14.1 to
13.1 per cent.89 In 1961 there were only 188,877 persons working in manu¬
facturing industries employing more than ten persons.40 Most of these are
employed in traditional manufacturing operations, such as food processing,
rather than in heavy industry. The small scale of commercial and industrial
activity tends to perpetuate the clientage structures inherited from the
countryside. Nearly 80 per cent of all Greek commercial establishments,
even wholesalers, employ only one or two persons, usually the proprietor or
his family.41 In 1966, only 1,353 commercial establishments in all of Greece
(1.6 per cent of the total) employed ten or more persons.42 A businessman
or entrepreneur can easily assume the patron’s role in this context, further
inhibiting organizational activity. Moreover, union membership remains
unattractive for some Greeks because of the heavy Communist influence in
the labor movement in its early years.43 Finally, an occupation involving
manual labor is not popular, since labor seems to be synonymous with servi¬
tude. In fact, a Greek workingman often changes into a suit and tie before
leaving his place of employment, transforming himself into a white-collar
worker for the bus ride home.
The fundamental dilemma for trade unions in Greece is simply that
there are more laborers than jobs; underemployment and unemployment
are chronic. Another bar to organizational activity, in labor and elsewhere,
is the tendency for a person to be involved in several different occupations.
In such a context, and considering the basic mistrust of those unconnected
by mutual obligations, it is not surprising that labor organization is im¬
peded, or that there is little class or occupational solidarity. In the postwar
period, labor organizations were not able to force wage gains, even to equal
productivity increases.44 As in other countries, the pressure of unemploy¬
ment or lack of opportunities in rural Greece drives people to the cities.
However, Greece’s modern industries cannot accommodate these new ar


Interest Groups
rivals, and most other establishments can absorb only a small fraction. The
migrants eventually enter the already crowded service sector, where the
proliferation of individual occupations and the intense competition further
inhibit any organizational activity.46
The Rural Gree\
If the Greek peasant is in a better condition than the lower-class urban
dweller, it is because government does not affect him as directly, and be¬
cause his clientage ties remain intact. In the lore of modern Greece one often
encounters the proposition that the peasant is and always has been intensely
aware of national politics. On the other hand, Irwin Sanders has suggested
that the Greek peasantry would be indifferent to politics if allowed to pur¬
sue its own affairs. He found that most peasants are chiefly concerned with
community affairs, crops, and personalities.48 There is concern with politics
but it is a concern similar to that for earthquakes or bad weather. Beyond
that, political discussion is confined to personal relations and mutual obli¬
gations.
Throughout Greece, but particularly in the rural areas, there is a feeling
that correct party affiliation is crucial for the receipt of government bene¬
fits.47 It is also assumed that improvements beneficial to a whole community
are distributed with an eye to how the village as a whole voted in the last
election. Even within the village, although party affiliation is not as crucial
as it is assumed to be in the outside world, there is evidence that political
factions do arise and persist. It is not a matter of the rural notables opposing
the rest of the population; rather, as Myron Weiner notes for rural India,
“conflicts between persons, families, factions, and castes virtually pre¬
clude joint enterprises by those who have wealth.”48 The network of friend¬
ships among the village officials becomes a de facto party because it operates
as a patronage system.49 Party labels may not be used in local campaigns,
but the network of personal ties that forms behind each competing candi¬
date may reach out of the village to patrons at the provincial level, and
ultimately to Athens.
The rural Greek feels that he is related to the state as a subject rather than
as a citizen. The ordinary villager may be able to deal with local officials,
but he must also cope with the laws and regulations emanating from the
central government. He is not self-sufficient: money is required for goods
not produced at home, for tax purposes, and for status. The peasant relies on
government credit, and is increasingly involved in politics because of gov


120 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
ernment agricultural policy. The government, although legally offering
many benefits and services to the individual Greek, does little to publicize
them; and the average citizen has difficulty in determining which govern¬
mental agency should be approached with any given problem.80 The ad¬
ministrative structure is further bedeviled by various “legal entities of pub¬
lic law,” which are ostensibly private concerns but carry on state-financed
activities. These agencies are more mysterious to the peasant than the gov¬
ernment itself; and when he confronts them, he needs the intercession of a
politician.
Even if the proper channel can be determined, the rural Greek has a diffi¬
cult time approaching civil servants, even minor officials, because of his low
status.81 In nearly every government office, including those at the provincial
level, the ushers at the door are haughty enough to keep all but the most
persistent lower-class petitioners away. Bribes, often in the guise of gifts, are
the accepted practice in dealing with officials; they may be cash gifts to
minor officials, or some gift such as produce offered to a higher bureaucratic
official out of “goodwill” rather than as payment for a specific request. Since
very little discretion is allowed to lower members of the civil service, it is
often crucial for the petitioner to bring his case to the attention of the higher
officials; however, the differences in status and the bureaucratic system itself
discourage this.
Some leftist groups attempt to gain government attention by strikes or
riots. But the ordinary petitioner has only a few alternatives. He can write
to the Prime Minister, whose personal office has a staff of about 50 political
appointees to handle communications addressed to him. The office takes
note of questions and complaints and sends a copy of the petitioner’s letter
to the appropriate minister, together with a form letter from the Prime
Minister. However, the letters sent by this office are standardized, and the
recipient can tell from the form of the letter whether or not he should re¬
spond with action. The citizen hears nothing about his request unless he
comes to Athens or has someone check for him. Another channel for com¬
plaint is the Council of State, which supposedly protects the citizen from
arbitrary acts of the state; but it cannot help the average Greek in his deal¬
ings with the bureaucracy. In fact, during the Karamanlis period, advice
from this agency was consistently rejected or ignored. The courts are equally
unsatisfactory. There is an insufficient judicial staff and by and large it is of
poor quality. The court system cannot be more effective than the laws it has


121
Interest Groups
to enforce; if laws are largely formalistic, responsibility for state action or
inaction is difficult to place. The courts, in the Greek system, are part of the
political bargaining network and the bureaucracy, with all the usual lia¬
bilities. The existence of an independent judiciary is largely illusory, as is
any expectation of redress for individual grievances.
The only solution for the ordinary villager is to turn to a patron, to some¬
one with influence in the community who also has connections outside it.
This patron is usually a deputy, and the kind of assistance he can provide is
geared to the individual client—a job, the adjustment of a particular wrong
committed by the state, or intervention in the bureaucratic process. Any
patron is assumed to be able to do more material favors for a client than the
client can possibly return in kind. Eventually, this can create a political ob¬
ligation. The Greek peasant is likely to have a closer tie to the deputy in his
district either personally, or through local notables, than a city dweller does.
The rural deputy is more likely to respond to demands because electoral
districts are small, and consistent slights may lose votes. This system is not
unlike Weiner’s description of rural Indian politics. In Indian cities the dis¬
advantaged person is likely to become involved in group activity; in the
country, his interests can be served by attachment to a particular politician.
The same attachment that makes rural India a bulwark of the Congress
Party makes rural Greece the stronghold of traditional clientage-based
political organizations.52
The pattern of organization in Greek agriculture parallels that of labor.
“Cooperatives” existed in several localities in the nineteenth century; but
they were actually variants of the indigenous clientage systems, despite their
label. The lines of loyalty went only from the peasant to the leader; there
was no particular bond connecting one member with the next. As in other
transitional societies, the leader was responsible for organization and direc¬
tion.53 Although the original impetus for cooperative activity had been to
some degree local, the state eventually became involved. First, the Western
pattern of agricultural cooperatives was superimposed on the local groups,
beginning in T915.64 Shortly afterward, during the upheavals caused by the
refugee resettlement, membership in the cooperatives was made compul¬
sory.55 Ostensibly, this action had two aims: first, the cooperative movement
would be strengthened by its increased membership; second, since compul¬
sion required government assistance, the state could use the cooperative
movement to exert some degree of economic control over the agricultural


122 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
system. This remains the pattern today; and cooperatives throughout the
country are tied together in the Pan-Hellenic Confederation of Agricultural
Cooperatives.
The basic impetus for individual membership in a cooperative must be a
person’s belief in common interest and mutual advantage. This is as lacking
in rural Greece as it is elsewhere in Greek society. Some traditional variants
of mutual aid are found in the country districts; but exchanging labor or
animals, for example, and that only with neighbors or relatives, is hardly an
indication of fundamental trust.50 Perhaps the Greek peasantry ought to see
the mutual advantage of cooperative organizations; but in this setting of
insecurity, each man’s interests seem at variance with the interests of all
others. Cooperatives require the peasant to think in terms of mutual advan¬
tage, future benefits, and distant markets—modern economic values, rather
than traditional family values. In short, cooperatives are designed for farm¬
ers, not peasants. A Greek peasant feels that he is better served by his own
clientage ties to specific people above him. This attitude creates numerous
factions, with membership drawn from all levels of the rural community,
Cooperation among rural Greeks of similar status is inhibited, as is the de¬
velopment of loyalty to institutions rather than persons.
The cooperative movement, sponsored and regulated by the state, per¬
forms several valuable functions for the rural Greek: cooperatives are nat¬
urally concerned with marketing orders and price control, as well as with
measures to increase productivity; a further important service is the admin¬
istration of rural credit through cooperation with the Agricultural Bank.
The reaction of the peasantry to this official atmosphere is predictable. The
organization and its officers are distrusted, and are viewed as state officials
rather than servants of the cooperative membership. They are assumed to be
as partisan and politically motivated as other elements of the state appara¬
tus. To the rural Greek, these officials must be approached as are others:
through personal connections and clientage. And he will circumvent de¬
cisions of the cooperatives in the same manner he would any government
decree. If possible, he will sell his own produce outside the marketing or¬
ganization, and he must often be persuaded not to destroy the implements
or physical plant of the cooperative organization. He will seek as large a
loan as possible from the Agricultural Bank, hoping to postpone or evade
payment indefinitely. Even considering the inadequacies of the Greek co¬
operative system, one must admit that the rural Greek, like his Indian coun


Interest Groups 123
terpart as described by Weiner, has “developed an almost incredible capac¬
ity to resist and to negate” efforts to change rural life.67
There is some regional variation in rural attitudes toward cooperatives. In
most areas the cooperative movement is viewed as a governmental instru¬
ment, but where catastrophe and economic development have combined to
transform the peasant into a farmer, the movement seems to have more vi¬
tality. Especially in the tobacco-growing areas of northern Greece, cooper¬
atives seem to operate less as state institutions and more as pressure groups.
This is one of the few areas where cooperative leaders have had sufficient
popular support to enter elective politics.
SUMMARY
The Greek political system does not fit the developmental patterns gener¬
ally suggested, and questions about its ultimate form are impossible to an¬
swer. Implicit in our discussion of interest groups is the notion that certain
types, particularly the associational form, are most appropriate in a highly
differentiated society. Moreover, it is assumed that nonassociational groups
will take on an associational form and behavior as society becomes increas¬
ingly differentiated. This formulation suggests that the clientage-based
Greek interest groups will be transitional. However, such a prognostication
—apart from the question of future Greek development—ignores factors
like the size of the system, the problem of individual trust, and the existence
of particular institutional patterns, all of which seem crucial in the Greek
case.
LaPalombara notes that the proliferation of strong, autonomous associa¬
tional interest groups is vital to the establishment and maintenance of a lib¬
eral democratic society in Italy.58 Weiner feels that even voluntary groups
organized along traditional lines can ultimately contribute to the consensus
necessary to maintain an orderly and democratic government in India; he
argues that the “community” groups there have a role to play, and should
not be viewed as a threat to the Indian state.69 And Grossholtz finds that
although individual demands predominate in the Philippines, traditional
loyalties are gathered into apparently modern groups.60 It is tempting to
suggest that developments in Greece will follow this general pattern, but
some caution is necessary. First, the narrow clientage organizations found
in Greece are not completely analogous to those in India. The Madisonian
world of multiple interest groups may indeed come to exist in the Indian


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
I24
context, creating a necessity for compromising and bargaining.61 However,
it seems doubtful, even from Weiner’s analysis, that a similar pattern will
emerge at the state level. Likewise, in Greece, the small size of the polity
makes the development of the type and number of groups and the pattern of
activity that Weiner suggests questionable. When the Philippine situation
is examined closely, it seems possible that the groups appear more modern
than they are. However, in that setting the constitutional pattern and the
national election of the president may affect interest-group development.
In countries other than Greece traditional interest-group patterns may
contribute to progress. The traditional bargaining culture in the Philippines
seems to aid the development of a democratic political system.62 On the lo¬
cal level in India there is a similar bargaining system between patron and
client. Weiner views the development of a bargaining culture on a higher
level as important to a democratic system, and thinks that such a culture
will develop as the traditional groups take on modern associational forms
and practices. However, in Italy, although bargaining on an individual
basis is found, modern interest groups tend to operate as if “the state was
something to be conquered by some group to the disadvantage of others.”63
Binder notes that in Iran bargaining is the standard process for resolving
political problems, or indeed any problems at any level; but he does not sug¬
gest that it must result in the development of a democratic system.64 Obvi¬
ously, the several types of bargaining must be differentiated. The patron
client relationship based on mutual obligation can be characterized as a
bargaining relationship. However, implicit in this relationship is the satis¬
faction of an individual demand; implicit also is a status distinction. The
transformation of this bargaining to a higher level is not automatic. There is
no assurance that even with economic and social differentiation, trust will
be strong enough to make associational cohesion possible; loyalty to one’s
fellow does not necessarily replace commitment to a leader. There is like¬
wise no assurance that if groups do develop they will act as interest articu¬
lators. It would seem that the institutional framework, the character of the
bureaucracy, the legislative institutions, and the parties in a political system
may all be intervening variables of great importance. Similarly, the size,
resources, and internal diversity of the society must all be considered. The
existence of a bargaining culture, by itself, is certainly not a sufficient con¬
dition, and perhaps not even a necessary one, for the development of an
interest-group infrastructure on the Western pattern.


6. Political Parties
Political parties seem to perform certain common functions in all systems
for example, political recruitment and the communication of demands to
political decision makers. In addition, parties seem related to particular
levels of modernization, as defined in terms of economic and social differ¬
entiation.1 Initially, the parties found in the major European states were
used as models in the study of political organization, and non-European
elites adopted similar structures as indicators of “modern” status. However,
studies of politics in different settings have suggested that party structures
and functions may vary considerably from those found in the European
context. Moreover, if all European political systems are examined, it is ap¬
parent that there is not only a great diversity of party systems, but a con¬
siderable variation in parties within each system in terms of organization,
electoral or legislative behavior, and general goals.
Joseph LaPalombara and Myron Weiner, in suggesting criteria to iden¬
tify “modern” political organization, focus on the continuity and perma¬
nence of an organization, its relationship to the mass electorate, and the
aims of its leadership (specifically, whether or not leaders seek decision¬
making positions within the system).2 In the Greek case, it is clear that the
major political groups at the parliamentary level cannot meet the require¬
ments of modernity; indeed, they are now and have remained for decades,
at the “antecedent” stage of development, composed of “cliques, clubs, and
small groups of notables.”3 If this categorization is correct (setting aside for
the present the matter of the left-wing political groups), we must ask why
these groups failed to develop into “modern” political parties, as did their
Western European counterparts. In the mid-nineteenth century Greek polit¬
ical organizations and processes were much like those in Western Europe or
the United States. According to LaPalombara and Weiner, most explana¬
tions for party development fall into three general categories: institutional,
historical-situational, and developmental.4 Examining these explanations


126 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
in the light of the intervening variables suggested previously as particularly
important for understanding the Greek political system may explain the
failure of the antecedent political organizations in Greece to evolve into
modern political parties.
The institutional explanation for party development is offered by Max
Weber and Maurice Duverger, among others, and centers on the expansion
of suffrage.6 The notables occupying the representative institutions are com¬
pelled to organize the masses of new voters at the local level in order to
maintain their personal positions. In consequence, political organization
extends from the representative institutions into the new mass electorate. In
Greece, of course, suffrage was extended at the same time that representa¬
tive institutions were established, and the Greek elite was never threatened
by a sudden rush of new voters. The new voters were affiliated to individ¬
ual political leaders not through modern associational ties but through ties
of mutual obligation. The political forms and practices found in contempo¬
rary Greece, then, are in part merely extensions of the localized patron-client
relationships prevalent at the time representative institutions were inaugu¬
rated. The institution of universal male suffrage did not break up the tra¬
ditional clientage structures, but instead reinforced them, since votes could
be exchanged for personal favors. Greek political organizations throughout
the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth were in reality only cli¬
entage groups tied to a regional leader. Until the mid-nineteenth century
the Greek “parties” were labeled French, British, or Russian, depending on
their sources of foreign support.6 Each major political figure had a regional
base that was secured through ties of mutual obligations running to the
local level. In parliamentary politics after 1862, the parties were simply fac¬
tions named after their leaders and founders; there was little cohesion, no
continuity, and in consequence, governmental instability.7 Under these cir¬
cumstances, it does not seem strange that Greece failed to develop modern
political organizations.
Party development in Greece can also be explained in terms of historical
situations, especially the crises occasioned by problems of legitimacy, politi¬
cal integration, and political participation.8 As we have seen, universal male
suffrage came with the initial development of representative institutions;
thus there was never any crisis of participation. Integration did not initially
provoke a major crisis either, since for most individuals loyalty was to the
incumbents of political offices rather than to the institutions. Individuals
were automatically integrated into the political system by virtue of their
ties to political leaders. The most common political crisis in Western Eu


Political Parties I27
rope involved the legitimacy of representative institutions. If “the legitima¬
cy crisis is adequately resolved ... where parliaments are established and
the power of the monarchy diminished,... then the ‘parties’ formed may
not involve a broader public and may be more appropriately conceived of
as incipient parties.”11 The prevailing notion of modernity in the mid-nine¬
teenth century centered on the development of representative institutions.
Since this goal was relatively easy to achieve, and was compatible with tra¬
ditional Greek patron-client structures, there was no need to disturb exist¬
ing authority relationships in the society; consequently, there was no crisis
of legitimacy. The legitimacy crisis was solved for other reasons in Greece,
but the consequences were the same.
The Greeks did face some problems of legitimacy that did not have Euro¬
pean counterparts. The representative institutions and bureaucracy were
dominated by the hereditary politicians. True, loyalty to individual politi¬
cal figures could sometimes be transferred to political institutions. How¬
ever, any conflicts between individual leaders and client groups, under cer¬
tain conditions, could provoke conflict throughout the society and ulti¬
mately create doubts about the legitimacy of Greek political institutions.
In fact, a major crisis of this kind did occur in the early twentieth century.
At this time there were two major political constellations, much alike in
structure: one centered on King Constantine; the other was tied to Eleu
therios Venizelos, the prime minister. This conflict—in part personal, in
part constitutional, and in part over Greek foreign policy in World War I
—became a struggle over the form of the regime itself. The issue was
fought out through coups and countercoups during the 2o’s and 30’s, and
was eventually settled in the postwar period. A more current crisis of legiti¬
macy is related to a recent change in the prevailing conception of modern¬
ity. When economic criteria came to replace political institutions as the mea¬
sure of modernity, the existing political system lost legitimacy in the eyes
of some Greeks. The existing parties maintained themselves through pa¬
tronage politics; the behavior of politicians, the expectations of the elec¬
torate, and the operation of the bureaucracy all seemed to preclude eco¬
nomic development. Only a regime that could make decisions largely on
economic grounds, create a bureaucracy imbued with legal-rational norms,
and impose a measure of discipline on an unruly and favor-seeking elec¬
torate could be viewed as legitimate. This vision was responsible for the
creation of several minor parties devoted to total reform. It has motivated
some Greeks to look to left-wing political organizations and others to wel¬
come military intervention.


128 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Perhaps the most crucial factor in understanding Greek political party
development is the process of integration—the manner in which people are
moved to active participation in the political system. In Western Europe
class differences or religious deviance have been the chief causes of inte¬
gration crises, but this has not been the case in Greece. Instead, the prob¬
lems of integration center on those who are not bound to the political sys¬
tem by ties of mutual obligation to political leaders. Throughout much of
the nineteenth century most Greeks met their political requirements by
ties of this kind. By the end of the century certain elements, particularly
the urban and provincial professional classes, had come to feel that they
were excluded from the highest reaches of the political system. The “revo¬
lution” of 1909 brought these elements into politics. However, they did not
create a modern political structure, but instead established new clientage
networks of the traditional type. Politics continued to be characterized by
fluid attachments to factional groups. The “new” politicians intermingled
with the “old” politicians, and the traditional political patterns were pre¬
served.
Between the World Wars, gradual social mobilization loosened tradi¬
tional clientage ties to some extent, and many Greeks were left without
patrons. These people, together with the newly arrived refugees, could en¬
ter the more modern types of political organization.10 The activities of the
Communist organizations in Greece began at this time. More important,
the major political groups began to exhibit a certain dualism. Many voters
were now tied to their party leaders not through bonds of mutual obliga¬
tion or through intermediaries, but for other reasons. Sometimes their sup¬
port was given for policy reasons, sometimes because of the personal quali¬
ties of the leader himself. The refugees, especially, were loyal to Venizelos
personally but did not have individual patronage arrangements. They found
the indigenous population hostile, they were totally unfamiliar with the in¬
stitutions of the kingdom, and they did not have previous ties to the system.
After Venizelos left the political arena, some followed his associates; but
many transferred their allegiance to the various parties of the Left. Ever
since, there has been intense conflict between politicians with support based
on clientage networks and party leaders bent on acquiring mass support.
Thus in Greece the crisis of integration has stimulated the development of
more modern political structures.
The unevenness of the developmental process in any country is evident
in its political organization. It is misleading to assume that political organi¬
zations must be either modern or nonmodern. In Greece, the major politi


Political Parties 129
cal groups at the parliamentary level have some components that can be
viewed as modern and others that are traditional. In order to describe such
organizations, Fred Riggs has adapted a party typology suggested by David
Apter.11 Apter’s system uses two dimensions: a party can have either a
bureaucratic or a personal control structure, and its organization is either
durable or fragile. Riggs revises this typology by adding “polyarchic” as a
control structure between bureaucratic and personal and “persistent” as a
compromise between durable and fragile. A polyarchic party has a form of
collective personal leadership resting on consensus or on some voting pro¬
cedures; a persistent party’s life is measured in decades, whereas a fragile
party lasts for years and a durable party for generations. The basic com¬
ponents of Greek political organization, as we have seen, are the personal
clientage structures built up by local politicians; these may be described as
“polyarchic and persistent” organizations. However, most of the major par¬
ties also contain a “personal and fragile” component, made up of those
attracted by the demagogic qualities of particular leaders and unconnected
to the more traditional clientage structures. The Greek parliamentary arena
also contains a wide variety of other, less important groups. Some parties
have been “personal and durable,” no more than families with political
labels; others such as the Left are “bureaucratic and durable.”
FORMAL PARTY ORGANIZATION
The formal organization of contemporary Greek parties of the tradi¬
tional type has been influenced by several factors. First, the leaders of these
parties have some knowledge of political organization in more developed
countries, and often imitate these foreign institutions. Second, the effective¬
ness of the Greek Left is popularly attributed to its formal organization. At
least in the urban areas, the major parties must appeal to the same segment
of the population as the Left does; therefore some attention must be given
to influencing and organizing voters with instruments similar to those used
by the Left. Third, the political leaders have become sensitive to charges of
autocratic personal control of the parties. Formally democratic party organi¬
zations are an answer to this problem.
The organizational charts of the two major political groupings, the Na¬
tional Radical Union (Ethniki Rizospastiki Enosis, ERE) and the Center
Union (Enosis Kendrou, EK), were similar in the winter and spring of
1965.12 Both were created out of existing parties; incumbent deputies merely
changed party labels. In the case of the ERE, most adherents had been
members of the Greek Rally (led by Field Marshal Alexander Papagos un


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
130
til his death). The EK was formed by George Papandreou from the parlia¬
mentary remnants of several Center party groups; its statutes were approved
by a parliamentary group that attached itself to the new label. The para¬
mount influence of the founder and leader is indirectly evident in each for¬
mal party organization. The ERE has many agencies with specified func¬
tions and a detailed set of statutes, but it has no formal means of electing a
party leader. When the party was founded, ultimate authority was lodged
in a general assembly, which was to meet every two years to establish party
rules and policies. The assembly was to be a representative body, including
the members of the party actually in parliament, the defeated party candi¬
dates, and delegates from the various party agencies and local organiza¬
tions. The party statutes left the agenda for the general assembly in the
hands of the parliamentary group, and most authority was officially in the
hands of the leader. However, the whole matter is academic, since the gen¬
eral assembly has never been called in the history of the party. Likewise,
the original statutes of the Center Union included a provision for a con¬
gress whose representation was similar to that in the Radical Union. Here
again, although the Congress was to be the final authority in matters of
policy and party organization, it has never functioned. The ERE provided
for a general council of ten members elected from the general assembly to
determine party policy between meetings of the assembly. There was also
an executive committee that included the leader of the party, the secretary
general, and three party members. The blueprint for the EK included a
ten-man executive committee, as well as a ten-man organizational commit¬
tee presided over by the party leader. Both parties also planned to establish
disciplinary councils, but neither appears to have done so*
Both the ERE and the EK have been chronically short of funds, and
party finance committees are as formalistic as the rest of the party organi¬
zations. In the past there have been few wealthy party leaders. Panayotis
Kanellopoulos and George Papandreou, the respective leaders of the EK
and the ERE, are men of moderate means, although each has some follow¬
ers with substantial wealth. The party in power is financially better able to
campaign. During the Karamanlis period the ERE received large-scale
campaign contributions from the business community; it was charged that
state funds were also used. After the party’s defeat in the 1964 elections,
* Papandreou, the leader of the Center Union, did not use any formal party procedures in 1963 when he unilaterally expelled and reinstated Sophocles Venizelos, the leader of the largest party faction, for supporting the Pipinellis caretaker government in that year. After becoming prime minister, Papandreou expelled two influential members of the party’s left wing for de¬ clining to go along with his choice for president of parliament.


Political Parties I3I
however, Kanellopoulos noted its precarious financial position.13 Likewise,
some of the earlier Papandreou defeats might be partially attributed to a
lack of funds. In a system that runs on favoritism and patronage, most
funds naturally go where favors can be returned. The parties do collect a
small percentage of their deputies’ salaries, but this sum barely covers the
rent on party headquarters.
A special place is given to the parliamentary group in the formal organi¬
zations of both major parties; but in practice, these groups have no unity.
Deputies’ efforts in their home provinces are directed to personal rather
than party interests, and the party leader provides the rank-and-file depu¬
ties with little information. On broad issues, a statement of the party leader
may provide some guide; however, the average deputy must rely on the
daily newspaper for information about his party’s stand. Few deputies are
concerned with policy matters anyway; if a deputy feels required to speak
on a particular issue because of interests in his constituency or because pub¬
licity of some kind would be desirable, he can go to the party leadership for
advice and permission. Few meetings of the parliamentary delegation of
the ERE have been held, and deputies have rarely been consulted on policy
or strategy. In the EK, Papandreou, although acknowledging the parlia¬
mentary party when forced to, operated without regard to it when he could.
Until the crisis of 1965 the parliamentary membership was occasionally in¬
formed but rarely consulted. After 1965 Papandreou appointed a series of
policy committees from the parliamentary party. Whether these commit¬
tees actually operated is not known.
Before their suppression by the military in 1967, both parties had central
secretariats with offices for the party leader and his chief associates. In the
ERE the secretariat included formal sections responsible for organization,
policy, propaganda, and finance. During the author’s period of investigation
(1964-65), the ERE was out of power. Its formal organs had atrophied, and
Kanellopoulos and his associates were obviously operating without regard
to party formalities. The permanent party workers were really the personal
retainers of the leader. Other personnel gravitated to the newspapers and
enterprises closely identified with the top party leadership, and some party
functions were carried out by these organizations. When a party is in
power, the personnel and functions of its various sections are intermingled
with the government itself, particularly with the personal political bureau
of the premier. This was the case with the EK in 1964-65. In either case,
the party secretariat actually functions only at election time.
In theory, both parties had nationwide organizations, with units at the


U2 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
communal, provincial, and regional levels. However, permanent party cen¬
ters existed only in the major cities, where they were less party centers than
the headquarters of leading party figures. There were also formal national
organizations for various professions. Women, as a special group, were or¬
ganized only in the cosmopolitan setting of Athens and its suburbs. These
organizations come alive only at election time. Each party also has a youth
group centered around the universities in Athens and Thessaloniki, and
these appear to have some vitality throughout the year. Some criticisms di¬
rected at the “undemocratic” aspects of party organizadon have been stilled
by the existence of these organizations, but they have not been uniformly
effective in appealing to the modern sector of the population. Greek parties
still gain support and transact business mainly through their informal, per¬
sonal institutions.
SIGNIFICANT POLITICAL STRUCTURES
Within the significant Greek party structures, there is constant conflict
between the polyarchic-persistent and personal-fragile aspects of the party.
The chief conflict is at the level of the party leader, although the conse¬
quences of this tension are evident throughout the party. The paths to party
leadership are diverse. Since there is little continuity in party organization,
there are many opportunities for individual politicians to establish their own
parties. Between 1946 and 1964 no less than 95 parties and coalitions ap¬
peared on the electoral lists.14 This figure does not include splinter groups
that did not survive long enough to contest an election or minor parties
that did not actually enter the lists at the election. The major political par¬
ties that we have considered so far are both of recent origin. The prewar
Populists became the Greek Rally, and ultimately the National Radical
Union; the prewar Liberals splintered and reformed, eventually producing
the Center Union. These organizations are termed parties here only for the
sake of convenience. Despite some appearances to the contrary, they are pri¬
marily the followings of individual leaders. Moreover, their genealogies are
much more complex than this rendering indicates.
Some politicians in the Greek parliament create their own parties, usually
by enlisting sitting deputies or political friends, either for purely personal
motives or because of pressures from clients. They may seriously aim at
capturing the premiership, or may simply use a personal party to give lever¬
age when coalitions are formed or ministerial portfolios awarded. In other
instances, parties are established by men with personal followings outside


Political Parties 133
the parliamentary arena. For example, the minor personal parties formed
by Kanellopoulos in 1936 and 1950 included many of his former students
and associates at the University of Athens. Papandreou also had a following
outside the parliament, which included those recruited in his early political
career and others attracted to him during his premiership in 1944. In both
cases, his personal following was not the usual regionally based clientage
network. Field Marshal Papagos, the founder of the Greek Rally, used the
prominence he had gained outside of politics to create a party drawing on
both deputies and those not connected to existing political groups.
Since Greek parties have a polyarchical component, there is ample oppor¬
tunity for the monarch to intervene in parliamentary politics by naming as
prime minister someone other than the obvious leader of the winning party.
However, the premiership can propel a man to party leadership. Karaman
lis was appointed prime minister by the king at the death of Papagos; this
allowed him to refashion the Greek Rally into his own instrument, the Na¬
tional Radical Union. But taking control of a party in this way is difficult,
and a new leader must form the same personal ties as his predecessor. In
the Populist and Liberal parties between the wars, the political enterprise
was inherited by a close relative of the former leader, who could attempt to
continue the personal relationships that tied the parties together. In both
cases the heirs had problems; and eventually both parties splintered badly
and were absorbed by new political groups. The same problem was evident
in 1963, when Karamanlis left politics after the defeat of his party and ap¬
pointed his wife’s uncle, Panayotis Kanellopoulos, as his successor.
The character of the Greek political system makes the premiership and
the ministerial offices crucial to a man’s—or a party’s—success. These prizes
in the political system, the commanding heights of the state machinery, are
sought by many politicians. The premiership is a prize because the govern¬
mental resources that it controls can be bartered for political support. Since
a leader must cement a coalition of factions to his cause, he must rely upon
patronage and favors; and unless a politician can at least secure a ministe¬
rial position, his personal power will diminish as his supporters desert for
more accommodating patrons. For the traditional component in Greek poli¬
tics, appeals to principle have little effect. However, the leader seeking the
highest position must also express some interest in reform in order to pacify
that portion of the population described as “modern” yet still attracted to
the traditional political arena.
When asked about the qualifications necessary in a minister, a sample of


T34 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Table 6.1. Deputies’ Perceptions of Qualifications for Ministerial Office
Qualification
Number citing this qualification
Total (55)
Party in power (32) Out parties (23)
Support for government 4 2 2 Political strength 11 6 5 Favoritism 11 7 4 “Operators” 3 1 2 Administrative ability 6 5 1 Intelligence 12 10 2 Moral qualities 12 8 4 Specialization 18 11 7 Leadership 3 1 2 No answer 8 3 5
Note: Some gave more than one response. Five of the eight “no answers” are from former or present ministers.
55 deputies mentioned two broad categories: personal attributes and politi¬
cal backing (see Table 6.1). Although common wisdom suggests that any
cabinet is selected on the basis of political calculation, the responses of the
deputies most often listed desirable personal characteristics. However, po¬
litical considerations carried equal weight for both EK deputies and those
from out parties. In fact, EK deputies mentioned favoritism by the chief
more often than others did. The number in this sample is not large; per¬
haps the most one can say is that all deputies, irrespective of party, tend to
have the same perceptions of ministerial qualifications.
Although the cabinet ministers cannot be examined for most of these
qualities, the importance of a minister’s degree of specialization does seem
to be exaggerated. The Papandreou cabinets seem to have been formed with
little thought to subject specialization. In fact, it probably makes little differ¬
ence whether a minister has expertise in the field over which he is to pre¬
side, since few ministers see themselves as anything more than patronage
dispensers. It would seem that expertise and specialization develop after
appointment to the ministerial chair, rather than before. Political consider¬
ations, not expertise, are probably the major reasons for the initial appoint¬
ment.
For the most part, Greek party structures still do not reach the local level.
If political organizations are found here, they are usually the clientage
groups of local notables or individual deputies. A voter’s electoral decision


Political Parties *35
is largely based on personal ties to a local leader, and he may not even be
aware of the parliamentary faction that his vote will ultimately support.
The membership of all major party groupings is calculated by the number
of voters who supported each at the last election. There are very few actual
members of the national political parties. For example, in the spring of 1965
the total printing of the sporadic ERE party bulletin was 800 copies, includ¬
ing those that went to the 100 ERE deputies in parliament.
The provincial notables are the essential components of a deputy’s fol¬
lowing. They may be local politicians and lawyers, heads of families, or
merchants with influence among the villagers.16 Lower in the scale, the
village notables act as buffers between the rural inhabitants and the outside
world. This local leadership reflects qualities admired in rural culture, and
may also have, at least to a limited degree, urban values of education and
culture. However, an uneducated man who is a good farmer, with a good
family and good judgment, may attain prominence. Any professional per¬
son in the area is a potential leader. Commission merchants, bus drivers,
or, in fact, anyone who can provide a link between the village and the out¬
side world, may also have political influence. But the influence of most of
these people is not as durable as the patron-client tie found in the kumbaros
relationship or in the other connections based on some kind of mutual
obligation.
Local government officials can be a link between the community and the
higher political level, A priest or teacher may also act in this capacity;16
however, the prestige of the church and the teachers has steadily declined.
Local politicians are able to protect their neighbors from the vagaries of
the central government, but this is not their primary function. Tax farming
continues to provide certain local revenues; and the preparation of the tax
rolls is itself an operation that entails compromise and negotiation between
the village authorities and the peasant. The signature of the village presi¬
dent is needed on most government forms and certificates; he is also likely
to have influence with the agricultural police, the branch of authority that
the rural Greek most often deals with.17 All of these functions provide op¬
portunities to build a political following at the local level, which can be used
to extract favors at the next.
The provincial notables are tied to their deputy or to a provincial politi¬
cian in much the same way that the villagers are tied to them. It is only
through these relationships that the patronage and favors necessary to pre¬
serve the local clientage structure can be secured. There may be some shift


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
H6
ing of allegiance at the local level if a deputy cannot satisfy local demands.
However, most deputies have a broad enough base so that they do not have
to worry about shifts of small-scale leadership. The influence of a local
leader is based chiefly on his access to party or governmental leaders, which
will be useful in favor seeking. Hence those party leaders who are out of
power may find their followers deserting because local influentials cannot
wait for the pendulum to return their patrons to power. The problem of
access and the need for assistance are always present.
The ties that bind an individual deputy to a larger group or party parallel
the relationships at the lower levels. A deputy’s main concern is maintain¬
ing his personal position. In return for parliamentary support, he has access
to favors and patronage that can fulfill the demands of local clients. When
the defeat of their party blocks this access, some deputies begin switching
to the dominant political coalition. Since every break is in reality a personal
one, it often brings on vitriolic debate and extreme methods of discredita
tion.
Despite the limited opportunities for a political career in Greece, many
men are eager to obtain the positions that do exist. However, there are no
elective offices at the provincial level, and municipal offices have only spo¬
radically been filled by election. The only level that a beginner can reason¬
ably aspire to is the parliamentary one; but the attractiveness of a public
career outweighs the hopelessness of the aspiration. Between 1926 and 1964
over 10,000 different men appeared as candidates in the 14 parliamentary
elections (see Table 6.2).18 The opportunity for advancing in a personal
profession, the possibility of adding to personal political resources, and the
desire to gain the status and income of a “political man” seem to be motives
powerful enough to overcome harsh reality.
There is an inherent tension between the party chief and the other lead¬
ing figures in the major Greek political groups: the party leader is con¬
stantly seeking to make the party into his own instrument; his associates
try to retain its polyarchic aspects. The major parties have all originated
in the parliament, and the most important figures in them are deputies se¬
cure in their own constituencies, perhaps the bosses of regions. These men
have their own networks of support, which include constituents, fellow
deputies, and prominent figures in national society. For these deputies, pa¬
tronage and party-hopping are a way of life; they are attracted to a given
party by the hope of ministerial portfolios and the opportunities for patron¬
age that these offer. Naturally enough, they are less concerned with policy


Political Parties *37
Table 6.2. Parliamentary Seats and Candidates
Year
Seats open
Number of candidates
Candidates per seat
1926 279 2,025 7.3 1928 250 1,354 5.4 1932 250 1,496 6.0 1933 248 825 3.3 1935 300 808 2.7
1936 300 1,665 5.5 1946 354 1,540 4.3 1950 250 3,042 12.0
1951 258 1,881 7.0 1952 300 1,045 3.5 1956 300 976 3.0 1958 300 1,483 4.9 1961 300 990 3.3
1963 300 1,263 4.2 1964 300 909 3.0
or with social change than with the maneuvering that solidifies their own
positions. Other coalitions will often pay a price for defection; and the con¬
nections of any major parliamentary figure in the bureaucratic and social
worlds are extensive enough so that a momentary loss of access and patron¬
age will not immediately damage his position.
The ties that bind the leading figures to the party chief are primarily
personal, and depend on the satisfactory performance of mutual obligations.
When the party is in power, these are the individuals who must be accorded
cabinet places, which they generally use to bestow individual and group
favors, building up a national support that will hopefully lead to the pre¬
miership itself. The ministers determine candidatures and are the arbiters
of party affairs in their own provinces. Since they are both the necessary
supporters and the chief rivals of the premier, he tends to keep major po¬
litical questions in his personal grasp. Cabinet discussions and planning did
not seem to be very common in either the Karamanlis or Papandreou gov¬
ernments.
A second group in the party is more properly the possession of the party
leader himself; this is the personal-fragile aspect of party organization. In
this group one finds the clientage network of the chief: the new deputies
who have not had time to consolidate their positions; the party stalwarts
from the marginal districts (elected more because of the influence of the
party leader than through personal connections in the district); and those


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
138
individual voters who have been clients of the leader in the past. Deputies
from the large urban districts will also be likely to follow the leader of the
party, since voters in these areas are less likely to have clientage ties to par
ticular politicians. Candidates in these competitive districts are selected by
the party leader, even though some pretense at local control is kept. Since the
supply of potential candidates always outstrips the number of places on the
ticket, confusion results; and the leader, as the only source of favors, is able
to keep control in his own hands.
Those who occupy the political offices can buy votes with their patronage,
and even have the opportunity to create political resources by instituting
new programs and by promoting restrictive legislation. Despite these ad¬
vantages, no party chief or premier can ever hope to satisfy everyone, or
even a majority of those with demands. Immediately upon victory, a win¬
ning party tends to draw deputies and influential to its side, all of them
anxious to share in the new distribution of resources. Each deputy, par¬
ticularly in the governing party, is confronted with an almost unlimited
number of requests, which are channeled to the ministers and often to the
premier himself. When political resources run short, as always happens,
some ministers and some deputies are inevitably favored or appear to be
favored over others; this results in disappointments and defections. Such
lapses from party discipline may call forth policy statements from the party
leaders; however, the rhetoric merely hides the feeling that obligations have
not been fulfilled.
Eventually, a government party is faced with defeat: the number of de¬
mands outstrips the government’s resources; voters become tired and frus¬
trated; and the parliamentary support of the leadership grows weaker. Basi¬
cally, the seeds of disintegration are the same for all parties. In defeat, only
the chief party figures are likely to secure parliamentary seats. That part of
the party properly belonging to the party leader is swept away; and unless
he has built up ties and clientage relationships throughout the society, so
that he can survive a long period without cabinet office, he will continue
to lose parliamentary clients. In most cases, the party leader in the out party
is merely a coequal part of the polyarchic leadership.
KARAMANLIS AND PAPANDREOU
Until 1956 Greek politics did not diverge from this pattern. The long
tenure of Constantine Karamanlis is exceptional. However, Karamanlis
had several advantages in combating the centrifugal tendencies of his par


Political Parties *39
liamentary party. For one thing, his accession to the premiership was a sur¬
prise. Although he had substantial ministerial experience, he was not count¬
ed as a possible successor to Field Marshal Papagos. Since his tenure was
expected to be short, some of the leading members of the Greek Rally re¬
turned to other parties. Hence Karamanlis could use the government ma¬
chinery to build a personal following at the same time that his leading op¬
ponents were opting out of his organization. The ERE candidates in 1956
included not only new faces recruited by the premier, but also many Center
deputies who had been enticed into the new political organization. The
ERE changed the electoral system to its advantage, as is customary in Greek
politics. This resulted in a massive failure of the opposition parties; and
many of the new ERE deputies elected by this maneuvering had no real
constituency support and had to rely on Karamanlis himself.
Karamanlis was faced with several mass defections from his parliamen¬
tary party. Ordinarily these larger departures would have brought about
the disintegration of the ERE. But Karamanlis was fortunate in that his
premiership coincided with an expansion of political resources, as indicat¬
ed by a dramatic increase in public revenue and expenditure.19 Although
American aid was coming in less rapidly, Karamanlis was in fact reaping
the political benefit of past aid.20 The public services were undergoing a
rapid expansion, providing opportunities for politically advantageous ap¬
pointments in both the government departments and the public corpora¬
tions. The economic boom itself, particularly in the realm of public works
and urban real estate, also provided many useful political opportunities. For
the first time, a Greek premier had vast sums to distribute; and the per¬
sonal and fragile components of the party overshadowed the polyarchic and
persistent, at least for a time.
These conditions existed until just before the elections of 1961. In those
elections, the Karamanlis government fell back on the military and security
forces, as well as private organizations of the extreme Right, to stay in
power.21 The general outlines of the operation were widely known shortly
after the elections; the specific details were exposed by the EK after its
assumption of power in 1963. “Operation Pericles,” as it was known, in¬
volved the chief of the armed services, as well as special agencies, e.g., the
Greek Central Intelligence Agency. Ultimately, these electoral methods, a
slight economic turndown, and an eventual diminution of political re¬
sources alienated too many voters and politicians. The government attitude
toward the Left and toward moderate elements of the Center encouraged


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
I4O
police irresponsibility and also served to encourage pressures and intimida¬
tion on the part of other right-wing groups. The Battalions of National
Security (TEA), home-guard units based in the countryside, used every
opportunity to harass their opponents. The celebrated Lambrakis affair
(the murder of Gregory Lambrakis, a leftist deputy, by a member of a
right-wing organization) and the subsequent inactivity of the police and
the Ministry of Justice were typical of the internal situation in Greece.
The ERE’s opposition, composed primarily of politicians with indepen¬
dent power bases, was particularly subject to internal dissensions. The major
opposition group was George Papandreou’s EK; and from this party’s for¬
mation in 1961 to its eventual victory in 1963 there was constant conflict
between the traditional leaders, who comprised the polyarchic and per¬
sistent part of the party, and Papandreou, who represented a personal-fragile
type of party leadership. Papandreou, although a long-time parliamentary
figure, preferred not to operate in a parliamentary milieu. He had great
faith in his own ability and vision, and was gifted with a dynamic oratorical
style that made him particularly effective in mass rallies. Papandreou in¬
tended to be in command, and he sought to achieve this by forcing a total
confrontation with the government. This would make it unnecessary to
compromise with moderate elements from the ERE, and it would pull
into parliament many deputies personally dependent on him.
The modern aspect of Papandreou’s appeal was evident in his campaign
techniques. In 1956, for example, he included the United Democratic Left
(Eniaia Demokratiki Aristera, EDA) in his center coalition in an effort
to secure an electoral majority. Traditional politicians had been conscious
of the personal political advantages to be gained from the patronage implicit
in the development of a communications and transportation infrastructure,
but had not capitalized on the existence of this structure for larger political
purposes. After 1961, Papandreou and his associates traveled throughout
the provinces on the newly built roads, reaching areas where politicians had
seldom been seen even at election time. These rural tours were accompanied
by rallies in the major cities. A “back to the people” mood captivated a large
segment of the urban youth, and was impressive to the rural population as
well. The style and extent of this campaigning actually did contribute to
the EK’s eventual victory.
Whatever the reasons, the EK was successful in 1963 and 1964. Once in
power, it soon displayed the tensions inherent in Greek political organiza¬
tion. In 1965 the party split, and a Center-Right coalition government was


Political Parties 141
formed, mostly because of the conflict between the traditional polyarchic
and persistent elements with secure power bases and the new men loyal
to Papandreou alone. The majority of those defecting to the new Liberal
Democratic Center (Philelefthron Demokratikon Kendrou, PDK) had
secure parliamentary seats and were not dependent on personal ties with the
premier for their election. Although the basic causes for this and other
political crises lie in the extraparliamentary level of politics, the failure of
Papandreou meant the temporary resurgence of the traditional mode of
Greek parliamentary life.
CHARACTERISTICS OF POLYARCHIC-PERSISTENT ORGANIZATIONS
In the Greek context, polyarchic-persistent political organizations are
characterized by a diverse and fluid membership, uncoordinated electoral
activity, and a tendency to avoid facing any concrete issue. They are diffi¬
cult to describe if one is limited to the usual labels applied to political groups
in Greece—republican, royalist, Right, Center, or Left. For example, the
republican and royalist labels were somewhat descriptive in the interwar
period because they signified personal attachments to political leaders. By
the end of the war, though, this cleavage was disappearing, at least between
candidates of the two major political groupings. Tables 6.3 and 6.4 illustrate
the political backgrounds of parliamentary candidates in the eight elections
from 1946 to 1963, including, for each year only those who had run before.*
The elections of 1946 and 1950 were replays of the 1936 election. In both
cases, a proportional representation system was used. The seats were divided
among the competing parties on the basis of the proportion of votes each
received. There were three allocations of seats: the first in 38 electoral
districts, the second in nine regional districts, and the third for the country
as a whole. The relatively small percentage of candidates moving from the
Center and from minor parties to the Right and the minimal group moving
from the Right and minor parties to the Center, illustrate the extent of the
old monarchist-republican cleavage in the postwar period. However, the
major party categories, even in the 1946 election, really included a variety of
factional groups, which banded together to compete in the election but
split once they entered parliament. Moreover, the election of 1946 was held
under abnormal circumstances: some potential parties offered no candi¬
dates; and those that did had difficulty filling all their lists. The Commu
* The data for these and other tables analyzing election results were obtained from the returns published by the Greek government after each election.


142 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Table 6.3. Political Backgrounds of Candidates
from "Mainstream” Right Parties, 1946-63
Year
Number of candidates
Parties of previous candidatures
Right
Minor Right Center Left Minor
1946 211 68.3% 9.6% 17.8% - 4.3% 1950 183 80.2 4.4 7.1 - 8.2 1951 448 32.9 24.4 36.9 - 10.2
1952 273 45.7 7.1 43.1 - 4.1 1956 241 33.0 19.4 43.4 •4% 2.5 1958 328 38.3 22.2 37.0 - 2.5 1961 251 41.4 19.9 35.8 .4 2.4
1963 242 46.1 21.0 33.0 — 
nists did not contest the elections, instead claiming that all who abstained
favored them.
In the elections of 1950 candidates were distributed among many more
parties; as would be expected, each party had a large number of men run¬
ning for the first time. The extreme fragmentation meant that there was
little party switching. In the 1951 election, and later, many more candidates
switched parties. This was in part due to the changed electoral system. The
proportional representation system was still used, but only parties polling
at least 17 per cent of the total votes cast in the country could take part in
the second allocation of seats. There were other refinements, all designed
to reduce the number of competing political groups. In 1951 the major Right
Table 6.4. Political Backgrounds of Candidates
from “Mainstream” Center Parties, 1946-63
Parties of previous candidatures
Year
Number of candidates Center
Minor Center Right Left Minor
1946 297 64.9% 12.9% 13.7% — 8.5% 1950 259 62.2 13.9 12.5 1.1% 10.3 1951 565 70.0 11.0 8.9 1.9 8.2 1952 252 73.8 8.7 9.1 4.0 4.4
1956 271 54.4 23.3 11.5 7.8 3.0 1958 432 46.1 12.5 19.2 2.8 19.4
1961 246 45.7 21.0 20.3 4.0 9.3 1963 231 47.7 6.0 17.6 10.7 18.0


Political Parties T43
party had candidates with consistent Right backgrounds, with mixed Right
and minor party backgrounds, and with Center backgrounds in almost
equal strength. In 1952 the Greek Rally had almost equal numbers of can¬
didates from the Right, minor Right, and Center categories. Although an
analysis of the 1964 election is not included here, impressionistic evidence
leads one to believe that party membership was still fluid.
The candidates for Center parties have had less diversified political back¬
grounds, partly because of excessive fragmentation in the Center. Most
often, the fragments have combined in electoral coalitions. In such in¬
stances there are usually enough candidates from among coalition partners
to occupy all the places on the consolidated list, and there is little room
for outsiders. More important, from 1952 until 1963 the right-wing govern¬
ment was in power, and there was little incentive for right-wingers to join
the Center. Those who did switch were mostly unsuccessful rightist candi¬
dates.
We must conclude that assigning conventional labels to Greek political
groups is not particularly meaningful.22 Such a typology seems to be a cor¬
rect description of parliamentary seating arrangements and little else. The
shifting membership of the major political groups indicates a discontinuous
and issueless political process. Deputies, ministers, and candidates wander
from one group to the next in search of patronage and favors or because of
personality clashes with factional leaders; the only common link between
members in any party is the personal tie to the party chief or one of the other
key figures. Political parties are much like other Greek secondary associa¬
tions in this regard.
The political manipulation of the electoral laws is an important part of
Greek party politics. In particular, the long postwar period of Right gov
vernments produced electoral legislation that discriminated against the
Center and the Left. We have already mentioned the various proportional
systems used from 1946 to 1951. In 1952 the system of proportional represen¬
tation was abandoned. Greece was divided into 99 electoral districts, with a
varying number of seats allotted to each; the party getting a plurality in any
single district received all of the seats. Ostensibly, this system was adopted
to encourage the development of a two-party system and to provide one
party with the necessary majority in parliament to form a stable govern¬
ment. Naturally, the constituencies were drawn to give the utmost advan¬
tage to candidates joining the Greek Rally. Since 1952, electoral legislation
has become much more complex. The electoral law prepared for the 1956


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
I44
elections, for example, set up three types of constituencies, each with a dif¬
ferent electoral system. In constituencies returning up to three members
(usually the rural districts dominated by political notables), all deputies
came from the party winning an absolute majority. In constituencies with
4-10 delegates (most often the larger provinces, where there was some
party competition), the party with the most votes got 70 per cent of the seats,
and the second party 30 per cent. Finally, in constituencies with more than
10 members (the metropolitan areas where the Left was strong), a straight
proportional system applied. In 1958, the proportional system used in 1951
was again adopted, although with revisions. To share in the second allo¬
cation of seats, individual parties had to receive 25 per cent of the votes cast
nationally, coalitions of two parties had to secure 35 per cent, and coalitions
of more than two parties had to receive 40 per cent. The provisions con¬
cerning coalitions severely penalized the Center, and in effect made it pos¬
sible for the Left to become the second largest party in parliament. The
same system was used in 1961 although the minimum proportion of votes
needed to qualify for the second distribution of seats was reduced to 15
per cent for single parties, 25 per cent for two-party coalitions, and 30 per
cent for coalitions with more than two parties. The elections of 1963 and
1964 were held under similar systems of reinforced proportional represen¬
tation.
Even if he belongs to one of the major parties, each Greek deputy must
rely on his own resources in campaigning. The party really does not exist
as a unit, at least as far as assistance to individual candidates is concerned.
The party leader may sometimes tour the country and greet the voters to¬
gether with the local candidates on his list, much as an American presi¬
dential aspirant travels from state to state and sponsors local and national
candidates. The party may also supply a local candidate with pictures of the
chief and general party literature; however, he must finance personalized
materials himself. In exceptional cases the party may supply funds for local
campaigns; but the recipient is expected to repay the loan if he is elected.
Usually, each candidate must use his personal fortune or seek funds from
his clients and friends in the community. In most electoral situations, the
voter has only one choice; he is not called upon to support a party list. In a
district that usually elects a number of men from one party and few from
another, the candidates of a given party may do some campaigning together.
But in general a united effort is rare, since each candidate knows that he is
running not only against other party lists but also against the other candi¬
dates of his own party. This being the case, he is most likely to campaign


Political Parties J45
Table 6.5. Success Ratios and Party Affiliation
Candidates by success ratio
Party and year .100 to .400 .401 to .700 .701 to 1.00
ERE: 1958 15.0% 45.0% 39.9%
1964 5.0 31.0 64.0 PK, 1958 8.3 38.8 52.7
EK, 1964 30.5 33.6 35.9 PADE, 1958 30.0 50.0 20.0
ELK, 1958 25.0 - 75.0
KP, 1964 20.0 40.0 40.0 EDA: 1958 34.5 38.2 27.2
1964 18.2 40.9 40.9
Note: This table does not include deputies who won the first time they were candidates.
by stressing his personal ties with the party leader, which would allow him
to offer patronage if he is elected.
Affiliation with particular political groups is related to long-term political
success in Greece, but it is not a party’s organization or program that aids
its members. The deputies coming from an area that gives substantial sup¬
port to a particular political group have longer tenures or greater “success
ratios” when they run than those coming from the less secure party areas.
This means that the governing party will have more deputies with modest
success ratios than will the minority political grouping, since the latter will
return deputies only from its strongest areas. The percentage of ERE dep¬
uties in 1958 falling into each of the three success ratio categories in Table
6.5 is instructive when compared with the 1964 distribution. The Liberals
and their descendant, the EK, also show a change, but in the opposite direc¬
tion. The steadier EDA figures indicate that the party leadership does keep
a core group in parliament, often by shifting promising deputies from the
more marginal districts to the large urban districts.
Electoral success and long parliamentary tenure is also associated with
geographic area. Table 6.6 indicates that deputies from areas such as the
Cyclades, Crete, Old Greece, the Ionian Islands, and the Epirus do have
greater success ratios than those from elsewhere. The most important factor
is the nature of political competition in the particular region. Most of the
areas with high ratios have long-standing affiliations with one of the major
political groups—or rather, long-standing affiliations with individuals or
families prominent in the group. The relationship between success and
party area must be modified by the observation that in some areas of one


146 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Table 6.6. Success Ratios of Candidates, by Regions
Candidates by success ratio
Area .101 to .400 .401 to .700 .701 to 1.00
Athens-Piraeus 1958 18.7% 34.9% 43.0%
1964 15.7 45.2 39.1
Old Greece
1958 9.9 43.3 46.6 1964 20.6 23.5 55.8
Peloponnesus
1958 21.7 39.1 39.1
1964 23.2 37.1 39.4
Thessaly
1958 43.6 26.1 30.4
1964 18.5 40.7 40.7
Crete
1958 13.4 46.7 40.0 1964 31.6 10.6 57.9
Epirus
1958 18.2 36.3 45.3
1964 7.1 42.9 50.0
Macedonia
1958 21.7 53.3 23.4
1964 22.7 33.3 43.9
Aegean Islands
1958 - 59.9 40.0 1964 18.6 24.9 56.1
Ionian Islands
1958 14.3 28.6 57.2 1964 33.3 22.2 44.4
Cyclades
1958 - 20.0 80.0 1964 20.0 - 80.0
Thrace
1958 - 30.8 40.0 1964 30.8 30.8 38.5
Note: Table does not include those elected on first candidature.


Political Parties 147
party dominance (Crete and parts of the Peloponnesus, for example), the
dominance itself makes for a factionalism that may displace an incumbent.
The pattern of political recruitment in the traditional sector of Greek
politics depends on the fluctuation of party fortunes. Parties with a history
of success generally have few places for new candidates (see Table 6.7). If
places are available, those offering a chance of victory are most likely to go
to relatives and clients of the party leaders, although some may go to as¬
pirants who have already run unsuccessfully with some minor party but
have made a creditable showing. The new recruits to the major parties do
not have a spectacular record of success, mostly because they usually run
in areas where the party fortunes are lowest. The percentage of new entrants
in an election is a good indicator of a party’s status: major political groups
have only a few new faces; minor parties offer a high percentage of new
candidates at each election.
The Populists (LK), the Liberals (PK), and the GLRE led by General
Georgios Kondylis were major political forces in 1936. The Free Opinion
Party of General Ioannis Metaxas (EF), the Democratic Alliance of Alex¬
ander Papanastassiou and George Papandreou (DS), and the Populist
offshoot led by Sotirios Cotzamanis (MK) were parties with a regional
complexion. The National Union Party of Panayotis Kanellopoulos (EE)
was a true minor party, a political group founded outside the existing polit¬
ical structure; the Greek Communist Party (KKE) and the Agrarian
Party (Agrot) fit into this category also. The 1946 election was abnormal
because it followed a long interruption in normal political life. As might be
expected, all political groups had significant percentages of new recruits.
The new National Party (Ethnikon Komma Ellados, EKE), was largely
a regional party, with many members who had been active in one of the
guerrilla organizations. It was made up primarily of new candidates.
The pattern in 1950 was more normal. The older parties, the Populists
and the Liberals, had the lowest percentage of new people. The new national
parties—such as George Papandreou’s Party (KGP), the EPEK of Nicholas
Plastiras and Emmanuel Tsouderos, and the expanded EKE of Napoleon
Zervas—had more than 60 per cent new entrants among their candidates,
as did several other minor parties. More ephemeral organizations, such as
the EPEL and the “X” party of General George Grivas, had more than 70
per cent new candidates. The Left also emerged in 1950, as the Democratic
Front (DP); it had 71 per cent new entrants, indicating that the cadres of
the prewar period had been largely replaced.


Table 6.y. Percentage of New Candidates by Party
£ °.
bo ON
O \£> o in
bb ON
O in
be O
<”
G
8uGO
S
b) 2
w o <Lu> r—1 <1 fN Du oo <LU> Tf <uU i-H <uu, oq
vd ~B 'o W ^ 'S ^ ■5 on VO CN
oo O *" s ^ o TM o 00 o ^ 6 OO
co
Xo
s oo
On
CO
w °°
S3
1-5
W Ph W
PP<hh
CN
ON iinn
NoO
hJ
o
o a, rr!
►h in
a, 2
*£
i-5
<unaUJ
it3o .gs
5S
2
cSj
".CgTJ
S
W (VJ
H*H T(
^ >o
Ui
Ph <=>.
Qn
< Q H
<! o w ^ o < o
N“ Q oo Q oi •
^ r—* Q in
T—1 W W ^ < N
Ph W N
WN "Q ON
W
CO On
n t''
I—1 <V-N
in
Ph (7>
W Ph
in Ph in Ph OO
CN o in O ON
tN vo m w Q
60.0
EPEK
62.2
EPEK
32.6
*4
< Ph
o O $4
PEK
7.7
VO Ph CCON Ph CNN" w Ph
vq O Ui IN
CCNN w OO w CCNN
w
Ss
o
)—*I <5N
W
§•
no
M °°
1 VO
H-l CN
T ON
H-l C^J
co ^
m rv*oo
co o W ON w
^Otn" W o
Ph o
W CN
Sen
vd W- W
ro On
ovOnon
vNoON
iOn
ON iOnN
CN vo OO m
in in m vo vo
ON ON ON ON ON


Political Parties M9
In 1951 the Greek Rally (ES), led by Field Marshal Papagos, made its
appearance. Strictly speaking, it was not a very new party since it was
peopled largely with old, established political figures. In 1952 and 1956, with
the electoral system prejudiced against smaller parties, the older political
groups had even fewer places for new candidates. Only the minor parties
and the category of independents continued to be relatively open. In 1958,
the two major party organizations, the ERE and the PK, continued to offer
few openings. The pattern since 1958 has generally been that of few open¬
ings in the major parties, except in areas of continued party weakness; the
Left and the minor parties, by contrast, continue to have a considerable
turnover. For the Left, at least, this seems to be a party policy designed to
make the party appear as democratic as possible.
A candidate with political experience has a definite electoral advantage.
As Table 6.8 indicates, only once in the period 1936-63 did the new entrants
for any party do better than the experienced candidates. In the major parties,
newcomers are particularly unsuccessful; the vacancies that exist are at the
bottom of the electoral list or in areas where the party leadership does not
expect to win. In a minor party nearly everyone, with the exception of
specific leaders, has an equal chance of losing, and the difference between
the success of the two groups is not as great. Even powerful family con¬
nections will not enable a young man to succeed on most minor party tickets.
Of course, anyone with connections is more likely to find a place on a more
promising electoral list. The major party groups have few openings and
the chance of victory for a new entrant is less than that for the party as a
whole. However, the open positions are eagerly sought. First, the chance
for success, though small, is greater than that for similar places on minor
party lists. Second, even a defeated candidate acquires political resources
that can be used to obtain patronage from the national leaders. He may even
acquire the rudiments of a personal clientage organization that can assist
him in the next election.
According to V. O. Key, one feature of a factional political system is the
relative absence of meaningful issues in the electoral struggle. He argues
that issues cause the formation of competing groups, and that competing
groups raise new issues.23 In the Greek case, the absence of issues other than
office-holding at the beginning has largely continued, and an issueless poli¬
tics prevails at the parliamentary level. The unstable coalitions, character¬
istic of factional systems, are held together by patronage and favors. The


i5° THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Table 6.8. Relative Success of New Entrants and
Politically Experienced Candidates
Party and year
New candi¬ dates elected
Experi¬ enced candi¬ dates elected
Differ¬ ence
Party and year
New candi¬ dates elected
Experi¬ enced candi¬ dates elected
Differ¬ ence
1936 (1951, cont.) LK 5.7% 30.8% 25.1% PK 0.0% 43.1% 43.1% GLRE 3.6 27.7 23.1 EDA 9.7 3.8 -5.9 PK 26.6 49.7 23.1 LK 1.3 4.9 3.6 DS 1.7 6.3 4.6 Other 0.0 3.8 3.8 KKE 0.9 14.8 13.9 1952
EF 0.0 6.8 6.8 ES 74.1 83.0 8.9
MK 0.0 16.0 16.0 EPEK-PK 4.8 19.9 15.1
Agrot 0.0 16.7 16.7 Other 0.0 5.7 5.7
Other 0.0 12.0 12.0
1956 1946 ERE 38.0 59.3 21.3 HPE 49.6 64.0 14.4 DE 27.6 45.7 18.1
EPE 16.5 25.1 6.6 Other 0.0 10.3 10.3 PK 34.8 36.5 1.7
EKE 6.5 21.2 14.7 1958
Other 2.6 19.1 16.5 ERE 35.0 50.0 15.0
PK 0.0 15.5 15.5 1950 PADE 0.0 5.0 5.0 LK 19.6 40.5 20.9 EDA 15.8 41.5 25.7
PK 10.0 27.2 17.2 ELK 0.0 4.8 4.8 EPEK 12.9 26.6 13.7 1961
KGP 0.6 40.0 39.4 ERE 38.9 62.5 23.6 DP 7.0 26.8 19.8 EK 12.9 37.8 14.7
PAP 4.1 9.5 5.4 PAME 4.1 10.7 6.6 MEA 0.9 6.1 5.2
EKE 0.0 9.1 9.1 1963 ERE 17.2 50.4 33.2 1951 EK 17.6 54.5 36.9 ES 18.4 40.5 22.1 EDA 0.7 16.5 15.8 EPEK 10.4 29.7 19.3 KP 0.7 0.8 0.1
leadership, even if it is concerned about programs and policies, is forced by
the pressures of maintaining power to be primarily concerned with the
distribution of existing resources. Since a politician is tied to specific indi¬
viduals, he cannot combine interests into any single universal policy. In
Greece, major policies have always been suggested and implemented out¬
side the parliament. And in most cases, there has been little debate and little
thought given to the consequences of legislative activity. The matter of
differences in party attitudes on issues was explored in my interviews with


Political Parties I5I
Table 6.9. Perceptions of Party Difference, by Party Background
EK (32) ERE (17)
Difference KP (2) EDA (4) New
Former Old Right New Old
Former Center
Historical and leadership - 1 1 EK more pro¬ gressive and democratic - 11 11 1 EK soft on national security - 4 4 No difference 2 1 - — - 1 3 2 Unclassified - 1 - 1 1 - 2 No answer - 2 1 5 - - 
55 of the 300 Greek deputies serving in 1964-65 (see Table 6.9). The small
size of the sample does not allow one to make definitive statements, but the
general atmosphere of issueless politics is sustained.
The two deputies from the Progressive Party (Komma Proodeftikon,
KP), a minor faction made up of the small nationwide following of its
leader, Spyros Markezinis, could see no real difference between the major
parties. In fact, they could not see any difference between themselves and
the major parties—except, as one said, that the two major parties had gov¬
erned, and “we hope to govern.” The Progressive Party has formed a wide
variety of campaign alliances, without respect to the formal programs of its
allies. Successful Progressive candidates are often enticed into other parties
after election; conversely, dissatisfied deputies of the major parties some¬
times find a place in the KP for a time. Although the deputies themselves
often mentioned their personal ties to Markezinis, their actual election
seemed to result from personal ties at the local level, or from other special
local conditions. Four EDA deputies were also interviewed: one suggested
that there was no difference between parties, one evaded the question, and
two declined to answer at all.
The EK deputies who were interviewed fell into three groups: those
newly elected, those with a consistent Center background, and those with
political experience in both the Right and the Center. The first category
had the closest ties to the leader, since most of them represented marginal
districts; they depended on his personal influence, as well as his demagogic
appeals to the voters. The other two categories had some independent po


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
I52
litical strength. They had their own clientage organizations, and could use
their own lateral ties to the bureaucracy to satisfy local demands, without
working through the party leader. In the group with Right-Center back¬
grounds, the ability to switch from one party to another denoted firm local
ties. When interviewed, the newly elected deputies repeated the major state¬
ments of the last political campaign—namely, that the Center Union was
more internally democratic, and that it supported civil liberties. Deputies
with consistent EK backgrounds gave the same general response. However,
several of these, although declining to answer the question specifically,
made other comments implying that there was little real difference between
parties. Only two EK deputies in the third category were included in the
sample, and one of these also felt that most parties were essentially similar.
The 17 ERE deputies in the sample fell into two categories: those with
consistent Right backgrounds and those with mixed backgrounds. The
group of the party directly tied to the party chief was minimal, since the
party had been defeated, and since its founder and leader was in voluntary
exile. The ERE, for practical purposes, was reduced to those deputies with
strong local followings. The single newly elected deputy could see no differ¬
ence in policy between the major parties; three of the ten old-line Right
deputies and two of the six deputies with mixed backgrounds felt the same.
The other major sentiment expressed was that the EK was soft on the issue
of national security; four of the consistent ERE group and four in the group
of deputies with mixed political backgrounds volunteered this response.
It is significant that the political issues mentioned most often by the dep¬
uties of the major parties—national security by the ERE and democracy or
civil liberties by the EK—were the obverse of one another. Moreover, these
issues were current electoral slogans; they were almost automatic responses.
When pressed, few deputies could add content to the slogan. Perhaps even
more indicative of the artificial character of the issues was the fact that by
the time of the interviews it was quite apparent that the EK was no more
“democratic” internally than the ERE. It was similarly apparent that de¬
spite the eased atmosphere and new attitudes toward the Left, the Papan
dreou government had not taken any important steps to change the legal
status of the Communist Party or the many political prisoners. Since this
was the basic problem that both slogans referred to, the responses of most
deputies actually showed little concern with real issues.
Only two deputies suggested that there were historical reasons for party
differences. It would seem that the bitter cleavage of the interwar period has


Political Parties *53
largely disappeared, and that Greek politics are once again “normal.” The
major concerns of the postwar period have been reconstruction and social
reform, although the nature of the latter has not been explicitly spelled out
by any major party. By and large, the major difference between the Right
and the Center, especially in the last few years, has been in their divergent
attitudes toward the Left and its place in the Greek political arena. This
difference stems from factors outside the traditional political level.
POLICY ORIENTATIONS, I 955 — 65
Cyprus has been the chief policy problem for Greece since 1955, regard¬
less of the party in power.24 The responses of both Karamanlis and Papan
dreou to the West, represented by the NATO alliance, and to other nations,
especially to Greece’s Balkan neighbors, were largely contingent on the
status of the Cyprus controversy. It is misleading to assume that Karamanlis
consistently sacrificed national aims to placate the NATO allies, or that the
fall of the Papandreou government occurred because of its willingness to
sacrifice the Western alliance for settlement of the Cyprus question along
lines desired by Greece. After 1952, the Greek Rally, which included many
of the leading figures in the later Karamanlis administration, had worked
to smooth relations with other Balkan states, including the traditional ene¬
my, Turkey. Papagos, as premier, had also tried to find a way out of the
Cyprus imbroglio. However, relations with Turkey and Britain deterior¬
ated steadily, culminating in the Istanbul riots against the Greeks in Sep¬
tember 1954, a month before the death of Papagos and the accession of Kara¬
manlis. The United States remained neutral, and relations with her became
tense after this episode. Events on Cyprus prevented any reconciliation, re¬
gardless of the feeling in Athens or elsewhere.
Karamanlis barely won the elections of 1956, in which the opposition con¬
centrated on foreign-policy issues. For the next three years, since settling
the dispute “within the family” seemed unlikely, Greece sought “friend¬
ships increasingly outside the circle of the Western alliance.”25 This expan¬
sion of contacts, characterized by a cultivation of many of the new postwar
states in the Middle East, was an effort to get the Cyprus issue settled favor¬
ably to Greece within the United Nations. On several occasions the Greek
government was not responsive to minor American requests; moreover,
Greece signed new trade agreements with the Soviet Union and Poland.
Cyprus was again a major issue in the 1958 election, and again Karamanlis
won. After this election Karamanlis and the Greek Cypriots bowed to the


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
I54
inevitable. The independence of Cyprus was assured by the Zurich Agree¬
ments of 1959. Relations with the Western powers improved, and ties with
other states began to weaken. Karamanlis’s opposition, of course, claimed
that needless concessions had been made to foreign pressures, at the expense
of national aspirations.
The elections of 1963 and 1964 did not involve the Cyprus question, and
the reasons for the Papandreou victory lie elsewhere. However, the constitu¬
tional structure agreed upon in 1959 proved unworkable; and in February
1964 Cyprus erupted once again. The reaction of the Papandreou govern¬
ment was a familiar one. A policy of good relations with Balkan neighbors
was initiated. An accord was signed with Bulgaria, and Papandreou paid
a state visit to Belgrade. Once again, official relations with the major West¬
ern powers became cooler, and minor indications of dissatisfaction were
evident.
The actual policies of both administrations were not dissimilar. The op¬
position, whether EK or ERE, could always decry the handling of foreign
policy issues; but once in power, it made no major changes. Foreign-policy
options were limited externally by the major allies; moreover, the Greek
government was never able to control the actions of Greeks on Cyprus. The
specific events culminating in the crisis of 1965 and the downfall of the
Papandreou cabinet were also related in part to the Cyprus question. They
will be discussed in the chapter to follow.
Economic Development and Social Reform
Since Greece’s reconstruction after World War II, economic development
and social reform have been acknowledged goals for every government.
One must look at specific programs to determine party differences. The task
is difficult, for seven years of ERE rule must be compared with scarcely
eighteen months of EK administration. It is primarily a matter of contrast¬
ing results with intentions. In terms of domestic policy, the climate and at¬
mosphere, rather than the results, were profoundly different. There was
substantial economic growth under both regimes.26
The ERE economic program was largely a continuation of the policy
inspired by Spyros Markezinis during the administration of the Greek
Rally. Each of these governments used state resources and pressures to
benefit those portions of the population most sympathetic to themselves.
Although there was some attempt at long-range planning, those plans that
did emerge were poorly conceived and coordinated, and certainly did not


Political Parties T55
indicate any logical system of priorities for solving Greece’s most funda¬
mental economic and social problems. The keystone of ERE policy was
continued monetary stability; this was accomplished, in large measure, by
rigorously controlling wages, often in an apparently haphazard manner.
The German ideal of a “market economy” also caught the fancy of the
ERE rhetoricians, as though free competition, together with state capital
investment, would be sufficient to recreate the German “miracle” in Greece.
The ERE encouraged the investment of foreign capital by extravagant
legislation and favorable contracts, but success was limited. The state itself
provided the funds for public works and particular capital investments, and
private firms made the profits.
The EK was faced with the same problems as the ERE, and to some ex¬
tent it propounded the same solutions. In urging the restoration of demo¬
cratic politics in Greece, the EK generally assumed that “democracy” would
be applied to economic and social problems; but specific programs were
completely lacking or intentionally vague. Certainly, economic develop¬
ment, particularly industrialization and increased agricultural productivity,
was a key part of the Papandreou formulation. It was recognized that state,
foreign, and private investment would be required. However, much of
this program seemed fanciful. Foreign capital was no more likely to appear
under Papandreou than under Karamanlis, particularly since the incentives
for its investment were diminished. The expectation of increased domestic
investment in industry or agriculture seemed to discount the realities of
Greek culture: the very rich regard conspicuous consumption as a way of
life; and the middle class puts its savings into economically static invest¬
ments, such as urban real estate and cash dowries. The EK’s specific pro¬
posals, such as that for regional industrial zones, seemed to be based on
political, rather than economic, realities. On the positive side, the EK did
make serious efforts to promote long-range economic planning; the privately
operated Center for Economic Research, for example, was envisaged as the
core of a refurbished Ministry of Coordination. But Papandreou’s tenure
was too short for the success or failure of this endeavor to be evident. The
battles between the new and the traditional elements in the Greek economic
bureaucracy were still raging when the regime fell.
A major difference between the ERE and the EK appeared in their at¬
titudes toward the use of state resources. The ERE distributed favors to
individuals and to certain groups (businessmen, some agricultural interests,
and the military). The government tried to maintain the status quo in


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
T56
salaries, and tried to discourage labor unrest by putting severe restrictions
on the labor movement. There was some increase in social-service benefits,
particularly to agriculture, and there were halting attempts at an improve¬
ment of the educational system. By and large, however, the ERE used sub¬
sidies, tax privileges, and foreign credits to buy support from people with
extensive influence networks and from specific population groups.
The EK, by contrast, tried to use public finances in another way. Papan
dreou announced salary benefits for various groups—civil servants, the
military, the lower clergy, and urban labor—almost immediately after
coming to power. Agriculture also received increased subsidies and social
service benefits. To some extent, this was the usual campaign for public
support; but it was also designed to lift support from the purely personal,
clientage-oriented level. However, none of these programs were carried out
completely. Financial benefits were announced for classes and groups, but
certain individuals also benefited. It was extremely questionable whether
the public finances could sustain this largesse. Policies of union reform re¬
mained incomplete; every action provoked criticism from either the Right
or the Left. In education, plans for a longer period of compulsory education
and the expansion of free education to the university level were not fully
realized.
Administrative Reform
The ERE was satisfied with the traditional structure of Greek politics and
made no attempt to change it. Under the EK, however, many proposals for
administrative reform were advanced. Some were novel, such as the crea¬
tion of a School of Public Service to provide qualified personnel for the
bureaucracy. Others were more typical of newly elected governments, such
as the proposals to reduce the size of the bureaucracy and to decentralize
the administration. In addition there were programs to reform the assess¬
ment and collection of taxes. In practice, only those aspects of administrative
reform that would assist the governing party were seriously undertaken.
Decentralization was not seriously promoted. Bureaucratic employees were
reclassified, and those with more than 35 years of service were retired. The
“temporary” employees of the Karamanlis years were replaced by new
“temporary” employees. Promotions and appointments continued to be at
least partly dependent on political affiliation.
A concern with unearthing the sins of the previous administration, char¬
acteristic of an issueless political setting, was a prominent feature of the EK


Political Parties T57
government. But Papandreou, although embarking on a thorough investi¬
gation of the preceding regime, did not go far enough to satisfy the extreme
Left and went too far to please many of the more moderate and traditional
elements in his own party. Court action was initiated against some former
ministers and against Karamanlis (although he had left the country). A
new law obligated all political figures to file statements of their net financial
assets with the secretary of the Parliament. In theory, this would have pre¬
vented some of the abuses that had been common under the Karamanlis
regime; but most deputies, and certainly the majority of the people, greeted
this legislation with skepticism.
National Security
The question of national security provoked much discussion throughout
both the Karamanlis and Papandreou administrations. During the ERE
period the Left and much of the Center campaigned vigorously for a “nor¬
malization” of Greek political life. Although this call was interpreted dif¬
ferently by different groups, it essentially implied a reinstatement of the
Greek Left in active politics. Several measures were involved: legalization
of the Communist Party of Greece, the KKE; permission for the return of
political exiles; the release of political prisoners; a restriction on the use of
certificates of social conformity, which limited the access of the Left to em¬
ployment and education; and a general relaxation of the “emergency mea¬
sures” that curbed the political activity of the Left. This issue, more than
any other, caused dissension in the EK and made good relations with the
monarch difficult.
After gaining power, Papandreou hesitated to enact his complete pro¬
gram. Although associating with the Left for political purposes, he re¬
mained an anti-Communist. The status of the KKE was never changed,
and certificates of social conformity were still required. A few refugees were
permitted to enter the nation—although fewer than during the Karamanlis
years—and only a few political prisoners were released. The Papandreou
government maintained, as its predecessor had, that the political prisoners
were in fact imprisoned for specific criminal activities; and it used devices
such as administrative deportation to handle individual cases, just as the
ERE had. However, there was some improvement in the general realm of
civil liberties: police brutality and harassment became less common; news¬
papers circulated more freely; and court action against editors for specific
newspaper stories diminished.


158 the political system
There is some evidence that party policy under both the EK and the ERE
was partly intended to aid specific groups in the population, rather than
individuals embedded in particular clientage networks. Unquestionably,
some “groups,” particularly in the business sector, were so small that benefits
were actually given to individuals. However, agricultural subsidies or broad
social-welfare measures did affect a great many Greeks. These can be viewed
as efforts of the premier and his personal-fragile party following to trans¬
form the Greek political system into one that we could call “modern.” Un¬
fortunately, these “group” benefits often increased the importance of mem¬
bership in a clientage network. For a benefit that must come through the
state bureaucracy, the average Greek needs assistance—which must be
sought, as before, from the polyarchic and persistent elements of the party.
The slight differences in party policies that we have examined do not
conflict with Key’s suggestion that “politics generally comes down, over the
long run, to a conflict between those who have and those who have less.”27
Those with clientage ties to the parliamentary level have the advantage;
those without ties are disadvantaged. It should be noted that not all “haves”
are treated alike, given the general conditions of scarcity. Each political
leader can use the state to discriminate against particular individuals and to
favor others. As long as the center of gravity in traditional political groups
is with the polyarchic and persistent component, this remains the standard
pattern of Greek politics.
THE ROLE OF THE MASS MEDIA
To an uninformed observer, the mass communications media in Greece
might appear to have great possibilities as instruments of socialization and
reform. However, the Greek press does not contribute much to opinion
change; primarily, it reinforces views already held by its readers. The polit¬
ical inclination of the reader is more or less apparent when he picks out his
newspaper at the corner kiosk. He knows the nature of the political views
he is going to find, since the majority of Greek newspapers are journals
of opinion and little else. Observers of modern Greece have often concluded
from newspaper content that all Greeks are intensely political. However,
these papers have a circulation of 125 copies per thousand population, one of
the lowest in Europe.28 Moreover, the nonpolitical journals, such as the
sporting newspaper and the “romantic” magazines, have increased in cir¬
culation, whereas most of the newspapers have gained no readers. In fact,
before the confused events of 1967 the major journals started to run serials


Political Parties 159
and other materials of historical interest on their front pages, apparently
attempting to draw readers for other than political reasons. Since the news¬
papers are owned either by individual politicians or by their close associates,
the strong political flavor and the tendency to sensationalism is accepted by
most readers as inevitable. Newspapers, as a channel for communication,
tend to be distrusted by most Greeks for these reasons. Instead, they are a
source of conversational material, a window through which the political
world is merely observed.
It would seem that radio could be an alternative channel of communica¬
tion. To a large extent, it does compete with the press. This is particularly
true in rural areas, where newspapers are scarce and where political pres¬
sures often prevent the circulation of papers with extremist views. How¬
ever, radio receivers are no more common than newspapers in remote rural
areas. A United States Department of State survey in 1951 found that
Greeks looked upon radio as “more truthful” because it was controlled
directly by the state. In reality, the state radio networks have not always been
neutral,29 since all appointments to their staffs are political in inspiration.
In the 1950’s the radio was openly conservative. By 1964, there was a degree
of fairness during the political campaign, and all three major parties re¬
ceived equal time for political broadcasts. By and large, the political con¬
tent of the radio programming is not great; most programs are for enter¬
tainment rather than for information.
ELECTORAL ANALYSIS
Political behavior in Greece does not seem explicable in terms of cash
crops, labor force, size of agricultural holding, or any of the usual variables
of aggregate analysis. Instead, the major explanatory variable is traditional
political attachment.* Seventy of the 146 eparchies in Greece can be said
to have strong traditional attachments, which fall into three categories: some
eparchies consistently give lopsided majorities to the candidates and polit¬
ical organizations of the Right; others are similarly attached to the Center;
and a few areas have followed the meanderings of a particular family or
set of candidates across the political boundaries. As we have seen, this ideo¬
logical labeling is for convenience only; there is little real difference be¬
tween “Right” and “Center” candidates. In these eparchies, the individual
candidates are likely to have personal clientage networks. The leading re¬
gional politicians are usually prominent in one of the major national parties.
* For a classification of eparchies by recent voting behavior, see Appendix B.


i6o THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
The specific political affiliation of these leaders seems to be related to his¬
torical factors, especially to the circumstances under which their region be¬
came part of the Greek state.
There are 20 eparchies in which the Right has almost always received a
majority. Between 1946 and 1963, the collective right-wing vote in these
areas was usually 70 or 80 per cent, and the Left seldom made much of an
inroad. All of these eparchies were in the original Greek kingdom, in
either the Peloponnesus or the Cyclades, except for Corfu and Paxi, both
annexed in 1864. In the nineteenth century, and even in much of the twen¬
tieth, these areas supported individual families or local notables; the fami¬
lies, although originally factionalized, were forced to combine into some
type of political grouping after 1910 to combat the Liberal Party of Veni
zelos. The representatives from the solidly traditional areas are still the
major figures in the right-wing parties. In this case, the loyalty of the voters
to families and notables has been transferred to whatever broader political
organization these leaders happen to represent. There is little temptation
to switch to the other side; at most, there may be an occasional tendency to
form splinter parties.
The major Center grouping has a similar stronghold although the strati¬
fication of eparchies is more complex. There are eleven eparchies that have
consistently given the center grouping majorities, usually from 75 to 90 per
cent of the vote. All but one of these eparchies are on Crete—the home island
of Eleutherios Venizelos, who brought the island into the Greek kingdom
and also founded the first Center coalition. The lone exception is the eparchy
of Kalimnos in the Dodecanese; although the Dodecanese was the last re¬
gion to become part of Greece, its annexation was presided over by the son
of Venizelos. The memory of Venizelos is sufficient to hold the political
allegiance of all these areas. Where there is competition, it is within the
same political grouping.
To these eleven eparchies must be added an additional seven, all on Crete.
These have almost always voted for the Center, but each has switched sides
in one of the eight elections since 1946. The year of exception to the rule
has varied, but in nearly every case there has been a split in the ranks of the
Center. In the eparchy of Temenos, which includes the city of Iraklion, the
Left was able to capitalize on this split to pick up a small plurality. In Las
sithi, the Right received a majority because the representative of a tradi¬
tional political family ran on their slate. The electoral geography of Crete
is very complex, although the island as a whole can be counted upon to


Political Parties 161
support the organizations that have descended from the Venizelist party.
Many of the twenty eparchies are extremely small and isolated. Allegiance
to certain families remains the rule. In some of these the traditional loyalty
may be to a family descended from those who were at odds with the Veni¬
zelist faction in the internal politics of Crete prior to her absorption into the
Greek state. These quarrels occasionally surface today, when the Center
splits over the formulation of electoral lists, or when other types of personal
antagonism produce minor parties.
Another group of eparchies, some nineteen in all, has voted for the Right
in all but one election. Most of these are in the old portions of the kingdom
—five in the Peloponnesus, four in the Cyclades, six in Old Greece, and two
in the Ionian Islands. Two, Kastoria and Grevena, are in Macedonia. Kas
toria, on the northern frontier, has been extensively resettled with peasants
from the crowded areas of the Peloponnesus to replace citizens who died
or defected to the adjacent Communist countries during the civil war.
Grevena is a different case: a popular local leader joined the lists of the
Right in 1950 and has managed reelection since that time. The reason for
the one off year in all these eparchies is not clear. There is, to be sure, always
some shifting of deputies and candidates from Right to Center lists. How¬
ever, most of the exceptions came in 1950 and seem largely due to the pro¬
liferation of candidates that the new proportional representation system
encouraged in that election.
There is a final category of traditional eparchy, in which the vote shifted
abruptly from one political grouping to another and continued to favor
the second. Usually, this happened in 1951 or 1952, and the switch can be
associated with the formation of the Greek Rally, led by Field Marshal
Papagos. In 10 of the 13 areas in this category, the leading political figures
changed parties, and the district followed suit; these areas were primarily
in the Epirus and Thrace. The switches in the other three eparchies oc¬
curred because local notables wanted a new patron, or because a popular
new entrant appeared on the list of the minority party.
The remaining 76 eparchies and the various urban electoral districts are
not as strongly traditional in outlook, and their electoral behavior cannot
be explained so easily. Most of Macedonia, Thrace, Thessaly, the Aegean
Islands, the Epirus, and Old Greece fall into this category. The attachments
of Macedonia, Thrace, the Aegean Islands, and even the Epirus had been
to Venizelos as an individual; this loyalty was not transferred as completely
to the Center political groups as it was in Crete. Thessaly is somewhat dif


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
162
ferent: an area devoted to commercial agriculture, with a tradition of
agricultural dissent, it has tended to fluctuate or to take an independent
course in most elections. The major cities of Greece are also located in the
eparchies in this large category; in these cases, too, the traditional attach¬
ments have become more tenuous.
In studying these areas, I assumed that the fluctuation in support for
either major political group would be contingent upon something other
than traditional attachments, which were lacking or severely eroded. An
index of fluctuation was constructed for each eparchy, and was then cor¬
related with the acreage of various cash crops and with urbanization.*
Nothing of significance emerged; in fact, there was a negative correlation
between political fluctuation and the amount of land devoted to cash crops.
(In retrospect, it might be argued that cash crops are so subsidized that
political fluctuation is not likely to occur because of farm prices.) One must
conclude either that the political shift in each constituency is dependent on
the peculiar set of economic determinants found there, or that Greek politics
is simply not explicable in nonpolitical terms. Although economic influences,
urbanization, and the like are felt in these eparchies more than in other
areas of Greece, their influence is not specifically on party affiliation but
on an individual voters relationship with a particular deputy or candidate
of any political grouping. Thus the personal political relationship remains
the most crucial factor in Greek electoral politics.
# The index figures were obtained by dividing the standard deviation of the right-wing vote in each eparchy (1946-63) by the mean right-wing vote for that eparchy. Only the right-wing vote was used, since the Center was badly fragmented during this period, and since the Right held office. Different socioeconomic variables were then correlated with each index figure, using the Pearson product-moment formulation. In retrospect, this seems to have been an inap¬ propriate technique; a more detailed and accurate electoral analysis is now in progress.


7* Politics at the Parliamentary Level
The chamber of deputies and the government selected from it are important
sectors of the Greek political system. Elections create parliamentary major¬
ities, which invest certain leaders with ministerial office; in return, the
political resources at the disposal of the ministers flow through clientage
networks to the deputies, and eventually to individual Greeks. However,
parliament is the context for bargaining only among the more traditional
elements of the Greek political system. Bargaining between parliamentary
leaders and the other major political groups does not take place in an insti¬
tutional framework. Certainly, the chamber of deputies is not crucial in
determining public policy, either for the traditional sector or for the whole
system. However, the modest importance of the Greek legislature in policy
making cannot be ascribed to the general causes of similar decline else¬
where.1
Basically, the decline of legislatures in the West has been attributed to the
complexities of the modern industrial setting. The subject matter for legis¬
lation is considered too complex for legislative understanding; and the pace
of the modern world requires more rapid decisions than the legislative pro¬
cess allows. Given this complexity, the devices for control of the executive by
the legislature have also been inadequate. Sometimes the shortcomings of
representative bodies have been traced to the party system: party discipline
prevents initiative and makes a mockery of executive control.2 Refinements
of this argument suggest that ideological conflict has subsided, and that the
leaders of parties formulate policy without consulting the rank and file; or,
conversely, they suggest that ideological conflict is extremely severe and
must be settled by elite negotiation outside of the parliamentary setting.3
Nevertheless, in each of these cases leaders with their roots in the parlia¬
mentary setting are involved in bargaining and negotiation, and making
decisions for the whole political system. The major portions of society view
the parliament and its derivative institutions as the legitimate arena for


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
164
conflict resolution. The concern with micropolitics and patronage so char¬
acteristic of the Greek parliamentary system, though not completely absent,
is far less important in Western governments. Certainly, part of the differ¬
ence can be traced to differing levels of economic development, which in¬
fluence the type and number of demands and the level of political organiza¬
tion. Family influence, for example, is likely to be much more pervasive in
the less industrial settings. The existence of particular political institutions
can also have a significant influence on the style and focus of political ac¬
tivity.
In other transitional societies, the nature of parliamentary politics re¬
sembles the Greek pattern. The concerns and the channels for action of the
rural Mexican are not unlike those of the rural Greek, and the village ca¬
cique is still an important figure. However, political bargaining and negotia¬
tion takes place within and between the sectors that make up the dominant
party (PRI, Partido Revolucionaria Institucional) rather than at the level
of the Mexican Congress.4 In Iran, the political system is essentially a tradi¬
tional one, according to Binder, and “its principle mode of operation is
through bargaining.”5 There are a number of independent power centers:
the shah, the military, the separate ministries and councils, the great families
and tribes, and some others. Bargaining takes place between these groups,
outside any formal institutional setting. Clientage structures are the fun¬
damental Iranian social units; and they are concerned with appointments,
administrative favors, special legislation, and the like, rather than with broad
demands. The bureaucracy is heavily penetrated by these clientage groups.
The government is characterized by lack of coordination, and generally
cannot deal competently with the major problems of modernization.6 As in
Greece, the parliament (Majlis) seems to be unconcerned with high policy
making; however, the parliamentary representatives are not the major chan¬
nels for individual demands, as they are in Greece. The relationship be¬
tween voter and deputy does not rest on the use of the vote as a bargaining
tool. In part this can be ascribed to the late development of parliamentary
institutions in Iran: other channels predated the representative body; and
clientage networks do not culminate in the Majlis because the powerholders
in the Iranian political system are not ordinarily found there.
As earlier references have suggested, the pattern of Philippine politics (as
presented by Jean Grossholtz) has many parallels with the pattern of Greek
parliamentary politics.7 The political culture and the style of bargaining
(“the use of the vote as the quid pro quo for quite personal services”) are


The Parliamentary Level 165
much the same in both countries.8 Philippine congressmen are concerned
not with appropriations, budgets, or policy as such, but with the acquisition
of the “necessities of electoral success”—in other words, with public works,
patronage, and bureaucratic intervention. However, in the Philippines the
major decisions for the whole society seem to he made entirely within the po¬
litical sphere. The president and his associates do not have to bargain with
a monolithic bureaucracy, a military, or other “veto” groups that do not par¬
ticipate in parliamentary politics. In the Philippines, as in Greece, the tradi¬
tional clientage structures were congruent with representative institutions;
in both settings, the bureaucracy developed in the same way, and was pene¬
trated by clientage networks. But in the Philippines the colonial experience
(and perhaps a peculiar combination of international factors as well) has
produced a military that accepts civilian control.
In all of these “transitional” systems the characteristic social structures
have been patron-client relationships based on reciprocal obligations. Few
Mexicans, Iranians, Filipinos, or Greeks are concerned with legislation in
the sense of broad policy decisions; instead they pursue the satisfaction of in¬
dividual demands. The method of satisfying these demands has varied in
each context, depending on the institutional channels available. In addition,
the role of the constitutional institutions in settling those major policy ques¬
tions that do exist or in maintaining a balance between the major political
sectors has varied, depending on the groups involved and on whether they
view the representative institutions as legitimate or not.
In Greece, the revolutionary elites and their heirs took command of the
representative institutions before a bureaucratic apparatus had time to de¬
velop. The parliament was never an instrument of the bureaucratic elite,
as it was in some systems described by Riggs.9 The early politicians simply
operated as patrons, interceding in administration for the benefit of their
rural clients. The bureaucracy was not a mechanism for control of the
political sector; it was an instrument for the use of the parliamentary elites,
who occupied the ministerial chairs. Wealth, status, education, and political
resources in the form of votes were all in the hands of the same political elite.
This orientation toward government output continued throughout the nine¬
teenth century, and is the prevailing attitude of parliamentarians and the
general population today. In modern Greece the top echelons of the bureau¬
cracy and the parliament are interchangeable. The minister who heads a
government department is of necessity a prominent politician. In general,
he is the master of his bureaucratic house, although his personal connections


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
166
and the expected length of his tenure may sometimes affect the situation.
The future of any government department is largely dependent on the
political influence of the minister who heads it. It is his task to innovate
programs, and to find ways to finance them. The assignments and pro¬
motions of the ministerial employees are largely dependent upon him.
Finally, a minister may be able to build a parliamentary following because
of his control over departmental patronage.
The Greek bureaucracy, then, is hardly a monolithic structure; it is pene¬
trated by the political world. Patronage, seniority, tenure, and part-time
employment are all individual concerns. As in other sectors of Greek society,
it is still largely a matter of each individual bureaucrat against every other.
Administrators are more concerned with protecting existing relationships
or with acquiring new status than with organizational output. Scarcity con¬
tributes as much to insecurity in the bureaucratic world as in other parts of
Greek society. The traditional political groups, as represented by the ERE,
have stressed national security in large part because it gave them protection
against new socially mobile elements in the society, who might well have
family or friendship ties that could get them into government service. There
is a formal merit system for hiring and promotion in the Greek civil ser¬
vice; but it is undermined because the pinnacle of the system is political,
and nearly every politician can intervene at the lower levels. A bureaucrat
with personal aspirations cannot afford to alienate the political leadership.
He is likely to have less loyalty to higher authority in his own department
than he has to influential politicians outside it. All of this forces a bureau¬
crat to concentrate on playing politics, rather than on doing his job.
The assumption that policy making ought to be the central concern of the
political system underlies all formal constitutional relationships in Greece,
as it does in most Western countries. However, neither parliament nor the
cabinet pays much attention to policy. In a society characterized by ties of
personal loyalty, there are few general interests and demands to be articu¬
lated and answered; there is only the reality of each personal demand. The
ministerial level has little knowledge of available resources and general pub¬
lic demands. The bureaucracy cannot supply this knowledge, since it is
also concerned with personal matters; besides, it may not have any adequate
sources of information either. As a result, policy making becomes a rather
formal exercise. Theodore Couloumbis notes that the most momentous pol¬
icies in postwar Greece were presented to parliament by ministers with little
knowledge of their content or consequences. The parliament passed them


The Parliamentary Level 167
with very little debate. For example, the NATO alliance was approved in
1949 in an atmosphere of complete unconcern.10 The association with the
European Common Market seems to have been made in a similar way.11
The Greek government sometimes tries to use legislation as an instrument
of social change, almost always with unintended results. Few government
leaders have an accurate picture of the real situation in any sector of Greek
society; hence there is no way to plan changes, or to integrate programs of
change in one sector with those in another. The habit of looking upon legis¬
lation as a way of increasing political resources further limits the possibility
that a given policy or action will produce the desired result. Since the major
concern of the parliamentary level is the satisfaction of individual demands
on the government, politically motivated exceptions to any policy always
appear, and contradictory legislation is often forthcoming. The political
world, then, is an unreal world, a world of micropolitics, personality, and
patronage.
The consequences of Greek legislation for the promotion of economic de¬
velopment are worth examining in detail. Adam Pepelasis has outlined the
role of legal factors in Greek economic development.12 One theme that con¬
stantly recurs is the wide range of government interest. But here, as else¬
where, government action promotes the interests of particular individuals
rather than those of the nation as a whole. The twin requirements of eco¬
nomic advancement and political necessity rarely coincide. The legal sys¬
tem, the primacy of family considerations, and the general mistrust in
Greek society have worked to keep the forms of enterprise primitive and in¬
dustrial activity retarded.
The behavior of Greeks involved in the economic sector has differed from
that of entrepreneurs in the West simply because the environment in which
they operate is different. The corporate form of management has always
been distrusted because it is assumed that corporations will invariably bilk
the public and the government by their extraordinary skill in finding tax
loopholes, and will rob minority stockholders because of family control of
the corporation. The corporate form seems to have been discouraged by the
government as a public service. For these and other reasons manufacturing
between 1911 and 1930 did not contribute more than 10 per cent of the gross
national income in Greece;13 in i960, the figure was only 19.7 per cent.14
There is still no real protection for minority interests when they do exist;
and devices like accounting standards, audits, and honest publicity, which
might make corporations more responsible, are all lacking. Even foreign


168 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
consultants have difficulty in acquiring the trust that enables them to see
the second set of books. In the past, corporate charters had to come from the
Ministry of National Economy or from the cabinet itself. Only after 1955
did legislation allow a true limited liability company to be formed; and even
this legislation was faulty in several respects. Until recently, corporate liti¬
gation could be appealed to the highest court as a matter of course. These
delays were compounded by judicial moratoria that prolonged settlements
for generations.
Several cultural factors have also impeded the development of a substan¬
tial manufacturing sector in Greece. The middle class, often nonexistent in
other underdeveloped countries, has a high propensity to save for items such
as dowries and education. Funds for these purposes are usually invested in
real estate or left in liquid form, rather than being put to more productive
uses. Greek business has tended to invest in commercial ventures (i.e., in
trading rather than manufacturing), since these can usually be financed
by family funds and can respond quickly to changed economic and social
circumstances.15 The same bias is found among other agencies with invest¬
ment capital; pension and welfare funds, for instance, do not invest in cor¬
porate securities either. The traditional Greek pursuits of commerce and
shipping have remained more lucrative and prestigious. The upper class,
often with fortunes derived from speculation in real estate, has not acted
to advance economic development, but is noted for its conspicuous consump¬
tion. Basically, any industrialization efforts have to face these attitudes,
which make capital difficult to secure; they have also been hampered by the
widespread feeling that a Greek product could not possibly be as good as
a foreign one. One might expect that foreign concerns would take advan¬
tage of this demand for capital; but there was little foreign investment in
Greece before World War II, and postwar efforts to attract foreign invest¬
ment (especially a law that allowed favorable terms for the repatriation of
capital and profit) were unsuccessful. Internal stability has been more im¬
portant in creating capital inflow than anything else.16
The Greek government has tried to use tax subsidies to encourage eco¬
nomic development. However, taxes are particularly liable to favor certain
individuals and firms at the expense of competitors. Political resources are
created, but economic development is only incidentally encouraged; and
the tax structure becomes more warped than before. For example, the Greek
turnover tax is not applied to construction firms, service and retail indus¬
tries, and newspapers; yet these are precisely the enterprises that should not


The Parliamentary Level 169
be encouraged if economic development is to result.17 The lack of a capital
gains tax also encourages speculation in the less vital sectors. The use of
standards of consumption to assess income taxes does promote saving among
the upper classes. However, only the fact that the method for checking on
commodity tax payments is so intricate and cumbersome removes one’s sus¬
picion that these taxes have been specifically designed to penalize the most
modern and efficient firms, and to allow the least progressive, such as small
urban craftsmen and retail traders, to escape.
The governments since 1952 have attempted to encourage economic re¬
construction and development by granting loans to private enterprise at
favorable rates and by building state industrial plants. In the second case,
inefficiency, nepotism, and other features of the Greek bureaucracy are
merely transferred to the public enterprise.18 Public corporations merely
create additional fields for political intervention. The government’s willing¬
ness to enter any particular sector of the economy is a political weapon that
can be used against existing firms. Given the small number of firms in
Greece, any government economic program is bound to benefit a few easily
identifiable firms or individuals. This is true whether state funds are used
to upgrade old production units or to create new ones. It is especially true
when the state locates plants and picks the managers and workers itself. In
recent years, there have been numerous programs to encourage the reloca¬
tion of industry into underdeveloped regions in Greece, which is intended
to speed up regional development by creating provincial industrial zones.
The concentration of industry in the Athens-Piraeus area can easily be ex¬
plained in economic terms: this is simply the optimum location in all of
Greece.19 Despite this, subsidies and other enticements are offered to indus¬
tries that locate in the more remote provincial areas, even when their place¬
ment is inherently inefficient. Here, too, the administration of the programs
is motivated primarily by political requirements.
The same patterns can be noted in Greek policies toward agriculture.
Legislation designed to improve agricultural output or better the position
of the peasants has often had the opposite effect. The limitations and failures
of the cooperative movement have been noted in Chapter 5. The govern¬
ment’s approach to the problem of farm fragmentation is similarly instruc¬
tive.20 State land distribution schemes have been primarily responsible for
fragmentation, although the topography of Greece has contributed to the
problem. Inheritance laws (which encourage equal division of land) and
the Greek dowry system have kept holdings small. Excessive fragmentation


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
17O
results in a waste of land and manpower, and limits the possibilities of
mechanization and modernization. However, given the peasants’ distrust
of any government agency, schemes for voluntary consolidation are not
likely to be successful. Until recently, in fact, the government pursued con¬
tradictory policies of distribution and consolidation with equal vigor. Other
efforts at agrarian development—the development of irrigation works, the
encouragement of the use of fertilizers or mechanization, and state efforts
to develop markets by special agreements with other nations—seldom benefit
the peasant in practice. For example, the government operates one fertilizer
plant itself, and has supplied capital to a private group for another; but gov¬
ernment policy throughout has favored the manufacturer of fertilizer, at the
expense of the consumer. Trade agreements have often meant that a farmer
pays higher prices for the imported goods he must use. Although the rural
Greek’s position is improving, he has not benefited from the recent economic
gains to the same extent as the urban dweller.
Regardless of its purpose, legislation in Greece is almost exclusively the
province of the government in power. Ministers submit proposals to parlia¬
ment, and these are forwarded to the proper committees. The rank and file
of the government party are rarely called upon for advice; in fact, they gen¬
erally receive no advance notice of impending government legislation. Even
those deputies with backgrounds in the relevant subject are allowed to do
little more than react. The chief legislative officer, the president of parlia¬
ment, is part of the inner circle of the majority party group. The content and
scheduling of legislative business is a matter for him and the premier to
decide.
Although the Greek parliament has a complete panoply of committees,
which correspond to the ministerial portfolios, they are not crucial to the
legislative process. A given committee’s membership, generally from 10 to
15, reflects the relative party strengths in the entire parliament. Although
formal assignments are made by the president of parliament, there is a fair
amount of cooperation among the various factions on these matters. In most
cases, the individual deputy has little control over his committee assignment.
Since committees are relatively inconsequential in the legislative process,
and since a deputy may have little interest in the particular legislative com¬
mittee to which he is assigned, it is not surprising that the average deputy
gives committee work a low priority, and that attendance at committee
meetings is poor. Most deputies would prefer to spend their time in satisfy


The Parliamentary Level iji
ing the patronage requests of their constituents, a far more productive and
necessary activity.
When committees do function, they rarely hear anyone other than the
minister directly concerned with the legislation. Committee proceedings are
ostensibly closed, but in most cases individual deputies, bent on publicity for
the home folks, make arrangements with the press gallery for leaks. The
committee has no option but to report the proposed bill to the full chamber,
giving its recommendation. The report of the committee is appended as
an introduction to the bill, together with the minister’s introduction. Any
deputy may then propose amendments, even if he is not a member of the
committee that has considered the legislation. These amendments are sub¬
mitted to the president of parliament, who directs their printing and their
submission to the committee and to the rest of the deputies. The minister
who originated the bill controls committee proceedings and the final hear¬
ing in the chamber, and announces which amendments he will accept and
which he will not.
Even the full parliamentary sessions are not important to most deputies.
The premier and the ministers rarely appear; when they do, their main
purpose seems to be receiving applause. Individual ministers appear
whenever they are scheduled for questioning on legislation or on the activi¬
ties of their ministries. Policy statements are given to the press, rather than
to party or parliamentary gatherings. Debate between party leaders often
takes place in the newspapers rather than in parliament. Although parlia¬
mentary rules require attendance, they are rarely enforced; however, a large
number of relatively mute deputies do attend because of them. During my
interviews with the sample of 55 deputies, it was rare to find anyone engaged
in legislative work. For the most part, no trace of proposed bills, committee
reports, or even a record of the previous day’s legislative events could be
found in their offices.
The major function of legislation at the traditional level of Greek politics
is the creation of “artificial” political resources. Here, formalism becomes
functional. Legislative enactments can ignore reality because there is little
expectation that they will be enforced or implemented. The ministers, either
by legislative initiation or by administrative ruling, have many opportuni¬
ties to create resources useful for the satisfaction of political demands. Tax
rates can be raised or lowered for specific groups. Fees and tariffs can be
varied, and can be collected or not. Concessions can be given, and competi¬
tion restricted. The general controls over imports and foreign exchange, as


172 the political system
well as the controls on both commercial and rural credit, can also be used
for political purposes. Foreign loans and grants are also distributed by the
ministers. Since most economic sectors are small, there is always the possi¬
bility that a general policy can be directed to specific ends. Since demands
for favors, access, and all the goods and services subject to government con¬
trol are always greater than the supply, some noneconomic criterion for dis¬
tribution is necessary; and political obligation becomes the standard, rather
than fairness or equality. In short, the highest level of traditional politicians
has a control over most groups in Greek society that can be used to maintain
political power. As the formalism in the society increases, citizens increase
their demands for the mitigation of its effects. These personal demands can
be satisfied by the traditional political system; more general demands for
material benefits cannot be so easily satisfied.
The description of prismatic finance offered by Fred Riggs, since it is
predicated on a scarcity of resources, seems appropriate for Greece.21 The
tax base in Greece is too narrow to support the tasks of government, even if
the country had an efficient bureaucracy and higher levels of taxation. Re¬
liance upon grants or loans from abroad, the Greek practice since indepen¬
dence, is one solution to this problem. The territorial expansion of Greece
and the attraction of material and human resources from the provinces to
the capital have also been useful. The gap between the wealthy and the poor
is widened by widespread tax avoidance and by the government’s reliance
on regressive indirect taxation, compounded by unfair exemptions. Bribery
and bargaining between payee and collector are common practices. Duplex
bookkeeping, part of the Riggs model, is also the normal procedure. The
formal apparatus of governmental accounting and auditing, although it
involves innumerable cross-checks and much red tape, does not reflect actual
practices. Kickbacks and bribes are a concomitant part of the administrative
process.
Other aspects of Riggs’s prismatic model are evident in the Greek case.
Both state and private monopolies of the control and sale of particular goods
and services are common, and they invariably provide the government with
funds. Revenue collected from a particular source is permanently diverted
to finance specific activities. This is not in itself “prismatic.” For example,
gasoline-tax revenue in the United States is often devoted to road construc¬
tion. The difference is that in Greece the source of taxation and the ultimate
recipient of the tax revenue have little connection. As a result, some activities
are over-financed and others poorly supported.22 Revenues earmarked for


The Parliamentary Level
specific purposes are really the result of ministerial attempts to innovate or
to create personal political resources. In general, a minister cannot call upon
the ordinary revenues of the state to finance new activity. The state revenues
are insufficient; moreover, other major political figures are unlikely to gra¬
tuitously increase the political resources of a competitor. By separating the
new source of revenue from the service it is to finance—essentially, by hunt¬
ing for a new source of uncommitted funds rather than trying to justify the
diversion of already existing funds—a minister avoids the political costs of
assigning revenue on the basis of program priorities.
The actual priority of Greek financial programs depends on the needs of
the political circle to which the top officials and ministers belong. The gov¬
ernment must also make concessions to political groups that are not formally
represented in parliamentary politics. Riggs suggests that in a prismatic
society officials must place the demands of the military, the interior de¬
partments, and the education departments above those of housing, labor,
agriculture, or cultural activities;23 this is certainly true in Greece. The most
influential politicians gravitate to the ministries with the greatest political
resources. Under these conditions, and in the absence of annual financial leg¬
islation, resource allocations tend to be initiated and perpetuated without
regard to program priorities. Greek finances are further strained by a fluc¬
tuating balance of payments, which makes financial planning difficult.
Two classical sources of legislative authority, control of the purse strings
and rule-making, do not have much importance in the Greek system. First,
both have been limited by the environment. Subsistence agriculture, the
paucity of natural resources, and the small commercial and industrial sector
have all caused Greeks to rely on outside sources for financial solvency. Be¬
cause of the fluctuations of the world economy and the vagaries of foreign
loans and grants, the governmental purse has never really been subject to
complete parliamentary control. Policy making is similarly limited by fi¬
nancial deficiencies and the concerns of foreign powers. Second, even though
the fiscal powers of the government have increased, particularly after 1952,
most legislators do not regard this as a threat. Instead, both they and the
ministers view budgeting and rule-making simply as ways to increase per¬
sonal political resources.24 If legislative control is attempted at all, it will be
by minor “combative” parties or by the out-of-power traditional groups. In
the latter case, control is used to embarrass the government in the hope that
it will fall, or sometimes to provide a lever for the extraction of favors.25
The chamber does come to life when the legislation before it can be


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
T74
applied to the specific patronage or constituency interests of the various
deputies. For example, in general sessions devoted to legislation that sets
subsidies for various agricultural products deputies from nearly all con¬
stituencies feel called upon to speak; considerations of retirement laws, tariff
revision, or tax legislation are also occasions for an individual deputy to
seek specific favors for his own clients. This kind of legislation is as pre¬
determined as any other, but its character is such that loopholes can be
inserted by amendment. In order to keep his own support within the parlia¬
ment, a minister must accept a certain number of “photographs,” as these
riders are called in Greece. The deputies, of course, are far more concerned
with the “photographs” than they are with the total bill. In some cases a
minister may be able to promote a measure that is something more than a
collection of special pleas, but this is unusual. All deputies except those of
the leftist EDA engage in this behavior. The leftists are most concerned
with general demands based on class or group interests. They discourage
any concern with personal favors on the part of EDA members, and they
barely tolerate personal demands from their few supporters outside the
party. This practice helps to maintain the feeling of solidarity essential to
left-wing political operation, which would disappear if every individual had
a chance of receiving special treatment. The party is able to continue its in¬
tellectual and moral disapproval of patronage chiefly because most other
deputies would probably not go along with EDA efforts to secure “photo¬
graphs.”
Normally, the chamber of deputies convenes several times a week at about
7 p.m., with a question hour at each session. One minister is questioned each
time, according to a regular rotation. There will be a number of prepared
questions, followed by one general criticism expressed as a motion to con¬
clude the proceeding. Except for certain topics that have priority, such as
Cyprus, the matters questioned will not be current, but will have been placed
on file months earlier. Regardless of the government, the great majority of
the questions will have been submitted by the deputies of the Left, who often
combine their relevant remarks with a general criticism of the government.
The rest of the deputies rarely have policy questions; most of their queries
are concerned with specific state injustices against individual constituents.
The ordinary deputy uses his public questioning privilege mostly as a threat.
He will usually go to the minister privately; only if the results are unsatis¬
factory will he be likely to ask open questions in the chamber. Although the
deputy is sacrificing publicity by acting informally, he may be able to get


The Parliamentary Level 175
results for his constituent by doing so, and he may build up a reserve of
goodwill with the minister. It is a bargaining relationship, pure and simple.
In short, the Greek legislative process does not involve the parliamentary
deputy very heavily, and he is not especially concerned about it. Functions
shaped by the clientage structures characteristic in Greek society are more
important to him. Most legislation is developed by ministers and their staffs
outside the parliamentary arena, and the legislature is not viewed as a place
for framing solutions or alternatives. The public regards the deputy as a
counter to the state rather than as a part of authority itself, and he is not
expected to translate demands into legislation. Moreover, most Greeks recog¬
nize that solutions and alternatives are limited by forces external to Greece.
Neither the public nor the deputies view the legislature in connection with
processes that involve the “institutionalization, crystallization, and resolu¬
tion of social and political conflict.”26
LEGISLATIVE ROLES
A useful method for studying the parliamentary level of Greek politics is
the technique of role analysis suggested by John Wahlke and his associates.
“Role orientations are probably not unrelated to the legislator’s perception
of the power pattern of the political system and the kinds of functions which
the legislature is called upon to perform.”27 These authors distinguish sev¬
eral types of role orientations: purposive, emphasizing legislative decision
making; representational, emphasizing the style of representation; areal,
emphasizing the relationship between the legislator and his district; and
pressure-group or party orientations. In Greece only the first two categories,
purposive and representational, can be said to exist. For the most part, a
Greek deputy is not bedeviled by overlapping role orientations. If there is
any conflict, it is between his idealized concept of what a legislator should
do and Greek reality.
The 55 deputies interviewed for the present study were questioned on
their own perceptions of the legislative role: “How would you describe the
job of being a deputy? What are the most important things you should do?
Are there any differences between what you think this job is and the way
your constituents see it?” The responses to these questions fell into the pur¬
posive and representational categories. Those in the purposive category were
the most numerous; and we will examine them in detail before considering
representational role orientations.
The purposive responses could be divided into four classes. The first, or


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
176
“ritualist,” group included deputies who were oriented to the job of law¬
making in terms of parliamentary rules and routines. They tended to ignore
legislative functions that might be influenced by the goals of parliamentary
groups or the power situation in the total system. The complexity of the
legislative process was their biggest concern, and legislative maneuvering
became an end in itself. The “tribune” category included legislators who
looked upon themselves as the advocates of popular demands or the de¬
fenders of the public against the state. The term “inventor” was applied to
those who felt responsible for discovering solutions and exploring alterna¬
tives to public issues. Finally, the “broker” orientation indicated a concern
for the conflicting demands of pressure groups; deputies in this category
felt that the proper role of the legislative body is the integration of national
economic and social life by the negotiation and bargaining of group claims.28
Many deputies responded in more than one category. Among the total pur¬
posive responses, there were 34 ritualists, 45 tribunes, 15 inventors, and only
one broker.
The two major purposive role orientations, the ritualist and the tribune,
are related to the pattern of development of the Greek representative insti¬
tutions. The tribune orientation, which sees legislators as advocates of the
people, is congruent with the basic clientage relationships found in Greek
political life; however, the Greek deputy is less concerned with the demands
and interests of all the people than with those of individual persons. The
ritualist orientation looks at parliamentary life in terms of lawmaking or
legislative control.29 Sophisticated deputies know that parliaments elsewhere
are concerned with these things, and their idea of the ritualist role becomes
a standard against which they measure Greek performance. These two
orientations are often found together: a Greek deputy thinks that he should
act as a ritualist, but he actually functions as a tribune. The inventor and
broker orientations are not highly developed in the Greek context.
The 34 deputies who indicated a ritualist outlook, a concern for the par¬
liamentary process itself, were expressing sentiments at odds with the reality
of Greek parliamentary institutions. A concern for the etiquettes, privileges,
and procedures of the parliamentary process is the chief characteristic of a
ritualist orientation, and Greek parliamentary history is primarily an exer¬
cise in the disregard of these matters.80 Although the parliament has been
in existence for over a century, there is still little force of tradition behind it;
few Greek deputies have any “feel” for the parliament as an institution.31
There is no conscious effort to train new deputies in the procedures and


The Parliamentary Level
habits of the chamber, and there is little emphasis on seniority. The intri¬
cacies of the legislative process are of little concern to most members.
Several responses that I placed in the ritualist category were quite un¬
ambiguous; they seem completely congruent with the Western ideal of legis¬
lative life: “The job of the deputy is to legislate, both by helping to prepare
bills and by giving them thoughtful consideration in committee. The major
role is parliamentary control of the government, although this is done
mainly by the opposition deputies.” Other responses showed a more realistic
view of Greek parliamentary life, but they still emphasized parliamentary
activity. One recognized the dominating role of the government in legis¬
lation: “The most important job of the deputy is to work in the Parliament
by debating and improving laws submitted by the government. It is theo¬
retically part of the deputy’s job to introduce legislation, but in fact, that
aspect is rather impractical.” Others adopted a much more passive role:
The job of the deputy is to watch continuously the work of parliament.
A deputy must watch the work of making laws and try to improve them, and must watch and control the ministers for the sake of justice and the advancement of the standard of living.
The primary emphasis in these responses was on parliament as an institu¬
tion. The functions deemed important were lawmaking and control of the
government. It was not always clear whether “government” was perceived
as the executive alone or as the executive and the parliament.
In most cases, a deputy’s ritualist response was primarily conditioned by
his knowledge of what parliaments were supposed to do. Generally, a ritu¬
alist response was qualified by a statement about the real situation in parlia¬
ment.
Your work in parliament, bills and speeches, is the most important, although, of course, you must think about the matter of reelection.... [The constituents] ex¬ pect their deputy to do things for them.
To legislate is a deputy’s main function, but the people do not understand that the deputy is for legislation; they want him as a tool for their own purposes.
The main job of the deputy should be to work in parliament, but unfortunately, the deputy today must deal with everything but parliament.... The voters of the countryside think the deputy’s only job and responsibility is to promote their personal affairs.
A deputy’s job is to make the right laws, and to ensure real parliamentary control of the government... to make sure the right questions are put to the government


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
178
and the correct answers returned.... Most voters see the deputy as the instru¬ ment for the promotion of their personal affairs, right or wrong.
The most important job of the deputy is legislation—discussing and amending legislation proposed by the government. However, in Greece, outside the EDA, no deputy has the time to look at legislation because of the necessity of doing
favors for his constituents.
In my opinion, the deputy’s job is to legislate, and to judge and criticize the gov¬ ernment if necessary.... The voters are interested only in personal favors.
It would seem that these deputies experience a conflict of roles, the magni¬
tude of the conflict depending on how seriously they take the Western
notion of parliamentary purpose. The deputies who qualified their state¬
ments with remarks about Greek reality were more likely to have had edu¬
cational experience outside of Greece. For them, the socialization gained
from their education and experience in Greece was in conflict with knowl¬
edge gained elsewhere.
In many responses the ritualist perception merged into the tribune per¬
ception. The first might be concerned with control of government as a
proper function of the legislature; the second felt that the deputy should be
able to influence the state machinery in order to protect his constituents. In
a society characterized by popular distrust of authority it is not surprising
that most Greek deputies consider themselves “tribunes.” Those who do
appear to have less role conflict, precisely because they do not think of law¬
making as a distinguishing feature of the deputy’s job; their attitudes and
specific activities involve the advocacy and defense of particular constituent
demands. These demands are not likely to be phrased in terms of constitu¬
tional or property rights, but in micropolitical terms.
Parliamentary ability is required in order to support the rights of the voter.
The deputy’s main task is to survey the legislative work, and to defend the needs of the people and prevent injustices that are caused by the faults of the bureau¬ cracy. I think that there are no basic differences between the deputy’s opinion and the constituents’ opinion, because, apart from favors, they want their man to do well as deputy.
The job of the deputy is to help the people of his area; there is no difference be¬ tween this view and the constituents’ view.
The deputy must be devoted to the interests of the people and the nation. ... He must help his district through legislative action. There are no differences between his conception and that of constituents.


The Parliamentary Level 179
The deputy should study people’s interests and take care of them and defend them in the Vouli. Unfortunately, most of the voters see the deputy’s role in a different way. People’s needs are great, and the resources to meet them are few; people need the state services, which do not work well, so the voter needs his deputy to help him.
This orientation was voiced for the most part by deputies from the rural
constituencies. It conforms to the patron-client relationships that have char¬
acterized traditional Greek politics. However, there is no relationship be¬
tween a deputy’s orientation and his visits to his constituency or the number
of constituents who visit his Athens office. The number of callers at the
political offices of the deputies interviewed ranged from six to 900 per week
(one deputy claimed to see 2,500 per week), depending on a deputy’s posi¬
tion in his party and the proximity of his constituency to Athens. The num¬
ber of times the deputy visited his constituency was more dependent on his
tenure in the parliament and the state of his personal finances than on any¬
thing else.
The tension between ideal and reality was also evident in those deputies
whose primary interest was in problem solving, a response that placed them
in the inventor category. Here, a role calling for general solutions to general
problems conflicted with the demands of individual constituents. The in¬
ventor is interested in political input, whereas his constituents are concerned
with government output.
The main job is to help the government, if that helps the nation and the people. The deputies can help the government in the problems it is dealing with.... The demand for personal favors is the exception, met with only in case of absolute necessity; unfortunately, the necessity of my constituents is great.
The work of the deputy is national foreign policy and internal reconstruction. The voters are occupied, for the most part, with their personal problems.
The work of the deputy is to find, both in parliament and the party, measures and policies which serve the general interests of the country.... The deputy’s tasks, unfortunately, cannot be done well by the Greek deputy, especially the government deputy.
He must support the right demands and stand up for his ideology in parliament, mainly by voting on laws. He must avoid personal interests and promote only the general interest.
In one case, although the deputy offered specific solutions for particular eco¬
nomic and social problems, he still felt that his constituents were of a dif¬
ferent mind.


i8o THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
The deputy’s job is to form better laws, which should be mainly concerned with a better distribution of public income. This could be done by some laws that would stop what happens today.... A few strong people are squeezing blood from the rest.... One should stop this even if some corporations have to be na¬ tionalized. The constituents have a different view.... If their party or deputy does favors, they will have constant demands.
In this category it was rare to find a deputy who did not include a statement
deploring the difference between his own perception of duty and his con¬
stituents’ view of his role. However, representatives of the Left noted that
the views of their constituents did not differ from their own.
My task, after the maintenance of democracy, is the independence of our country, liberation of Cyprus from the imperialism of NATO, the improvement of the standard of living of the Greek people, disarmament, and the stabilization of Greece and the world. My voters have the same opinion.
The job of the deputy involves the deepest study of economic and social policies, to solve the problems of the people and also the international problem. There is no difference between these views and the views of the constituent.
The deputy must know the problems and their solutions. He should try to pro¬ mote these solutions and to inform parliament about them.... The conscious, not the transient, voters of the EDA ... have the same point of view as their deputies. The rest think that the deputy’s job is to solve their personal problems.
An inventor orientation marks the Left off from traditional parliamentary
politics, and three of the four EDA deputies perceived their function in this
way. Wahlke et al. have noted that the inventor orientation “comes at a later
stage of political development than the foregoing orientations.”32 The EDA
stands out as the one modern political organization operating in the Greek
parliament.
Only one deputy saw his role as that of a “broker” who balances diverse
pressures and conflicting group interests. As previous chapters have sug¬
gested, interest groups of the Western associational type are not well de¬
veloped in Greece. Even if clientage organizations are viewed as competing
groups, the focus remains at bargaining on a personal level. Moreover, such
bargaining would be unlikely to involve the average deputy and would not
occur in the parliamentary context. In my sample of 55 deputies, 27 men¬
tioned group memberships, but these memberships appeared to have po¬
litical significance in only a few cases. All but two deputies said that groups
came to see them, but most deputies gave no indication of paying attention


The Parliamentary Level 181
to group demands. If attention was given to a group spokesman, it was given
to him as an individual rather than as an organizational representative.
It is difficult to distinguish some aspects of the representational role orien¬
tation from the tribune category of the purposive role orientation. The repre¬
sentational role implies a more sophisticated view of the political system than
that required for purposive perceptions, in which the deputy is merely
“representing the demands” of his constituents. The representational role
orientation is concerned with who is represented—a group, individuals, or
an area. It is also concerned with determining which factors weigh most
heavily in legislative decision making. The Greek deputies who do see them¬
selves as representatives are oriented toward the district or province. Ac¬
cording to the Greek constitution, each deputy represents the entire nation;
in practice, each deputy is concerned chiefly with his constituency, and espe¬
cially with specific clientage groups. A deputy may have obligations to
specific party leaders, but he has none to the party as a whole. The lack of
interest articulation means that few deputies view themselves as the rep¬
resentatives of special groups. Since only a few deputies are personally
involved in shaping legislation, constituents seldom judge their representa¬
tives by legislative voting record; thus a deputy rarely has to choose between
his conscience and instructions from his constituency.
The responses to the general question on legislative role that fell into the
representational category were coded into three groups: trustee (18), dele¬
gate (5), and politico (2). The third role orientation combines the roles of
trustee and delegate. These roles may be held simultaneously (making role
conflict likely) or one at a time, depending upon the legislative context. The
politico in the American legislative context is more aware of conflict, more
flexible in posing alternatives, and in general less dogmatic in his orienta¬
tions than the other two. To some extent, the politico orientation seems to
result from the multiplicity of group demands that conflict with each other
and with the public interest.33 It is not surprising that so few Greek deputies
are found in this category, since few demands are phrased in group terms
and there is little concept of a “public interest.”
The trustee sees himself as “a free agent in that, as a premise of his deci¬
sion-making behavior, he claims to follow what he considers right or just,
his convictions and principles, the dictates of his conscience.”34 He may feel
that his principles or objectives are in harmony with those he represents;
he may act on his own because he does not trust those from whom he might
take advice; and if his opinion differs from the opinions of his constituents,


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
182
he feels obliged to convince them that his position is correct. Few of those
with responses in the trustee category felt that their principles and objectives
were in harmony with those of their constituents; moreover, many felt that
the deputy himself should try to change opinions in his constituency.
The main job of the deputy is the transformation of the people. The deputy should not only be the servant of the people; he should not have to act for them in personal matters, but only in general matters.
The deputy’s main task is to deal with legislation in the parliament for the coun¬ try, his district, and the Greek people. Quite often people are confused about the deputy’s job; but the state machinery is responsible for this, not the people them¬ selves.
In my opinion the deputy must be mainly interested in the promotion of his dis¬ trict’s interests, and then in leading the people and his voters as a shepherd does. I don’t think there are many differences, except that voters try to use the deputy as their employee and to ask for impossible things.
He must work for the general interests of his people, and he must persuade his constituents and voters that this is the right path, and not the favor-making one.
The deputy must work for the elevation of the educational, cultural, and tech¬ nological standards of his district.... You know what the constituents think.
Several mentioned difference and said nothing more: “I have a basic dif¬
ference with my voters because they want me to carry on their personal cases
and only that.” One deputy evaded the issue by posing the confrontation in
different terms: “In the case of a difference between party policy and that
held by myself and constituents, I would publicly state my objections to
party policy.”
Regardless of this conflict in perceptions of the legislative role, the de¬
mands of the clientage system prevent much actual variation in legislative
behavior. Little policy is set by the parliament, and even that policy is of
little relevance to most voters; the average deputy is probably free to vote or
not to vote, as he wishes. The major determinant of voting behavior would
seem to be the demands of political leaders to whom the individual deputy
is tied through a high-level clientage network, since a deputy must provide
parliamentary support for the leaders of his political group if he is to receive
the political resources necessary to maintain his personal position.
The “delegate” category of representational roles is somewhat misleading
in the Greek context. A delegate is presumed to make legislative decisions
on the basis of instructions from his constituents, his party, or interest


The Parliamentary Level 183
groups. However, it is unlikely that many Greek constituents have views on
particular legislative proposals; they are simply not oriented to the input
side of the political system. The pervasiveness of personal demands retards
associational development, and this precludes instructions to the deputy
from interest groups. Although conjecture would give the political party
primary importance in legislative decision-making, no deputy mentioned
his party as the determiner of his vote. Presumably, deputies whose responses
put them in the delegate role are really perceiving themselves as representa¬
tives not in the legislative arena but in the state machinery itself. If they are
delegates, they represent traditional clientage networks; they do not seek
policy, but patronage. Almost every deputy deplores the errand-boy function
so pervasive in Greek politics; but in the final analysis, only those with sub¬
stantial staff assistance or strong support in their districts can afford not to
pander to the wishes of the voters.
The deputy must keep in close touch with the voters and listen to their demands. He must be on call 24 hours a day and listen to their fantastic demands. The con¬ stituents don’t care how well the deputy is educated or what he does in the par¬ liament as long as he serves them.
The deputy, in his work, should try to help his people solve their problems and should report to the parliament the problems, desires, and needs of the people he represents. He must study the problems of people by coming in contact with them. He must also take part in the meetings of the parliament.... In Greece and in some other countries, the deputy’s job is not what it should be. He is the servant of the people; the voters expect their deputy to solve their private prob¬ lems and to do favors for them.
Very few deputies looked upon themselves as representatives of particular
segments of the population, as did this deputy: “My passion is to serve the
poor working-class people... but perhaps from habit, or need, quite a few
voters, when they vote, see their deputy as the executor of their personal
affairs.”
Ordinarily, a representative is expected to be the spokesman for district
interests, since there is little else to represent. But Greek deputies do not feel
any need to discover the interests of their districts. In any case, the districts
are small enough so that interests are usually not very diverse. Although
some deputies mentioned their concern for national problems, most focused
on the district level.
A deputy must deal with the general problems of his district, and also with the personal problems of his constituents, which are many and various.


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
184
I know that the deputy must be sincere and honest, and one who knows the gen¬ eral problems of the district and stays away from micropolitics. Voters are inter¬ ested in national problems, but if the deputy doesn’t fulfill a personal favor he is
lost.
The deputy’s job is intense and continuous activity on behalf of his country, reli¬ gion, family, and people. To bring about a renaissance of the Cyclades and Syros, every party must have the same purpose.
The job of the deputy is difficult and complex. The mission of the deputy is na¬ tional representation. He has an obligation, theoretically, to deal with the country and society’s welfare. But in reality, there are so many demands from his voters that his need for reelection forces him to overlook moral rules, and even obliga¬ tions toward society, in order to become useful to their demands.
The district interest, in fact, merges with the personal interests of those to
whom a deputy has obligations in his constituency. The patronage and
favors that the deputy can provide cannot be distributed to the whole dis¬
trict; a minister might be able to provide public works or a plan of regional
development, but a deputy has only the means to satisfy individual demands.
SUMMARY
The Greek deputy is confronted with two general models for political
behavior. On the one hand, there is the Western pattern, in which legis¬
lators are presumed to be concerned with lawmaking, the representation of
general interests, and the balancing of conflicting social interests. The struc¬
ture and the rules of the Greek parliament are congruent with this model.
On the other hand, there is the traditional Greek pattern, with its clientage
networks that extend from the village to the parliamentary level and require
the satisfaction of individual demands. These personal demands are directed
at governmental output; they arise because of the basic distrust present in
Greek society, because of the malfunctioning of the state machinery, or be¬
cause of formalistic legislation. They are not the kind of demands that can
be absorbed in more generalized concerns. Each request must be satisfied
largely by intervention with the top political leaders or in the bureaucracy,
rather than through legislative activity.
As long as the Greek population remained rural and relatively unmobi¬
lized, and as long as the basic social organization depended on clientage, the
traditional political pattern was functional. The individual Greek recog¬
nized that the satisfaction of his demands rested on the mutual performance
of obligations, and did not expect to have access to patronage if the clientage


The Parliamentary Level 185
network to which he was connected was not in office. However, with urban¬
ization and with the decreasing isolation of the peasant, both economically
and intellectually, traditional legislative roles are subject to increasing strain.
First, social mobilization has produced more demands. Despite increasing
governmental resources (as measured by expenditures since 1954), scarcity
has never really been overcome. Second, many new problems cannot be
settled simply by the amelioration of individual dissatisfactions; they are
actually group needs, even if the individual does not perceive them as such.
Third, even Greeks in the more remote parts of the country demand equal
treatment, and they are less willing to accept the political consequences of
supporting the wrong man. And finally, there are increasing numbers of
Greeks involved in the clientage networks.
The Greek parliament, then, because of limitations imposed by its en¬
vironment, cannot operate as its Western counterparts do. Lawmaking in
the sense of providing solutions to broad problems or balancing conflicting
group interests does not occur at this level. However, the penetration of the
modern representative institutions by the traditional clientage structures has
given the parliamentary representative definite roles. The deputy represent¬
ing the least modern sectors of Greek society does function as a “tribune”;
he does represent his constituents in the battle with the state. As long as these
traditional roles are maintained—that is, as long as the satisfaction of indi¬
vidual demands remains the major focus—the stability of the larger system
is maintained. However, if a political group in the parliamentary milieu
should change its style, either because of new interest pressures in the society
or because of ideological reasons, the parliament would begin to operate
more on the Western model. Policy would be decided, and new resource
allocations would be made. Political blocs unrepresented at this level and
elements refusing to recognize parliamentary institutions as the authorita¬
tive decision-making agency would find this situation intolerable.


8. Politics at the Extraparliamentary Level
The level of Greek politics lying outside parliament can be termed the crisis
level. This is the arena where rival ideologies clash. During and after World
War I, the conflict over the nature of the regime and the direction of Greece’s
international allegiance was fought out between King Constantine and Ven
izelos at this level. In this instance, and during the crises caused by the rule of
General Ioannis Metaxas and by the civil war, the traditional political level
vanished or remained quiescent, only to reassert itself once “normality” had
been restored. Normality was usually restored because international society
expected a return to a democratic parliamentary structure, and because pro¬
longed rule by an extraparliamentary element soon fell into the traditional
political pattern. In the past, political crises that had to be resolved at the
extraparliamentary level were caused by disruptions within the parliamen¬
tary world, and the chief participants were also involved in parliamentary
politics. Today, an extraparliamentary level exists alongside the traditional
level; its forces, though standing apart from parliamentary politics, contin¬
ually intervene in parliament informally, usually because of conflict at the
extraparliamentary level itself.
The traditional patterns of personal politics in Greece were well suited to
the slow transition from an unmobilized society to a mobilized one. The
more modern forms of political organization found at the extraparliamen¬
tary level have only become important with the appearance of a large mobil¬
ized population and the increasing complexity of the international scene.
The events of the world wars, the influx of refugees, and the growing mar
ketization and urbanization of Greek society have produced a population
that cannot always be accommodated in the traditional parliamentary sys¬
tem. Some mobilized elements are no longer a part of traditional clientage
networks, and have demands that cannot be satisfied on an individual basis.
Because the traditional political organizations have monopolized the par¬
liamentary level, these new elements have operated outside of the parliamen¬
tary arena, where clientage ties are largely absent.


The Extraparliamentary Level 187
The extraparliamentary structures are characterized by hierarchic author¬
ity, impersonal bureaucratic organization, and ideological coherence. They
have been heavily influenced by foreign models. Two major components
of the consociational system are in this category: the military establishment
and the left-wing political organization, the EDA. Both are hostile to the
traditional parliamentary level, although both will cooperate with that level
in certain situations. They either actively oppose the traditions of patronage
and favoritism or grudgingly accept these practices as part of present-day
Greek reality. Both the Left and the military are concerned with policy, and
especially with modernization and economic development. However, the
ideologies and the policies they espouse are opposed on almost every sub¬
stantive point. The EDA would like to forge stronger ties with the neutral¬
ist and Communist countries, and to modify those with the West. The mili¬
tary views this as a treasonable policy. The Left advocates thoroughgoing
reforms within the traditional society. This would require an assessment of
governmental programs in terms of basic priorities, which would bring sig¬
nificant reductions in military spending. The military not only feels its own
position threatened, but looks upon the segments of the population who sup¬
port the EDA as unreliable citizens. The military tends to view itself as a
model for government operation; it feels that governmental policies them¬
selves are correct, but that they are administered incorrectly.
Any change in the relative position of the two extraparliamentary forces
creates a threat to the precarious balance of the consociational system. If the
Left seems likely to gain because of specific operations by traditional parties
or because of increasing frustrations among the modern, mobilized sector of
the population, the military must intervene. If the military gains because of
parliamentary policies or foreign assistance, the Left feels challenged. The
dynamics of the Greek political system hinge on the interplay between the
left wing and the military, and on their relations to the traditional level of
Greek politics.
THE MILITARY
In the nineteenth century, the Greek military took part in the factional
struggles of the parliamentary world. However, the military men of that
period were virtually indistinguishable from any other members of the
political elite. Throughout the period of the revolution, and well into inde¬
pendence, political and military leadership tended to coincide. The military
did not have a monopoly of higher education, as in Turkey. Although a
separate military school was created, it coexisted with the University of Ath


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
188
ens. In general, the Greek military was under civilian political control be¬
cause there was little differentiation between civilian and military leaders.
A competent professional army became necessary as Greek territorial as¬
pirations increased and as the armed forces of adjacent states, particularly
the Ottoman Empire, improved. The military academy was reformed, and
foreign military missions trained junior officers and noncoms. The new pro¬
fessionals, largely drawn from the growing middle class, imbued with mod¬
ern training, and formally separated from the political world, were no longer
willing to let dilettantes lose battles or monopolize the higher command po¬
sitions. Therefore, they constantly attacked the traditional military establish¬
ment represented by the crown prince and his brothers, particularly after the
Greek defeat by the Turks in 1897.
The professionalism of the new military establishment could only be pre¬
served and developed by intervention in civilian politics. For this reason,
professional officers formed the Military League, which promoted the revo¬
lution of 1909. At this point, Greek civil-military relations appear to fall into
the democratic-competitive category suggested by Morris Janowitz, in which
the military offers important political support to a civilian group.1 The older
governing groups were replaced, and the officers retired from the arena of
active politics after their demands had been met by the new political men.
The professional military was given social status, more independence, and
a greater role in Greek society. Unlike the military in many new states, the
Greek armed forces did have an immediate function. Greece was at war
almost continuously from 1912 to 1923 and from 1940 to 1949. A large part
of the national income went to the military; and a military career, like any
with security and bureaucratic status, was quite attractive to the average
Greek.
In spite of its new importance, the Greek military was not a completely
“modern” organization for some time after 1909. The crisis over foreign
alignment during World War I split the military establishment, as it did the
rest of Greek society, into rival camps supporting either Venizelos or King
Constantine. Each of these strong figures had a personal following in the
military, as well as a traditional clientage structure with military compo¬
nents, and each was backed by foreign powers. The Balkan wars permitted
many men to rise from the ranks; many of these new officers were devoted
to Venizelos. Constantine, too, had attempted to create personal ties in the
army by expanding royal use of the traditional kumbaros relationship. From
this time until the end of World War II and the civil war, there were really


The Extraparliamentary Level 189
two military blocs: Venizelist and republican, and anti-Venizelist and mon¬
archist.2
In 1922, younger officers staged a coup and executed the politicians and the
general deemed responsible for the Greek military failure in Asia Minor.
This was the capstone to military involvement in the political arena. By this
time, many younger officers were committed to the idea of a republican re¬
gime, and other military elements were clearly monarchists. Each of these
groups intervened whenever it appeared that the traditional parliamentary
groups with which they were identified might compromise on the regime
and return to normal parliamentary pursuits. As the political parties alter¬
nated in power, by either elections or coups, the officer corps of the Greek
military establishment also alternated in command positions. Each of the
political and military groups had its own formula of legitimacy and its own
ideal of state institutions.
This pattern was upset when General Metaxas seized power in 1936. The
republican officers were removed from the Greek armed forces, just as royal¬
ist forces had been demobilized during periods of republican power. The
left wing had gained strength as refugee and other urban elements, increas¬
ingly alienated from the traditional political forum, voted for the Commun¬
ist Party in 1936. The Metaxas regime, which represented the older, more
conservative, and highly professional military elements, attempted to elimi¬
nate all politics, Right, Center, and Left. The politicians of the Populist Party
were formally royalist; this did not prevent their detention and exile. It
would be a mistake to characterize the regime as merely super-royalist;
rather, it was antipolitical.
The military dictatorship of Metaxas, a variant of the traditional military
oligarchy, succeeded in removing parliamentary politics. Since they no
longer had access to government resources, the traditional politicians lost
their political ties and were forced into retirement. Only the Communists,
who had the necessary underground organization, retained their identity.
Metaxas made only half-hearted and unsuccessful efforts to create a mass
base. His nonpolitical, authoritarian regime lasted as long as it did because
of outside threats that gave it temporary legitimacy. Metaxas died at the
beginning of World War II, and his successor committed suicide; the king
then called upon a politician to lead Greece.
The armed forces that met the initial Italian invasion of Greece in 1940
were largely commanded by professional officers with royalist tendencies.
These “establishment” officers were far better trained, because of Metaxas’s


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
19O
efforts, than the republicans whom they had replaced. In fact, the former
republican officers, demobilized in 1935, served as enlisted men if they
served at all. After the Nazi occupation some of the regular officers collabor¬
ated with the occupation regime; others escaped from Greece to form the
nucleus of the Greek forces in exile. The republican officers, who mostly re¬
mained in Greece, could contribute to Allied victory only by service with the
resistance forces. Although these forces were aided by the British, they were
eventually dominated by Communist elements.
During the war the guerrilla movements in occupied Greece and the
Greek forces elsewhere in the Middle East were under British command. In
fact, by the end of the war the British had created two Greek armies: the
exile army was chiefly staffed by professional officers from the old army; the
resistance included republicans and new recruits. At the end of the war, once
the Communist direction of the resistance army was apparent, the exile
forces and the military men who had remained quiescent during the Nazi
occupation combined to form the new Greek military establishment. When
the civil war broke out, some republican officers remained in the guerrilla
forces; but nearly all officers and men ever involved in the major resistance
groups were considered Communists, if only by association.
Under the confused conditions at the end of the occupation and during the
early stages of the civil war, the military was unavoidably involved in the
traditional political world. Army units could not pursue guerrilla bands
because influential politicians demanded that provincial cities not be left un¬
defended. The system of staff control was impossible; orders came to be con¬
sensual instead of being issued through hierarchical command.3 The inabil¬
ity of the political leaders to manage domestic crises caused instability; this
increased the uneasiness of the military, since the degree of foreign military
and economic aid often depended on government stability. After the United
States announced the Truman Doctrine in 1947, the direction of the war was
taken from the politicians and placed in the hands of the general staff alone.
The establishment of a joint United States-Greek command further re¬
moved the conduct of the war from purely political considerations. The
United States supplied virtually all military equipment and much of the
direction.4 Officers and noncoms were sent to the United States for profes¬
sional training.
The defeat of all armed opposition in the last months of 1949 marked the
beginning of a new era for the Greek military—a period in which it emerged
as a major power bloc quite independent of the traditional parliamentary


The Extraparliamentary Level 191
level. The armed forces became a symbol of national unity; they had saved
the nation from the barbarians. The new Greek army, created by the fight
against the guerrillas, can be compared to armies formed by national libera¬
tion movements elsewhere. It had an ideological commitment, a cohesion
formed by common experiences, and a heightened sense of self-esteem.5
Once the old regime was reestablished, and once the monarchy was secure
as the national symbol, the military could assume a “nonpolitical” stance
while retaining an interest in politics. The army felt that its main purpose
was to protect the nation from Communists, both foreign and native. Its ex¬
ternal mission complete, it now proposed to maintain internal security. All
young Greek men are liable for military service, and those with higher edu¬
cation serve as reserve officers. The armed forces, especially the army, set up
a thorough indoctrination program to evoke anti-Communist sentiments
and to imbue recruits with loyalty to the nation, as represented by the armed
forces and the monarch as commander in chief. The military maintained
ties throughout the country by a network of military stations and a system
of reserve units, the TEA (Battalions of National Security). The split in
the military establishment that had been evident before the war no longer
existed. From the outside, at least, the Greek armed forces appeared to be
united and above politics.
The basic ideological position of the military, based on postwar experi¬
ences, was a hard-line anti-Communism. There was little awareness of the
contemporary Communist world, and little understanding of the Left’s
changing character in Greece itself. The goals of the military were shaped
to some degree by its dependence on the Americans, but the only common
theme was anti-Communism. Unlike other armies in developing countries,
the Greek military establishment had a limited view of its contribution to
modernization. It did not, for example, push for industrialization, even
when this would have improved military preparedness or national security.
Because of its self-imposed isolation and its dependence on the United States,
the military became more and more divorced from the other sectors of
Greek society. Association with the Americans and, later with the armed
forces of other NATO members, led the Greek military to operate closer to
the bureaucratic ideal than did most Greek institutions. Moreover, as the
military became technologically oriented, it became more dependent on the
outside world. The new norms of efficiency and incorruptibility increased
its hostility to the traditional political world.
The military remained the one group with a total institutional life for its


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
192
members. It had an exclusive means of communication through special
radio stations and other mass media. Subsidized commissaries, low-cost
housing, and other privileges removed the military, at least partially, from
the civilian world of scarcity and clientage. Of all the elements in Greek so¬
ciety, the military is, as Janowitz observes in another connection, “more
likely than other professional groups to have its members’ kinship ties
loosened and their sociometic ties more rooted within the organization.”6
The military can assume modern organizational forms and can decry tradi¬
tional politics because insecurity derived from scarcity is largely lacking
among its members.
Although essentially antipolitical, the military has used its resources to
gain friends at the micropolitical level of parliament. With universal mili¬
tary service, there are always civilian demands for military reassignments
or deferments, which are channeled through political leaders; similarly,
there is always pressure for commissions, and for promotions that can be
used to placate the politically powerful. The engineering branch of the
Greek Army not only has planning responsibilities in the field of public
works, but has mechanized units stationed throughout Greece to make
plans into reality; moreover, it has financial resources even greater than
those of military units. The military is able to favor its friends and ignore its
enemies when planning and executing public works. However, the formal
head of the defense establishment, until the 1967 coup, was a civilian, and
the military budget had to be formally approved by the parliament. Thus,
despite the military’s reluctance to deal with the traditional political level,
it could not entirely avoid involvement.
The Greek military establishment views itself as a threatened group exist¬
ing in a society mismanaged by corrupt politicians who are bent only on
personal power. From its perspective, the concerns of the parliamentary
level seem either trivial or dangerous. Generally, the career of an officer
does not equip him to understand the problems of economic scarcity; this
lack of understanding, combined with his ideological indoctrination, pre¬
vents him from realizing the basic reasons for the strength of his major ad¬
versary, the EDA.
THE MONARCHY
It is difficult to assess the place of the monarchy in the Greek political sys¬
tem. At times the monarch has actually held political power; at other times
he has merely been a pawn of others. The actual ruler, rather than the mon¬
archy itself, has always been the focus of loyalty or hostility. On occasion the


The Extraparliamentary Level 103
monarch, instead of promoting national unity, has caused fundamental
cleavage in the society; and he has often been the victim of conflicts orig¬
inating elsewhere in the society, beyond his control. Although the monarch¬
ies of Western Europe have symbolized continuity in societies undergoing
economic, political, and social change, the Greek monarch has seldom been
above the political milieu. He has usually been visibly for or against the
major changes occurring in the society, and has either supported or opposed
the major factions in the society.
The monarchical form of government was originally selected for Greece
because it was the most respectable in nineteenth-century Europe. Beyond
this, since the monarch himself was selected from outside the country and
was above the warring internal factions, both the institution and the in¬
cumbent were considered a force for stability. However, this aloofness also
meant that the monarchy as an institution and the monarch as a person did
not have strong roots in the country. The efforts of the first king, Otho, to
foster widespread support for himself and the monarchy were resisted by
the indigenous leaders, and ultimately caused his downfall. In practice, the
Greek monarchy has seldom been an apolitical unifying symbol. The king
has been forced to descend to the level of mutual obligation and patronage
whenever he has sought to inspire loyalty. Consequently, loyalty and com¬
mitment to the monarchy or the king himself have been as fragile as loyalty
to any ordinary political leader.
Although it is not a legitimate symbol of national unity, the Greek mon¬
archy does have an independent position in some minor areas. Their Majes¬
ties’ Fund, formerly the Queen’s Fund, has approximately $10 million per
year to distribute, and it is not under government supervision.7 The Fund
is financed by surcharges on the import duties of luxury items such as auto¬
mobiles; it also contracts for the manufacture of handicrafts and sells them
in its own shops. Primarily a welfare agency, it has the allegiance of those
who administer it, as well as those who benefit from its charitable activities.
In the Greek political culture, this allegiance can be translated into vigorous
political support. Apart form this, at least some Greeks do admire the mon¬
archy as an institution and the monarch as a person. For some, this is a cli¬
entage relationship; for others it is a sort of traditional deference. Finally,
socialization through the school and the church and political education in
the armed forces—although of questionable effectiveness, considering the
strength of primary group loyalties—have equated loyalty to the monarchy
with national loyalty.
The precarious position of the Greek state gave the monarch some im


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
194
portance in the nineteenth century. He could use his dynastic connections to
lobby for Greek interests, particularly territorial acquisitions and financial
assistance, among his cousins and uncles on the other thrones of Europe.
“The conception of the crown as a court of last appeal in the conduct of for¬
eign policy had come to be recognized as one of the conventions of the con¬
stitution”;8 and it remained unchallenged until World War I. Foreign pol¬
icy, because it included problems of foreign debt, franchises for foreign
investment in internal development, and trade agreements, could affect
almost every facet of domestic policy. Most Greeks expected the monarch to
use foreign policy to strengthen his own position by manipulations in the
domestic sector. Because of this, he was almost invariably drawn into domes¬
tic political questions. It was, in fact, customary that there could be no
change of government without some formal complaint against the conduct
of the crown.
The first king, Otho, was a compromise selection, but he did have satis¬
factory dynastic credentials. He was finally overthrown, but not because of
his unconstitutional actions and his efforts to undermine the position of the
indigenous leadership. Instead, he had identified himself with virulent
Greek nationalism and alienated the Great Powers, from whom future bene¬
fit had to come. He was jettisoned because he had failed to advance Greek
territorial ambitions and had become a national liability in the process. The
British contribution of the Ionian Islands at George I’s accession enhanced
the new king’s political stature; the eventual acquisition of Thessaly and
part of the Epirus was also helpful. However, the recurring problem of
Crete and the disastrous war with Turkey in 1897 put a cloud over the
monarchy. The revolution of 1909, though mainly directed against the estab¬
lished political elite, was also a protest against alleged royal failures in mili¬
tary matters. Credit for the great successes of Greece in the Balkan wars was
given to Premier Venizelos as much as to the king or royal princes. In nine¬
teenth-century Europe it was usual for the crown to be a major force in the
conduct of foreign policy; it was not so usual for the monarch to suffer per¬
sonally becauses of his foreign policy mistakes.
After the struggle between Venizelos and King Constantine before World
War I, the Greek monarchy had little to do with foreign policy, which for¬
mally became a matter for the political level. Since that time, the Greek
monarchs have been more the pawns of domestic political figures than the
actual manipulators of power. Republican military officers and outraged
radicals easily forced George II to sign the death warrants for the leading


i95
The Extraparliamentary Level
politicians of the right after the Anatolian debacle in 1922. When the crown
returned in 1935 after a republican interregnum, it was controlled by rightist
politicians. King George may have facilitated Metaxas’s takeover in 1936,
but he was in large measure unable to do more than acquiesce. A plebiscite
restored the monarchy in 1946, probably because estimations of the kind of
regime the Greeks needed at home were modified by estimations of the
kind she needed in order to get on with the Allies. Since the royal role in
foreign affairs has diminished, many voices have been ready to question the
wisdom of an annual expenditure of $650,000 to support the royal estab¬
lishment.9 There is constant criticism of specific special expenditures on
royalty, such as the dowry voted to Princess Sofia and the expenses for the
wedding of the king himself.
The character of Greek political groups gives the monarchy a natural
place in the traditional political system, and the king has always been in¬
volved in parliamentary politics. A recent premier argued that the monarch
was necessary because he was the one stable element in a nation given to
political volatility.10 Presumably, he was implying that the selection of a
head of state by normal electoral processes would be more than the political
system could bear, and that parliamentary politics needed a “nonpartisan”
referee. Moreover, the king does have some formal power, in that he ap¬
points the premier. During the first decades of the Gluecksburg dynasty
there was no actual limit on the king’s power to appoint or dismiss ministers
and to dissolve the parliament, and George I frequently worked with mi¬
nority or extraparliamentary governments.11 This practice later receded, but
not because of any constitutional prohibitions. The monarch could still act
arbitrarily when it suited him: for example, Venizelos was both the bene¬
ficiary and the victim of royal authority to remove ministers and premiers,
even those enjoying the confidence of the parliament. The provisions of the
1952 constitution were relatively vague concerning the relationship of the
king to his ministers. The king could not issue any order unsigned by a
responsible minister; however, there was no collective cabinet responsibility,
and a single minister could cooperate with the king without the premier’s
permission. Likewise, if one government refused to cosign a royal order for
its own dissolution, the next government could.
The main reason for the king’s role at the parliamentary level is the
factional political structure itself, which gives him great freedom in issuing
invitations to form governments. This was obvious during the immediate
postwar period, when no party had a majority, and in 1955, when Karaman


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
196
lis was selected as premier after the death of Papagos. The system began to
break down in 1965-66, when George Papandreau protested that his dis¬
missal by King Constantine was unconstitutional; his supporters in parlia¬
ment and in the streets nearly blocked the king’s appointment of a new
premier. The vagueness of the constitution and the factional character of
Papandreou’s Center Union party allowed Constantine to have his way.12
The coup of April 1967 and the later flight of the king to Italy revealed the
precarious position of the monarch as an actor in the consociational Greek
system. The involvement of the king at the parliamentary level had con¬
flicted with his position toward the military at the extraparliamentary one.
THE LEFT
The National Liberation Movement (EAM) and its military arm
(ELAS) had functioned as the virtual government for much of Greece
during the later years of the Nazi occupation. Since the occupying forces
were stationed only in the few large cities, the EAM was almost completely
in control of the country. It had an operating government that held elec¬
tions and congresses, and even a functioning school system using specially
printed texts.13 The prime movers of the resistance were the Communists,
though other leftist groups and some Center politicians were involved.
Dimitrios Kousoulas argues that the situation in 1946 strongly favored a
Communist takeover. The party was legitimate; it had cadres and influence
because of its role in the resistance.14 The older generation of political lead¬
ers was occupied with personal quarrels or the question of the monarchy.
The disorganized economy, the breakdown of administration, and the fact
that most of the country was occupied by Communist-led resistance groups
seemed to give the Communist Party of Greece (KKE) an undisputed ad¬
vantage. But the advantage was dissipated by Communist brutality toward
domestic opponents, and ultimately lost when the party could not retain the
loyalty of the population under its control. The visible Left was smashed by
the civil war. The KKE and its associated parties were eventually proscribed,
and the climate of opinion made it difficult for left-wing public sentiment to
reassert itself for some time. The Greek resistance movement and its later
transformation to Communist insurgence closely resembled resistance move¬
ments and rebellions elsewhere, particularly in former colonial areas; how¬
ever, the ultimate collapse of the Greek movement prevented the social revo¬
lution that tended to accompany other liberation movements.
In 1950 several socialist splinter parties, together with various trade-union


The Extraparliamentary Level 197
elements, formed the Democratic Front (Demokratiki Parataksis, DP) in
order to compete in the elections. The following year these same groups
founded the United Democratic Left (Eniaia Demokratiki Aristera, EDA).
The announced aims of the new organization were “peace, democracy, and
amnesty.” The EDA, unlike other groups operating under party labels in
Greece, does meet the requirements of a political party as suggested by La
Palombara and Weiner: continuity of organization; permanent organiza¬
tion at the local level, with firm ties between local and national units; de¬
termination of leaders at every level to capture and hold decision-making
power in the society; and a concern with seeking popular support. Beyond
this, the EDA in many ways conforms to Riggs’s description of a “com¬
bative” party, and to Giovanni Sartori’s model of an “anti-system” party.
The EDA represents those with no ties or access to the government
through the traditional parties, and its supporters are largely those who op¬
pose the existing political system. Naturally, the electoral system has in¬
variably been manipulated to discriminate against it. The EDA parliamen¬
tary group has little influence in politics at that level, and is not viewed as
a possible coalition partner or a potential government. It is not recognized
as the equal of the other parties by either the crown or the state apparatus.
The demands formulated by the EDA cannot be met through the existing
state machinery, since even the minimal social changes that the party pro¬
motes drastically alter the society and the status quo.
Organization
The other major parties in Greece are highly organized in theory, but not
in reality. The theory and practice of EDA organization tend to coincide.
In fact, the EDA’s success has stimulated the development of formal organi¬
zation in the traditional parties. The current organizational structure of the
EDA is based on party statutes adopted in 1955, and resembles that of other
left-wing parties in Western Europe.15 The family loyalties and clientage
ties normal in other Greek parties are discouraged. The involvement of a
man’s family in politics, though useful in evoking early interest and aware¬
ness, is not crucial to the initiation of a parliamentary career under EDA
auspices. The party is most successful in urban settings, where family ties
are tenuous or lacking, even among candidates from the major political
constellations.
The EDA discourages the formation of personal or clientage ties be¬
tween its deputies and their constituents, and deputies appear to be rotated


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
198
from one area to another. The deputies do not handle requests for patronage
or favors, and the party asks its members not to make them. The requests
that do arise, whatever their source, are handled directly by the party secre¬
tariat. Requests for government assistance—and especially complaints of
bureaucratic intimidation—are forwarded to the EDA deputy from the
province nearest to their origin. Ordinary complaints will rate separate tele¬
grams to the ministry concerned, the president of parliament, and the press.
A more serious complaint might call for a question in parliament.
The EDA has functioning organizations in most parts of the country.
During much of the Karamanlis administration, however, the activities of
the party were severely curtailed, especially at the lowest levels. The circula¬
tion of the party press was virtually restricted to Athens and Thessaloniki
and their environs. Only in areas with great concentrations of EDA strength
such as Mytilini, could the local committees operate openly.
The lowest EDA units are in individual villages, and at the neighborhood
level in the larger cities; occasionally, they are based on place of employ¬
ment. These primary party organs must have at least three members. De¬
pending upon size, they are directed by a single secretary or by a committee
of three to seven members. The EK or ERE units at this level, when there
is any organization whatsoever, are composed of local men who “own” a
certain number of votes, but even here the EDA has a more or less profes¬
sional staff. The next level of organization is in eparchies and cities of over
100,000 population. Finally, there are organizations at the nomoi (depart¬
mental) level, and regional organizations for Macedonia and the Pelopon¬
nesus. The departmental and city organizations send representatives to the
Party Congress, which is supposed to meet at three-year intervals. The en¬
tire EDA parliamentary delegation also attends. The congress sets the gen¬
eral party line and elects the governing committee of the party, which is
responsible for affairs between congresses. In 1965, the governing commit¬
tee had 95 members; it met about five times, although it is specifically
charged with meeting only twice during a calendar year. The presiding
officer elected by the governing committee becomes the president of the
party.
The governing committee determines the size of the executive commit¬
tee, and selects the membership from its own ranks. This smaller commit¬
tee (it had 15 members in 1965) generally meets weekly and handles day
to-day policy. Its members include the president of the party, a number of
parliamentary deputies, and some officials drawn from the party secretariat.


The Extraparliamentary Level 199
The Secretariat consists of special commissions set up by the governing
committee; in general, these are assigned to party organization, trade unions,
women, and cooperatives. A separate supervisory committee to handle
problems of discipline and party finance is elected by the party congress from
those not on the governing committee. Other supplemental party organi¬
zations are permitted by the party constitution. The governing committee
can convene a “panhellenic” congress between sessions of the party congress
to modify the party lines; a similar conference, with more limited powers,
can be called more easily for the same purpose. There is also provision for a
national council to study newly raised issues and advise the other party or¬
ganizations.
The EDA in the period under study was committed to a parliamentary
role, and the parliamentary delegation seemed to take the lead in the formu¬
lation of day-to-day party policy. The chairman of the party himself was
a member of parliament; in 1965, the executive committee included six
deputies. In case of a controversy between the deputies and the rest of the
executive committee, the dispute would be taken to the governing commit¬
tee. There is no evidence that this ever occurred.
Although EDA literature emphasizes the democratic nature of party or¬
ganization, democratic centralism is the operative principle of the party,
operating in Greece much as it does elsewhere. Discussions are held at the
lower party levels, and resolutions do advance up the hierarchy; but real
direction and initiative come mainly from the summit of the organizational
network. Even in formal terms, the powers of the governing committee and
the executive committee seem to limit the real authority of the supposedly
supreme party congress. The governing committee determines the agenda of
the congress and provides the chairman. The executive committee can re¬
place old members of any party organization or appoint additional mem¬
bers; any action along these lines by the lesser party organs must be ratified
by the executive committee. Nevertheless, the EDA’s lower party agencies
do have at least as much influence as those of the other Greek parties. The
EDA is relatively unified when compared with its competitors, and does
not have major problems of internal conflict between the party leader and
the parliamentary deputies. This does not mean, however, that personal
conflict reminiscent of that in the traditional political groups is unknown
in the EDA it is simply obscured by ideological bickering.
Like other parties, the EDA includes some people who actively seek nomi¬
nation; but more often, particularly since EDA nomination means auto


200 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
matic defeat in some areas, the party does the recruiting. Formally, the
local committees propose candidates, and the governing committee merely
ratifies their choices; but in actuality, most choices are made by the smaller
executive committee. There seems to be a conscious effort to select can¬
didates with the proper proletarian background. There is no internal
struggle among the candidates because everyone knows who has a chance
of getting elected and who has not. Certain party figures are always renomi¬
nated and reelected, but the majority of the parliamentary delegation
changes at each election. Major electoral decisions—for example, the decision
to join Papandreou’s Democratic Union for electoral purposes in 1956—are
made by the governing committee.
The financial aspects of the EDA are actually more visible than those of
other Greek parties, although it is difficult to come to any definitive conclu¬
sions about them. Other parties look with skepticism on EDA claims of
financial self-sufficiency; however, this may be because of their own de¬
pendence on foreign and governmental funds. The EDA, unlike the other
parties, does have a formal membership requirement, with minimum dues
of ten drachmae per year (about 33 cents) ; but apparently there is a sliding
scale of payment for members with more ample financial resources. In ad¬
dition, the party collects the parliamentary salary of each of its deputies,
amounting to 13,500 drachmae per month, and remits to the deputy a flat
4,000 per month. A substantial amount of EDA revenue comes from “friends
of the party,” both in Greece and abroad, and from certain trade unions.
Financial assessments are made upon local party organizations, and these
must be raised through dues or special contributions. The party also con¬
ducts house-to-house fund-raising drives in some areas in Athens and Piraeus
where EDA membership is concentrated, and these can be quite successful:
the financial campaign of 1965, necessary because two national elections and
one local election were held in one 12-month period, set a goal of 7 million
drachmae and collected over 9 million.16 The EDA also maintains several
shops in Athens that sell goods made in Communist nations.
Notwithstanding, the EDA’s ability to meet current expenses out of the
limited financial resources of its supporters might be questioned. However,
the intense activity in party headquarters, the constant stream of literature,
and the endless demonstrations and meetings do not cost the EDA as much
as they might cost another party. The commitment and solidarity of EDA
members mean that the personnel at party headquarters work for less than
do those associated with the other Greek parties. The EK and the ERE must


201
The Extraparliamentary Level
hire men to hold their placards during election campaigns. The EDA has
willing volunteers, and its rallies are far superior to those of the other po¬
litical groups: artists and craftsmen decorate the platform, and poets and
musicians perform prior to the speeches, all without cost. There are EDA
members in business who are willing to provide services and supplies at
less than the market rate because of party loyalty. The party also uses the
special privileges of its deputies, such as free postage and telephone service,
for its own purposes; in other parties, individual deputies are allowed to
take advantage of these exemptions to advance their personal interests.
Meynaud suggests that outside assistance, essentially meaning that coming
from the Communist nations, is limited to occasional special contributions.17
In any case, the EDA’s strenuous efforts at domestic fund raising would
indicate that foreign sources are not a primary source of support.
Program
The EDA has a coherent program, based on its application of marxist
ideology to Greek society.18 Unfortunately the marxist phraseology of its
pronouncements is by itself enough to discredit the party in the view of
many Greeks. The efforts of the EDA to secure the legalization of the Com¬
munist Party also make it suspect. Finally, the stand of the EDA on foreign
policy issues differs from the general Greek outlook. It is the party stand
in these areas rather than its program of social reform, that alarms the
military and some elements in the parliament.
One of the major items in EDA programs has always been the restoration
of “democracy”—which includes, first and foremost, the legalization of the
Communist Party. All administrative rulings and legislation directed
against the KKE must be revised, especially Article ioo of the constitu¬
tion, which states that “ideologies advocating change of the existing con¬
stitutional or social regime by force and violence are absolutely unacceptable
for those holding public office.”19 The precise effect of this stand on the
EDA’s success is difficult to determine. In a sense, the constancy of the de¬
mand alienates some potential supporters, since it makes the EDA appear
as the handmaiden of the KKE. The party states publicly that the “KKE
never ceased to play a considerable role in Greek public life”;20 there is no
other place for this role to be played than in the EDA. However, the co¬
hesiveness and solidarity of the EDA may well depend on the harrassment
directed at it because of this association.
Even though most Greeks regard the EDA as only a stand-in for the Com


202 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
munists, it has received 10-20 per cent of the popular vote in recent elec¬
tions. The proportion of the vote that is actually Communist is impossible
to determine: the last election in which the Communists legally partici¬
pated was that of 1936, in which they received 6 per cent of the vote. Even
then, the dedicated Communists and the mere protestors cannot be sepa¬
rated. The KKE in exile claims to have accepted evolutionary and parlia¬
mentary tactics. Even so, if the party were reinstated, the EDA could no
longer be considered the “extreme left.” Once the most militant element in
the EDA leadership was removed, the party would not differ significantly
from left-wing socialist parties elsewhere in Europe. Moreover, it would
still not fall into the persistent-polyarchic mold of other Greek parties.
Some Greeks feel that EDA pronouncements on foreign affairs are suffi¬
cient evidence of the party’s Communist character; and the EDA does echo
Soviet policies. Occasionally, Russian activities, particularly Russian support
of Turkey in the Cyprus controversy, have put the EDA in a difficult politi¬
cal position. The party’s efforts to establish good relations with the other
Eastern bloc nations, e.g., its advocacy of a demilitarized zone in Eastern
Europe, also alienate many Greeks. The EDA has consistently denounced
Greece’s membership in NATO and association with the Common Market
as infringements on Greek independence. Both organizations are blamed
for the country’s submission to Western views on the Cyprus question under
both the Karamanlis and Papandreou governments. Full membership in
the Common Market would supposedly bring in more foreign monopoly
capital, keeping Greece industrially backward; and Greek industry would
not be able to compete with industry in other member nations. The EDA
was the first group to voice these sentiments, but it is certainly not the only
one. It is, however, alone in regarding the Soviet Union as an honest broker
for the settlement of all outstanding world problems, as well as matters
specifically affecting Greece.
The EDA’s domestic program and its analysis of the Greek social system
are set forth in For a National Democratic Change, a document adopted
in 1956. Greece is described as an almost classic “colonial” country, controlled
by foreign imperialists and their local representatives. The ERE is attached
to the United States and NATO; it is the party of the large capitalists. The
EK, in the eyes of the EDA theoreticians, is largely representative of the
petty bourgeoisie; it is deficient because it has no consistent policy of pro¬
moting Greek “independence.” Basically, Greece is “an underdeveloped
country, industrially backward, without a heavy industry, with a weak light


The Extraparliamentary Level 203
industry and certain semi-feudal elements.”21 An “independent Greece,”
that is, independent of the West, must be created before these conditions
can be overcome. The EDA charges that the paucity of Greek heavy in¬
dustry is caused by foreign capitalists, who manipulate national financial
markets to keep Greece a consumer of foreign industrial goods and a source
of raw material. American aid policy is blamed for the lack of agricultural
improvement. The enormous proportion of the budget devoted to military
expenditure precludes adequate state assistance to industry or agriculture.
The description of objective economic conditions is not dissimilar from that
offered by respected non-marxist economists;22 however, the EDA analysis
places the blame on dubious causes and suggests uncertain remedies. Re¬
gardless, the EDA program does, in both domestic and foreign proposals,
suggest a new national identity and a new basis for political integration in
Greece.
The EDA, besides advocating a new national independence, has tried to
assume the role of successor to the revolutionaries of 1821. The literature of
the EDA maintains that the German occupation and the resistance consti¬
tuted a second revolution, which temporarily eliminated foreign interference
and changed the Greek social structure. These advances were swept away by
the Truman Doctrine and American intervention, which reestablished a
non-democratic foreign-serving (and by implication illegitimate) regime.
The EDA is the contemporary extension of the wartime resistance, and a
continuing symbol of legitimacy. Unfortunately, this position is tenuous be¬
cause the linking of the national resistance movement and the EDA is not
as complete as the literature implies. The analysis concludes that all patri¬
otic forces must unite before true national independence can be secured.
The working class must join with the peasantry as the nucleus for a wider
movement that will finally include the middle strata of the towns, and even
the national bourgeoisie.
The specific goals mentioned in National Democratic Change seem irrel¬
evant to the foregoing analysis. The program is certainly not socialist; in
many respects it does not differ from that proposed by the Center Union.
The EDA goals envision a Greece that is “free, well-fed, gay, and civilized,”
and worthy of its great traditions.23 Revolution and the class struggle are not
mentioned. The EDA, like the other Greek parties, hopes to gain support
by appealing to specific sectors of Greek society, and its program seems de¬
signed for electoral purposes. The party assumes that parliament will be the
major arena for political and social change. The EDA appeal for a return to


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
204
the simple proportional representation system is one part of this parliamen¬
tary orientation.
The EDA program vows to raise the standard of living in Greece. Al¬
though it is assumed that economic development will eventually do this, the
specifics of the program seem to depend on immediate public financing. It
does not seem likely that the EDA would be as successful as the EK in bal¬
ancing these two requirements. Industrialization is to be financed through
a revision of priorities. Military expenditures are to be reduced, imports re¬
stricted, and exports, especially to eastern bloc nations, increased. These pro¬
posals rest, of course, on the assumption of a Greek withdrawal from NATO
and the Common Market. Even if this occurred, the reliance upon the east¬
ern bloc and the complexities of the Greek economic picture make the task
easier to suggest than to accomplish. Revenues are to be increased by pro¬
moting tourism and expanding the merchant marine. Additional funds for
industrialization, however, are supposed to come from abroad without any
terms or political strings. Moreover, the EDA program seems quite unreal¬
istic in its estimate of energy resources and mineral deposits. A significant
heavy industry may actually be an impossibility, given Greek resources. All
in all, the concrete proposals of the EDA are much like those of the EK.
The rest of the EDA’s program seems less attuned to internal economic
development than to providing benefits for the entire range of EDA sup¬
porters and penalizing those who benefit from the existing regime. The only
social class scheduled for complete transformation is the group of wealthy
families most involved with foreign monopolies. These families monopolize
the two major banking groups, large-scale industry, trade, and the merchant
marine. Banking is to be nationalized, but joint state-private ventures are to
be encouraged in other fields, particularly in chemicals, agricultural pro¬
cessing, and the metals industries. Land reform is to be applied to the estates
of the few remaining large landowners, such as the church and the royal
family. New subsidies to agriculture and relief from existing debts to the
Agricultural Bank are part of the platform, which also suggests a renewal of
agricultural cooperatives in order to encourage technical improvements and
the raising of more profitable crops. The worker is promised higher wages
and pensions, together with improved social insurance schemes. The trade
union movement is to be reformed, and labor legislation improved. Even
the lower clergy is to receive greater financial benefits. The small business¬
men and craftsmen will obtain easier credit and improved social insurance
benefits. The national bourgeoisie, unlike those Greeks with international


The Extraparliamentary Level 205
connections, would be assisted by protective legislation. The EDA also ad¬
vocates a drastic curtailment of indirect taxation and an increased use of
direct taxation; in this case, the personal exemption would be raised, and in¬
creased tax rates would be applied to those with greater income. The non¬
economic sectors of society are not forgotten. Women, as a group, are to ben¬
efit by the lifting of all legal, social, and economic distinctions between the
sexes.
The educational program of the state would be completely reworked with
the EDA in power. First, educational opportunity would be expanded by
extending the compulsory educational system and opening university places
to all Greeks, regardless of their political beliefs. The EDA also makes an
explicit demand for a better quality of education. The existing system is
viewed as anachronistic; it is devoted to foreign cultures rather than to the
promotion of patriotism and democracy at home. One major reform would
be the introduction of demotic as the official language of the state and
higher education.
All these proposals, according to the EDA, will be feasible only when
Greek ties to the West have been revised. The difficulties of the Greek econ¬
omy—unemployment, emigration, deficit financing, and the poverty of the
countryside—all come from the absence of industrialization, and this lack is
perpetuated by Greece’s “colonial” status. The party never considers the real¬
ities of the international world, the cultural impediments to industry in
Greece itself, and the paucity of Greek resources. It does recognize one major
obstacle, the traditional distrust of government authority. However, it is ar¬
gued that once authority is not in the hands of the local oligarchs and subject
to foreign influence, this distrust will disappear. Moreover, the party would
make every effort to increase the people’s active participation in government
at every level. Traditional favoritism by the legal and administrative systems
would be eliminated; but how this would be done is not clear. This analysis
fails to consider all of the cultural and environmental factors that have pro¬
moted the negative attitude toward authority. Since the EDA does not seem
to envisage a total revolution, it is difficult to see how these influences would
disappear.
Membership
The ERE and some segments of the EK view the EDA as nothing more
than a manifestation of the illegal KKE. Some Center elements, however,
look upon the EDA as merely the left wing of the Greek republican tradi


206 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Table 8.1. Political Backgrounds of Left Candidates, 1950-63
Year Candidates
Parties of previous candidatures
Left Minor Center Right
1950 41 85.8% 8.7% 5.5% 
1951 184 83.1 8.2 6.7 2.0% 1952 78 87.8 4.2 7.9 1958 123 82.7 9.7 5.6 1.7 1961 177 80.0 9.7 8.0 2.3 1963 163 91.9 3.7 3.7 0.7
Note: This table does not include new entrants.
tion. For its part, the EDA explicitly claims to have Communists, socialists,
and all other progressive democrats among its members. It is obvious that
some Communists are attracted to the party because they have no other legal
avenue for political action. Several EDA deputies had prewar affiliations
with the KKE; other party figures had roles in the resistance or the civil war.
Moreover, the party prefers to select its officers and candidates from men
who were imprisoned for political activities or ostensible criminal activity
during the civil war. One non-EDA deputy suggested that perhaps a third
of the EDA parliamentary membership was Communist. In any case, the
party has few elements that are not drawn from the Left (see Table 8.1).
Dissension in the EDA tends to concern policy, not party organization or
ministerial positions. However, personality clashes are often masked by ideo¬
logical disputes. The question of national security is the chief difference of
opinion between the Right and Center parties as groups, but in the EDA it
causes internal friction. Even worse is the problem of whether to pursue a
moderate course or to press for unlimited change, which is reflected in inter¬
nal compromises over program and tactics. Certainly, the KKE would not
settle for the social and economic program of the EDA as a final goal; at
most, it would be a tactical maneuver.
Although the EDA claims to have accepted the evolutionary and parlia¬
mentary course, it still mobilizes the population for extraparliamentary ac¬
tivities that challenge the legitimacy of traditional politics and of the conso
ciational system itself. Any distrust or dissatisfaction with government on
the part of labor, agriculture, the professions, or the students, is exploited
for party purposes. Street demonstrations have been a part of the Greek
scene for much longer than the EDA has existed, and those in Athens have
been responsible for the fall of several regimes and many governments.


The Extraparliamentary Level 207
However, EDA militants now take leading roles in most extraparliamen¬
tary disturbances. In fact, the party claims to organize or support, morally
and materially, all such activities, even when its role has been minimal. It
attempts to turn them not only against the government in power but against
the basic political system. The major cities—particularly the Athens-Piraeus
complex, since it is the seat of government and has the largest concentration
of EDA supporters—are under almost constant siege by one organization
or another.
Electoral Analysis
R. V. Burks argues that Communism in Eastern Europe attracts two
broad categories of supporters: those who originate in a “badly disturbed
social order,” and those who reflect the impact of Western civilization on
the more backward East European provinces.24 In the first category he places
refugees and farmers with cash crops; in the second, he puts youth and
women. Surprisingly, he finds little relationship between Left affiliation and
class position, and suggests that personal insecurity, whatever its cause, pro¬
vides the most common motive. This hypothesis also fits the Greek situa¬
tion. Between the world wars, refugees were the major group unable to
solve problems of personal insecurity. Since that time, the Left has appealed
to the lower classes in the urban areas, who are similarly unable to utilize
traditional clientage ties.
The most obvious change in the position of the Left over the last several
decades has been the increase in the vote given to it (see Table 8.2).25 The
groups who supported the KKE in 1936 still support the Left under the
EDA label. However, the EDA has extended its appeal to other elements in
Table 8.2. Vote for the Gree\ Left since 1936
Percentage Percentage of of Year total vote Year total vote
1936 5.76% 1956 1946 — 1958 24.42% 1950 9.70 1961 14.62 1951 10.57 1963 14.34 1952 9.55 1964 11.80
Note: No Left parties ran in 1946; the EDA-EK coalition in 1956 precludes a separate per¬ centage for the Left.


208 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
the Greek population, despite the constant harassment of those who persist
in left-wing political beliefs.
Nineteen scattered eparchies in Greece can be classed as generally com¬
petitive.* In these areas any one of the three major political groups might re¬
ceive a plurality of votes; in other words, the Left has enough electoral
strength to compete. Votes for the Left are relatively sparse in the great ma¬
jority of rural constituencies; however, rural support increases in the prov¬
inces added to the Greek state in the twentieth century. These are districts
with a more modern agricultural sector, more refugees, and fewer clientage
ties to bureaucrats and politicians in Athens. There are some exceptions to
the general pattern of EDA rural weakness. The island of Lefkas supports
the EDA because a local notable, a doctor, runs on the EDA electoral list.
The eparchy of Palis on the island of Kefallinis is harder to explain; the high
percentage of men from the island employed in the merchant marine may
have some relationship to EDA strength there. The island of Thasos off the
Thracian coast and Ikaria, the small island adjacent to Samos, are also in¬
cluded in the competitive category; the reasons for left-wing strength in
these areas seem obscure. The only competitive rural district in continental
Greece is the eparchy of Tirnavos in Thessaly. The long tradition of agrarian
discontent in this region could possibly account for this radicalism; if so, one
cannot explain the relative quiescence of adjacent eparchies with a similar
past. EDA strength in rural Greece does not seem to be related to agricul¬
tural difficulties. Correlation analysis using rural population per square
kilometer and EDA vote in 1958 resulted in a modest Pearson r value of
.266. Analysis using particular cash crops did not produce anything better.26
The strength of the Left in Greece today is directly related to the status
of the refugees who arrived in the early 1920’s. They comprised about a quar¬
ter of the population at that time, and had a great impact upon the political,
social, and economic aspects of Greek life. The refugees themselves were of
diverse backgrounds: those from central Anatolia, the Anatolian littoral,
Constantinople, the Caucasus, and eastern Thrace, as well as the smaller
groups from other Balkan states, all differed in dialect and culture.27 Re¬
gardless of their background, most refugees were not immediately accepted
by the native Greeks. There had long been a minority in Greece who ex¬
pressed resentment against Greeks from abroad, and the large infusion of
refugees introduced a discordant note into the political system.
* For a complete classification of eparchies, see Appendix B, pp. 324-27.


The Extraparliamentary Level 209
The settlement of many agricultural refugees meant that there was less
land for the indigenous Greeks to divide. In the towns, the refugee business¬
men, entrepreneurs, and craftsmen had greater skills and more worldwide
contacts than the more provincial Greeks of the kingdom. The entrepreneur
from outside the kingdom was more likely to have a Western education,
experience with Western techniques and knowledge of Western tastes. A
1961 survey showed that one out of five Greek industrialists had been born in
Turkey.28 Native Greeks often disguised their awareness of these economic
considerations by a hostility based on the premise that people with such dif¬
ferent customs and such peculiar dialects could not be truly Greek. Al¬
though the origins and cultural levels of the refugees varied, it was not dif¬
ficult for the native Greek to assume that the cultural level of all refugees
was equal to that of the least cultured.
Politically, the refugees supported Venizelos almost to a man. King Con¬
stantine and the politicians of the Populist Party were viewed as responsible
for the defeat in Asia Minor. Venizelos, they thought, would have piloted
the Greeks to victory, and the native Greeks had removed him from the
helm of state at the most critical juncture. In any event, the loyalty of the
refugees went to Venizelos as a person, and not to the Greek state or the
king. They continued to support him and the Liberal Party until his death.
Urban refugees, resettled in the new communities near Athens, were levers
available for Liberal and republican politicians to use against their Populist
and monarchist opponents. Very shortly, the refugee vote became crucial
for political control. Both General Pangalos and General Kondylis achieved
power in the twenties with refugee assistance.29
The Communists were more successful in recruiting voters and sympathy
among the refugees than among the indigenous Greeks from the very begin¬
ning, but it was not until the romance with Venizelos began to fade that
they made great strides. The Liberal’s support began to shift to the Left after
the abandonment of refugee claims against Turkey in the 1930’s, when
Venizelos sacrificed domestic support to get a rapprochement with Turkey.
A substantial shift from the Liberal Party occurred in 1936; the political loy¬
alty of many refugees has been to the parties of the Left since that time.30
The government’s promises of housing and land for all refugees remained
unfulfilled throughout the interwar period and well into the present. Those
refugees who were resettled in rural areas often had grievances also. To
some extent, the national aim of hellenizing Macedonia was given priority
over the economic well-being of the refugees. Many were settled in the in


210 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
hospitable borderland, rather than on more desirable land in less strategic
places. Under the system of land distribution, the native Greek tenant farm¬
er was given a larger and better landholding than the incoming refugee.
Many refugees, who had never known land scarcity, were annoyed at the
small size of their farms and the different technical requirements for culti¬
vation.
The most nontraditional of the Greek parties, the Communists, were able
to capitalize on refugee dissatisfactions. Burks found high coefficients of cor¬
relation between refugee settlement and Communist vote: the coefficient
was .62 in 1926, .57 in 1933, and .67 in 1936.31 Communist ideology was sharp¬
ened to appeal to those frustrated with a new and often more difficult life.
Perhaps the fact that many of the refugees came from the Soviet Union
made them more susceptible to this appeal. More important, the traditional
Greek political structures, built on personal political relationships running
from the small community to the national level, simply did not admit the
refugee to membership. The refugee was an outsider in most communities,
and there were very few places in which refugees were the majority of the
voting population.
The refugee groups created a refugee press and began to organize for
political purposes very early, although their diversity and their dispersion
throughout the nation tended to hinder these efforts. This organization was
built on the one thing that all refugees had in common: their separateness
from the rest of the Greek people. The attempt to build a bond of “refugee
ness” that would equal the tie of the ordinary Greek to his political patron
was not completely successful. Electoral districts were gerrymandered to
minimize the possibility of refugee majorities; and many of the refugees
were women and children, who could not vote. After 1926, the independent
refugee parties began to die out.
All political groupings eventually put refugees on their political lists, but
they were most successful in the Liberal Party, led by Venizelos. However,
refugees provided a larger percentage of the vote for the KKE than they did
for any other party.82 Refugee deputies sometimes received cabinet posts,
although only the lesser positions usually came their way. One of the vice¬
presidencies of parliament was also reserved for a refugee deputy. Leading
refugee politicians could be assured of at least a minimal political career in
the older political groupings. But the very fact that certain positions were
considered “refugee posts” tended to perpetuate the refugee’s separation
from other Greeks. In addition, the refugees never had a parliamentary rep


The Extraparliamentary Level 211
Table 8.3. Refugee Deputies in Parliament
Year Number
Percentage of parliament
1923 43 10.8% 1926 36 12.5 1928 34 13.6 1932 39 15.2 1933 30 12.0 1946 35 10.1 1958 36 12.0 1964 32 10.8
reservation that matched their real strength in the population (see Table
8.3).33 As Table 8.4 indicates, the correlation between the left-wing vote and
refugee settlement has declined since the war. To some degree this would be
expected, given the dislocations caused by conditions since 1936. The refugee
census of 1928 has not been repeated, and can hardly produce much of a
correlation with current electoral data. Individual refugees, particularly
those who have risen in social status, are probably voting for other parties;
those who have not been so successful seem to have remained with the Left.
Successful refugees are more likely to be accepted into traditional clientage
networks, since they have something to offer a patron besides a single vote.
Readily identifiable refugee enclaves in the Athens-Piraeus area, which are
characterized by poverty and general insecurity, continue to support the
Left. In rural areas, villages whose support for the extreme Left dates back
to the i93o’s have continued to vote for the EDA. However, there is no uni¬
form voting pattern among all refugee villages. Only nine of the nineteen
competitive eparchies have substantial refugee populations.
The urban and suburban districts of Athens, Piraeus, and Thessaloniki
fall into the competitive category, as do provincial centers such as Volos,
Larisa, Naoussa, and Kavalla. These areas, besides having large refugee
populations, are industrialized; and the usual association of industrial em¬
ployment with radical politics would seem to explain the EDA strength.
Correlation of urban population data from the 1961 census with EDA vote
in 1963 revealed a coefficient of determination of .2228 ;34 but when the re¬
lationship between EDA vote and the percentage of the active population
employed in industrial activity was examined, the coefficient of correlation


2X2 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Table 8.4. Refugees and Postwar Left Vote
Year Coefficient of correlation
1950 .1338 1951 .1867 1952 .2099 1958 .2179 1961 .1242 1963 .1412
Note: In no year was the correlation significant at the .05 level.
was a mere .0103.36 By contrast, Burks found correlations of .40, .70, and
.59 between the KKE and industrial workers in 1926, 1933, and 1936.36 He
concluded that the Communists were most successful in capturing the trade
union movement when there was only a small industrial labor force, and
notes Comintern figures for 1921 in which 50% of the total union member¬
ship in Greece was in Communist unions. Even today, this is not a very
large figure in actual numbers. Particular unions, e.g., those in the building
trades, still contribute a large bloc of supporters to the EDA; but in general,
the party draws support from a much wider segment of the population than
in the prewar period.
The reservoir of potential supporters for the EDA has increased with so¬
cial mobilization and urbanization. Villagers who go off to the city in search
of work or an education often find the experience disappointing. Jobs are
scarce, and a former peasant usually has to join the surplus industrial labor
force or eke out a living in some overcrowded service occupation. Although
a recent arrival can sometimes fall back on relatives and friends, there is no
real substitute for the family unit found at the village level. In many cases,
one must rely on the state for welfare benefits or subsidized housing. In a
recent study, 88.7 per cent of the former villagers interviewed felt that their
decision to leave for the city had been correct, but nearly a third were un¬
happy in their new environment.37 Since there are no patrons of the tradi¬
tional sort to satisfy the demands of these people, they are attracted to po¬
litical activities of a more modern kind. The temporary emigration of Greek
workers to the industrial countries of Western Europe builds still more sup¬
port for the Left. The inadequacies of the Greek public services and the lack
of economic opportunity are likely to seem particularly severe to man who
can compare them with the conditions elsewhere. Moreover, this man has


The Extraparliamentary Level 213
seen that left-wing groups are generally respectable in Western Europe,
and may be more inclined to join Greek groups having similar labels and
programs.
A significant part of the left-wing support in the urban areas comes from
university and gymnasium students. In the 1930’s the Communists and
other left-wing groups were exceedingly prominent in university precincts;
and today, the EDA youth groups seem to dominate student politics. How¬
ever, it is questionable whether this activity produces long-term left-wing
affiliation. It is more likely that the radical phase ends for many students
when they leave the university setting and seek a career through the tradi¬
tional patronage networks.
Although EDA strength is largely an urban phenomenon, the increase in
the EDA vote does not seem related to the rate of population growth in the
major urban centers (see Table 8.5). The relationship is undoubtedly more
complex than the techniques used here could reveal. It seems possible that
support for the Left lags behind population increase because the insecurity
stemming from urban residence and the diminution of older clientage ties
only gradually becomes apparent. Regardless, the major metropolitan cen¬
ters, Athens, Piraeus, and Thessaloniki, with their suburbs, account for a
large part of the left-wing vote in any election. The percentage has remained
fairly constant since 1950, ranging from 49 per cent in that year to 36 per
cent in 1951 and 1958; in 1963 the proportion of the total EDA vote provided
by these three cities and their suburbs was 40 per cent.38
The leaders of the EDA, like those of the Italian Communist Party in sim¬
ilar circumstances, “have been good sociologists, and have provided these
displaced, insecure, and economically and socially frustrated masses with
their first meaningful associations.”39 However, their success has increased
Table 8.5. Urban Growth and EDA Vote Increase, 1951-61
Urban growth category
Number of cities
Mean population change
Mean change in EDA vote
Over 30% increase 4 37.79% 4.73% 20-30% increase 14 24.20 9.59 10-20% increase 13 15.25 9.64 0-10% increase 17 4.96 8.94 Decrease 7 -8.32 5.84
Modified from Kayser and Thompson, p. 206.


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
214
the instability of the already precarious consociational system. One major
stimulus for the coup of 1967 was military uneasiness at the Left’s growing
strength.
STRAINS IN THE CONSOCIATIONAL SYSTEM
The history of postwar Greece is mainly one of the interplay between the
monarchy, the armed forces, and the Left, and of the relations of each to the
traditional level of Greek politics. For some time the equilibrium of the
consociational system was maintained because most of the leaders in these
groups had an interest in preserving the existing system. The patriotic char¬
acter of the war against the Communist guerrillas overrode some differ¬
ences; and Greece’s dependence on foreign powers kept quarrels in check.
The Greek monarch has had the unenviable task of placating both the
traditional political level and the armed forces. The military establishment
has viewed the Left as its major opponent; and any actions by the monarch
or the parliamentary politicians that might be interpreted as concessions to
the Left have been met with some type of intervention. This has been a
matter of reactive militarism: the military perceives civilian weakness as a
threat to its own position.40 The left wing has viewed the monarch and the
armed forces, because of their contacts abroad, as the main compromisers
of Greek independence. The traditional parliamentary political groups are
viewed as willing accomplices of the military, or as indifferent to the major
problems of Greek life. The traditional politicians conceive of both the mili¬
tary and the extreme Left as actively or potentially hostile to Greek democ¬
racy as it is currently practiced. However, any of these groups may help
the others in particular situations. Demands for change in the Greek politi¬
cal system have come either from the personal-fragile component of the
traditional parties or from the left-wing party. The military establishment
and the polyarchic-persistent portions of the traditional political organiza¬
tions have usually done no more than react to the activities of the other ele¬
ments in the system.
There are two main sources of contention among the various groups: the
position of the Left in national political life, and the priority of military
expenditure. These two questions are bound up with the problems of in¬
ternal security and foreign alignment. The significant aspects of the con¬
troversy stem from the resistance and the civil war. The cleavage between
the Left and the rest of the political system was fairly complete at that time.
The crown, the armed forces, and the traditional political level were all


The Extraparliamentary Level 215
considered “national” political forces by most Greeks. The Left, involved
in treasonable acts, was not. The EDA has never been accepted as a legiti¬
mate element by many Greeks. The statements of the Left on major politi¬
cal issues and in reference to the other actors in the consociational system
have done nothing to dissipate these notions.
The crown was useful as a rallying point for all nationalists in the early
postwar period. In fact, the monarchy was genuinely popular from 1946
to at least 1956. Loyalty to the monarch was frequently equated with anti
Communism and patriotism, especially in the armed forces. Throughout
this period the monarchy was profoundly hostile to the left wing, and rarely
accorded the EDA the recognition given other political parties—although
the fact that the EDA is closely associated in terms of policy with the Soviet
Union does not make it any less a “national” party than the ERE or the
EK, who are similarly linked with the West. In 1964, at the death of King
Paul, the EDA leadership attempted to come to better terms with the mon¬
arch, with little success. If the monarch did recognize that lessened world
tensions call for a change in internal policy, and if he responded to the
EDA’s protestations of friendship, his usefulness as a symbol to the military
might be at an end. The attempts of King Paul to encourage a coalition of
Center and Right politicians in 1963 would have strengthened the tradi¬
tional elements in Greek politics. The similar role played by Constantine II
from 1965 to 1967 might be interpreted in the same vein. The EDA remains
outside the system, and the nontraditional components of the parliamentary
political organizations have not been encouraged. By appearing to favor the
status quo, the monarch has reaped censure for political interference; but
any concessions to the modern elements are viewed with suspicion by the
military. The monarch seems to be a prisoner of his position, with no en¬
during support from the most significant parts of the population.
The military establishment has never accepted the left wing as a legiti¬
mate part of the political system. During and immediately after the civil
war, draftees with left-wing backgrounds were separated from the others
and sent to a small island off the tip of Attica for military training and in¬
doctrination. Later, they were put in special training units known for their
severity. In service, these men were assigned to the most unpleasant jobs in
the army, such as mule driving in the Rhodope Mountains. In the rural
areas, the harassment of leftists by members of the TEA (Battalions of
National Security) was common. Until the victory of Papandreou in 1963,
it was rare to find either of the left-wing newspapers in the rural areas.


216 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
Even after 1963, certificates of social conformity from the local police chief
or a priest were needed in order to qualify for a wide range of public em¬
ployment. It is still assumed by many soldiers and some civilians that no
person with political ties to the Left could possibly be loyal to the state.
For its part, the Left has continually accused the military of fascist ten¬
dencies. Military indoctrination and the backgrounds of high officers have
been so criticized. Left-wing proposals for the normalization of political
life have included a general amnesty for the veterans of the civil war on the
guerrilla side. The military, and even the more moderate elements in Greek
society, view these men as criminals and traitors; but the EDA lauds them
as the real exponents of Greek nationalism and independence. The EDA
has opposed the NATO alliance and all other ties to the West. It has advo¬
cated decreasing the military expenditures—since the neighbors of Greece,
with the exception of Turkey, are peace-loving socialist states—and divert¬
ing the funds to social welfare and reform. These measures and attitudes
threaten the very existence of the professional military establishment.
Both the military and the Left are opposed to the traditional parliamen¬
tary practices. More important, each views the other as a hostile force, a
force dedicated to the elimination of democratic forms as it defines them.
Each needs the other to justify itself. The military’s importance diminishes
if Communism ceases to be the internal and external enemy. And if the
Western alliance were changed and the military forces were reduced, left
wing policy would not diverge greatly from the policy of the modern com¬
ponents of the more traditional political organizations; some new villains
would have to be found to explain Greek underdevelopment.
Even before the coup of 1967, some members of the military were willing
to intervene in traditional politics if governmental instability threatened
the internal status or foreign connections of the military. The first postwar
instance came in 1951, when a number of militant junior officers involved
in an organization known as IDEA (Sacred Link of Greek Officers) at¬
tempted a coup.41 The later candidature of Field Marshal Papagos could
also be viewed at least in part, as a military revulsion against traditional
politics. Any political organization on the traditional level that has ap¬
proached the Left for electoral support has been viewed with distrust by
the military. In fact, the armed forces have always intervened on the op¬
posite side in these cases. This, in turn, has provoked the Left to more and
violent rhetoric, punctuated with foreign appeals and public disturbances.
The armed forces have generally been hostile to the traditional Center


The Extraparliamentary Level 217
parties. The Center is viewed as the most fragmented part of traditional
politics; and the instability caused by fragmentation alarms both the mili¬
tary and its foreign supporters. Further, the leaders of the Center, in their
efforts to regain power, did not inspire confidence. Papandreou’s inclusion
of the EDA in his electoral coalition of 1956 caused grave distrust; the
military felt that he was willing to undermine the regime in order to gain
personal political power. The massive failure of the Center in the elections
of 1958 meant that the EDA became the official opposition party for a time;
this also reduced confidence in the Center and in parliamentary politics. The
possibility of a Center victory in 1961 provoked the military and certain
portions of the ERE to intervene in the normal electoral processes. Some
members of the military undoubtedly distrust the Center because it is
viewed as the modern heir of the interwar republican tradition. Certainly,
several of the leading Center figures were allies of the republican officers
who alternated with the royalist military establishment during those years.
Papandreou, in his campaigns of 1961 and 1963, and in his statements as
premier, seemed to threaten the old order. His exposure of “Operation
Pericles,” the plan initiated by the military for the manipulation of the 1961
elections was especially outrageous. EK plans for the normalization of
political life also annoyed the armed forces.
Conservatives had occasionally questioned the scale of Greek support for
NATO. Military expenditures ran to almost half of the Greek budget in
the early postwar period.42 However, in the years from 1954 to 1965, the
military share of the current-expense budget dropped from over 30 per
cent to 16.3 per cent.43 The Papandreou government suggested that even
that scale of military preparedness was incompatible with economic develop¬
ment. It seemed likely that basic military priorities would be not only
questioned but readjusted. The armed forces could not tolerate any thought
of regional disarmament or of withdrawal from the NATO alliance; their
professional pride and material support were dependent on this association.
Officers and noncoms might lose the special privileges that set them apart
from the rest of Greek society, and be thrown into an already swollen labor
market. In 1964 a former general speaking as an ERE deputy opened the
question of military loyalty to the Papandreou regime: “Is the government
prepared to reach that point [i.e., to further reduce the military forces]?
Will she find a military leadership that will accept it?”44 Finally, the revela¬
tions of the “Aspida” affair (supposedly a contemplated coup by Papan¬
dreou and his followers) indicated that some portion of the professional


2l8 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
military itself might share the views of those desiring a new international
position for Greece and the modernization of Greek political life. Some
younger officers were identified as tied to Center or Left politicians.
There has not always been harmony between the crown, the army, and
the Right in Greek politics, either. Field Marshal Papagos, the leader of
the most successful postwar political movement, was not on good terms with
the monarch. Later, the intervention of the army on behalf of Karamanlis in
1961 rebounded to the discomfiture of the king. Whether or not he knew
of the intervention in advance is problematical; but by declining to re¬
pudiate those responsible, he was identified as an accomplice. The army,
Western statesmen, and part of the Greek bureaucracy had pressed Kara¬
manlis to accept an American offer to station medium-range ballistic missiles
in Greece, but he had refused. In fact, Karamanlis, though speaking for the
right wing, never completely acceded to military budget requests. The per¬
centage of the budget devoted to the military fell in every year from 1957 to
1963, with the exception of 1959. Ultimately, Karamanlis himself resigned
in 1963 because of a conflict with the crown. The public issue was a pro¬
jected visit of the monarch to London against the wishes of the government,
but it was rumored that Karamanlis actually entertained antidynastic
thoughts that made him suspect among some members of his own entour¬
age and among the leaders of the armed forces. The details of this event
remain obscure.
When the traditional political organizations seem to threaten the military,
there has been little hesitation in using the armed forces for political pur¬
poses. One method has been the use of the army vote. In any election the
placement of military units in marginal areas can have a substantial effect
on the outcome. This is recognized by parliamentary politicians, and the
electoral laws enacted before each election regularly include provisions con¬
cerning the military vote. Similar provisions are included in regard to civil
servants. Table 8.6 indicates the military and civil service have voted dif¬
ferently than the rest of the population: the right-wing parties have received
more and the Left party considerably less than the corresponding averages
of the total popular vote in each election. As the military has become more
professional, in the sense that draftees and short-term volunteers make up
a smaller percentage of its strength, it has become more right-wing in po¬
litical support. In some cases, especially 1956 and 1961, soldiers were ap¬
parently encouraged to select ERE ballots by the higher leadership.
When the Greek military intervenes to stem radical politics, the Left be


The Extraparliamentary Level 219
Table 8.6. The Military and Civil-Service Vote, 1950-64
Year and vote
Military-civil share of total vote Right Center
Party
Left KP Other
1950
Military and civil 10.8% 40.8% 53.2% 3.2% 2.1%
National total 30.9 53.3 9.7 — 5.2
1951
Military and civil 9.5 60.4 36.5 3.1 — 
National total 43.2 46.2 10.8 — 
1956
Military and civil 4.7 76.7 19.2 — 2.7% 1.4
Nadonal total 47.4 48.2 — 2.2 2.2
1961
Military and civil 4.4 78.9 18.1 2.6 — 0.3
National total 50.8 33.6 14.6 — 0.9
1963
Military and civil 1.8 60.2 34.9 1.9 2.8 0.1
National total 39.4 42.0 14.3 3.7 0.9
1964
Military and civil 1.9 48.3 50.2 1.5 — 
National total 35.3 52.7 11.8 — 0.2
Note: In 1950-51 the military vote was isolated. In 1956-64 civil servants are included; they probably comprise about one-half of the total. In 1946, 1952, and 1958 military and civilservice totals could not be separated from the general totals. The KP was in an electoral coali¬ tion with the Center in 1961, and with the Right in 1964; the same was true of the EDA in 1956. No separate party totals are available for those years.
comes more willing to embark upon an extraparliamentary course. The left
wing youth group, the Lambrakists, were to some degree a product of the
tensions of the later years of the Karamanlis regime. This group, in par¬
ticular, has been extremely active in demonstrations and other antigov
ernmental activity. The Left has come to express complete intolerance for
both the armed forces and the traditional right wing.
It is not to the advantage of either the military establishment or the left
wing to allow a transformation of traditional Greek politics by the other
or by parliamentary politicians. Any attempt by a parliamentary political
leader to respond to nascent interests in the society would require a genuine
reassessment of program priorities. The personal-fragile political movement
that such a man would rely on would have to break the hold of the poly


220 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
archie and persistent elements in its own party by overwhelming patron
client relationships with a broad appeal to the unattached elements in the
political system. In such a situation, the supporters of the Left would have
to be admitted to the political arena, and the recognition of these elements
as legitimate would limit the function of the armed forces. An appeal by
a parliamentary leader on program or issue terms might undercut some of
this specifically leftist support, but it would also attack the traditional sys¬
tem. Nevertheless, it can be argued that only vigorous social reforms and
political parties that perform the aggregative function can decrease the ap¬
peal of the Left to the mobilized urban sectors of the population.
It is in the interest of the Greek military that traditional, issueless poli¬
tics prevail. Under these conditions, the Left, because it represents the more
modern elements, is easily recognized as a threat to the status quo. The Left
itself seems to prefer working both inside and outside parliament. The rapid
changes now taking place in Greek society, combined with the inability of
the traditional political structures to accommodate increased demands, are
likely to increase the strength of the Left in electoral politics whenever it
can legitimately compete. The stability of the earlier postwar period has
already been shattered by the events since 1965. The military oligarchy that
seized power in 1967 has temporarily frozen the process of change, and the
direction of Greek politics in the immediate future depends largely on the
junta’s decisions.


9- Military Oligarchy: The Coup of 1967
The fragile relationships between the major components of the Greek po¬
litical system have been noted in the foregoing chapter. The equilibrium
of the consociational system was finally upset when the military reacted
to the efforts at modernization pushed by Andreas Papandreou and the
threat posed by the left wing. Although the threat of a transformation
initiated by the traditional political world was important, the additional
possibility that the extreme Left would be the ultimate beneficiary of any
change was even more upsetting. The result of the military’s reaction in
April 1967 was a military oligarchy, whose form and operation fit the gen¬
eral pattern of military oligarchies elsewhere in the world.1
The Greek military was not happy with the outcome of the election held
in November 1963. By themselves, however, the victories of the EK then
and in the following February should not have been viewed as immediate
threats. George Papandreou, the party’s leader, was clearly a traditional
Greek politician, who used words as substitutes for action. He had allied
with and repudiated nearly every politician or political faction in Greece:
he had been republican and royalist; he had been an anti-Communist leader,
and later an occasional ally of the EDA. Papandreou’s political affiliations
were largely dependent on his perception of how best to gain political office;
and the core of his Center Union was composed of notables who followed
much the same principles and were little different from the leading figures
in the other major parliamentary group. The members of the Papandreou
cabinets, for the most part, had secured their positions largely because of
their individual political strength and their associations with their chief;
it is difficult to find much in the way of a policy or issue orientation among
them. Likewise, most of the EK deputies were occupied with maintaining
their personal political positions by dispensing patronage.
Despite the rhetoric of the new government, its policies were not particu¬
larly startling. The EK’s suggested reforms in education, the bureaucracy,


222 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
and economic policy had in most cases been suggested earlier. The Greek
tradition of statism and government intervention in all aspects of life could
accommodate even the most “extreme” views of the new ministers on gov¬
ernment activity. Papandreou had made a number of promises to specific
sectors of the population, but their fulfillment was contingent on a modern¬
ization of the Greek political system. The major difference between the
Papandreou administration and the previous one was that some of those
in important political positions, primarily the small group of modernizers
associated with Andreas Papandreou, really intended to reform the system.
Andreas, the premier’s son, may have entered politics for traditional family
reasons, but he brought with him a concept of the political party that was
unlike that of his father and the other parliamentary political leaders. To
him, “party” meant organization, discipline, and program. These modern
views could only dislocate traditional parliamentary politics, and an up¬
heaval here was bound to have repercussions at the extraparliamentary level.
The military was particularly alarmed at two specific elements in the
younger Papandreou’s program: the matter of budgetary priorities, and the
treatment and position of the Left in the Greek political system, especially
in regard to the future of the rural gendarmerie and the National Security
Battalions. In addition, there was a certain fear that Andreas would attempt
to influence military actions by manipulating personnel.
The military could maintain a nonpolitical stance only as long as the
traditional political level continued to play the role assigned to it, preoccupa¬
tion with factional, issueless politics. Any politician who wished to change
this pattern faced a hostile military establishment. The military, because
they used the monarch as the focus of loyalty, considered themselves out¬
side the parliamentary purview. There was little civilian control over mili¬
tary personnel, the defense budget could not be seriously altered, and for¬
eign-policy questions that might alter the relationship of Greece and the
military to the NATO alliance could not be broached. These and other
questions, which are considered political in most countries, were stipu¬
lated to be nonpolitical in the Greek context. Any modern politician who
intended to be involved in issues rather than personalist politics was bound
to be charged with political interference, precisely because these untouch¬
able policy areas had to be breached in order to modernize Greek society.
Although the military was generally unhappy with the Center Union
administration, there was no intervention until the “Aspida” affair of 1965
brought tensions to the breaking point. The army, as the largest and most
influential component in the military establishment, was directly involved.


Military Oligarchy 223
The air force and navy remained quiescent at this time and were not ac¬
complices in the ultimate coup either. Basically, it was charged that “Aspida
was a secret organization of army officers conspiring, under the political
leadership of Andreas [Papandreou], to take over the Greek army, throw
out the King, and impose a Nasser-type dictatorship on the Greek people.”2
But the affair was considerably more than a simple confrontation between
civilians and military; in fact, the web of relationships between the various
contending groups was almost Byzantine in its complexity. The personal
rivalries of leading figures in the EK with each other and with Andreas
Papandreou provided one part of the drama. In addition, there was a
rivalry in Cyprus between Archbishop Makarios (the president of Cyprus)
and General Grivas, the commander of the Cypriot National Guard and
the contingent of the Greek Army stationed there. The mere rumor of the
plot itself suggested that the military establishment was not as monolithic
as outside appearances and nationalist rhetoric proclaimed it to be. Toward
the end of the affair, fundamental constitutional questions arose concerning
the role of the monarch in the Greek political system.
Archbishop Makarios, who differed with General Grivas over the future
course of Cyprus toward union with Greece, found that control of the
Cypriot armed forces rested not with his government, but with Grivas.
In an effort to counter this, Makarios was attempting to build up the
gendarmerie as an alternative force. Supposedly, the Aspida plot, at first
intended only to undermine Grivas, began with a visit of Andreas Papan¬
dreou to Makarios. The military saw a connection between this and the
concurrent attempts of the Papandreou government to find sympathetic
officers in the military establishment, which produced transfers and shifts
at the higher levels. Eventually, Grivas blew the whistle. His allegations
provoked demands by the king (as commander in chief of the armed forces)
and by competing groups in parliament for an investigation. The Minister
of Defense, Petros Garofilias, one of the old-line EK notables, was per¬
haps afraid of the personal and fragile modernizing leadership of the young¬
er Papandreou, and supported the monarch. George Papandreou, viewing
Garofilias as more loyal to the monarch than to himself, wanted to assume
the defense portfolio. Although he apparently had other reasons for this
course of action, he would have been in the position of presiding over an
investigation of his own son’s activities.3 Constitutional vagueness allowed
the king to disallow this course of action. Premier Papandreou then threat¬
ened to resign, and the king took the threat as fact.
The stage was set for the usual game of parliamentary musical chairs.


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
224
The king sent for President of Parliament George Athanasiadis-Novas, a
leading EK notable, and asked him to form a new government based on
the existing Center Union majority. For three tumultuous weeks he tried
to find support; but in the end, the parliament failed to approve the ap¬
pointment. The king then asked Stephanos Stephanopoulos, another lead¬
ing figure from the polyarchic and persistent segment of the EK, to form
a government. Stephanopoulos declined the offer, bowing to the decision
of a party caucus. Then Stephanopoulos and Elias Tsirimokos, an EK
veteran who had at times been affiliated with the Left, resigned from the
Center Union. The king gave Tsirimokos the opportunity to form a broadly
based government, but he was also unsuccessful. Eventually, Stephano¬
poulos was able to form a government that lasted until December 1966.
Throughout the period, there were massive demonstrations and strikes
in Athens and the provincial cities; the Left was prominent, but the bulk
of the participants were EK supporters. Violence erupted in the streets,
with many injuries and at least one death; in the parliamentary chamber
itself, all civility disappeared, and at least one fistfight occurred. The bulk
of the EK membership in the parliament and the EK supporters among the
people supported the elder Papandreou, who demanded reinstatement as
prime minister or new elections. In fact, only 49 of the 171 EK deputies were
induced to break the bonds of personal loyalty or party affiliation to support
the defecting notables. All but four of the 49 eventually formed a new
party, the Liberal Democratic Center; however, it existed as the governing
party only with the support of the ERE and the KP. Incipient party loyalty
and personal loyalty to both George Papandreou and his son prevented
further attrition. Beyond that, given the extent of social mobilization, and
the penetration of the mass media, Papandreou became something of a
national hero. Deputies wishing a political future found it convenient to
remain tied to him, even though he was out of office.4
The Stephanopoulos government fell in December 1966, when Kanello
poulos, the ERE leader, declined to support it any longer. The Governor of
the National Bank of Greece, Ioannis Paraskevopoulos, was named head of
a caretaker government, to prepare for new elections in spring 1967. It
seems likely that the traditional political world was attempting to restore
equilibrium. Compromises and agreements at that level might not have
favored either the modernizing elements in the parties or the extraparlia¬
mentary interests.
During the interregnum between the “resignation” of Papandreou and


Military Oligarchy 225
the coup in April 1967, the army officers alleged to be involved in the Aspida
plot were investigated and tried by a military court. The prosecution alleged
that the elder Papandreou had succeeded in destroying incriminating evi¬
dence in the last days of his administration. There was considerable un¬
happiness that parliamentary immunity kept Andreas Papandreou out of
court, at least temporarily. The trial was delayed and prolonged, possibly
so that the charges against the Papandreous and the EK could influence the
ensuing elections. However, the trial produced questionable evidence, some
forced “confessions,” and a torrent of countercharges; the government and
the army received unflattering publicity instead.5 Ultimately, 13 of the 28
officers accused were acquitted. The alleged military leader of the plot
received an 18-year sentence. However, the outcome of the trial only in¬
censed the military against the traditional political level.
Tensions had increased since the crisis of July 1965. The worsening eco¬
nomic situation and the serious political polarization were turning the long
delayed election into a plebiscite that would decide between Papandreou
on the one hand and the monarch, as a representative of the military estab¬
lishment, on the other. The extreme Left, with its talent for organized agi¬
tation, was attempting to build up the election as a referendum on the
existing political system. Its actions and announcements, which demanded
substantial changes in state policy toward the left wing, provoked many of
the traditional parties, as well as the military. Athens was in almost con¬
stant turmoil. Throughout the first weeks of April 1967 there were increased
strikes, particularly in the EDA-dominated building trades, as well as fre¬
quent clashes between demonstrators and the police.
The leaders at the traditional level were also active. Kanellopoulos, the
leader of the ERE, clashed with George Papandreou over a provision in the
proposed electoral law; this in turn brought down the caretaker govern¬
ment of Paraskevopoulos. The king selected Kanellopoulos as premier, but
he failed to get a parliamentary vote of confidence. Kanellopoulos then
called upon the monarch to dissolve the parliament and prepare for elec¬
tions on May 28,1967. Despite the closing of parliament and the termination
of parliamentary immunity, the Kanellopoulos government decided not to
prosecute Andreas Papandreou for his alleged role in Aspida. This decision,
in the face of the trial and conviction of the army officers, suggested that
the whole plot had been fabricated.
Perhaps most alarming to those who favored the current political system
was the very real threat of an EK victory. Despite the delay in calling elec


226 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
tions after the initial crisis in 1965, the EK and the Papandreous still re¬
tained great popularity. Given the elder Papandreou’s age and general
health, it was likely that Andreas would emerge as the party leader, particu¬
larly since several logical contenders had defected to form the Liberal Demo¬
cratic Center. Despite conflicts with his father over policy and organization,
he had already secured the right to nominate candidates in constituencies
not already held by EK deputies.6 If the EK were to win some of these
marginal seats and add them to the 40 or so EK deputies who had favored
Andreas Papandreou in the recently dissolved parliament, the presumed
EK victory would create a parliamentary bloc that was largely the personal
instrument of a reformist politician. Some portions of the military appar¬
ently viewed this outcome as nearly equivalent to a Communist victory.
Official explanations for the subsequent coup stressed that “the real danger
was that we were sliding down the road to Communism.” The Greek Com¬
munists, “acting within the framework of international Communism,” were
the main antagonists.7 The views of Andreas Papandreou on military ex¬
penditures, the NATO Alliance, and Cyprus, in military eyes, posed as
large a threat as did the Left itself.
All of these factors no doubt contributed to the feeling that the initial EK
campaign rally, to be held in Thessaloniki, was a crucial occasion. Thessa¬
loniki, the second city in Greece and the major center of the North, had
strong affiliations with the EK and with Papandreou personally; moreover,
it was a stronghold of the EDA. According to the junta, the regional army
commander was informed by local authorities that the rally could not be
contained by local police forces. That officer, however, felt that military in¬
tervention would result in great bloodshed.8 The conspirators later argued
that this was why they acted.
THE COUP
A triumvirate of middle-ranking army officers—Colonels George Papa
dopoulos and Nikolas Makarezos and Brigadier Stylianos Patakos—planned
the coup. Nine additional officers were told of the scheme some 20 hours in
advance, and 21 others 14 hours beforehand. The army chief of staff, under
whose signature the orders were transmitted to army units outside Athens,
was brought in only at the last moment. The navy and air force were un¬
involved. The coup itself was carried out efficiently and swiftly, according
to a NATO contingency plan.9 In the early hours of April 21, armored
units surrounded the royal palace, the parliament building, the major min


Military Oligarchy 227
istries, the chief post offices, and the telegraph offices. Transportation and
communications to the outside were closed. The vast majority of leading
left-wing politicians and left-wing sympathizers, together with the leading
parliamentary figures from the other political groups, were arrested. Ap¬
parently over 6,500 people were arrested, and a large proportion of those
with left-wing views were detained on an island in the Aegean.10 Most of
these were gradually released in the months to follow.
The first news of the coup came from the armed forces radio network,
which announced that portions of the constitution had been suspended.
Martial law and curfews were put into effect; schools, universities, and
banks were closed; public and private meetings of more than five people
were banned; and a strict press censorship was imposed. There was vir¬
tually no armed opposition to the coup, and only on Crete was there any
initial protest. The EDA was taken by surprise; and the traditional political
world, with the exception of Kanellopoulos and some parliamentary depu¬
ties who were abroad, remained quiet. Although the military intervention
was well planned and executed, the very ease with which the coup occurred
suggests that the supposed Communist takeover was less than imminent.
Apologists for the coup leaders argued that military intervention occurred
only because the political situation was abnormal. Moreover, it came only
after politics, in the form of the Aspida affair, had penetrated the military
establishment itself.11 The ideological predispositions of the officers who
acted had convinced them that an EK victory would benefit the Commu¬
nists. The military intervened to save itself and, as it believed, to save the
nation. The first statement by the new premier, Constantine Kollias (a
civilian with a history of involvement in extreme right-wing activities),
justified the coup in these terms and set the tone for future policies.*
We have long been witnessing a crime committed against our people and our
nation. Unscrupulous and base party compromises, shameful recklessness of a
great part of the press, methodical attack on and undermining of all institutions,
complete debasement of Parliament, all-around slander, paralysis of the state ma¬
chinery, complete lack of understanding of the burning problems of our youth,
moral decline, secret and open collaboration with subversion, and finally, con¬
stant inflammatory slogans of unscrupulous demagogues, have destroyed the
country’s peace, created an atmosphere of anarchy, chaos, hatred and discord,
and led us to the brink of national catastrophe.12
* It was argued that the king’s influence was illustrated by the appointment of a civilian as premier. However, authority remained in the hands of the junta leaders. Moreover, Kollias, since he had been heavily involved in extreme right-wing activity, particularly in regard to the celebrated Lambrakis affair, was hardly a symbol of conciliation.


228 THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
In short, the officers intervened to stop political bickering and to restore
“responsible” politics to the nation. According to their spokesmen, they were
merely following the illustrious pattern of the revolutionaries of 1909, who
had intervened in the midst of political confusion, brought order out of
chaos, and returned to their barracks.13 The 1909 revolutionaries are viewed
as early Greek modernizers by some portions of the population. However,
the parallels with 1909 begin and end with the rank of the conspirators and
the fact that the forerunner of the armored unit commanded by one of the
coup leaders was also used by the earlier conspirators. The present junta
has far more in common, in terms of ideology, policy, organization, and
attitude toward politics, with the Metaxas regime of the late 1930’s. Colonel
Makarezos, an intelligence officer, and Colonel Papadopoulos, a special po¬
litical warfare officer, both had an ideological background lacking among
officers in 1909. Moreover, all three coup leaders, and presumably some of
the other officers involved, came to maturity during the Metaxas period and
graduated from the Greek military academy during the last years of the
Metaxas dictatorship. They, like Metaxas, came to power without a pro¬
gram that could be applied to concrete situations; their major innovations
were taken from the programs of the previous regime. The initial reaction
of both was to clear away the traditional political forces so that problems
could be easily and quickly solved. In each case, the complexities of rule
became apparent only later.
THE INTERNATIONAL FACTOR
There was great uneasiness over the Greek coup in the NATO countries
because democracy and constitutional government had been extinguished
in a Western country close to home. Many private individuals and organi¬
zations, as well as political parties, protested the actions of the junta and
pressured their governments for expressions of disapproval. However, there
were few sanctions that could be applied. The Common Market voted to
suspend the financial credits that were going to Greece in her status as an
associate member. The Council of Europe at least considered a complaint
from four member governments who asked for the expulsion of Greece
unless human rights were restored. The Danes wanted to bring up the
matter in a NATO Council meeting, and only great pressure kept them
from doing so.14 In the long run, the hostility of the Western European
states could seriously affect Greek plans for economic development.
The leaders of the coup placed a high priority on remaining in NATO,


Military Oligarchy 229
and particularly on maintaining good relations with the United States.
The Greek military attitudes on foreign relations, paralleling those out¬
lined by Irving Horowitz for the Latin American military, are “geared both
to national redemption and to the international expectancies of the big for¬
eign powers.”15 The coup leaders apparently assumed that any measures
taken in the name of anti-Communism would be acceptable to the United
States, and her generally unfavorable reaction seems to have surprised them.
Some members of the junta had felt that America would increase her mili¬
tary aid, and perhaps even her economic aid, since Greece was now more
firmly in the NATO alliance than before. According to Makarezos, “It
was a mathematical certainty that the Communists would have taken over
without a coup.”16 If more aid was not forthcoming, a Communist take¬
over was still a very real future possibility.
The United States did little more than protest, since the coup did not
threaten the larger balance of forces in the eastern Mediterranean. No de¬
cision on diplomatic recognition had to be made, since ambassadors were
accredited to the monarch, who was still the nominal head of government.
The State Department announced a selective embargo on military equip¬
ment, which was later dropped. Secretary of Defense McNamara took the
occasion of a NATO defense ministers’ meeting to warn his Greek counter¬
part that American aid might be cut off unless Greece returned to consti¬
tutional government.17
It can be argued that American policy toward the junta gave the ap¬
pearance of approval.18 It has always been assumed in Greece that internal
politics are subject to foreign approval. This was true when the main pro¬
tector was Great Britain, and it remains true now that Greece is in the
American sphere of influence. Greeks of all classes believe that little of major
importance can happen in Greece that is not the result of American action,
pressure, or at least acquiescence. It has been considered axiomatic that no
military coup could occur without American complicity, particularly be¬
cause of the close ties between the Greek and American military establish¬
ments. Thus America’s failure to oppose the coup with strenuous measures,
and her eventual acceptance of it, lent credence to the allegations of fore¬
knowledge and involvement that were rampant in Greece and in some
circles in the United States.19
One early report suggested that the new leadership was “more national¬
istic,” and that it would press for the annexation of Cyprus more vigorously.
However, this is not likely to happen. The new emphasis on anti-Commu


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
23O
nism makes the Western alliance more important to Greece than any other
consideration. Indeed, the junta’s announced policy of “friendly relations
with all nations” was soon belied when an eight-year-old frontier agree¬
ment with Yugoslavia was terminated.20 This kind of action, anachronistic
in the context of recent Balkan relations, is bound to rekindle old hostili¬
ties with Greece’s northern neighbors, as is the renewed praise of Greek
Christian civilization as a barrier against the unenlightened barbarians. The
efforts of recent Greek regimes to curry the favor of the “third world” for
support on the Cyprus question were accompanied by coolness toward the
Western allies, few of whom supported the Greek position. Conversely,
the renewed dependence on NATO can only have a deleterious effect on
friendships in Africa and Asia. On the other hand—again in the context
of anti-Communism—good relations with Turkey are essential. The recent
meetings between the leaders of the two nations on the Thracian frontier,
as well as the softening of statements on Cyprus, would seem to confirm
this.
The military junta is even more dependent on American goodwill than
previous Greek regimes. The Greek army has received its supplies and
much of its training from the United States for some time, and now Ameri¬
can acquiescence is necessary if the army is to maintain its political posi¬
tion. The Cyprus issue has low priority, since it would sour relations. The
military distrusts Archbishop Makarios because of his neutralist tendencies,
and because he has built up a police force to counterbalance the Greek
controlled military forces.21 Moreover, the Cypriot Communist Party is one
of the most active and influential of those outside the Communist states.
For both Greece and the United States, the status quo is probably the most
comfortable solution to the Cyprus question.
THE MILITARY AND THE MONARCH
The sudden action of the coup leaders, though also suggesting cleavage
in the military establishment, clearly revealed that the armed forces were
not simply a tool of the monarch. The fact that civilian governments did
not control the military did not automatically mean that the king did.
Constantine was not informed of the impending coup; his personal ad¬
visers were arrested, and eventually slid into diplomatic exile. Although the
junta initially maintained that Constantine had signed the decree dissolving
the Kanellopoulos caretaker government, it is now apparent that he did not.
Several weeks elapsed before he was photographed with the new cabinet,


Military Oligarchy 231
and he did not address the Greek people until one month after the coup.
It seems clear in retrospect that the king had no alternative but to acquiesce
once the coup had taken place* He had been deluded, as had many other
observers, into believing that the military was loyal to him as the symbol of
the nation; instead, he was only a symbol used to give legitimacy to the non¬
political status of the armed forces.
Some commentators suggested that the king had retained private sources
of power that could be used to counter the military leadership.22 Initial sup¬
port for this interpretation was drawn from the fact that a civilian had been
appointed as premier. However, it was soon apparent that real control re¬
mained in the hands of the army triumvirate. Moreover, when the king’s
countercoup failed in December 1967, Premier Kollias went into exile
along with Constantine. The posture of disguised hostility adopted by
Constantine toward the junta was perhaps aimed at restoring his lost
popularity. However, he was an unlikely nucleus for opposition. The EK,
for instance, still retained memories of past grievances against the throne.
After all, the years of turmoil since July 1965 were at least partly Constan¬
tine’s responsibility. And whatever the king’s personal attitudes toward
the junta, “The few overt acts he performed have all helped to cloak the
revolutionary regime with an aura of legitimacy.”23
Although he hardly had support from the traditional political world
or indeed, from any group—Constantine toured the countryside on his
own, constantly referring to “the government” while conspicuously refrain¬
ing from calling it “my government.”24 These activities caused evident
dissatisfaction among the junta leaders. The initial coolness of the monarch
was an embarrassment; as it continued, his position became increasingly
untenable. The king himself willingly subscribed to the anti-Communist
ideology that pervaded the military establishment, and the monarchy, as
the pinnacle of the armed forces, was the institutional focus of this anti
Communist stand. However, Constantine refused to recognize that the
“nonpolitical” stance of the military was in essence political: “Any en¬
deavor, as long as it will respect the purely national mission of the army
and will avert the penetration of political ambitions in the armed forces,
will have my full support.”25 Unfortunately, these hopes could not be
realized. The possibility of Constantine’s reversing or directing the trend
* The statement of General Spandidakis, the new Minister of Defense, was instructive: “Of course the King speaks very little ... but I am sure that in the end he will understand it was the only solution.” (New Yor\ Times, May 5, 1967, p. 13.)


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
232
of military activities diminished as time passed. The junta gradually re¬
moved officers who might give their first loyalty to the monarch. The at¬
tempted royalist countercoup in December 1967 had practically no support,
either among the military or among the general population. When it failed,
the king had little choice but to leave the country. The junta retained the
monarchical institutions, installing a regent in place of the king, and it
seemed clear that the removal of Constantine was not unwelcome. Iron¬
ically, the new constitution, proposed by the new military regime and
adopted by referendum in September 1968, placed limits on the power of
any future monarch, in effect making him a figurehead, that the traditional
political world would probably not have been able to put into effect. More¬
over, the constitution placed the corporations and institutions formerly un¬
der royal authority, from which the monarch had drawn some independent
power, under the direct control of the government.
THE MILITARY AND THE TRADITIONAL POLITICAL WORLD
The junta destroyed the visible Left. The EDA and its youth affiliate
were formally proscribed. The leaders of all left-wing organizations were
imprisoned or detained, fled the country, or went underground. Within
months, however, only the hard core who refused to renounce their po¬
litical ties and to abstain from future political activity remained in custody.
The EDA archives were combed for evidence of Communist direction and
affiliation, and any information that could be so interpreted was highly pub¬
licized. Beyond this, the ease with which the coup was executed and the
EDA’s failure to mobilize its cadres into any form of opposition discredited
the Left among parts of the population. An underground organization
apparently remains, but there is little evidence of organized opposition to
the junta.
The major antagonist of the armed forces was the EDA, but the coup
leaders also took swift action against the traditional political world. Both of
the major political groups at this level, the EK and the ERE, contained
men drawn from the major sectors of Greek life—banking, shipping, in¬
dustry, the professions, and the press—as well as the actual political figures.
These people and the social groups from which they came were all accused
of contributing to the political confusion of the past months. According to
the leader of the junta, Colonel Papadopoulos, “The political parties brought
Greece into chaos by following their own selfish designs. This created an¬
archy and raised the specter of a Communist coup.”26 They were respon


Military Oligarchy 233
sible for allowing a reformist like Andreas Papandreou to assume political
leadership, and for dragging the position of the military and nature of
Greece’s alliance structure into discussions at the political level.
It is necessary to repeat that political labels have little relevance in the
Greek context. The coup can best be described as antipolitical. It was sup¬
posedly a right-wing government that was overthrown, and the military
leaders have spoken and acted strongly against all the groups involved in
parliamentary politics. The youth auxiliaries of the EK and the ERE were
abolished soon after the coup. The parent parties were not themselves out¬
lawed, but major figures from both were arrested initially, along with the
entire EDA leadership. Most of these men were released after the junta was
firmly in power, although Kanellopoulos and the elder Papandreou re¬
mained under house arrest. Eventually, even Andreas Papandreou was re¬
leased and sent into exile. By this time, the state institutions were staffed
by the military; the traditional political leaders had been publicly dis¬
credited and eliminated from public life, and the bonds of personal con¬
nection that had substituted for party organization were destroyed. In es¬
sence, the military had eliminated the traditional parties, as well as the
left wing, as a political force. At present, all politicians are “on a strict form
of parole.”27
The social elements closely connected with the leading parliamentary
politicians were also detained, harassed, and stripped of privileges. For
example, the Union of Journalists, composed of particularly influential
journalists with political connections, had been allowed to conduct a lucra¬
tive annual lottery, which supplied the bulk of its pension funds.* The junta
not only terminated this privilege, but detained some of the Union’s lead¬
ing members and exiled them to the provinces. The major newspapers
closely identified with leading politicians also suffered: most were shut
down for some time; and some failed to reopen at all. The circulation of the
remaining papers diminished, at least initially, because of the strict censor¬
ship imposed by the junta. Eventually, publishers who would not reopen
their newspapers and operate under state supervision were faced with virtual
confiscation of property.28
The more influential business figures were arrested at the beginning of
the coup; others sought asylum outside the country. The privileges enjoyed
by professionals and businessmen—in fact, by anyone with the necessary
* See pp. 112-13.


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
234
connections to operate in the labyrinth of traditional parliamentary politics
—were threatened. Licenses for trade and commercial activities were made
freely available; this removed the monopolies that already existed, and en¬
couraged greater competition. The new government ordered the payment
of the usual Easter bonus the first month after its takeover, even by com¬
panies without the financial means. All dismissals of private employees
were initially forbidden. Finally, the junta decreed that no salary in the
nation, whatever its source, could top the $1,500 a month paid to the pre¬
mier.29 The administrative leverage of traditional governments had always
been sufficient to harass hostile or unfavored elements in the business world.
Now, however, business suffered not only because of formal decrees, but
because the traditional influence networks used to ameliorate government
action were disrupted.
The military oligarchy is somewhat contradictory in its attitude toward
the business world. Because of military isolation, or perhaps because of
businessmen’s involvement in traditional politics, the motivations and activi¬
ties of businessmen are suspect. One of the first aims of the regime was the
reconstitution of the state “as an instrument of all the people, and not just
businessmen exploiting workers.”30 Moreover, the new Minister of Coordi¬
nation, Makarezos, stated that a major task of the regime was “to raise the
standard of living by the redistribution of income.”31 These threats, how¬
ever, were qualified by the statement that private initiative was to remain
the chief medium for economic growth. Basically, the business world is
distrusted by the junta; yet the development of the country still depends
on private enterprise.
Other structures connected with the traditional political level were also
attacked and destroyed. Those trade unions not members of the govern¬
ment controlled confederation, many of which had been dominated by the
Left, were abolished. There was a purge of cooperative leadership and a
reform of cooperative organization. All representative institutions at the
lower levels of the state were eliminated. Intermediate organizations, such
as the Union of Communes and Municipalities, were disbanded. Local
officials suspected of disloyalty to the regime were suspended, and new ap¬
pointments were made. Henceforth, there would be no elections. The gov¬
ernment intended to avoid a political role; local officials and those in sec¬
ondary associations were to be merely administrators.
These actions, while more extreme and thoroughgoing than traditional
Greek practice, were not unprecedented. Leadership in associational life


Military Oligarchy 235
and local office had always been selected on the basis of political ties, or
had been manipulated by the government. The junta merely replaced lead¬
ers tied to the traditional political world with those more amenable to mili¬
tary direction. However, regardless of military desires, administration does
involve politics. The new “nonpolitical” official must participate in the allo¬
cation of scarce resources, just as his political predecessor did, and any
allocation will have political overtones.
THE MILITARY AND LEGITIMACY
The Greek military, once in power, had only a tenuous claim to legiti¬
macy. The initial goal of preventing the presumed EK victory and the con¬
sequent success of the Communists was quickly realized, but the next steps
were unclear. The militant left had been destroyed. Since the army’s ex¬
istence, and its claim to power, could at first be justified only on the grounds
of a Communist threat, the junta’s first reaction was to deny the disappear¬
ance of the threat. It was argued that Communists would reappear if the
military relinquished power; in addition, the hostile international environ¬
ment was stressed. Papadopoulos called for a “guided liberalism,” which
was to include central executive power, morality, and patriotism.32 Beyond
this, the government has relied on slogans such as “unity, work, peace, and
progress,” or “The life of the nation is the death of Communism.” The
Ministry of Public Order announced that “all Greeks would be required
to stand at attention whenever they heard the national anthem or watched
the raising or lowering of the flag.”33
The military leaders, partly because of their training but perhaps also
because of their actual military function in the Western alliance, have not
attempted to legitimize their regime by concentrating on economic de¬
velopment. Instead, the junta has attempted to fill the ideological void by
manufacturing a new nationalism out of Greek Orthodoxy and the classical
heritage. The school and the church are the central institutions in this effort.
However, before even this program could be inaugurated, the educational
establishment and the church hierarchy had to be sifted to eliminate those
hostile to the new regime.
The Minister of Education announced: “The first and chief objective of
the school is to stimulate the national conscience. To achieve this you need
high spirit and exaltation that will make the school atmosphere vibrate,
and give that particularly Greek color which is the firm foundation of the
survival and the great deeds of our race.”34 In fact, this task required a


236 the political system
reassessment of the role of education in national life. If the school was to
become a major instrument for inculcating loyalty to the new regime, the
influence of the family would have to be lessened. School instructors were
given the responsibility of directing student conduct during after-class
hours. The task of socialization, to “form Greek citizens inspired by Greek
Christian civilization,”35 became paramount. This program, according to
the military leaders, required an even greater concentration on the classics,
religion, and other nontechnical subjects than before. For example, the new
regime restored the practice of teaching only Katharevusa after the first
three years of school. This purist language, with little relation to everyday
life, serves mainly as a vehicle for entrance into the civil service. Altogether,
the new methods of education and the exclusion of most technical and vo¬
cational subjects from the curriculum are serious obstacles to Greece’s eco¬
nomic development.
The Orthodox church had been as politicized as any other sector of
Greek society. Moreover, notable lapses of morality on all levels of the
church hierarchy, as well as the sketchy educational attainments of the
lower clergy, had undermined respect for the church. To counter this
trend, the junta purged the church hierarchy. Archmandrite Kotsonis, the
former Chaplain to the King, was made Archbishop of Athens and Pri¬
mate of the Greek Church. The government appropriated the right to
choose the governing synod of the church, which had previously been done
by a 67-member assembly of bishops, and announced that it would select
bishops for vacant sees from nominees supplied by the synod.36 To ensure
that the church could play an effective role, the junta demanded that the
population take religion more seriously. Church attendance was “ordered,”
and a stricter public morality was demanded—and enforced by countless
new blue laws and regulations.
THE MILITARY AND THE BUREAUCRACY
The new regime, properly viewing the bureaucracy as one pillar of the
old regime, has made strenuous efforts to change it. Brigadier Patakos said
that one major government goal was the “synchronization of the govern¬
ment apparatus.”37 The contrast between the military’s own bureaucracy
and the operation of the Greek public service, as well as the connection of
the bureaucracy with the traditional political level, prompted this policy.
First, military edicts ostensibly eliminated the need for political influence
and favors. The coup leaders decreed that all pending business was to be


Military Oligarchy 237
cleared up in two weeks, and that future questions from citizens were to
be dealt with in three days. Complaint bureaus were to be established in
each ministry, and each civil servant was made personally responsible for
decisions rendered by him. Finally, “influence peddling” itself was made
illegal.38 The inefficiency, favoritism, and cumbersome bureaucratic pro¬
cedures that had provided political resources for politicians in the past were,
in theory at any rate, eliminated. The tenure of civil servants was suspended
for six months while the inefficient and corrupt were dismissed; the major
political appointees and all possible opponents of the military at the lower
bureaucratic levels were replaced. The diplomatic service and the judiciary
were also “purified.” Moreover, the independence of the judiciary was elimi¬
nated because the Minister of Justice was made a vice-president of the high
court.
The coup leaders, rather than encouraging technical skills, have seemingly
discriminated against them. In fact, when the new regime has “found any
[specialists] in official positions, it has gotten rid of them.”39 It was esti¬
mated in March 1968 that about 5,000 officials and government employees
had been dismissed after investigations of their loyalty and competence.40
The government, however, admitted that the major factor in these per¬
sonnel shifts had been connection with the old political regime.
Despite these efforts, the fundamental social causes of Greek bureaucratic
corruption and inefficiency remain untouched. In many ways, the military
edicts have made the bureaucracy less responsive and less accessible than
before. The junta soon had to rescind some decrees because they were
“paralyzing the state machinery” by inhibiting bureaucratic action.41 The
military has found that it cannot rule without the assistance of the civil
service.
POLICIES
The military junta found it easiest to conduct reforms in small but rela¬
tively obvious matters. The puritanical flavor of Greek military life and
thought was apparent in the multitude of early decrees; the assumption
that announcement of a new rule would bring automatic compliance also
stemmed from the rulers’ military background. Many of these edicts made
the regime look ridiculous to both Greeks and foreigners. For example, the
traditional breaking of glassware at celebrations or in the tavernas was made
illegal. There was to be an immediate end to price gouging, short weights,
and unsealed garbage cans. The colorful street pretzel vendors and sidewalk


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
238
kebab shops were given new orders regarding sanitation and display. Civil
servants were ordered to pay more attention to their dress. The police were
instructed to prevent the display of indecent pictures outside motion-picture
houses. Motorcycles were to be checked for mufflers. In the first days after
the coup, the playing of music by Russian composers, even pre-soviet ones,
was stopped. Later, the ban was extended to “songs of the Communist Mikis
Theodorakis, former chief of the disbanded Communist youth organization
Lambrakis, which among other things are a means of liaison between Com¬
munists.”42 The government announced that young people would be re¬
quired to give up seats in public conveyances to pregnant women, priests,
and invalids. Throughout the early days of the regime, petty edicts of this
kind were announced along with significant measures, with little attempt
to distinguish between the two.
Civil liberties of all kinds were severely curtailed. The dissemination of
statements “likely to arouse anxiety among citizens or lessen their sense of
security and order” was forbidden;43 during the first weeks of the regime
there were many arrests on this charge. Political inscriptions or badges were
prohibited. At first, all newspapers were prepared in the government offices.
After two months, the junta announced that it would “tolerate some criti¬
cism in the press”;44 newspapers were ordered to resume their former poli¬
cies. A month later, explicit censorship was abandoned, but punitive laws
remained to deter criticism. It must be noted that there has always been
sufficient power in Greek press legislation to muzzle journalists offensive
to the regime, military or not.
The new government resurrected legislation inherited from the Nazi oc¬
cupation to deal with the theater. Censorship was deemed necessary to
protect the “moral, spiritual, artistic, and cultural standards of the people.”45
The laws banned any production that would tend to destroy public order,
promote subversive theories, discredit the nation or tourism, offend the
Christian faith, the king, or the government, undermine the people’s healthy
social traditions, or damage the aesthetic sense of the populace. The military
oligarchy was primarily interested in curbing dissent; positive efforts to
direct behavior were left to other institutions.
In their initial clarification of aims, the coup leaders announced that
economic development within the framework of the Common Market was
a major goal of their group.46 However, considering the contradictory
nature of other government policies, it is highly doubtful that the ruling
junta knows anything at all about the nature and necessities of economic


Military Oligarchy 239
development. The only elements in Greek politics with explicit programs
for economic development, the younger Papandreou and the EDA, were
eliminated, partly because their visions of development clashed with the
existing position of the military. Any program of economic development
would be crippled unless military expenditure were reduced; and under
present circumstances, the military budget is likely to increase rather than
decrease. Moreover, the uniformly unfavorable reaction of the Common
Market members to the coup produced a suspension of Greece’s economic
credit. Although the political instability existing before the coup was not
conducive to economic improvement, the military regime does not inspire
confidence among foreigners. This can be particularly crucial, since tourism
and remittances from Greeks abroad are a significant portion of Greek
national income.
The junta, perhaps because of its uncertainty and lack of experience,
hastened to sign a contract with Litton Industries for the development of
the western Peloponnesus and Crete. The previous government had de¬
layed ratification of the agreement because of a general feeling that the
terms were too favorable to Litton, and that such a contract might be the
opening wedge for a new kind of colonialism.* Litton and its subsidiaries
were to serve as management consultants on a fee basis, and were to act
as brokers in finding capital for the proposed development projects. In
essence, the junta used Litton Industries to bypass traditional Greek bureau¬
cratic roadblocks to development, and to provide needed expertise for solv¬
ing Greek economic problems in general. The oligarchy took steps to en¬
courage private Greek investment also, particularly in building construc¬
tion, by reducing the bank rate and authorizing new loans. However, as
most analysts of the Greek economy have pointed out, building construc¬
tion is the least desirable type of investment from the standpoint of eco¬
nomic development.47
Basically, the military leaders seem to have hopes that foreign private in¬
vestment and economic aid will solve the development dilemma. However,
the laws relating to foreign investment were very favorable under previous
regimes, and did not attract much foreign capital then. Moreover, the
United States, the chief supplier of foreign economic assistance in the past,
is increasingly interested in cutting back on its aid. Finally, the natural
economic deficiencies of Greece—a limited market, poor transportation,
•Litton was to receive a fee of 11 per cent over all costs, plus a commission of 1.90 to 2.25 per cent on all the capital that it raised. (New Yor\ Times, Apr. 29, 1967, p. 18.)


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
24O
scarce energy resources, and a shortage of skilled labor—as well as the pos¬
sibility of political upheaval, are likely to limit the success of any plans for
economic development that depend on foreign assistance.
The initial announcement of the military leaders stated, “We do not
belong to the economic oligarchy.”48 Moreover, since the leading figures in
the economy had close ties to the traditional political world, it is not sur¬
prising that the triumvirate identified with the less fortunate in Greek so¬
ciety, at least verbally. Some of the measures directed against the business
sector benefited the urban laboring classes. However, by and large, the
regime has directed most of its efforts elsewhere. Rather than woo an urban
proletariat that may be contaminated by leftist influences, the regime has
concentrated on an agrarian policy that is obviously an attempt to build
support in the rural areas. However, this policy is incompatible with the
requirements of economic development, and is itself based on questionable
assumptions. A present campaign to stop migration to the cities by promis¬
ing to bring urban conveniences to the rural areas may actually increase
migration to the urban areas. For example, the premier’s public “demand”
that the Ministry of the Interior extend the water supply, electric power,
roads, and telephones to all villages in Greece only commits the regime to
promises it cannot keep.49 The attempts to rationalize the bureaucracy are
unlikely to benefit the average peasant because he still needs assistance in
deciding what government agency to take his problem to. There is no help¬
ful patron in this new setting. The peasant may even be more neglected
than before, since now he does not even have a vote to compel attention.
The Ministry of Agriculture, apparently convinced that landholding
problems were of first concern in the rural areas, announced several mea¬
sures to deal with the alleged problem. The government ordered villages to
distribute their public land among landless farmers. In reality, there are
few landless farmers, and most unowned land is controlled not by the
municipalities but by the state itself. The problem of farm fragmentation
is acute, and has been aggravated by government agricultural policies in
the past and by the tradition of the dowry. To deal with this, the Ministry
proposed that the state buy out the smaller landowners and distribute the
land to those who held the larger parcels. Supposedly, this would create a
large class of well-to-do farmers disposed to support the regime. How this
operation would be carried out financially or administratively is not ex¬
plained; and the proposal ignores the social and moral value that a Greek
peasant attaches to owning his own land. According to the Ministry, the


Military Oligarchy 241
surplus labor created by this program would be absorbed by “rural in¬
dustry.”50 Since there is almost no existing rural industry, in spite of past
government efforts to encourage its development, it seems unlikely that
this would solve the problem. Reforms of the kind advocated would almost
certainly cause great dislocations in the rural areas and force thousands of
unskilled workers to migrate to the cities—one of the very things that the
government is trying to stop.
The government, in its effort to garner rural support and at the same
time destroy political structures, announced plans to reorganize the co¬
operative movement.61 But the general rural distrust of the state and state
organizations is unlikely to disappear, no matter what form the organiza¬
tions take. Another measure was a decree that old-age pensions for rural
workers were to be raised by 70 per cent within the year; they were to be
financed by an increase in the turnover tax, which would hit the urban
consumer/' However, the subsidy on wheat, which was the contribution
of the old political world to the rural dweller, was removed at the same
time. In sum, the agrarian policies of the military oligarchy are internally
inconsistent, and they conflict with policies in other sectors as well.
THE FUTURE OF THE MILITARY OLIGARCHY
The fundamental dilemma of the Greek military is summed up by Ed¬
ward Shils:
the military oligarchy is not a complete regime. It has neither a comprehensive program nor a perspective into the future. Like all non-hereditary oligarchies, it has no provision for succession. It is what some of the military oligarchs them¬ selves call a “caretaker regime.” But its ideas about what it takes care of are rather scant and, even where well-intentioned, unimaginative.53
However, since the military oligarchy already exists, and since stability has
been restored to the Greek political world, the present regime has some
support. It is quite likely that many Greeks who are dissatisfied with tra¬
ditional politics and suspicious of the Left strongly support the new rulers.
Certainly, a portion of the middle classes prefers even short-term stability
under military rule to upheaval. Moreover, since the first concern of most
Greek citizens is for their clientage ties, it is not difficult for them to abandon
party government.64 Patron-client ties can still be used to penetrate the
bureaucracy—and over the long run, the military leadership itself. Since
an essential point in patron-client relations is the minimization of personal
risk, it is unlikely that these ties would be used to organize opposition to


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
242
the regime. With the traditional political groups scattered and discredited,
the modern sector of the parliamentary political constellations exiled or
underground, and the EDA destroyed, there is no focus of opposition. The
relative lack of organized opposition, or even sporadic protests against the
regime, indicates that the majority of the Greek population is simply wait¬
ing. The regime itself has not yet faced up to the problem of developing a
viable mass political apparatus; instead, it views the quiescence of the
population as evidence of support.
At this point, it is difficult to forsee any threat to the military oligarchy
from within the political system. If the military steps down, it is likely
to do so for its own reasons. The cohesiveness of the military establishment
is unclear. The junta leaders resigned from the army at an early date; how¬
ever, this seems to have been more formality than anything else, for army
officers still dominate the government institutions. There are several possible
lines of cleavage. First, there is some rivalry among the three services. Sec¬
ond, sectors of the army officer corps itself may have divergent interests.
Finally, there may be friction between the professional soldiers and the
temporary officers and draftees.
The army gets most of the state resources that are allocated to the armed
forces. The coup itself was purely an army undertaking. Before his lines
of communication were cut on the morning of the coup, the king contacted
units of the air force and navy. Several days passed before these services
gave public indications of support for the new regime. After the junta
assumed power, some leaders in the air force, the navy, and the gendarmerie
were replaced. The formal subordination of these services to the army—and
to lower-ranking officers, at that—is not likely to be met with favor by high
ranking naval or air-force officers. Further, the air force and navy have had
more privileges and higher status than the army in the past; this is likely to
be reversed. Finally, both of these services are even more dependent on for¬
eign support than the army, especially for equipment. They are more likely
to be sensitive to international opinion. The army itself would appear to be
less than monolithic. Some higher officers, even though they might be in
sympathy with the aims of the coup, are bound to resent being commanded
by colonels; some may feel slighted at not being brought into the initial coup
planning. Younger officers may feel that normal progression up the ranks
will be hindered by the abnormality of junta rule, although others will be
satisfied as they fill the places opened up by compulsory retirements. In the
first days of the coup, eight major generals, fourteen brigadiers, and hun


Military Oligarchy 243
dreds of other officers were retired,55 including five members of the Supreme
Military Council. The junta, at the outset, represented at the most only 2,000
of the 8,000 army officers.66 Although the widespread assumption that the
military was simply a tool of the monarchy and the Greek Right has proved
to be incorrect, there are still elements in the military who are personally
loyal to the crown. Since the coup, the junta has retired many pro-royalist
officers, but there is every likelihood that this purge will not be completely
successful. Moreover, these mass retirements have created a sizeable pool
of disgruntled officers from which any dissident military group could draw
support. Finally, there is continual speculation about the relationship of the
three junta leaders to each other.
The composition of the Greek armed forces would also seem to preclude
singleness of purpose. Because Greece employs universal conscription, the
ranks are composed of men with all kinds of political affiliation, including
leftists. The reserve officers are drawn from university graduates, and might
constitute a potential weak spot. Although Greek recruits are traditionally
amenable to higher directives, dissident officers leading recruits drawn from
an unsympathetic population could dislocate the military organization.
Friction within the military is likely to increase if the privileged position
of the military as a whole is threatened. Of course, the privileges of the en¬
tire military establishment would be curtailed if the coup leaders decided
to divert resources from the military to the cultivation of support from so¬
ciety at large. More likely, mismanagement of the economy, combined with
external pressures, could end the military’s affluence by causing an internal
economic crisis or the diminution of foreign military assistance. Under these
conditions, quarrels over a division of available resources would threaten the
existing junta; but they would probably result only in its replacement by an¬
other military group.
The longer the junta stays in control, the greater the likelihood that tra¬
ditional political vices will penetrate the military itself. In fact, the tradi¬
tional vices of the parliamentary level, such as nepotism and favoritism, are
already evident in the appointments of the new regime. For example, the
Minister of Agriculture, a former director of classical studies in a small
Boeotian town, has turned out to be the brother-in-law of one of the trium¬
virate.67 As stability returns, and as new influence networks are built from
the population to the state apparatus, clientage may reappear in its tradi¬
tional form. To the extent that the military is involved in administration,
loyalties may shift from a bureaucratic organization—i.e. the armed forces


THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
244
as the representative of the nation—to particular individuals. The require¬
ments of personal security will demand a return to the system of personal
ties and obligations, even though these relationships must exist in a formally
nonpolitical framework. In an effort to inhibit these developments, the
office of Ombudsman, directly responsible to the prime minister, was
created in November 1968. Citizen complaints against the bureaucracy were
to be investigated and resolved by this office. When the army intervenes in
politics, it, too, becomes political, and is subject to the same strains as any
other political group.
The military’s renunciation of a political role does not mean the death
of politics. No regime, particularly this one, is likely to have the resources
to meet all the demands made of it. The fact that allocations and preferences
will have to be made will alienate some citizens and make loyal partisans of
others. The purge of the bureaucracy and other organizational leadership
serves the same function for the military as it has for the traditional parties
in the past. It, too, will create a reservoir of support. Whether the military
establishment will be completely penetrated by the traditional clientage
system remains to be seen. The fact that the Greek armed forces retain their
purely military function and remain closely tied to the NATO alliance
would seem to favor their efforts to prevent such penetration. However,
whether the military leadership will decide on a “Burmese” solution, a with¬
drawal from the political sphere to protect its own integrity, is problemat¬
ical.68
The increased social mobilization of Greek society, with the resulting
decline in patron-client ties, created demands that could not be accommo¬
dated by the traditional parties. In many ways these problems are even less
amenable to solution by the junta. Eventually, particularly disadvantaged
groups may resort to strikes, demonstrations, and other forms of direct
action. The usual military response to these measures is repression. As early
as May 1968, new decrees aimed at strengthening the hand of the govern¬
ment in case of civil disturbances were announced. A state of civil mobiliza¬
tion could be declared “in case of external threat to the nation’s security, in
case of internal trouble that may disturb the economic or social life of the
country, and in any other case in which such a measure is justified as deter¬
mined by the cabinet.”59 These measures would subject all Greeks to war¬
time discipline, which would allow confiscation of property, suspension of
all labor legislation, and compulsory enlistment of the population in military
or educational programs. A regiment of marines, the first such troops in


Military Oligarchy 245
Greek military history, was created and given the insignia of “21 April,” the
day of the coup; its job was to maintain internal security. Clearly, the
regime is aware of potential threats and is prepared to meet them. However,
the measures selected so far seem likely to create a “cycle of distrust,” with
unpredictable consequences.
Perhaps the greatest problem facing the military in charting its future
course is the fact that the limited initial goals of the coup and the difficulty
of selecting future ones make a return to civilian rule difficult. The coup
leaders have been contradictory and vague in speaking of their future plans.
After much procrastination, a new constitution was finally produced, and
eventual elections are promised. The coup leaders have approved a consti¬
tutional framework that includes a provision for limiting parliamentary
authority, greater executive power, a permanent electoral system, and a
means “to prevent politicians from making mistakes.”60 The new constitu¬
tion was approved by 92.11 per cent of the voters in a referendum of Sep¬
tember 29,1968. It went into effect, with “temporary suspension” of a num¬
ber of articles relating to civil liberties, on November 15.61
Now the way is cleared for the military establishment as a whole to “re¬
turn to the barracks.” However, the precedent for its future involvement in
politics has been set. Moreover, the present coup leaders, relying on the
political support they have secured during the months of military rule,
might decide to enter traditional politics. The restoration of traditional
politics and the consociational system in Greece will depend on the actions
of the military. However, the events of the past several years are almost cer¬
tain to make the shape of this consociational system different from that
existing in the past.




III. Political Recruitment




io. Socialization and the Family
This chapter and the one to follow present empirical data on the mode of
recruitment to political roles in Greece. This concern serves two purposes.
First, recruitment patterns can be viewed as an index of the modernization
process. Ascriptive standards of eligibility and selection for political roles
are especially common in systems that have not yet attained high levels of
role differentiation and organization. In these systems, recruitment to the
sector representing traditional powerholders—in Greece, to the parliamen¬
tary level—is especially likely to exhibit this orientation. Second, as sug¬
gested in my Introduction, the pattern of recruitment to political roles affects
the maintenance and operation of the entire political system.
Political recruitment is commonly viewed as an extension of the socializa¬
tion process. Lucian Pye, for example, distinguishes basic socialization, the
process by which a child is inducted into the culture and introduced to social
roles, from political socialization, “in which the individual becomes aware
of the political world and thereby gains appreciation, j udgment, and under¬
standing of political events.”1 The process of political recruitment, in his
formulation, begins when a man sheds the passive role of citizen and ob¬
server of the political process and assumes that of an active participant. The
focus here is on how individuals become oriented toward political roles.
However, individual orientations are only one dimension; another involves
questions of eligibility and selection. Analytically, the socialization and
recruitment stages in the process are distinct; but in practice, the separation
of these stages is difficult, particularly in systems where the family over¬
shadows other socializing agents and is an important factor in eligibility
and selection for political roles.
SOCIALIZATION
The term “political socialization” is used to describe the process of inte¬
gration into the political system. From childhood on, the socializing in


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
25O
fluences of primary and secondary groups on the individual perpetuate the
culture and the structures of the political system.2 The family (and its ex¬
tension, the kinship group), the church, the school, individual occupations,
the mass media, and various political institutions are all recognized as
agencies of socialization. In Greece, latent socialization, primarily family
inHuence, is most critical; manifest socialization, as exemplified by civic
education in the schools, would appear to be far less important. Secondary
associations, whether political or otherwise, have generally not been effec¬
tive agents of socialization. National institutions, such as the schools, the
military, and the mass media, have most often only confirmed or reinforced
particularistic family attitudes. However, as Greek culture changes in re¬
sponse to the modern world, the pattern of socialization may change. Until
now, however, the only constant element in modern Greek history has been
the primacy of family infiuence.
In the lifetime of the present generation, few institutions have even com¬
peted with the family in importance. The church and the schools have had
varying infiuence, depending on the social class and regional location of the
family. However, these institutions have contributed little to forming a
consensus in Greek society: the question “What is a Greek?” has been
answered in conflicting terms by each. As the previous chapters illustrate,
the fragmented character of Greek society both reflects and contributes to
dissensus. There is a gulf between the language of the educated and that of
the villager. There is a gulf between the Christianity of the villager and the
faith of the urban intellectual. The civic educational content of the school
system has been based on conflicting heritages, the classical and the Byzan¬
tine; and different areas of the curriculum have been argued over and
changed by political factions. Since the boundaries of the Greek state have
been changed repeatedly, the mental picture of what Greece should be is
not the same for everyone. Every adult Greek has witnessed several va¬
rieties of parliamentary system, and also several instances of extraparlia¬
mentary rule.
For most Greeks, membership in a family is superior to that in any other
group. Of those Greeks with disturbed family connections, namely, the
refugees and the urban workers, only the first group has had time to pro¬
duce a second generation of political age. The specific impact of public
events—the struggle between the Venizelists and the royalists, World War
I, the population exchanges, the Metaxas dictatorship, World War II, and
the civil war—has differed among all Greek citizens, and among the deputies


Socialization and the Family 251
in our sample. The individual reaction to these public events has usually
been influenced by the way they affected the family.
Political socialization implies a growing awareness and understanding of
political events. A related aspect of political recruitment involves the de¬
velopment of individual orientations to political roles. Analytically, these
two processes are distinct. Empirically, as in the data gadiered for this book,
they are hard to distinguish. The imprecise nature of the interview sched¬
ule is partly to blame in this particular instance; the very nature of “tran¬
sitional” systems also contributed to the problem. In the transitional set¬
ting, it is simply difficult for either the respondent or the interviewer to
separate the political from other roles, and to separate political interest
from orientation to political roles. Roles tend to merge, and each has a po¬
litical aspect. The Greek emphasis on clientage structures means that in¬
dividual roles in the economic, social, and political spheres coincide. Status
in one area is transferable to another. Patronage roles originating in an
economic setting may be easily transferred to the political sphere. Member¬
ship in a clientage structure is itself evidence of political interest; and both
patron or client inevitably direct their attention toward political roles. In
the traditional setting, the patron seeks to formalize his position by acquir¬
ing the legal status of deputy.
Part of the interview schedule used with our sample of 55 Greek deputies
was designed to elicit information about political socialization experiences.
Deputies were asked, “How did you become interested in politics?” Table
10.1 contrasts their responses with data drawn from interviews with Amer¬
ican state legislators.3 In both cases, respondents usually gave more than
one answer.
Of the 55 deputies in the Greek sample, 31, or 56.4 per cent, came from
families with relatives active in politics. For the parliament as a whole, 40
per cent had relatives who had been active politically. Those deputies with
Table 10.1. Major Sources of Interest in Politics
Percentage of sample responding
Source of interest Greece United States (N474)
Family influence 45.5% 41.1% Political or civic participation 30.9 54.2
Current events or conditions 54.4 26.0 Personal predispositions 63.6 47.5 Socioeconomic beliefs 5.4 8.4


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
252
active political families had responses that fell into a common pattern.
Typical comments were: “All my relatives for five or six generations have
been politicians.” “Before me, my brother was involved in politics, and I
succeeded him.” “When very young, I helped my father, who was a poli¬
tician; while helping him, I myself became involved and interested.” “I
belong to a political family.” For some, family involvement with particular
public events was more explicit:
My earliest recollection comes from the 1920’s, when my father and uncle were exiled for their royalist political sympathies.
My family took part in the 1916 Venizelist movement in Salonika.
My father was important in local politics as one of the leading Liberals; I listened to the great Venizelos and followed the foreign policies of all the Powers. In a high school essay on “What do you want to be?” I said I wanted to be a foreign minister; the professor gave me a good grade anyway.
The importance of family as an agent of political socialization cannot be
overestimated; furthermore, there is substantial evidence that this is true in
more modern settings as well. The Wahlke survey found that the percentage
of American lawyers with relatives in politics ranged from 41 to 59 per cent
in the four states studied.4 James Barber, in his study of Connecticut legis¬
lators, found that approximately 65 per cent had relatives interested or
active in politics.5
These figures suggest that family influence is equally important for
evoking interest in political events in both transitional and modern systems.
Of the Greek deputies, only twelve mentioned a single source of political
interest; of these, eight mentioned only the family. However, most deputies
were also influenced by personal predispositions, events, and opportunities
for participation. In both systems, socioeconomic beliefs had affected very
few representatives; undoubtedly, the reasons for this are different. In the
United States, the low score is probably due to the presumed consensus on
these matters; in Greece, the concern with personal ties and patronage
obliterates class and interest politics. The contrast in responses for the other
categories seems to reflect differing social and cultural environments. In the
sample of American legislators, the category of “political or civic participa¬
tion” received more responses than any other; among Greek deputies, this
category ranked low as a source of political interest. Undoubtedly, the low
Greek response merely confirms the paucity of associational life that we have
noted earlier (see Table 10.2). Similarly, many more responses from Greek


Socialization and the Family 253
Table 10.2. Political and Nonpolitical Participation as a Source of Political Interest
Type of participation
Percentage of sample
United States (N256)
responding
Greece (N17)
Study of politics 24.2% 5-9%
Activity in school politics 9.4 General political work 23.4 Party work 24.6 
Civic or community work 14.4 11.8
Occupational or professional activities 9.0 23.5 Ethnic and religious acdvities 1.2 Legislative lobbying 2.3 Politically related job 9.8 64.7
deputies fell into the classification of “events or conditions” than did those
from American state legislators. Moreover, when this category is sub¬
divided, the kinds of events and conditions stimulating the two groups turn
out to be very different (see Table 10.3). There is also a substantial differ¬
ence in the proportion of legislators in each system whose responses fall into
the “personal predisposition” category. This category also exhibits such great
differences in its subclassifications that comparison is difficult (see Table
10.4).
The fact that so few Greek deputies viewed political or civic participation
as a major source of political interest is evidence of the relative underdevel¬
opment of the Greek political infrastructure. Over half of the American
legislators queried gave responses that fell into this category; moreover,
these responses tended to emphasize the “organizational” categories, and
that of formal study. In contrast, Greek deputies most frequently mentioned
activities related to occupation. This simply reflects, once again, the transi¬
tional character of the Greek political system. There are few civic organiza¬
tions in Greece. Most of the existing ones have been initiated for political
ends; however, membership in these organizations tends to come after
political involvement, and joining them is an explicit recognition of a po¬
litical goal.
Occupation is relevant to political awareness, but few deputies mentioned
it specifically as instrumental in evoking their own political interest. A
journalist elected in the 1964 election said, “My profession took me in con¬
stant contact with politicians.” Several men educated in the law but em¬
ployed as civil servants made similar responses, as did former secretaries to


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
254
Table 10.3. Events or Conditions That Helped Develop Political Interest
United States (N12 3) Greece (N30)
Event Percentage Event Percentage
Political campaigns Civil war 33.3% or administrations 61.8% Local conditions 30.0 Local conditions or issues 21.1 War and occupation 20.0 War 8.9 Specific personalities 13.3
Depression 6.5 Metaxas regime 13.3
State conditions or issues 5.7 Asked to run 13.3 Specific election campaigns 3.3
Refugee status 3.3
political men. In one case, education and employment were tied together:
“It was natural to be interested in politics because of the education I had,
and because of the state job I had filled.” The legal profession is particularly
intimate with the political world; apparently this connection seemed so
obvious that no one in the sample mentioned it specifically. The initial de¬
cision to enter the legal profession was at least partially the result of an al¬
ready aroused political interest. Occupational associations, especially the
cooperative movement, were responsible for some interest in politics: “In
the beginning I was interested in cooperatives, not politics.” By and large,
the influences in this category mentioned by Greek deputies can best be
viewed as a stage on the path to political office. Instead of sources of political
interest, they are indications of the time and origin of a deputy’s orientation
to a specifically political role—i.e., of his recruitment to politics.
The responses of American legislators and Greek deputies that were
coded into the category of “events and conditions important as a source of
political interest” are really not comparable. However, the comparative pro¬
portions of the responses in this category as a whole are significant (see
Table 10.3). A substantial number of the Greek deputies were aroused by
wars, foreign occupations, and the upheavals surrounding the population
exchanges of the 1920’s. It is not surprising that fewer Americans would be
stimulated by public events. In the American context, only electoral cam¬
paigns and elections were important, and they were a major source of
political interest to only a few.
Wahlke and his associates are not very helpful in explaining the responses
of American legislators in the category of “personal predispositions.” Ac¬
cording to them, the majority simply said that they had long been interested
in politics and “left it at that.”6 Very few Greek deputies responded in this


Socialization and the Family 255
Table 10.4. Personal Predisposition and Political Socialization
Predisposition
Long interest Ambition, desire for power Admiration for politician Indignation General sense of obligation Sense of obligation to special group Other
Greece (N37) United States (N224)
13.5% 51.3' 16.2 7.1
29.7 14.7 29.7 11.6 40.5 15.6 32.4 4.5
8.1 6.2
vague way (see Table 10.4). In neither case is desire for power admitted as
a predisposition with much frequency; although this, or “ambition,” may in¬
deed influence many to enter politics, there would appear to be much re¬
luctance to admit the fact publicly. Proportionately more Greek deputies
noted “admiration for a politician” as a factor, but this is not surprising,
given the personalist character of the Greek system. Substantial differences
in response do appear in the next categories: indignation, and general or
specific sense of obligation. The clientage system, characteristic of Greek
politics at the parliamentary level, operates on the basis of mutual obliga¬
tions. In the Greek setting, “obligation” has a much more specific meaning
than it does in the American context. The responses here may be more ap¬
propriately characterized as orientations to political roles, rather than simply
as indicators of political socialization. Although the factors noted here can¬
not be called “motivations,” they do seem closely connected with political
careers in a way that the other major sources of interest do not.
Adult socialization appears to be more important in modern settings (see
Table 10.5). Over 75 per cent of the Greek deputies had developed political
interests in childhood or youth. It is perhaps more surprising that even 23.6
per cent could have escaped developing an interest in politics before adult¬
hood, given the difficulty of separating economic and social existence from
political life in Greece. In a sample of German and French elites, Lewis
Edinger and Donald Searing noted that adult socialization experiences were
more useful than variables associated with earlier experiences in predicting
elite attitudes on certain salient political issues.7 For Greece, a transitional
country, the nature of the salient political issues would in all probability
be different; in this context, variables associated with earlier political social
izadon might well be crucial.
For those Greek depudes who placed the awakening of polidcal interest


256 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 10.5. Time of Earliest Political Interest
Time of initial interest Greece (N55) United States (N421)
Childhood 43.6% 37.3% Youth 32.7 
Adolescence — 14.7 College or equivalent period — 10.7 Adult 23.6 After college, or equivalent period _ 16.6 At entry into politics — 20.7
at adolescence or later, the major source of political interest varied. But in
general, the character of the respondent’s family determined how important
later agents of political socialization were likely to be. Deputies found it easy
to remember that their families had introduced them to politics, and took
pride in saying so.
Differences in patterns of political socialization and recruitment can also
be discerned among the different groups and sectors in the Greek political
system (see Table 10.6). The empirical data presented here focus on the
level of traditional politics, the parliament. Since the chamber of deputies
in this period did not include many left-wing members, the sample does not
include a sufficient number of EDA deputies to allow more than inferences
and conjectures to be drawn.
The greater number of ERE deputies noting the family as a source of in¬
fluence can be attributed to the ERE’s being out of power. ERE candidates
with the strongest ties to their constituencies, particularly family ties, were
more likely to have been reelected; the EK contingent, as the governing
party, included more deputies for whom family was not as paramount.
Ideology was not a very significant source of political interest. This is not
Table 10.6. Major Source of Interest in Politics, by Party Affiliation
Source of interest
Number of deputies responding
ERE (N17) EK (N32) EDA (N4) KP (N2)
Family 11 13 __ 1
Political or civic participation 5 10 1 1 Events or conditions 8 18 3 1 Personal predispositions 8 23 4 2
Socioeconomic beliefs — 1 1 1


Socialization and the Family 257
Table 10.J. Time of Earliest Political Interest Recalled by Greel{ Deputies, by Party Affiliation
Time
Number of deputies responding
ERE (N17) EK (N32) EDA (N4) KP (N2)
Childhood 9 14 _ 1
Youth 3 11 3 1 Adulthood 5 7 1 1
surprising, given the low ideological content of political conflict at the par¬
liamentary level. During the formative years of most deputies in the sample,
the parties of the Left were barely significant. Only three deputies used the
questions as an opportunity to justify political interest by mentioning ideo¬
logical factors; one, from the EDA, mentioned his syndicalist beliefs; the
other two tried to give a vague liberalism or nationalism the status of
ideology.
Most politicians in Greece seemed to have become interested in politics
at an earlier age than the ordinary citizen. Some differences in the time of
earliest political interest appear when the deputies are separated according to
party affiliation (see Table 10.7). The limited sample casts doubt on any
conclusions drawn for personnel from the minor parties. However, it is in¬
teresting that three of the four EDA deputies put the time of their earliest
political involvement during adolescence. This period of their lives coin¬
cided with the most severe political and economic crisis of modern Greek
history. The largest percentage of deputies recalled childhood as the time
of earliest political interest, again reflecting the fact that Greek deputies
seem to come from families heavily involved with politics.
We have already seen that great public events have had a significant role
in socialization in Greece. Thirty of the deputies interviewed gave responses
that could be classified in this category; their answers are listed by party in
Table 10.8.
These various events, besides evoking political interest, have promoted
cleavage in the society. The upheaval of the population exchanges often
pushed some Greeks, particularly refugees, into leftist politics; at the same
time, the impact of the refugees caused many native Greeks to adopt right
wing views. Reactions toward General Metaxas and his authoritarian re¬
gime differed. Several of the deputies interviewed became interested in poli¬
tics because they approved of events; others became politically active in
order to undermine the regime.


258 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 10.8. Events or Conditions That Helped Develop Political Interest
Event
Number of deputies responding
ERE (N8) EK (N18) EDA (N3) KP (Ni)
Particular campaigns - 1 - War and occupation 1 3 1 1
Civil war 4 5 - 1 Local conditions - 7 1 1 Personalities 1 3 - Asked to run 3 - - Refugee status - 1 1 1 Metaxas regime 2 1 1 
I took part in the 1935 movement, and also in the anti-fascist activities against Metaxas, for which I was nearly exiled.
When I was twenty, I was connected with Metaxas, and I stayed with him until
his death. This relationship led me into public life.
In 1935, just after the coup d’etat, when the victors turned against the rights of
the people, my conscience was revolted; and I believed that I could only work for
real democracy if I became involved in politics.
The occupation and the civil war had similar effects:
I was a student during World War I, and was pro-Venizelist; after World War
II, I finally took a leftist position.
I entered politics because of my activities during the occupation. I returned after the war as an island hero, and was elected mayor with 98 per cent of the vote.
My first interest in politics was at the University during the occupation; I was
involved in one of the many underground groups.
The category of “asked to run” reveals some notable differences. The
number of ERE deputies giving this response reflected the efforts of Papagos
and Karamanlis to build up their personal component in the political group¬
ings they led. It was easier for the governing party to recruit than it was for
the opposition. The EK under Papandreou had not had such an opportunity
up to the time of the interviews.
Particular personalities have had a lasting impact on Greek political life.
The significant figures in modern Greek history have been controversial;
they have called forth devotion from admirers and hatred from opponents.
Venizelos figures in the statements of several deputies, both those in the Cen¬
ter political grouping and those in the Right who had Center backgrounds.
There has not been a similar commanding figure for the Right. Marshal


Socialization and the Family 259
Table 10.9. Personal Predisposition and Political Socialization
Predisposition
Number of deputies responding
ERE (N8) EK (N23) EDA (N4) KP (Na)
Long interest in polidcs 2 3 _ _ Ambition 1 4 _ 1
Admiration for a politician 2 7 1 1 Indignation 2 6 2 1 General sense of obligation 4 9 1 1 Sense of obligation to special group 9 3 Other 1 1 - 
Papagos might fit this role, and perhaps even Karamanlis; but those who
would be influenced by them have not yet entered politics. Local conditions,
generally economic deprivation, were mentioned by several deputies. How¬
ever, all of them had only recently entered parliamentary politics. It would
seem that this response was largely a justification for political involvement,
rather than the actual agency that promoted political interest. On the whole,
the responses indicate that no one set of events or conditions could be iso¬
lated as crucial. Their effect depended principally on the orientation of the
individual deputy and his family.
The category of personal predespositions also showed marked differences
in the responses of deputies from different parties (see Table 10.9). Of those
who mentioned a long interest in politics, most had a history of family po¬
litical involvement. Several deputies were quite frank in viewing a political
career as a prime means of advancement for an ambitious man.
Personal advancement was part of it; I was fed up with military life.
From an early age I was ambitious to enter politics and play a role in public life.
However, the material advantages of public service—a substantial tax-free
salary, privileges in transportation and the importation of autos, low-cost
housing loans, and other benefits—were never specifically mentioned as
goals. The personalist character of Greek politics is illustrated by the sub¬
stantial number who mentioned admiration for a politician. The most fre¬
quently named figure was Venizelos, but other Center leaders were men¬
tioned as well. Neither the Left nor the Right has produced leaders with
the personal appeal of those from the Center, at least in recent times.
I ran with EPEK because I admired Plastiras and felt he was a genuine demo¬ crat.


260 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Since I was interested in democracy, I became a follower of Alexander Papa
nastasiou.
One non-Left figure mentioned several times was Metaxas. However, those
mentioning him were either distant relatives or came from the same island.
Certainly, his appeal was not as general as that of the Center politicians. It
should be noted that the widespread shifting from one political group to
another in Greece has meant that deputies in nearly every part of the po¬
litical spectrum can share a common admiration for the same man.
Indignation at the activities of local or national politicians was a predispo¬
sition in several cases:
I had not intended to be involved in politics, but as a servant of the city I had a
quarrel with the mayor; I thought I would punish him by being involved in
politics, so I ran and was elected.
After the war I was involved in the distribution of UNRRA aid in my district;
this put some politicians in a difficult position, and they started chasing me. They
forced my transfer, which I refused. I resigned from my civil-service position and
decided to run for office.
It is difficult to separate the genuine expressions of obligation to the public
from mere rhetoric. Several deputies who entered politics after being civil
servants felt that they could do more for people as politicians than as bureau¬
crats. In the traditional sectors of Greek politics the powerholders are poli¬
ticians, not bureaucrats. This kind of response seems to reflect both Greek
preferences for political solutions and the realities of the Greek bureaucratic
world.
I had been aware of the problems and demands of the people since my youth,
when I began to work in the city offices of my home town. I felt I could do more in politics.
I worked in the office of the president of parliament, and the injustices of all
government made me believe that perhaps I could help in some way to stop in¬ justice and to raise the standard of living.
The same sentiment was echoed by an Athenian doctor: “I had always been
concerned about the poor and unfortunate in my clinic, and I felt that a
politician would have the power to do something about them.” In some
instances, the sense of obligation, a normal feature of Greek patronage poli¬
tics, was engulfed in rhetoric:


Socialization and the Family 261
I entered politics because I felt an obligation toward the Greek people to improve
the standard of living, and because of the emotion caused by the affection of the people for my brother.
I felt a need to protect suffering man. I believe that politics is a sacred activity, and not just adventure.
As a child I became upset with the condition of the poor in comparison with my own family.
Several deputies mentioned their obligations to more specific groups, al¬
though for many of them the obligation seemed to result from participation
in the organization they claimed to represent.
It was through the land-reform program that I entered politics, seeking rights for the cultivators.
During my long, violent fights as president of the union, I found that there was
a need in the Vouli for the straight and honest voice that would come from the working classes and pensioners.
In 1926 I was present when the police attacked a labor meeting in which laborers
were asking for an improvement in their humble conditions; that has deeply influenced my future course.
It is obvious from the foregoing analysis that the political interest of Greek
deputies is awakened by a wide variety of experiences. It is less easy to dis¬
cover how and why an individual becomes specifically oriented to a political
career. At what point does a man perceive himself in a primarily political
role, and at what point does he try to institutionalize this role through formal
election to the parliamentary body ? The responses to one of my interview
questions, “What clinched your decision to run for public office yourself?”
can be used to examine this question (see Table 10.10). First, the responses
here are very similar to those elicited by the questions on major sources of
Table 10.10. Reasons for Political Career at the Moment of Entrance
Reason
Number of responses Reason
Number of responses
Service 15 Asked by politician 7 Ideals 13 “Natural” 5 Family decision 10 Personal condition 3
Special interest pressure 8 Could win 2 Community pressure 6 Hopefulness 1 Unknown 1


262 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
political interest. This, in itself, reaffirms the difficulty of separating political
roles from others. As the vague categories of “ideals” and “service” indicate,
some deputies had difficulty in pinpointing a particular time for the final
decision. Some deputies ran because they were asked either by the party
chief—at least this was the claim—or by the local party committee. How¬
ever, not all requests came directly from the party; for example:
My compatriots were pressing me to run because the island of Syros had not had
a spokesman in the Vouli for the last twelve years.
I was persuaded to enter politics by my present and former townsmen, who urged
me to run even though I didn’t know anything about the demands and interests
of the people.
I was asked to run because it was felt that an engineer, with his knowledge of
the more technical problems, was needed to offset the great number of lawyers.
For the rest, the decision to run for office was made because of a temporary
condition, such as the imminence of an election, the availability of a place
on the list, or the odds of success.
There was no trouble getting on the list because my family was part of the found¬
ing group of the Populist Party.
My standing for election was obligatory: since my brother had died, I had to
stand in his place.
I decided to run for office in 1958 because I was assured of winning in a walk.
I ran because of the pressure of friends; they didn’t want to be without a patron.
For many, political interest turned to active involvement only when one
of these factors was present.
The responses of deputies from political groups that confined their activi¬
ties to the parliamentary level were not significantly different. The variations
in socialization patterns that did emerge centered on the importance of the
family in the total process of political socialization. For some deputies, par¬
ticularly those from families heavily involved in politics, family influence
was predominant, and other experiences only reinforced it. Deputies coming
from less political families were more affected by other kinds of socialization.
The prevalence of either type of socialization pattern in the groups at the
parliamentary level depended on the results of the previous election. More
deputies from the out party tended to have socialization patterns emphasiz¬
ing family influence, whereas the political group controlling the parliamen¬
tary institutions contained many deputies who had been influenced by other
factors.


Socialization and the Family 263
The sample for this survey was drawn from the traditional political milieu.
The small number of EDA representatives included does not justify defini¬
tive statements about the attitudes of that entire organization. However, it is
likely that the backgrounds of men attracted to a highly organized and
ideologically oriented left-wing political group like the EDA would differ
from the backgrounds of those in the traditional parliamentary groups. The
limited evidence of the survey does provide some clues. None of the four
EDA deputies named the family as a major source of political interest or
mentioned childhood as the time of their earliest political interest. Dissatis¬
faction with the political system and a sense of obligation enunciated spe¬
cifically in class terms were the major ingredients of their personal pre¬
dispositions; other deputies, when they were dissatisfied at all, were usually
indignant about specific minor events. Several groups in Greek society,
refugees and urban labor in particular, are largely without clientage ties
to the political system, and may be expected to be frustrated and dissatisfied
with the traditional political groups. This would increase support for the
EDA, and would probably create other groups ready to organize “com¬
bative” parties. In that event, adult experience and political indoctrination
by the party would produce many more politicians whose socialization dif¬
fers from that of the traditional political groups.
It is unclear whether the EDA deputies in the sample came to their be¬
liefs because of their family situations or because they opposed family beliefs.
In other words, it is not known whether their frustration came from the
failure of the political system to meet specific demands. It is possible that
dissatisfaction with the existing system could be transmitted through the
family group, just as the more traditional political attitudes are transmitted
in other Greek families. This dissatisfaction would surely be reinforced by
the widespread discrimination against Greeks with leftist backgrounds.
Since this was a parliamentary survey, there are no responses from another
major group, the professional military establishment. However, the impor¬
tance of the family in socialization would almost certainly diminish with
military education and adult experience in the military organization. The
professional officer corps, unlike any other institution in contemporary
Greece, is “total”; a cadet is separated from his family and from other non¬
military groups at a relatively early age. Moreover, life in the military, un¬
like that in other work or social situations in Greek society, does not rein¬
force family influence and the relationships that extend from the family.
The military is a part of Greek society not especially bothered by scarcity of
resources; and its formal hierarchy is not dominated by family groups and


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
264
clientage ties. One would expect professional military men to have different
political attitudes and different perceptions of politics.
The varying importance of the family and of secondary structures illus¬
trates the forces behind the dissensus in Greek society. It also indicates how
different “communities” in Greece are perpetuated by the socialization
process. In the traditional sector, family influence overwhelms secondary
influences; in the more modern sectors, secondary influence is more signifi¬
cant. In Greece one’s family exerts the greatest single influence on political
socialization and recruitment, and we must examine its effects more closely.
FAMILY BACKGROUND
There has been a seeming resurgence of political dynasties in the United
States and in other countries with democratic institutions.8 However, in¬
herited political position is generally associated with traditional political
systems—with those societies in which ascriptive criteria, particularly family
ties, have been used as qualifications for positions in modern representa¬
tive institutions. Sir Lewis Namier, in his study of eighteenth-century Brit¬
ish politics, divides a category of “predestined Parliament men” into “mem¬
bers of political families, born to hunt with certain parliamentary packs,”
and “country gentlemen with seats for heirlooms.”9 According to his data,
only one-quarter of the members of the parliament elected in 1761 had no
family connections.10 In contrast, Austin Ranny, investigating political re¬
cruitment in contemporary Britain, notes a category of “hereditary seats”
among Conservative constituencies, but does not suggest that they are a very
high proportion of the total.11 This category was apparently completely ab¬
sent in Labour constituencies.
Mattei Dogan, in his extensive study of deputies in the Third and Fourth
French Republics, also touches on the matter of political inheritance.12 He
found that about 100 of the 4,892 members during those periods were the
sons of great political families dating from the Monarchy or the Empire; in
addition, there were more than 300 provincial notables, who inherited a
particular parliamentary seat as part of the famliy fortune. The first type
of inheritance was common in the early years of the Third Republic; the
second was significant throughout the Third Republic, but declined pro¬
gressively after 1900.13 The United States House of Representatives also
contained a substantial membership drawn from families with traditions
of officeholding in its early years, but the proportion has steadily dropped
from that time to the present.14 These data suggest that political inheritance


Socialization and the Family 265
is most common in societies with limited role differentiation. There, elite
groups are not separate; political power, economic power, and social prestige
tend to “agglomerate.” However, as such a society becomes more complex,
roles are increasingly differentiated, and the direct inheritance of political
position becomes less common.
In the Greek setting, the actual inheritance of political position is com¬
mon. At the national level, leadership in several major political groupings
has passed from father to son or from relative to relative.16 At the parlia¬
mentary level, a significant number of deputies have come from families
with histories of political involvement. It seems likely that the networks of
political influence at the provincial and local levels have similar family
components.
Family and Parliamentary Position
In preparing this study, I examined the family backgrounds of deputies
in selected past parliaments, as well as the family connections of those depu¬
ties selected for interviews from the 1964 parliament. The data on deputies
from the earlier parliaments (1946 and 1958) came from published sources,
parliamentary personnel records, and electoral lists. In each parliament ex¬
amined, a large percentage of deputies had relatives in politics: 32.2 per cent
in 1946, 34.6 per cent in 1958, and 40 per cent in 1964. Relationships were
relatively easy to trace when political office passed from father to son; how¬
ever, caution was necessary in ascribing relationship in other cases. Except
for a few instances, it was impossible to be certain whether or not political
backgrounds existed in the maternal line. This problem was avoided in the
1964 sample. In this group, 31 of the 55, or 56.4 per cent, noted that they had
relatives who had been or were currently active in political life. The higher
incidence is due primarily to the fact that information on political activity
in the maternal line was available; this may also account for the higher per¬
centage figure in the total 1964 parliament.
A high incidence of representatives drawn from political families active
in politics is not in itself unusual. For example, among the Connecticut legis¬
lators studied by James Barber, some 63 per cent had relatives active in poli¬
tics.16 John Wahlke and his associates, surveying four American state legis¬
latures, found that from 41 to 59 per cent of the members had politically
involved families.17 Since the level of differentiation is higher in these Amer¬
ican states than in Greece, some further distinctions in the nature of “family
political involvement” must be made. Dogan, after noting the different types


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
266
of direct political inheritance, suggests that there can also be inheritance of
a “social-psychological” nature, an inclination for politics that is produced by
the socialization experience.18 In this type of inheritance, the family may
or may not have held offices directly; but the only advantage gained by the
son, aside from an early interest in politics, is a name familiar to the elector¬
ate. Dogan classified about 750 of the 4,892 French deputies he studied in
this category; about half of them also had relatives involved in politics at
the parliamentary level.19 The American data does not distinguish this form
of inheritance, and is probably similar to the Greek data for this reason.
In modern settings, which have many alternative career opportunities, it
seems likely that an individual could indeed “inherit” an interest in politics,
and perhaps even a useful political name; however, an office would rarely
pass from one family member to the next. Dogan notes in passing that this
inheritance of inclination is renewed with each generation. Inheritance in
the Greek context is more likely to involve an actual political position. There
are few career opportunities in Greece, and political office itself is often the
basis of family status and fortune. Family political activity implies office¬
holding—using office to secure favors for clients and using the votes of
clients to secure office. For the most part, the results obtained in this study
reflect direct inheritance, in which parliamentary seats have remained in the
hands of one family or a small group of families.
In Greece, there seems to be little correlation between family political
background and many of the variables that might be used as indicators of
economic underdevelopment or of “traditional” cultural norms. In scattered
areas, a high incidence of deputies from political families does seem related
to social conservatism as indicated by high birth rates, a higher percentage of
boys than girls in school, and illiteracy. In other places, mechanized agricul¬
ture or substantial industrial employment is associated with a decline in the
number of deputies claiming family political backgrounds. But there is no
uniform pattern. The indicators themselves depend on geographical factors,
the complicated demographic history of modern Greece, and the varying
regional cultural patterns. The usual indices of modernization do not ex¬
plain the persistence of political inheritance in Greece.
Table 10.n illustrates the regional differences in parliamentary recruit¬
ment from political families. Overall, there has been a gradual increase in
the percentage of deputies coming from political families since 1946. It is
difficult to explain this by correlating the results with socioeconomic vari¬
ables. In some regions, such as Macedonia and Thrace, second-generation


Socialization and the Family 267
Table 10.11. Deputies from Political Families, by Percentage of Regional Parliamentary Delegation
Region 1946
Parliament
1958 1964
Athens-Piraeus 29.2% 32.5% 35.3% Old Greece 34.1 34.3 40.0 Peloponnesus 44.8 51.0 63.6
Ionian Islands 54.5 45.4 44.4 Thessaly 44.8 45.8 50.0 Macedonia 14.4 18.6 22.0 Epirus 42.1 33.3 35.6
Crete 52.4 61.1 47.4 Aegean Islands 25.0 22.2 31.2 Cyclades 50.0 66.7 80.0 Thrace 5.9 7.1 30.8
Average 32.2 34.6 40.0
politicians have begun to appear only recently, since these regions had little
opportunity for elective politics before their acquisition by the Greek king¬
dom. The most striking difference in family background is between the
older parts of the kingdom and the new territories. There is also a significant
difference between areas of great population gain such as Athens-Piraeus,
and regions of population loss, such as the Cyclades. Basically, family back¬
ground is less important in urban areas and in areas with substantial refu¬
gee resettlement. The type of patron-client relationship that characterizes
the rest of Greece is not as common in these places. Moreover, the demands
of the population in cities and in the areas of the greatest rural mobilization
are harder to satisfy on an individual basis.
The use of family political involvement as an index of modernity needs
to be qualified. First, the character of the traditional social structure is im¬
portant. In the Greek case, the predominance of clientage relationships, even
in the modern sectors of society, can account in part for the high incidence
of inherited political position. In the Philippines, where similar clientage
networks exist, direct political inheritance is also found. However, according
to Jean Grossholtz, the practice of grooming someone from outside the
family for office is more prominent.20 Second, the manner in which parlia¬
mentary institutions are established in developing states may be critical.
In Ceylon, many members of the parliament that was set up after inde¬
pendence came from families of traditional officeholders.21 The uneventful


268 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
transition from colonial status to independence allowed the older elites to
secure new positions. However, in Ireland, where the independence struggle
upset many traditional relationships, few Dail members from 1920 to 1948
had family connections with the older political elite. Only 32 of the 518
members during this period inherited their seats directly; 12 of these were
women elected in place of deceased male relatives.22 Now, since the revo¬
lutionary generation has largely disappeared, more of the representatives
may be inheriting their positions. Finally, the status of parliamentary office
itself may be important. If this office is useful in maintaining family status
in a constituency or personal status in society, particularly in a setting where
opportunities are limited, political positions may be treated as family prop¬
erty. Beyond this, the electoral system may favor a party with strength in
the areas where political inheritance is most common. This list of factors is
meant to be suggestive, not exhaustive. Although inheritance of political
position may be related to the process of modernization, many other inter¬
vening variables must be considered before it can be used as a reliable index
of modernity.
Family and Initial Advantage
A Greek born into a political family automatically has an earlier aware¬
ness of politics through the normal process of socialization. When he comes
of age, he is likely to have more specific advantages. In most cases, he will
not have to create a network of clients by himself, but can use the organiza¬
tion already established by other members of his family. A candidate without
this background will probably have to spend time in another occupation
while he constructs his own political network. The man with political rela¬
tives will be more likely to receive a place on the ticket of the dominant
political grouping in his area; he will not have to be content with minor
party labels, since he will not have to develop and demonstrate his political
capabilities.
Table 10.12. Family Connections and Age
Year
Age at entry Age at election
With relatives
No relatives
Differ¬ ence
With relatives
No relatives
Differ¬ ence
1946 (N354) 38.8 yr. 33.4 yr. -5.4 yr. 40.0 yr. 36.2 yr. —3.8 yr.
1958 (N300) 36.8 41.3 4.5 41.1 46.7 3.6
1964 (N300) 36.6 40.4 3.8 40.3 45.8 5.5


Socialization and the Family 269
Table 10.13. Age Advantage of Deputies with Political
Relatives, by Party Affiliation
J946 _1958_ 1964
Party Entry Election Entry Election Entry Election
Mainstream Right
LK 2.9 yr. 5.8 yr. - — — _
ERE - - 4.7 yr. 2.1 yr. 7.3 yr. 8.5 yr.
Minor Right
EPK 5.2 4.4 — _ _ _
KP - - - - -0.8 0.5
Mainstream Center
PK -6.8 -2.9 2.7 5.6 _ _ VenPK 4.5 2.2 — — — _
EK - - - - 1.7 5.4
Minor Center
EKE 2.8 7.3 — _ _ _
SD -0.2 0.8 — — _ _
PADE - - 3.0 9.0 - 
Left
EDA - - 6.2 5.7 4.7 11.7
Men from political families are more likely to enter politics at an earlier
age, and to win elections at an earlier age, than other Greeks (see Table
10.12). In 1958 and 1964 deputies with political backgrounds had a pro¬
nounced advantage in both respects. (The figures for 1946 are unreliable
because there were 43 deputies with relatives in politics for whom no entry
age could be determined.) The same advantage existed in all but one minor
political party, as shown in Table 10.13. The extreme advantage in the EDA
figures for 1964 reflects advantages gained by early political awareness be¬
cause of birth into a political family rather than a use of family connections.
Table 10.14 considers only those who were victorious on their first try for
Table 10.14. Average Age of Those Winning Elections on First Attempt
Parliament
Age
With relatives
No relatives
Differ¬ ence
1946 40.8 yr. (N66) 43.0 yr. (N118) 2.2 yr.
1958 38.8 (N52) 44.2 (N86) 5.4
1964 37.7 (N54) 42.9 (N67) 5.2


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
270
parliamentary office. In all three parliaments those with family backgrounds
had a slight edge.
Family and Political Party
Party affiliation is not particularly related to any family political back¬
ground, except in the instance of a particular type of minor party. The minor
parties that originate outside parliament most often have only a small family
component. Generally, candidates are attracted to these parties because they
have no family connections to facilitate entry into the major parties, or be¬
cause they have ties of loyalty to the founder of the party. However, splinter
groups that form in parliament and masquerade as separate parties at elec¬
tion time tend to be made up of deputies with long tenure, secure political
bases, and substantial family connections.
The varying percentage of those with family political backgrounds in a
given parliamentary delegation is related to that delegation’s status as a
governing party or a nongoverning party. The regional makeup of the
party is also important. In general, a nongoverning major party seems to
have a higher percentage of deputies with family connections. Family links
are apparently more durable than those forged by other means, and the
deputy with a family political background is less subject to sudden political
upheavals (see Table 10.15). In 1964, when it was out of power, the ERE had
a larger family component than in 1958; the reverse was true for the EK
and its predecessor, the Liberals (PK). The PADE and ELK of 1958 were
parliamentary splinters with a high family component. The KP in 1964 was
a party largely outside the parliament. The 1946 distribution is more difficult
Table 10.15. Deputies from Political Families, by Party Affiliation
1946 1958 I 964
Party Percentage Party Percentage Party Percentage
LK 50.0% ERE 34.9% ERE 47.0%
EPK 24.2 ELK 100.0 KP 20.0 EKE 27.8 PADE 40.0 EK 38.9 PK 24.4 PK 47.2 EDA 21.7 VenPK 56.5 EDA 27.8 SD 30.4
Minor 52.6
Note: The parties for each parliament are listed in the approximate order of their selfassessed positions on the Right-Left spectrum.


Socialization and the Family 271
to interpret, largely because the Metaxas period and the war, occupation, and
civil war had broken up many traditional political networks. The high fam¬
ily component in the Populist Party (LK) was probably due to its regional
base in the Peloponnesus. The Venizelist Liberals (Ven Phil) were the
Cretan section of the prewar Liberal Party. These two political organizations
represented the core of the prewar political groups. The other political or¬
ganizations in 1946 were largely factions of the other two major groups. In
order to present tickets in all constituencies, they simply took anyone who
was willing to join the list. The contrast between the EDA and the major
party groups is instructive. Although many EDA deputies did have family
connections, they represented a much smaller percentage of their party.
Although the family component of the parties varies considerably from
the Right to the Left and from major to minor political groups, being born
into a political family is advantageous regardless of party affiliation. The
individual politician is born into a political milieu; he takes his place in a
particular network of influence, which may include both family clients in
the local area and patrons in the capital. Usually, he will enter one of the
major political groups, where his background can give him the greatest ad¬
vantage (see Tables 10.12-10.14). As a result, the core of each major political
group is composed of firmly entrenched deputies with substantial family
connections and personal clientage networks. The minor groups are usually
ephemeral, whereas the major groups continue despite changes in party
names and hangers-on.
Surprisingly, family political background is more useful to left-wing can¬
didates than to those from most other political groups, in terms of both age
at entry into politics and age at election. The early introduction to politics
in political families would account for some of the advantage. The frustra¬
tions and dissatisfactions that have made left-wing politics attractive may
become apparent only in middle age. Perhaps more important, the EDA
selects “typical” members of lower social groups as candidates. These are
usually men with substantial local party experience and strong local ties,
who are put on the electoral list largely for appearance. Occasionally, if the
major political groups splinter, they are elected to parliament. But the core
of the parliamentary delegation consists of party professionals.
As might be expected in a country characterized by personalist and ephem¬
eral party groupings, party affiliation is given little credit for electoral vic¬
tory but takes most of the blame for defeat. The 55 deputies in our sample
were asked about the causes of their success or failure when they first ran;


272 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 10.16. Deputies’ Reasons for Success or Failure on First Candidature
Reasons for success (N23) Responses Reasons for Failure (N32) Responses
Personal factors and qualities 5 Party affiliation 18 Respect of people, service 10 Youth 2 Family influence 7 Insufficient preparation 6
Party affiliation 3 Fraud 2 No answer 1 No answer 8
Note: Several deputies gave more than one reason.
their answers are summarized in Table 10.16. Personal character, respect
from the voters, and family connections are given as the principal reasons
for victory.* However, defeat is rarely ascribed to personal deficiencies.
Since the party as an organization does little to help the individual candi¬
dates, it is not surprising that the deputies credit their personal victory to
their own efforts and organizations. In most cases, a deputy considers that
his personal qualities and his connections in his constituency are constant
regardless of party label; if defeat comes, it must be because his party has
allowed itself to be undercut by the electoral system or has become associated
with inaction or maladministartion in the minds of the voters. In general,
electoral defeat was assumed to mean that the candidate’s personal qualities
and organization did not outweigh the party albatross. None of these depu¬
ties considered the increasing number of voters outside the traditional clien¬
tage networks, who are more likely to vote on the basis of party leadership
than on the basis of personal characteristics.
Family and Political Career
Once a Greek’s political career has commenced, does his family, region of
origin, or party aid in that career? The advantages connected with a family
political background appear to be most important in beginning a political
career; and Table 10.17 indicates that the “success ratio” (the number of
times the candidate won divided by the number of times he ran) still favors
those with relatives involved in politics. However, the differences between
those with relatives and those without are not great. It would seem that once
a deputy is elected, his new position compensates for family advantage. The
figures for 1958 are heavily influenced by the abnormal victory of the EDA.
* Barber (in The Lawmakers) obtained responses to a similar question from Connecticut legis¬ lators. According to his separate figures for the four legislative types he delineates, only 12.5 per cent of these men attributed their election to their own efforts.


Socialization and the Family 273
Table 10.17. Success and Family Political Background
Success Ratios
Year .IOI-.4OO .401-.700 .701-1.00
1958 With relatives (N99) 16.1% 33.4% 50.5%
No relatives (N155) 21.2 49.6 29.1 1964 With relatives (N119) 15.1 33.6 51.2 No relatives (N178) 24.7 33.1 42.2
Note: Does not include deputies winning the first time they were candidates.
In this instance many regular Left candidates won, largely because of the
splintering of the Center. The importance in that year of the difference be¬
tween the “success ratio” of those with family and those without family is
unusual. The 1964 data are the more representative.
For the traditional sectors of Greek society, family is always important.
The deputy with family political ties and personal clients is most likely to
be an important figure in the Greek parliament and in the major political
groups. His policy or issue orientation is usually minimal, and he concen¬
trates on the satisfaction of unaggregated individual demands. However,
family connections are not the only aid to forming these ties, or to political
success in general. As we shall see in the next chapter, certain occupational
backgrounds provide similar advantages.


ii. Occupational Backgrounds and Local Connections
The fact that certain occupations lend themselves to political activity more
than others is well established. An occupation that involves public contact,
flexibility in the time and place of work, and relatively high status in the
society is more likely to be selected by a person with political ambition, and
it is more likely to inspire that ambition in the first place. However, other
factors also seem to be relevant in determining the prevalence of particular
occupational categories in the representative institutions of a given political
system.
Data on the distribution of parliamentarians among occupational cate¬
gories are available for many political systems, but comparisons are difficult.
The general categories useful for analysis in one political system seldom fit
the others. Different analysts may make distinctions in terms of intellectual
and nonintellectual occupations, public and private affiliations, or amateur
and professional status.1 One fact seems clear: there is now a growing ten¬
dency for political systems to represent group interests rather than those of
individuals. This is reflected in a changing distribution of deputies among
the different occupational categories. Perhaps most striking is the rise in
importance of pure political types—party or trade-union officials and special¬
ists representing particular subject areas.
In general, the appropriateness of a given occupation to a political career
in a particular system must be examined on three levels. First, practical con¬
siderations will intervene. Does the occupation facilitate a political career in
terms of time and place of work, or in terms of useful skills ? Is it useful for
gaining support or recognition in the constituency, so that nomination can
be secured? Finally, does it contribute to a successful performance of one’s
role in the parliamentary setting? These three dimensions, analytically
separate but empirically muddled, are all likely to be considered by the
ambitious man seeking political position, and by the voters as well.
One of the major factors influencing the pattern of political recruitment,


Occupational Backgrounds 275
particularly when it is considered in terms of occupation, is the degree of
social and economic differentiation in the society. Differentiation is often
related to the organizational complexity of political parties and other groups
with specific economic and social interests. The very existence of party or¬
ganizations, whatever their nature, has several consequences for political
recruitment in general and for the utility of specific occupations in the pro¬
cess. A party must draw support from some part of the population, and must
cater to the wishes of its supporters. The presence or absence of groups rep¬
resenting particular social or economic interests often determines the party’s
choice in these matters. Sometimes a particular interest group (for example,
a trade union) may have extremely close ties to a party; in these cases, the
pattern of party recruitment may reflect the common occupation of the
supporting group.
Economic and social differentiation may be uneven within a given coun¬
try; and the modes of organization, membership structures, and bases of
support of different political groups may differ also. Parties with little or¬
ganization are generally forced to seek candidates with some previous status
in individual constituencies. Highly organized “modern” parties can select
candidates without considering occupation and status, since the attributes
of an individual candidate will often be less important to the voters than the
party label he carries. If a party maintains a staff of professionals and de¬
pends on its formal members to handle volunteer organizational work, it
may prefer to select candidates from its own cadre. However, if a party de¬
pends primarily on specific groups for support, it may be forced to include
those groups in the nominating process. Finally the competition between
parties may influence the type of candidates selected.
A change in economic or social differentiation in the society can easily
change the status and political utility of specific occupations. At one time
local notables may be accorded the highest social status and have a great
effect on politics. Later, they may be replaced by entrepreneurs or merchants
—who may give way, in turn, to professional politicians representing the
managerial class in business or trade unions. In some settings, particular oc¬
cupations may be crucial to politics, and hence to a political career, whereas
in other settings they are not. For example, in France during the Third Re¬
public journalists were crucial; this does not seem to have been the case
elsewhere.2 Teachers have been important in France and Italy, but they
have been idenitfied with a different political group in each country.8 Law¬
yers have dominated some settings—France, Italy, and the United States,


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
276
for example—but have not been as important in Germany or Britain.4 Some
occupations are more adaptable than others. For example, lawyers, because
of the instrumental character of their profession, can easily adjust to new
levels of differentiation; they can defend traditional peasant interests and
modern group interests equally well. This is true, to a lesser extent, of other
intellectual occupations. However, it must also be recognized that recruit¬
ment to repersentative institutions from particular occupational categories
may be maintained simply because of tradition and habit.
The electoral system, both the nominating procedures and the regulations
surrounding the final choice, may affect political recruitment. The terri¬
torial size of a constituency and the number of individuals selected from it,
as well as the particular method of selection, can also be important. For ex¬
ample, Benjamin Akzin argues that in Israel, which has a proportional rep¬
resentation system using the whole nation as a single constituency, candi¬
dates have little contact with individual voters and must rely on group ties.5
On the other hand, Gerhard Loewenberg suggests that the recent slight rise
in the number of lawyers in the German Bundestag may be attributed to
the adoption of the single-member constituency, in which lawyers, as the
chief local notables, have a better chance.6 However, he observes that the
German electorate is particularly responsive to candidates representing par¬
ticular groups. Similarly, many members of the British parliament, particu¬
larly on the Labour side, are closely associated with group interests.7
Certain institutional features in a political system can have important
consequences. For example, if the financial remuneration of a representative
is slight, candidates must either be recruited from the wealthier sectors of
the population or be supported by organized groups. Laws permitting par¬
liamentarians to hold other public offices, either elective or administrative,
influence the career choices of ambitious men, and thus affect the distribu¬
tion of deputies across occupational categories. The number of career oppor¬
tunities in the legislative setting itself may also be important. In addition,
there is the question of where a parliamentary career may lead. Is the acquisi¬
tion of a seat the climax of a career, or does it lead to higher office in the
executive branches of government? In Britain there are many opportunities
for members of the majority party when a government is formed. By con¬
trast, there are very few such openings in the German system; as a result,
the more ambitious persons may prefer to make a career in administration
or in politics at the state level.8 Mattei Dogan notes that many of the major
political personalities in the Third French Republic were not found in the
parliament.9


Occupational Backgrounds 277
Another major factor in recruitment is the role and status of the legisla¬
ture in the political system as a whole. In part, the status of a parliamentary
career depends on its perceived importance in the system. If central bureau¬
cratic structures are developed before a representative body exists, the role of
the legislature as a policy-making body or as a defender of the individual
against the state machinery may be less than if the developmental sequence
had been reversed. For example, the lack of importance of the German
Reichstag in the nineteenth century made it a poor career choice for am¬
bitious citizens.10 The substantial number of public officials in the Reichstag,
and later in the Bundestag, as well as the large number of ex-officials in the
Japanese Diet, may be related to the common perception of these institutions
as outgrowths of the bureaucratic structures.11 The decline of the legislatures
noted in the last several decades may mean that positions of power outside
the formal representative institutions, or even outside the government itself,
have become more attractive. In some cases, where the representative institu¬
tions are viewed by the powerholders primarily as instruments for ratifica¬
tion and real power lies elsewhere, a broad spectrum of occupational cate¬
gories may be recruited.
Representation refers to the processes through which representatives are
chosen. Implicit in this concept is the suggestion that the manner of choosing
representatives will influence the character of legislative decisions. In mod¬
ern legislative bodies, the crucial question seems to center on whether group
representation is considered legitimate, or conversely, whether individual
demands for favors ought to be processed by legislators. Ultimately, the role
and status of representative bodies, as perceived by the legislator and the
public alike, may depend on the limits imposed by other sectors of the politi¬
cal system, and on the complexity of the society. In a complex society, char¬
acterized by “modern” political parties and well-defined and organized
group interests, deputies may do little more than handle grievances from
individual constituents, provided that group interests can be served by di¬
rect ties to the bureaucracy. If the bureaucratic structures are relatively im¬
mune to group penetration, individual deputies drawn from specific occu¬
pational categories may be needed. In a system where groups are poorly
organized, the individual deputy may act primarily as a defender of in¬
dividual interests against the state; in this case, a “professional” occupa¬
tion may be most desirable. Most societies combine group and individual
representation. Some groups will have ties to the bureaucracy, and others
will not. Similarly, some individual demands may be handled by the bureau¬
crats, and others by representatives.


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
278
The relevance of particular occupational categories to politics sometimes
depends on the functional relation of the political sphere to the society itself.
If conflicts arising elsewhere in the social system are usually settled at the
political level, more attention will be given to group representation. On the
other hand, if politics are not important in the everyday life of the people,
the occupational category from which a representative is drawn may make
little difference. The resolution of conflicts between groups may call for dif¬
ferent occupational specialties at the political level than the resolution of
conflicts between specific groups and the state.
In Greece, most politicians are still recruited from the traditional “intel¬
lectual” occupations, particularly the law. This pattern is also found in
similar settings elsewhere. Tarrow observes that representatives from south¬
ern Italy continue to be drawn from the traditional professions, despite
changes in the character of representation elsewhere in Italy.12 In Turkey,
once the modernizing elite gave way, and once managed indirect elections
were replaced by popular elections in a competitive political setting, lawyers
and other professional men began to replace those with “official” occupa¬
tions.13 These data, as well as those to follow, indicate that particular oc¬
cupations are more appropriate for representation at certain stages of dif¬
ferentiation, although the intervening variables in any given system may be
crucial.14
TRADITIONAL OCCUPATIONS
The occupations most heavily represented in the Greek parliament have
always been those with the highest traditional status. Under Turkish rule,
a man’s status in the community depended mostly on his relationship to
the Ottoman authority, and this often depended on landholding. Although
Greeks of all classes sought to possess land, no real landholding aristocracy
developed; and after 1911, Greece had few large estates.15 In part, the prin¬
ciple of state distribution of the public domain, the inheritance and dowry
requirements, and the topography of the country discouraged the accumu¬
lation of land. In addition, the models of Greek civilization, whether classi¬
cal or Byzantine, have been urban; there has been no tradition of the gentle¬
man retiring to his country estate.18
The state structure of Greece was modeled on that of Western European
states. Education, not landholding, became the mark of prestige and power;
and after the University of Athens was established, the sons of the revolu¬
tionary elite were channeled into the professions, particularly the law. The


Occupational Backgrounds 279
educated man was admired because he alone was qualified for employment
in the new state structure. He had power not only because he himself could
attain official status, but because only an educated man had access to the
equally educated men in the bureaucracy. In this way, the traditions of
clientage and mutual obligation could be continued. In return for favors
gained through state intervention, the rural Greek provided political sup¬
port, which his patron used for personal advancement. Almost at once, the
parliament came to be regarded as the major political institution—the goal
of ambitious men.*
For much of Greek history, the only “professional” occupations were
medicine and the law. These were admirably suited to traditional social
structures because in each case the economic role merged into the political
one. The stream of professionals produced by the University of Athens
reached a flood stage just as the state administration began to extend into
the countryside. The peasantry then needed patrons with new skills, and
the new class of professionals needed support in order to attain political
position in the society. The low degree of economic and social differentiation
in Greek society has maintained the political importance of these traditional
occupational categories into the present. The small size of the country, the
failure of party organization, and the absence of group activity—all related
in some way to this major factor—have inhibited the development of other
avenues to a political career.
There are a number of excellent reasons for the widespread predominance
of lawyers in representative bodies. Training in the law provides familiarity
with the political and administrative processes of the state. It encourages
the development of verbal skills, and provides practice in negotiation, com¬
promise, and intercession. The law, as an instrumental profession, can serve
the interests of individuals, specific groups, or social classes with equal ease;
and the lawyer can be a protagonist of nearly every ideology, since his oc¬
cupation is not grounded in any. In Greece, as elsewhere, a lawyer can leave
his profession to enter politics, or can advantageously combine politics and
the law.
* Cf. Grossholtz p. 238. The Greek pattern of political development in rural areas differs from that found by Grossholtz in the Philippines. She suggests that before World War II Filipino landlords controlled the peasantry through economic and social relationships. These were disrupted by the war, and by the rise of an entrepreneurial class. The entire social structure of the countryside was weakened, and the politicians stepped in. The Greek peasant was aware of his government earlier, and Greek politicians were in large measure drawn from the rural
notables.


280 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
The nature of Greece’s society and governmental structure give the Greek
lawyer still more political advantages. The cultural importance of bargain¬
ing and negotiation in Greece, especially in dealings with authority, creates
the need for an intermediary, a role the lawyer is superbly suited for. The
lawyer, by virtue of his profession, has the skills necessary to create a political
following. Moreover, his skills are needed at the national political level, as
well as in the local setting. On the local level, lawyers are indispensable be¬
cause they are concerned with the same matters of “kinship manipulation,
petty favors, and land disputes” as their counterparts in southern Italy.17
The lawyer, by virtue of his education alone, is likely to be a man of stature
in the community; he will have social and professional contacts with pro¬
vincial officials and other community leaders. A peasant, when searching for
a \umbaros, would be likely to pick such a man.
Greek law is encumbered with many details and exceptions; an adminis¬
trator must make constant decisions on which classificatory scheme is to
be used, which method of computation to employ, and which of the multi¬
tude of provisions to enforce in a given case. This complexity, as well as the
Greek tendency to concentrate all decision-making power at the top of the
bureaucratic hierarchy, makes it necessary for the ordinary Greek to find
someone who can speed up the administrative process and influence the
decision to his advantage. A lawyer, because of his status, can bypass the
crowd of lesser clerks present in most governmental offices. Since he often
has a personal retinue of clients and friends, he can usually offer political
aid to a deputy or a local official. He may be able to advise the provincial
officials on their own legal problems, in return for administrative favors. Be¬
cause he is of the same social status as the officials with whom he must deal,
there are many informal occasions on which he can plead the causes of his
clients; if favorable decisions are not made because of interest in the prob¬
lems of the client, they may be made out of friendship for the lawyer.
It is difficult to determine precisely how many of the deputies in the
parliaments considered in Table 11.1 actually practiced law and how many
merely took a law degree before entering another occupation. In many re¬
spects the faculty of law in each of the two Greek universities corresponds
to the generalized liberal arts curricula in the United States; it is the normal
school for a young person to enter. Jurisprudence is commonly regarded as
the key to advancement in the society. However, although the profession of
law has more prestige than trade or business, it is overcrowded and poorly
paid. Many deputies who have never practiced law may classify themselves


Occupational Backgrounds 281
Table 11.1. Occupational Distribution in Four Gree\ Parliaments
Occupation 1936 (N300) 1946 (N354) 1958 (N300) 1964 (N300)
Professional
Academic 0.7% 1.7% 4.3% 4.3% Engineer 0.3 1.1 1.7 2.0 Journalist 3.7 3.1 5.3 5.7 Lawyer 45.6 50.8 40.0 40.3 Medical 11.3 15.2 12.7 10.7 Other technical — — — 1.3 Politician 4.0 1.7 4.0 3.0
Official Civil servant 1.3 2.8 6.7 5.7 Military 8.0 7.6 5.7 6.7
Economic Banker — — — 0.3 Businessman 3.3 2.5 5.3 4.7 Farmer 1.6 1.4 3.0 2.3 Industrialist 1.3 2.5 1.3 1.7 Landowner 2.3 3.1 2.3 1.3 Merchant 4.0 4.0 0.7 2.3 Shipowner — — — 0.7
Unclassified Employee 4.0 1.7 4.7 3.0 Other 0.3 — 0.3 1.0 Unknown 8.3 0.6 2.0 3.0
Note: These figures were computed from deputies’ responses to a question on their personnel records in the parliament. In some cases a deputy changed his occupation from one parliament to the next.
as lawyers to gain prestige, though actually having been engaged in other
occupations. Law students also enter the civil service in great numbers. Here
again, a deputy with a bureaucratic background often prefers to put law as
his profession in the parliamentary records.
Although law is the most favored background for Greek politics, medical
men are highly respected. The mere practice of their profession can create
obligations that may be used politically; and the opportunities for a doctor
to build a loyal clientele, especially in the rural areas, are second only to
those of the provincial lawyer. Greek doctors, and even dentists, are admired
for their education, and their high social status puts them on a par with
provincial notables and gives them the same advantage that lawyers have
in seeking favors. Most young doctors are reluctant to set up a practice in
the rural areas because of the primitive facilities and because they prefer


282 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
urban life. But even in Athens some doctors are able to acquire supporters
from the provinces by treating villagers in their Athenian clinics—especially
villagers from their home provinces. For the villagers, the clinic becomes a
friendly place in the big city, and many of them may receive free medical
care; naturally enough, the doctor is soon regarded as a patron.
Professional occupations may dominate the political scene in Greece, but
there are some opportunities for those with other backgrounds. At certain
times in Greek history the line between a military career and a political one
was not sharply drawn. However, in recent years, military men have been
required to resign from the armed forces before embarking on a parlia¬
mentary career. Retired officers in parliament occasionally express a mili¬
tary point of view, but they do not explicitly represent military interests. In
several cases war heroes have retired from active service and entered the
political arena, generally in the metropolitan constituencies. Military figures
without this national renown may still have enough prestige to be rela¬
tively successful in rural politics. Moreover, there are some opportunities for
the incumbents of particular military positions to build civilian clienteles
if they desire to do so. The Greek use of universal military service means
that nearly every family generates requests for deferments and transfers.
Also, the Greek equivalent of the United States Army Corps of Engineers
has a role in the construction of public works similar to that of its American
counterpart, and this role can be used politically.
The graduates and students of law from the two universities have a near¬
monopoly of the higher civil-service positions. However, any civil-service
career, even one at the lower levels, can be transformed into a parliamentary
career. A young man from the provinces can often build up a substantial
clientele simply by servicing hometown requests presented to his own
agency and assisting former neighbors with problems involving other gov¬
ernmental departments. Toward anyone else, he adopts the haughtiness and
obstructionism so common in the Greek bureaucracy. Eventually, those
grateful for his assistance become his political capital; he may be able to use
them to advance his civil-service career through political pressure, or he
may finally have enough support to run for office.
Some particular occupations have unique political advantages. For ex¬
ample, in the Cyclades and in the Piraeus area shipowners have usually
been involved in politics. Some shipowners come from the families of tra¬
ditional notables; in other instances, their political success is due to their


Occupational Backgrounds 283
ability to offer employment in shipping lines. They may also grant voters
free transportation—a particularly crucial commodity for the many Greeks
living on the islands.
Although not every lawyer and doctor in parliament, nor every deputy
with family political connections, may actually have a network of clients
that keeps him in office, it is most probable that he does. Deputies with other
ocupational backgrounds may also have clients, but they are less likely to.
When the deputies in some recent parliaments are divided between those
likely to have clientage networks based either on family political connections
or occupations and those apparently unencumbered with such ties, the per¬
centage of those with no obvious clientage support is modest: 23 per cent
in 1946, 36 per cent in 1958, and 32 per cent in 1964.
OCCUPATION AND PARTY AFFILIATION
The pattern of occupational backgrounds is much the same in all the
traditional political groupings. Occupations with a clientage-building poten¬
tial clearly predominate, and each of the parties has a high proportion of
deputies with legal or medical backgrounds. Even the distribution of depu¬
ties among other occupational categories varies only slightly. Table 11.2,
illustrating the occupational distribution in four modern Greek parliaments,
confirms these facts. Actually, this similarity in the groups primarily occu¬
pied with parliamentary politics is not surprising. The major party group¬
ings draw their candidates and support from similar social and economic
categories, and politicians think nothing of shifting from party to party.
There is little or no effort to place group spokesmen in parliament. No
group would be likely to have the political muscle to be successful; and in
any case, parliament is not a crucial point of access for group demands. For
most voters, a candidate should have a “traditional” political occupation,
rather than one representative of the social or economic complexion of his
constituency.
The left-wing parties, currently represented by the EDA, have a markedly
different occupational distribution among their parliamentary deputies.
This was especially true in 1936, but it also holds for the more recent delega¬
tions. The leftist party in 1936, the KKE, adopted a deliberate policy of
nominating proletarians for parliamentary office, and 60 per cent of the
KKE delegation classified themselves as workers or employees. In 1958, a
year of almost accidental Left success, 16.4 per cent of the EDA parliamen¬
tary delegation had employee classifications. By 1964—a more normal year,


Table 11.2. Tarty Affiliation and Occupation
OiOn o\
VO "o3\
vrOonn
W
rbdo
2 111®
o N
CO
In CN
O
o _ o CN CN
CN p tN
06 ov <n
1—< <N
d
Pu 0
£ !§ O 1-4
O A-»
• —< C/5
1g
■8 | °§
II I I
p ITS
N OO N
O ! p O) CN O uq O)
4 N"
s
CN in vd vd cd CN
N 0p^ 10 O O) O) p o\ O) p co CN 06 in CN in In r-H IN
NO ON OO I 0 I I I 1 I LO CN
in CN
10 m
1 11 11
NO ON
O in p O) co , IN cq cq
CN
CN CN 1—H
06 vd in cd
N Op' 0p I I p I 0 1 p
0 10
t— 0<
1 1 cd 1—H
10 ^H
1O
Np ON CN O) O) I I VO cq I p
IN N"
cd cd 1 1 in CN 1 in
Np vq 00 p CO CO CN O VO 0
10 N"
rd CN in OO In O IN
C n>PN CO I I CO cq I cq I I
CN N“
1 l N” r—H
1 11
NOON
CO , IN p p 00 OO IN
ov N"
CN O CN
CN CN IN O CN
nOON CN p r—H O) a\ CN CO o\
CN lO
t-H CN r-H CN CN IN vd CN
NOON
lO I p I I I I I p IN CO
1 CN 1 1 1 1 l CN T-H
N OPN
IN I I IN I In I I 1
vo 1 1 vd 1 vd 1 1 1
NO ON vo OO O 00 O OO cq CN vd N“
cd CN 0 cd T-H o\ in CN
Np ON O CO IN I 00 IN vo 1—H
i-H
1 N" O IN cd
OO
II
d
>
In ^
flJ Uh
5 ■*—'
03 C/5
X§> 3U
p
CN O) CN
op CN *-h
II
Uk
gyo
, r} *-*< n
> —2 H »> T1 G .H
oS
Wh <U d
& o ID
Sc
q 03
LT\ Tt*
^I
CO 1
O CN
IN fO CO vo
o o
OO CO CN CN
vo
o
CO
p^ CO f-H
T|- Tj
CN ’-h
ITN in CN CN
CO CO*
CN CO 1 CN O
’“1 CN O
In o
p CN
vOo
CN CN
I1 C^oN
IN CN
OO CO 1-H
I II I
co
VO T-H
ll
CO CN
II
ITN
P O
12 11
S *S
<L) u, <L> <L>
>? C
OO
O-i * V5
ag
IN o
o3
r*Ods
U> (J <u <u
p CN
O N"
II
CN LO
IN O
lO o
LO CN
IN VO
CO 06
o ON
■ <suu
q o3 d <u C jz! kJ U, Wfc w o
C/5 3 O
Sg
cC >
S=3 O
<u d
oa
on *■3
3D
Note: These figures were computed from deputies’ responses to a question on their personnel records in
parliament. In some cases the deputy changed his occupation from one parliament to the next.


Occupational Backgrounds 285
since the Left did not benefit from Center fragmentation—this particular
occupational category had dropped significantly. Although the EDA now
seems to make a practice of nominating workers or peasants for many parlia¬
mentary seats, these seats are in the marginal areas, where success is most
unlikely. The smaller EDA delegation in the 1964 parliament, though still
having significant differences from the parliamentary delegations of the
other political groupings, does not contain many genuine proletarians.
The major characteristic of the EDA delegations is the relatively low per¬
centage of lawyers and the broad representation of other occupations, includ¬
ing employees and farmers. Occupations calling for familiarity with modern
communications media are also more common, reflecting the more modern
character of the party. There is more emphasis on the propagandist and
the legislative expert than on those occupations with built-in clientage net¬
works. It should be noted in passing that there are several districts where
attachment by the voter to the EDA runs through a patron in a traditional
or legal occupation. By and large, however, the party is not tied to particular
occupational classifications or to men with clientage networks; it can recruit
any individual regardless of personal background and occupation, since the
party itself draws voters.
LOCAL CONNECTIONS
The importance of clientage networks in Greek parliamentary politics is
evident in the high percentage of deputies who represent the constituencies
of their birth (see Table 11.3). If data on deputies with other types of local
connections were available, the percentage of those supported in this way
would undoubtedly be higher. Table 11.4 indicates that in the older portions
of the country, this is the general pattern. Only Athens-Piraeus, with its
recent urban influx, and Macedonia, Thrace, and the Aegean Islands, which
have substantial refugee populations, are contrary to this generalization. The
Table 11.3. Deputies’ Birthplace and Constituency
Deputies 1946 (N354)
Parliament
1958 (N300) 1964 (N300)
Those representing district of birth Those representing a different
69.5% 70.3% 65.0%
constituency 18.6 17.7 22.0 Refugees 9.8 12.0 10.7 Birthplace unknown 2.0 — 2.3


286 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 11.4. Deputies Running in Districts of Birth, by Region
District 1946 (N354)
Parliament
1958 (N300) 1964 (N300)
Athens-Piraeus 33.3% 45.0% 37.2%
Old Greece 88.6 85.7 88.6
Peloponnesus 89.6 89.8 70.4 Ionian Islands 81.8 90.9 100.0 Thessaly 86.2 83.3 73.1
Macedonia 48.2 42.8 483 Epirus 78.9 86.7 85.7 Crete 95.2 94.4 843
Aegean Islands 87.5 77.8 973 Cyclades 100.0 833 80.0
Thrace 47.0 71.4 383
older, less urban, and more setded pordons of the kingdom usually have
above 80 per cent of their deputies elected from the district of their birth
(see Table 11.4).
At first glance, comparative data from more developed countries do not
diverge substantially from that noted above. Of the American state legis¬
lators examined by the authors of the Legislative System, 74 per cent were
born in their states, and 56 per cent in the counties they represented.18 The
average would have been considerably higher, except that California was
one of the four states examined. In Germany, another highly developed
system, nearly 80 per cent of the Bundestag representatives elected in 1957
were residents of the districts that they won.19 In France, according to Leo
Hamon, if the district party organizations are strong, candidates from out¬
side are generally discouraged; moreover. “The elector does not approve of
changes of constituency.’’20 And in the Italian parliament for 1946-58 there
was almost complete identity between birthplace, place of upbringing, place
of residence, and district represented.21 However, the British experience
shows that this association between candidates and their districts is not uni¬
versal. Austin Ranney, using a much broader definition of connection, found
that only about 30 per cent of the Conservative candidates from 1951 to
1961 had connections with their constituencies, with variations depending
upon the type of election and the chances of victory in the constituency.
Among Labour candidates, the connections of the candidate with his con¬
stituency ranged from 44 per cent in districts where success was verv likely
down to 20 per cent in districts likely to be lost.22 Although these studies


Occupational Backgrounds 287
have not extended over long periods, the impression given is that these pat¬
terns are relatively stable. However, Frederick Frey, in his examination of
members of the Turkish Grand National Assembly over several decades,
finds substantial changes in the percentage of candidates with local con¬
nections. In the first several assemblies in the early 1920*5 the percentage of
deputies born in the constituencies they represented remained relatively
high, at 62 per cent. However, as the regime was consolidated, and as a na¬
tionally oriented elite took control, the number of deputies with local con¬
nections by birth diminished to 34 per cent.23 The always latent localism be¬
gan to reassert itself; and finally, after the introduction of the multi-party
system in 1946 and the breakthrough of the opposition Democratic Party
in 1950, the percentage of deputies with local connections increased, reach¬
ing 71 per cent in 1954.24 “As the parties have moved into a situation of true
inter-party competition—a situation of increased need for popular support
and simultaneous uncertainty regarding that support—there has been an
acute rise in localism within all political parties of Turkey.”25
The data for Greece, Turkey, and the more developed systems suggests
that the relationship between local constituency connections and political
recruitment is complex and far from uniform. In Britain, it has long been
customary for representatives to shift constituencies, and for constituencies
to seek outside candidates. Since this is a long-standing practice, it cannot be
solely due to the existence of highly disciplined parties. Moreover, Members
are still expected to perform personal services for the inhabitants of the con¬
stituencies they represent.26 In fact, Members from large urban centers seem
to spend more time listening to constituents’ grievances than those from the
country.27 By contrast Hamon observes that the French deputy from a rural
constituency will have many requests for personal services from individual
constituents, whereas a deputy from an urban setting is likely to have more
from organized groups.28 In Germany, although the Bundestag members
have local ties, they tend to represent organized interests, no matter what
the nature of their constituencies.28 In all these systems, the particular rela¬
tionship of the deputy with his constituency seems to depend on the percep¬
tion of legislative role held by both the public and the deputy. Whether or
not the patronage function is important seems to depend on this. The recog¬
nized points of access in the political system for organized groups will also
be a factor in shaping the functions of the individual members of parliament.
If organized groups in a constituency can work through local deputies, the
recruitment of deputies is likely to reflect local interests of a group character.


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
288
The nature of the administrative system may also influence the perceptions
of voters and parliamentarians. Where the bureaucracy is arbitrary or distant
from the average citizen, the parliamentary figure is likely to be viewed as
a middleman; for this function, the voter prefers someone he knows, and
hence a premium is placed on local connections. Beyond these rather specific
factors, past traditions, the size of the constituency, the nature of the electoral
system, and the character of political party organization are all likely to be
important.
In Greece (and probably in Turkey since local interests have become im¬
portant in electoral politics) the relationship between deputy and voter is
more direct than that in the Western European settings. It is usual for a
deputy to have personal connections with many individuals in his district,
and especially with local notables. This is relatively easy to do, since each
deputy represents less than 30,000 citizens; the number of actual voters is, of
course, much less. Since the constituencies follow provincial lines, the num¬
ber of deputies elected by a constituency varies; but generally, in all but the
largest metropolitan constituencies, the vote for any individual candidate is
highly concentrated in the area of his birth.
PRE-LEGISLATIVE POLITICAL EXPERIENCE
The Greek political system is not structured to provide many opportuni¬
ties for elective office. Only sporadically have local offices been elective; and
the only consistent level of elective office is the parliament. A political career
in Greece, then, cannot be viewed as either a “regimented, orderly life” or
a “tangle of ladders, ropes, and runways that attract people from other activi¬
ties at various stages of the process and lead others to a dead end or blind
drop.”30 Although certain civil-service jobs or other public positions ap¬
pointed on a political basis may lead to a political career, there are other
avenues that seem more appropriate. Moreover, with the exception of the
Left, party organization has been weak. This leaves each man free to find
his own route to public office; he is not directed to particular channels. Un¬
der these conditions, the paths to a parliamentary career have usually been
guided by family experience or other personal connections.
Given the dearth of elective offices in Greece, many of the data on pre¬
legislative officeholding in other political systems are not of much use. How¬
ever, an examination of these data does suggest that the importance of local
officeholding in political recruitment varies considerably from one system
to the next. Perhaps the most important factor is simply the individual


Occupational Backgrounds 289
office seeker’s perception of the career pattern most appropriate for him.
Heinz Eulau, discussing four American states where the percentage of legis¬
lators without previous governmental experience ranged from 34 to 51 per
cent, suggests that the more competitive the party system, the more likely
it is for legislators to have had some prior governmental experience.31 How¬
ever, in the highly competitive British system almost two-thirds of the Con¬
servative candidates and a bit over half of the Labour candidates had no ex¬
perience in local office.32 The base of a party’s support and the place of the
party in the system may determine career patterns. For example, in the re¬
cent Japanese data provided by Robert Scalapino and Junnosuke Masumi,
41 per cent of the Socialist deputies had previous governmental experience.
A very small number had been national officials, and the rest had held local
or prefectural elective office. In the Liberal Democratic Party, 34 per cent
had had previous experience in local or prefectural office, but 26 per cent
were in the ex-official category.33 At least in part, this divergence in recruit¬
ment patterns is related to the relationship of the Japanese Socialist Party
to the political system. Socialists are less likely to be admitted to adminis¬
trative position and less likely to reach the top. The importance of local
experience may depend on the character of the local office. If the voters
regard a position as simply an appendage of the central administration rather
than as a defender of local interests, it may be of limited utility in a political
career, since any distrust of the central government may be transferred to
the local office and its incumbent. Frey, in his study of Turkish deputies,
found only a small percentage with experience in local office.34 The local
leaders, although connected with the higher government, were not neces¬
sarily the local officeholders.
A highly cohesive and disciplined political party may be able to prescribe
appropriate career patterns for its recruits: apprenticeship in local or party
offices, for example, or particular occupations and degrees of specialization.
The usefulness of a particular career pattern can diminish in importance
over time. In the German Bundestag, 24.4 per cent of the deputies who began
their careers in the prewar period had held local elective office, whereas 58.1
per cent of those who began careers in the postwar period had such experi¬
ence.35 Dogan estimates that more than two-thirds of the French deputies
from 1900 to 1940 had local office experience, but that this dropped to about
40 per cent during the Fourth Republic,36 when party experience or resis¬
tance activity became more important.
The data from our sample of 55 deputies in Greece, as presented in Table


290 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 11.5. Pre-legislative Political Experience
Experience
Number of Deputies
(55)
Won First Time
Party Affiliation
ERE (17) EK (32) EDA (4) KP (2)
No previous experience 23 10 6 15 2 Local government 11 4 4 6 1 Civil service, military 17 6 5 10 1 1 Political appointment 12 5 6 5 — 1
Note: Some deputies gave more than one response.
11.5 indicate that those with no previous political experience did as well
or better than those with this experience. Perhaps most significant is that
nearly half had no previous political experience in any elective, appointive,
or civil-service position. Few significant conclusions can be drawn from the
breakdown by party. The numbers involved for the EDA and the KP are too
small for any comment. The divergencies between the career patterns of the
other two parties are in part a result of the very long tenure of the Right and
the more recent victory of the Center. The difference between EK and ERE
deputies in the categories of “no previous experience” and “political appoint¬
ment” is not as significant as it may appear because of this. Moreover, each
of the two major party groupings includes a number of deputies who had
switched from one group to the other.
According to modern Greek political lore, particular appointive offices on
the national level can be useful for beginning a political career. The office
of general secretary to a ministry is especially valued. This office, like the
ministerial position itself, dispenses favors, and hence allows the incumbent
to prepare for personal victory at the next election. However, general secre¬
taries are appointed by the premier or the minister involved, and the offices
are more likely to go to relatives of influential politicians or to defeated can¬
didates from the winning party than to the ambitious person who is only
beginning his political career. Information on these positions is very sketchy.
The earliest listing of general secretaries available to me listed those in office
in i933-3T At this time there were twelve, of whom four were involved in
electoral politics prior to their appointments and three afterward. Only one
of the general secretaries can be said to have had a substantial career in
politics, and it is difficult to attribute it to his tenure as general secretary.
In lists for i960,1963, and 1964 the total number of secretaries increases.88
In i960 seven of the fourteen secretaries were “political”; four won at subse


Occupational Backgrounds 291
quent elections, always on the ERE list. In 1963, eight of the fourteen secre¬
taries were politically involved; two went on to win elections in November
of that year, although both had run unsuccessfully in the past. All eight were
involved in the ERE, which was then in power, and their appointments were
probably a reward for party service and a compensation for accidental defeat.
There were thirteen secretaries in 1964, but only four had political back¬
grounds. Three of these had been involved in politics for a long time,
although only one had ever been elected. Their political backgrounds varied
considerably, ranging from minority-party to right-wing. The small number
of “political” secretaries was at least partially due to the recent victory of
the EK; several of the “nonpolitical” appointees had relatives active in par¬
liamentary politics, and would probably run for parliamentary office even¬
tually. Obviously, secretaryships will often advance a political career; how¬
ever, the small number of positions open makes them an almost accidental
route to parliamentary office.
Greek governments have traditionally appointed men to the office of
nomarch in each of the provinces. The nomarch, in terms of function, is
modeled after the French prefect, although he actually has somewhat less
discretion than his French equivalent. In the recent past, efforts were made
to create a cadre of nonpolitical officials. However, political necessity—both
on the part of governments needing clients and on the part of a rural popula¬
tion more accustomed to political than bureaucratic solutions—has worked
against this trend. According to the popular tradition of Greek politics, the
position of nomarch is one of the most useful steps to a parliamentary career.
There are many individual cases of successful advancement from nomarch
to deputy. Perhaps the most noteworthy example is the career of George
Papandreou, whose early position as nomarch on the island of Lesbos en¬
abled him to establish political ties there in addition to those in his native
province. However, the data available, although spotty, indicate that this
particular administrative office is not really very useful for beginning a politi¬
cal career (see Table 11.6). A nomarch, by virtue of his office, does have a
few political resources. In most cases, however, he is not in office long enough
to gather clients and challenge the political power of the sitting deputies. The
average nomarch is usually more concerned with his relationship to the gov¬
ernment in power and the local politicians. Moreover, the government will
not usually appoint a nomarch who has family ties and personal friendships
in the province. The sitting deputies from that region are likely to possess
most of these resources.


292 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 11.6. Nomarchs and Parliamentary Involvement
Year Nomarchs
Number in Politics
Time of Involvement
Before appt.
After appt. Both
1933 31 10 2 3 5 1960 49 17 16 1 1963 47 12 12 - 1964 49 17 16 1 
Note: Compiled from incidental materials.
Of those occupying the position of nomarch in 1933, only three were ever
really successful in parliamentary politics. One of them was elected 23 years
later, on his first attempt; for the other two, the time in appointive office was
merely an interlude in a lifetime of parliamentary politics. In i960, only two
of those entering the political arena were successful—one before his appoint¬
ment as nomarch, and one after. The same pattern is found in the data for
the other two years. In 1963, although several nomarchs came from political
families, only one of the 17 involved in politics was elected to parliament.
His success came shortly after his appointment as nomarch, but he had been
running unsuccessfully for years. The 1964 nomarchs with political back¬
grounds had been uniformly unsuccessful in their previous attempts at
parliamentary positions. In general, they came from all sectors of the politi¬
cal spectrum, and some had attempted to gain parliamentary office as early
as 1932.39
Greek administrative appointments traditionally favor men from the older
parts of the Greek state or from the strongholds of the major political groups
—the Peloponnesus, continental Greece, the Cyclades, or Crete, for example.
This tendency limits the usefulness of a nomarchy for future political pur¬
poses. In the older regions, the organizations of individual deputies are
strong, and they are often inherited; thus the appointive nomarch is gen¬
erally beholden to a local machine. In the newer parts of the kingdom,
political organizations are more fragile, but the nomarch is an outsider who
views his position primarily as an opportunity for personal enrichment.
Some nomarchs have been successful in the quest for parliamentary office,
but in general, the nomarch’s office has had little relevance for the victory.
In our sample, 11 of the 55 deputies had experience in local government.
All of these had entered parliamentary politics after World War II. There


Occupational Backgrounds 293
were four deputies who had served on city councils, three in Thessaloniki
and one in Athens; the others had been mayors in smaller communities.
Local officeholding did not seem to have had much relation to winning the
parliamentary election. True, the position of mayor in Athens, and to a
lesser extent in Thessaloniki, is hotly contested by all the parties. The mayor
in these cities has little actual power; but there is enough prestige involved,
especially in Athens, to entice deputies to resign from parliament in order
to run. However, the same is not true in most Greek towns and cities. It was
possible to secure lists of mayors for the years 1954,1963, and 1964 (see Table
11.7).40 In each of these years, the percentage of mayors who had been in¬
volved in parliamentary politics, either before election to the mayor’s post
or afterward, was relatively low: 21.6 per cent in 1954, 19 per cent in 1963,
and 20.5 per cent in 1964. This is not surprising. In all but the largest cities
a mayor is clearly identified with the interests of a particular community,
rather than those of a whole constituency. Moreover, he is often chosen as
mayor because of his presumed ties to the central government, not because
of heartfelt support.
By and large, it would not seem that local office contributes significantly
to later parliamentary success with the major traditional parties. However,
a successful EDA member at the local level does appear to be groomed for
eventual success on the parliamentary level. Moreover, the communities
with EDA mayors were almost invariably urban or suburban districts where
traditional clientage ties were minimal. This reflects the difference between
the EDA’s recruitment pattern and those of the more traditional political
groupings. For the other political constellations, political control of a com¬
munity may be useful. Mayors from these groups probably act as local in
fluentials for their particular party; however, they are not any more likely
to be involved in parliamentary politics than other community notables.
EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENTS
Deputies are far more educated than the average Greek citizen, and there
is some evidence that this has always been the case. This is consistent with
data on the educational levels of representatives in virtually every other par¬
liamentary body in the world. In Greece, it would be presumptious of some¬
one with a limited education to seek public office. The educational attain¬
ments of the sample of 55 deputies are clearly above those of the general pop¬
ulation.41 The graduates of the two major educational institutions were in
the majority: 27 deputies had attended the University of Athens, and


£o
I
!Vs.
'o'
o
ha
IN
<3 £
ti
_+. in
^ O'
\f\ M
M*
M <u
a <£
•’"* 03
£ bo
oa
n • zi
03 C
s r§t
<1 in
<3 a\
£M
'--'■ flj
_*_ >-o<
in u-<
c^ u
M -U
d bo
•t=5 G
£g
9c
<<NN z
VCOO ON
<ONN
<N
£ N'^O*
ON
G rPoGh3
8
C/3D
r3G 03 Ph
c/GD
£a
fO IA vj- M I <N 'O
CN rf co I CO CO
I »-H <N
(N] K ro '—I I (N IA
--I 1—i i—t »—i | i vo
o o cn o | cn rt
va (N r-t \r | VO ON
co ro N co -—i H CN CN H o
o o co i—i co co in
c\ a\ vo ^ cn
vo On i—< m oo o On
H < <N i-h h c\
o co o <—i cn K co
CN CO
in N- G- in IGn“
<D a
CO
<Lg> CO
<U r*
CO (L)
<u *G .a a
u Go
<u
CJ <L>
<U Uh
*+-i
Vh G
•j-> <u G
G 1 r~] O
M-l
c> <-G
Gh
o
X PHHcOI


Occupational Backgrounds 295
another five had attended the University of Thessaloniki. Of these 32 depu¬
ties, 11 had done additional graduate work in either European or American
universities. Seven deputies in the sample had received all of their advanced
education abroad. Four additional deputies had attended the ASOEE, a
school in Athens that offers advanced work in various commercial and
technical fields. Two deputies were graduates of the military academy. The
Polytechnic (Ethnikon Metsovion Polytechnion) is an engineering school
of university quality; two deputies had degrees from that institution, and
one of these had done additional work in Germany. Ultimately, of the sam¬
ple of 55, only seven did not have some advanced training. Four of these
were gymnasium graduates, and three had terminated their education at the
elementary school level (one of these three had great difficulty in reading
and writing).
There is little reason to believe that this sample was not representative of
the entire parliamentary membership. Complete educational information
was not available for everyone in the 1964 parliament, from which the
sample was drawn, or for the other parliaments analyzed. However, educa¬
tional background and occupation are closely related; and as we have seen
the overwhelming majority of deputies in recent parliaments have been
drawn from occupations requiring advanced education.


12. The Political Elite
Several scholars, most notably Pye and Verba, have suggested that the way
political elites handle the particular “historical-situational” crises implicit in
political development can determine the kind of political system that
emerges.1 Although the full list of relevant political phenomena varies
from author to author, all theorists mention the crises of legitimacy, integra¬
tion, and participation. The first refers to the development of loyalty to
the major national symbols and the political elite, the second to the differen¬
tiation and extension of political structures, and the last to mass suffrage, or
at least to a near universal suffrage that has political consequences. The
magnitude and sequence of these crises both have important ramifications.
Eric Nordlinger observes that “instead of attempting to identify a general
pattern according to which political systems develop, we can look at the
various developmental patterns and ask questions about their different
consequences.”2 Certainly, the pattern of development in Greece has pro¬
duced a system unlike most European ones. However, the developmental
pattern and the consequent political system are inexplicable without a
knowledge of the intervening variables through which change has been
filtered.
The four general variables that seem significant in the Greek case have
been noted in previous chapters: the character of the society, elite attitude
and behavior (especially the prevailing perception of modernization), the
international system, and the physical environment of the country. The
manner in which the political system has handled the crises of legitimacy,
integration, and participation, influenced by these intervening variables, can
be examined by focusing on political recruitment.3 Most commonly, studies
of political recruitment examine the manner in which new social strata are
admitted to or restricted from political roles. This requires that variables
such as social background be described and related to particular leadership


The Political Elite 297
positions. However, one can also consider the recruitment function in terms
of the performance of the whole political system. In this case, changes in
the recruitment pattern over time are related to crises in the political system.
This chapter, centered on recruitment to cabinet positions in Greece from
1843 to 1965, will use both modes of analysis. It will provide some clue to
the “openness” of the Greek political elite by assessing the pattern of re¬
cruitment over time, as well as examining the relationship between recruit¬
ment patterns and critical periods of modern Greek history.
THE STRUCTURE OF OPPORTUNITY
In any examination of political recruitment, a knowledge of the oppor¬
tunities offered by the political system is of great importance.4 In Greece,
aside from sporadic and short-lived efforts to elect mayors, only parliamen¬
tary offices have been filled by election since 1843. The size of the parliamen¬
tary body has varied, expanding as new territories and populations were
added and fluctuating in response to changing electoral systems or new
constitutions. Since the 1920’s the number of elective places has generally
remained between 250 and 300; only the 354-seat chamber elected in 1946
was an exception. We have already seen that in Greece the premiership and
the cabinet offices are by far the most important political roles. The top
leaders of the Greek political elite are those occupying ministerial office for
long periods; a secondary level is composed of men who occupy these top
offices intermittently; and the lowest level includes those who are never more
than deputies. In this chapter we will examine only the top two groups.*
The Greek cabinet had eight portfolios from 1843 to 1910, with only occa¬
sional exceptions. The ministries of agriculture and national economy were
added in 1910, in response to economic and social changes. The subsequent
increase in state territory and population made it necessary to appoint gov
ernors-general for the new territories, who were given cabinet rank. New
state concerns in health and welfare were also reflected in new cabinet posi¬
tions. The period 1930-35 marked an uneasy truce between the major politi¬
cal groups; as Table 12.1 indicates, additional portfolios were added in an
attempt to meet the interests of all factions. The Metaxas dictatorship from
1936 to 1941 needed a vast range of deputy ministers to deal with all sectors
* Data on the number of cabinet positions and the names of the incumbents up to 1926 is from Ktenavea, Ai Hellenik,a Kuverneseis at Ethnika Syneleuseis-, the post-1926 figures are from
Ailianou, The Greek, Governments.


298 POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
Table 12.1. Gree\ Cabinet Size
Period
Number of cabinets
Average size Period
Number of cabinets
Average size
1910-14 1 12.0 1940-44 4 24.0
1915-19 9 10.3 1945-49 11 32.0
1920-24 14 12.9 1950-54 7 29.4 1925-29 5 16.2 1955-59 4 25.2 1930-34 6 21.0 1960-64 7 24.0
1935-39 3 27.7
of economic life, as well as additional territorial administrators with cabinet
status. However, this period, as well as the period of exile governments from
1941 to 1946, is largely irrelevant to our study of political recruitment. The
increase in ministerial positions in 1946-50 reflects the aftermath of the war
and occupation, when government presence in every social sector and in
every part of Greece was demanded. Even more, it reflects the fragmented
character of the political realm at that time. Cabinet positions, after all, were
the framework of coalition building, and were useful in bargaining. Since
1950 cabinet size has steadily diminished. The minor offices have been
abolished, or have been combined with others; bargaining requirements
have been met by new political resources derived from economic growth,
the expansion of administrative regulations, and foreign assistance.
Compared with the larger Western European countries, Greece has a high
ratio of ministerial offices to total population. Cabinets in the German Fed¬
eral Republic have numbered about 20 portfolios.5 French cabinets in the
Fifth Republic have been of similar size, with perhaps six additional secre¬
taries of state.6 In Britain there are up to 40 men in the ministerial category
and a substantial number of parliamentary secretaries, but the cabinet itself
usually has only 15-20 members, depending on the preferences of the prime
minister.7 Greece resembles these countries in number of ministerial posi¬
tions, but the total number of political opportunities in Greece is far fewer.
Furthermore, opportunities in the nonpolitical sectors of Greek society are
greatly restricted.
The number of top political roles in the Greek system is one indication
of political opportunity, but it is also important to know the rate of turnover
among the incumbents.8 The graphs on page 299 illustrate the “openness”
of the top political roles at different times; a ratio of new entrants to mem


The Political Elite 299
bers with experience in any prior cabinet was computed for each of the 148
cabinets from 1843 to 1965.* The rate of personnel carry-over from any one
cabinet to its immediate successor was also analyzed; in only 45 per cent
of the cabinets was there any carry-over at all.
The first years after 1843 were marked by relative cabinet stability,
although many new faces appeared with each change. The key political
figures cooperated to restrain the monarch, but they were still antagonistic.
Each was supported by and sympathetic to a major European power; each
had a regional base and a group of personal followers. Only 19 of the 45
* For the purposes of this analysis, modern Greek history was broken into six periods: 1843-78, 1878-1910, 1910-36, 1936-41, 1941-46, and 1946-65. The parliamentary institutions came into existence in 1843. By 1878, the last of the old leadership had disappeared, and the po¬ litical system seemed to operate somewhat differently. The years 1909-10 marked a definite end of one era and the beginning of another with the premiership of Venizelos. The Metaxas dictatorship from 1936 to the occupation is also well defined, as is the period of exile regimes. The last period begins with the first postwar elections in 1946 and ends in the summer of 1965. Caretaker and temporary military cabinets have been included in the computations.


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
3°o
cabinets formed between 1843 and 1878 included ministers who had served
in the cabinets immediately preceding; and most of the 19 were formed in
the early years, when the circle of potential cabinet members was very small.
This situation prevailed until the overthrow of King Otho in 1863. After
this, cabinets collapsed at nearly every minor crisis, and new faces appeared
around the cabinet table. Factions alternated in office because the pool of
potential ministers was larger.
The original generation of Greek leaders was fading; the last of the old
great men, Admiral Boulgares, died in 1878. The new elite was largely
descended from the old competing leaders but tied more closely together
because of similar education and intermarriage. Despite the rather closed
nature of this elite, few men served in successive cabinets. Of the 32 minis¬
tries formed between 1878 to 1910, only five had any carry-over. The similar
backgrounds of the top leaders did not prevent the formation of competing
factions. The graph of this period shows several concentrated groups of new
entrants after 1890; however, these were merely nonpolitical, caretaker
cabinets who kept the government running just before an election. In gen¬
eral, the ministers in these caretaker cabinets did not differ from the regular
politicians in socioeconomic background.
The prevailing recruitment pattern was abruptly broken in October 1910.
The revolution of 1909, the political intervention of junior officers, and the
premiership of Eleutherios Venizelos brought new men into top political
roles. But recruitment soon grew more restrictive, and half of the 37 cabinets
formed between 1910 and 1936 contained members of their predecessors.
Although the system was generally stable, cabinet life was punctuated by
short, violent periods of parliamentary breakdown and military interven¬
tion. The sudden jumps in the graph for this period indicate the temporary
seizure of top offices by military officers in response to the domestic conse¬
quences of external events.
The period from 1936 to 1940 was abnormal. General Metaxas inherited a
cabinet of practicing politicians, but later replaced them with men who had
not held public office before. Most of these remained with Metaxas through¬
out his dictatorship and were inherited, in turn, by his successor in 1941. The
exile governments of the war period were also abnormal. There was limited
talent available, and it was difficult to assess political strength without a
parliamentary setting. Each of the eight cabinets in 1941-46 contained mem¬
bers of the previous cabinet. From 1946 until 1965, a pattern of limited
recruitment to top political roles was the rule. This pattern persisted both


The Political Elite 301
Table 12.2. Individuals and Officeholding
Period Ministers Leaders
Per cent of ministermonths held by leaders
1843-78 147 14 41.4% 1878-1910 116 12 47.7
1910-36 316 31 43.2 1946-65 337 35 44.8
Note: The total number of months available in each office was calculated, and was used as a base to compute individual tenures. Leaders are considered to be the top 10 per cent in terms of total time in office. The figures for the Metaxas dictatorship and the war years are omitted.
in 1946-52, a period of intense governmental instability, and in 1952-65, a
period of fairly stable governments. Fifteen of the 24 cabinets after 1946
contained members inherited from immediate predecessors, but these in¬
stances were clustered at the beginning of the period, when political faction
alization was most acute.
The total number of men attaining cabinet office in the Greek political
system, shown in Table 12.2, is substantially higher than the totals in other
countries. Unfortunately, there is no completely comparable study. In
Britain from 1868 to 1955 there were 294 different incumbents with cabinet
status.9 In the United States, only 144 men and women held cabinet rank
from 1900 to 1958; by contrast there were 121 individual ministers in France
between 1947 and 1958.10 As the table shows, Greece has had far more
cabinet members during each of these periods. However, the opportunities
are more apparent than real. Over 40 per cent of the available time in office
was held by about 10 per cent of the men who had served as ministers. All
in all, the opportunity for real political power in Greece is slight. There have
always been few elective offices. Except in 1910, there has always been a
small turnover in the higher positions; and within the top leadership group,
most offices have been consistently held by a few durable figures.
EDUCATION AND OCCUPATION
The number of top roles in the Greek political system is limited, and the
overall chances of recruitment are slight. Moreover, not everyone has an
equal chance at even these few positions of leadership. Social backgrounds
and career patterns can aid or hinder those who aim at being ministers, as
well as those who merely want a lower parliamentary position. For one
thing, sexual discrimination automatically excludes half the population. Tra


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
302
ditional Greek attitudes toward the social roles of women were seriously
altered only recently.11 The part played by women in resistance movements
during the Nazi occupation was perhaps the most important factor in this
change. Nevertheless, women could not vote in national elections until 1958
In the short time since then, only one woman (the widow of a former pre¬
mier) has attained cabinet rank, and very few have been elected as deputies.
Education also restricts eligibility for political roles. For Greeks, the im¬
portant consideration is not necessarily education as training, but education
as evidence of achieved status. It would not be appropriate to have a person
of low status elected to high political position. The usefulness of higher
education as an avenue to top political roles is recognized by Greeks at all
social levels. Even so, few reach the ultimate threshold, the university.*
Greece was one of the first nations to establish the principle of free public
education, and she has had universal compulsory education to the sixth grade
since 1911. Nevertheless, illiteracy is common. Children from the more pros¬
perous regions or families have a definite advantage in the race for ad¬
vancement through education.12 The regional differential reflects the order
in which the various areas were incorporated into the Greek state, as well as
the gap between urban and rural areas. The initial capital investments in the
older parts of the kingdom, especially the Peloponnesus, were not matched
elsewhere. Two world wars, population exchanges, and a civil war have
all ensured that school buildings and trained teachers are not uniformly
available throughout the country.
The educational level of Greek cabinet ministers from 1843 to 1965, with
the exception of those in the earliest period, was uniformly high (see Table
12.3).13 In the early period, 53.8 per cent had university training or some
advanced education. The educational achievements of the remainder, pri¬
marily revolutionary leaders, were unreported, but it is quite likely that
these men had not received a formal education, since there were few insti¬
tutions of higher education in Greece at that time. Taking the 147 ministers
as a group, it is noteworthy that 38.7 per cent had received some education
abroad. The majority of these had studied in France, with Italy and Ger¬
many following in importance. It is difficult to ascertain the quality and
length of this education; however, the very facts of travel abroad and the
acquisition of Western languages meant that these men had some familiar
#Even as late as 1961-62, the major institutions of higher education, the University of Athens and the University of Thessaloniki, had enrollments of only 9,527 and 8,054, respectively. (Statistical Yearbook, of Greece, 1963, p. 104.)


The Political Elite 303
Table 12.3. Educational Background of Gree\ Cabinet Ministers, 1843-1965
Period
Mili¬ tary
MediLaw cine
Tech¬ nical Other
Gym¬ nasium only
Studied abroad
Un¬ known
1843-78 Ministers (147) 6.1% 38.7% 2.0% 2-1% 2-1% 2.7% 38.7% 46.2% Leaders (14) 14.3 42.8 — — 7.1 — 35.7 35.7
1878-1910 Ministers (96) 28.1 52.0 2.1 4.1 — 1.0 51.0 12.5 Leaders (12) 16.7 58.3 8.3 — — 8.3 50.0 8.3
1910-36 Ministers (300) 16.6 53.6 7.3 6.3 1.7 2.2 37.0 12.7 Leaders (31) 16.1 77.4 3.2 3.2 — — 61.3 
1936—41 Ministers (34) 20.5 29.4 5.9 2.9 2.9 5.9 29.4 32.3
1941-46 Ministers (124) 16.1 48.4 7.2 5.6 3.2 1.6 39.5 17.7
1946-65 Ministers (230) 10.4 58.2 8.7 8.7 1.3 0.4 33.8 12.2 Leaders (35) 5.7 80.0 5.7 8.6 — — 57.2 
Note: The computations on all ministers and on top leaders alone are not completely com¬ parable. The overall trend is computed for all men who entered cabinet rank during a par¬ ticular period. The top leadership is the top decile of this group, judged according to the num¬ ber of minister-months held. These men may have entered politics in an earlier period. This accounts for the fact that the number of top leaders does not always equal 10 per cent of the total number of cabinet entrants.
ity with Western institutions and ideologies. In this early period, most stu¬
dents studied law, whether abroad or in Athens. There was little difference
in educational background between the top political leadership and the
average cabinet members.
Between 1878 and 1910, the educational level of entrants to the cabinet in¬
creased drastically, but the contrast between the total group and the top
leadership remained slight. The percentage of ministers studying abroad
increased; France and Germany were still the major centers of foreign
study. There was a sharp increase in ministers with military educations.
This did not reflect military intervention in politics; it was customary for
the military ministries to be occupied by “uniformed politicians.” Most cabi¬
net ministers and leaders were educated, well traveled, and, as might be
expected in a small country with few schools, friends and former classmates.
In the third period, the educational level of all cabinet entrants differs


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
304
only slightly from that of entrants in the previous period. The total num¬
ber of men with military education decreased although a new category of
noncommissioned officers was added. The character of the education
changed; in particular, only 37 per cent had secured education abroad. How¬
ever, the top leadership differed from both the total of cabinet entrants and
from the top leadership of previous periods. Legal educations and study
abroad were far more common. Although the events of 1909 brought new
men into the political arena, the leadership, even among the new men, came
from families wealthy enough to send their children abroad for study.
In the Metaxas period (1936-41) and in the era of exile governments
(1941-46) different patterns of educational achievement emerge. However,
the abnormal character of these periods makes the findings of lesser sig¬
nificance. During the Metaxas era, the military component reached 20 per
cent, and the antipolitical character of the regime was reflected in a decrease
in the number of men with legal training. Politicians were replaced by un¬
knowns with little experience and parochial backgrounds. In the exile period
and the disturbed years immediately after the Nazi occupation, those with
greater personal resources—implying family wealth and a European edu¬
cation—were involved in government. Because of the number of temporary
figures in the ministries, the data for this period are also abnormal.
In the postwar period, the pattern of 1910-36 has been repeated. A third
of the entire group was educated abroad, primarily in France and Germany.
Law still held a paramount position, but other kinds of professional educa¬
tion, especially medicine and engineering, were increasingly common. (This
trend is particularly evident when the period 1946-65 is examined at five
year intervals.) The contrast between the top leaders and the entire mem¬
bership continued. Over half of the top leaders had been educated abroad;
and 80 per cent had legal educations.
Education is important for a political career not only because it marks one
off from the multitude, but because it qualifies a man for a “political” oc¬
cupation. As we saw in Chapter 11, certain occupations are more appropriate
for political activity than others.14 In transitional political systems most
people are subject-oriented; interests are rarely organized, and parties are
often short-lived and ill-defined. The deputy does not negotiate with other
“interests” on the parliamentary level, but intercedes with the administra¬
tion for individual clients. In the Greek case, a lawyer or doctor, in the ab¬
sence of a landed gentry, can fulfill the role of local notable; the patron
client relationship is based on mutual service rather than land. Despite their


The Political Elite 3°5
Table 12.4. Occupational Background of Gree\ Cabinet Ministers, 1843-1965
Government Service Professional
Period
Mili¬ tary
Bureau¬ cratic
Poli¬ tics Law
Other Profes¬ sions
Busi¬ ness Other
Un¬ known
1843-78
Ministers (147) 21.8% 27.9% 17.7% 6.1% 5.4% 5.4% 0.7% 14.9% Leaders (14) 35.7 35.7 14.3 7.1 — 7.1 — 
1878-1910 Ministers (96) 25.0 13.5 18.8 13.5 9.4 12.5 — 7.3 Leaders (12) 8.3 33.3 16.7 16.7 8.3 8.3 — 8.3
1910-36 Ministers (300) 18.6 18.0 4.3 22.0 18.7 8.7 0.3 9.3 Leaders (31) 12.9 12.9 12.9 42.0 12.8 6.4 — 
1936-41 Ministers (34) 26.4 2.9 5.9 17.6 14.7 8.8 2.9 20.6
1941-46 Ministers (124) 16.1 16.1 2.4 20.1 21.4 8.9 1.6 13.7
1946-65 Ministers (230) 16.9 19.1 2.2 32.6 20.0 4.3 1.8 3.0 Leaders (35) 20.0 20.0 — 43.0 11.5 — 5.8 
modern characteristics, the intellectual professions operate in both the mod¬
ern and traditional milieus. They have status because of modern education;
this in turn, allows them to fill the traditional patronage role in the country¬
side. One would expect that occupation, like education, would be even more
important to ministers than to deputies.
The information on occupation summarized in Table 12.4 reinforces the
conclusions drawn from data on education. A major component of Greek
cabinet membership in all periods had previously been involved in govern¬
ment service. In the first period, 67.4 per cent of all cabinet ministers had
been bureaucrats, military men or politicians.16 Only 6.1 per cent listed the
law as their occupation. In the top leadership group, the government service
category involved 85.7 per cent, largely because so many early leaders had
been involved in the revolution. The combined government service category
remained high among entrants to political positions in all subsequent
periods, but there has been a steady increase in the number of practicing law¬
yers and members from the business sector. These figures are congruent
with historical data suggesting that practicing lawyers were the main bene


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
3°6
ficiaries of the revolution of 1909.16 Inspection of more detailed data for five
year intervals from 1946 to the present did not reveal any significant varia¬
tions in these occupational patterns; however, it should be noted that the
occupational distribution of ministers in the postwar years is very much
like that of all deputies who served during the same period.
FAMILY AND REGIONAL BACKGROUND
We have already seen (Chap. 10) that certain ascriptive characteristics
are important to a successful political career in Greece. There are two major
factors: the first is kinship and family connection; the second, related to the
first, is regional loyalty. The pervasiveness of the patron-client relationship
in Greece accentuates the political importance of these factors. A man born
into a political family will be able to utilize the clientage organization estab¬
lished by other members of his family. Political leadership based on long¬
standing clientage ties is generally less subject to sudden political upheavals.
The longer and more certain a man’s tenure, the greater his clientage net¬
work, and the better his chances of reaching the cabinet. Politicians from
political families are particularly crucial in coalition building, which is espe¬
cially important in Greece, where few individual parties remain strong for
more than a few years. The small size of the Greek political system makes
analysis of this factor possible; since parliament is the only political arena,
it is possible to trace the involvement of individual families. In many cases
biographical sources indicated family relationships. In the later periods, can¬
didate lists, provincial electoral returns, and parliamentary personnel records
were used. The problem was eased by the Greek practice of using the father’s
name as the second name of the child. No effort was made to trace political
involvement in the maternal line, and thus the figures for family relation¬
ship are conservative. The results of the investigation are noted in Tables
12.5 and 12.6.
Before 1843, Greece had no constitution, and most of the government
offices were staffed by Bavarians. Even so, many ministers between 1843
and 1878 had fathers who had been in politics; moreover, many ministers
had been active in the revolution. By 1878, the sons of these men were en¬
tering politics. In fact, the fathers of one-third of the top leadership in this
period had themselves held cabinet office. The disturbances of 1909 did bring
new people to the top political level. A class of provincial lawyers, largely
without family political connections, made their appearance. At the same
time the percentage of ministers with relatives in politics diminished. How


The Political Elite 307
Table 12.5. Family Background of Gree\ Cabinet Ministers, 1843-1965
Period
Personally in revolution
Father in politics
Relative in politics Total
1843-78 Ministers (147) 30.6% 40.1% 6.8% 77.5% Leaders (14) 35.7 21.4 — 57.1
1878-1910 Ministers (96) — 47.9 10.4 58.3 Leaders (12) — 83.3 8.3 91.7
1910-36 Ministers (300) — 21.3 15.0 36.3 Leaders (31) — 22.6 12.9 35.5
1936-41 Ministers (34) — 14.7 17.6 32.4
1941-46 Ministers (124) — 18.5 14.5 33.1
1946-65 Ministers (230) — 15.6 21.7 37.4 Leaders (35) — 31.4 17.1 48.6
Table 12.6. Family Background of Gree\ Cabinet Ministers, 1946-65
Period
Father in politics
Relative in politics Total
1946-51 Ministers (86) 15.1% 30.2% 45.3% Polidcians (66) 19.7 28.8 48.5
1951-56 Ministers (51) 11.8 19.6 31.4 Polidcians (39) 15.4 20.5 35.9
1956-61 Ministers (25) 12.0 24.0 36.0 Politicians (20) 15.0 25.0 40.0
1961-65 Ministers (68) 20.6 19.1 39.7 Politicians (30) 30.0 16.7 46.7


Table 12.J. Regional Background of Gree\ Cabinet Ministers, 1843-1965
d
MSoGG
D
-G
6
t/o5
G -3
3£
<u J3,
T3 </5
O'
Q
<u G
txQ o
3 1£-1
o
o>
Ph o <u
2 -d £
■3 e tj
P rt m
W^
-<Gu H
G
•<OaJ
"GO
GO t-h 06 in
CN CO cn
^I I
co 1 1
t-h rq co 06
in cn t-H ro
IN T-H in vo
in o
o
in
o1 1
n- in
c>n
In ’
II
ro On
oNon°
VO
N
IN
00 VO
in
in
N" IN |N
o vd on
ro 04 Tt; in ro r-^
ro ON ON VO CN O
in in cn
On CO
O CN O
VO CO T}-'
O T-H
cn In
1N0"
On p 1-1
t-h co ON
CN ro
VO ^
p\ <N
vo vq t-h co cn ro
r—I CN T-H
o o ro 'ro
JQhJ
irOONInoOO“
v, QJ U
.§ *g fn
o
ON
070 in CO
t<-LH> c/5 G
_ Vh OJ
wUu .S g O
rvoIoo
ON
1QhJ
G
— 00
C/5 G
Uh QJ
QJ O
7 00
^ ON t“H T-H
IN
N"
CONN
ON CN
On CN
ON in
00 co
rNo"
T-H to
34
ro ON
IN
IN
OONO
CO ©
VO
VO
ON
CN
ro
IN
in
"3 H O'
.5 £ CO i-H in On In rq O T-H 1—1 ON CN
,W> bo ro’ IN CN 0 r-4 CN ON ON CN ON CN
i
c
O 3 in in 00 in N- VO ro CN ro ro
rq
in
CNN
N“
K
On CO
oo vq On O CO ON T-H CN
rq vq p
t-h CO o
in vq co
vo co co
in in in co in cn
in o
T-H* O
rr N
IN
CNN“
in vq p
co 06 CN
T-H CN CN
Oo i^n co
co O
Vh QJ VO T
ONN"
ivvONInooN"
00 G
U QJ
UU
c3
Note: Thessaly includes part of the Epirus. The major areas of refugee settlement are Macedonia, Thrace,
and the Aegean Islands. Between 1843 and 1910 the census data are somewhat unreliable.


The Political Elite 3°9
ever, this change was only temporary, and after the confusion of the Metaxas
period and the war years the number of hereditary politicians began to
increase. When the years from 1946 to 1965 are broken into five-year seg¬
ments, the percentage of all cabinet members with fathers or other relatives
in politics is that shown in Table 12.6. However, when those who were mem¬
bers of caretaker cabinets and thus not active in elective office are eliminated,
the percentages for the five-year periods become 48.5, 35.9, 40.0, and 46.7.
Those from political families have increased their hold on the top political
offices since the war. The number of ministers whose fathers were active in
national politics may have declined, but the number with positions inherited
from uncles, cousins, and brothers has increased.
Research on other political systems indicates that the high percentage of
Greek leaders who originate in political families is not unique. An examina¬
tion of the British political elite (which used an index of aristocratic descent,
landownership, and public school education rather than one based on family
connections alone) found that from 1868 to 1955, 50.5 per cent of the cabinet
members were drawn from the traditional ruling class.17 The authors of the
Legislative System noted that in four American legislatures, the percentage
of members with relatives in politics ranged from 41.0 to 59.0.18 However,
these data reflect political socialization, not inherited political position. Al¬
though impressionistic evidence suggests that inherited political position was
important in nineteenth-century British and American national politics, it
does not seem widespread today. In modern industrial societies offices are
filled by recruitment through parties or other organizations. The clientage
base of the hereditary politician has been eroded by mass education, eco¬
nomic development, and modern bureaucracies. In Greece, the necessity for
a patron-client tie remains; in consequence, the percentage of politicians with
inherited position is high. Without question, those raised in a political en¬
vironment do have some advantage in future political careers; however,
this advantage cannot compare with the inheritance of the office itself.
The advantages given by particular regional backgrounds are related to
those given by family; and most Greek politicians retain ties to their place
of birth, even if they actually live elsewhere. From the figures in Table 12.7,
it is evident that families from the original parts of the Greek state have
managed to dominate both elective and bureaucratic politics. The percen¬
tage of cabinet members from each major region of the original kingdom
corresponded quite closely to the population distribution from 1843 to 1878
with one exception: the first addition, the Ionian Islands, had 17.5 per cent
of the population but only 6.8 per cent of the ministers. In this earliest period,


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
310
some 28.4 per cent of the ministers came from outside the state boundaries.
However, the top leadership group was almost completely restricted to those
with secure bases of political strength in the kingdom itself. In the following
period the number of cabinet ministers born outside the national boundaries
diminished considerably, but the new territories, including Thessaly and
a part of the Epirus, were underrepresented. The original kingdom, in¬
cluding Athens, continued to be the dominant region.
In the third period, the population distribution of the Greek kingdom
was much more complex. The addition of Crete, much of northern Greece,
and the major Aegean islands, as well as the arrival of the refugees from
Turkey and other Near Eastern areas, vastly increased the population.
Nevertheless, the older parts of the kingdom continued to supply most
cabinet ministers. Thessaly, Crete, and the Epirus were only somewhat
slighted; but Macedonia and Thrace, where most of the refugees had settled,
did not contribute more than 4 per cent of the ministers. The observations
on the regional origins of the entire cabinet membership for this period also
hold for the top leaders, making the slight to the newer areas even greater.
In the period from 1946 to 1965, the original kingdom and the Ionian
Islands, excluding Athens, contributed 45.2 per cent of the ministers. In the
past Athens had been overrepresented, but now it had less than its share of
ministers. It must be noted, however, that many Athenians had been born
elsewhere; and that politicians, like the people who elect them, had migrated
to the city. The other slighted area continued to be Macedonia, although
some of the ministers listed as “unknown” could have come from there.
Again, this pattern was similar for both top leadership and the whole cabinet
membership.
It is clear that refugees and persons born in areas recently added to the
Greek state have not yet found their place in the top political stratum. The
refugees, dispersed across the northern provinces, have not been able to enter
politics as a bloc. Today, Macedonia, Thrace, and the urban constituencies
are areas of substantial political competition, which results from weak clien¬
tage ties and a corresponding emphasis on personalities and issues. Few
deputies from these areas can acquire enough tenure and influence in parlia¬
mentary politics to demand ministerial portfolios, especially since their con¬
stituencies are usually left-wing strongholds. Politicians from the older
areas, with secure clientage networks, continue to dominate the traditional
political groupings. They are the enduring part of any political constella¬
tion, and automatically receive a place at the cabinet table. Those elements


The Political Elite 3ii
most committed to substantial changes in the political system are not likely
to appear.
GREEK POLITICS IN PERSPECTIVE
The critical periods in modern Greek history, which partly reflect crises of
legitimacy, integration, and participation, are related to the patterns of po¬
litical recruitment. A varied group of mountain chiefs, notables, phanariot
princes, merchants, and sea captains participated in the war of independence,
and eventually occupied the parliamentary institutions after 1843.19 The
members of this political elite, though holding divergent images of the fu¬
ture Greece, all utilized the central institutions imposed by foreign powers
to maintain their traditional clientage networks. The state institutions, as
they penetrated the countryside, were used more for patronage purposes
than as instruments of central government control. Suffrage was extended
at the same time as representative institutions were adopted; hence there
was no crisis of participation. The individual voter—in reality a client be¬
longing to the patronage network of a given political figure—was not a
threat to the political elite, but the basis of its position. However, each voter
was loyal to the incumbent of a public office, rather than to the office or the
nation itself.
Until the end of the last century, the Greek kingdom could be viewed
as an almost ideal state. Similar education, intermarriage, and a shared life
in the Athenian social and political milieu had created a fairly homogeneous
(though not cohesive) elite from the children of the early leaders. However,
since the ties binding a citizen to the top political level were almost ex¬
clusively personal, the continuance of the system depended in large measure
on the attitudes and behavior of that elite.
In the last decades of the nineteenth century the patriarchal character of
the rural areas changed. Landowners sold their estates to the peasantry and
moved to the cities. Agrarian discontent flared in Thessaly, the one area
where absentee ownership remained common. Gradually, the peasant popu¬
lation increased, and land pressures became severe. The peasant was more
in need of ties to influential than before, since the state, through taxation
and military recruitment, had begun to affect the rural population more di¬
rectly. However, peasant requirements were often beyond the interests or
ability of the traditional patron to handle. At the same time, the national
university was producing a new class of professionals, mainly lawyers, who
began to replace landowners as provincial notables. Other graduates, with


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
312
no opportunities in the state services and no inclination to return to the
country, settled down in Athens and became coffee-house agitators. The
pressures for political office and the demands of a large voting population
for the amelioration of individual grievances through political channels set
the scene for crisis.
The revolution of 1909 was precipitated by external events. The decline
of Turkey and the rise of other Balkan powers had created a need for a pro¬
fessional Greek military establishment. The state set up military academies
and accepted foreign military missions, and soon the army appeared to be
a modern, efficient force. Nevertheless, Greece was badly defeated by Turkey
in 1897. The junior officers and noncoms, imbued with a sense of national
mission not found in the traditional elite, became acutely aware of the de¬
ficiencies in the existing military establishment. The revolution of 1909, ini¬
tiated by dissatisfied elements in the military and instructed by the Young
Turk example, ultimately benefited the new class of provincial and Athenian
professionals. It shattered the monopoly of the old elite and gave opportuni¬
ties to the new men.
From 1910 to 1936, the Greek political elite was primarily composed of
new men, without family ties to the earlier generations of political leaders.
However, the chronic scarcity of resources, in Greece, although directing
ambitious men to political office, also necessitated the retention of the pre¬
vailing political practices. Members of the major political groups were in¬
distinguishable in their social background, and differed primarily in their
regional origin. The jobs, the possibilities for administrative manipulation,
and the public funds available to those in control of the state machinery were
still used to build or maintain clientage networks. Political participants, for
the most part, were still subject-oriented. Favors were bestowed by individ¬
uals, and no one benefited simply by being a citizen.
The knowledge that state regulations could be evaded through personal
contacts further undermined loyalty to national symbols and obedience to
national institutions. Since individual favors were tied to the actions of spe¬
cific leaders, many Greeks equated loyalty to individuals with loyalty to the
political system itself. The legitimacy of the system and the operation of
the state institutions depended on good relations between the members of
the political elite. However, leaders continually clashed over national iden¬
tity, institutional forms, foreign alignments, and control of the state ma¬
chinery. Since 1910, modern Greek history has been filled with crises of
legitimacy and integration, all stemming from personal conflict. The politi


The Political Elite 3T3
cal system has constantly been challenged and upset, either by the clashes of
major figures or by domestic military pressures.
Besides the military, newer, less organized groups of refugees and other
dissatisfied urbanites, uninvolved in the traditional political processes, be¬
came more important in the inter-war period. The crisis of 1936 and the
ensuing dictatorship of General Metaxas can be related to a failure of re¬
cruitment, which was also a failure to settle basic questions of legitimacy
and integration. The traditional political groups, held together by mutual
necessity in the quest for scarce resources, could not accommodate Greeks
who were not attached to the usual patronage structures. This failure pro¬
vided opportunities for new political groups organized on other than clien¬
tage principles. The lassitude of the traditional politicians and the threat
of a Communist outbreak provoked Metaxas to action, backed by the
military.
After World War II, the sons and nephews of the beneficiaries of the revo¬
lution of 1909 began to enter politics. For most individual deputies, and for
the political groups, the major concerns were still patronage and the pursuit
of office. The majority of the Greek voters probably remained loyal to in¬
dividual political figures. Social mobilization and the expansion of educa¬
tion produced more citizens who sought political careers, as well as more
who wanted political solutions to their individual problems. However, as
competition for political position increased, the number of political roles
stayed substantially the same, and it became more and more necessary for
an aspiring politician to have family political ties. This made it even more
difficult for the newer groups in society to reach the top of the political sys¬
tem, and in turn inhibited their loyalty to the system and their obedience to
its institutions.
Over the last several decades another level of politics has appeared in
Greece. The elite at this extraparliamentary level has promoted a new image
of modernity, chiefly tied to economic development. They have attempted to
form modern organizations bound by associational ties rather than the loose
groupings characteristic of traditional society. One extraparliamentary force,
the left wing, has attracted many Greeks who were unaffiliated with the
traditional leadership. Political office is important to the Left; at a minimum,
it has sought to obtain recruitment to top political roles. However, leftists
have also questioned the legitimacy of the entire political system by attack¬
ing the manner in which the state institutions operate. They have sought to
eliminate the essential element of Greek politics—the clientage system based


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
3M
on the mutual obligations of individuals. The Left was viewed as a threat
by the traditional parliamentary forces because the existence of universal
suffrage might give it substantial power. The other extraparliamentary force,
the Greek military establishment, had been freed from exclusive dependence
on the traditional patron-client relationship by foreign military aid, both
British and American. The military, too, was dissatisfied and fearful, dis¬
trusting both the Left and the parliamentary politicians. The politicians
were unreliable because of the fragile bonds of personal loyalty that char¬
acterized their political groups. The larger concerns of the state, which the
military saw itself as representing, seemed to be in constant confusion. The
Left, should it realize its goals, would undermine the military as the symbol
of national unity and disrupt its international affiliations.
The precarious relations among leaders representing these competing
elites were shattered in the summer of 1965. The consequent unrest culmi¬
nated in the military coup of April 1967. Since then, the military has at¬
tempted to eliminate both the parliamentary politicians and the Left as
important political forces. It would seem that the destruction of the tra¬
ditional political groups threatens the entire pattern of clientage relations
in Greek society. Although the military leaders did not intend to do more
than restore stability to Greek society, they may have cleared the way for
new political groups with ideologies stressing new goals and institutions,
whether under the auspices of the military or a renewed Left. On the other
hand, the traditional pattern of clientage relations may penetrate the modern
military organization. However, as social mobilization proceeds and as
clientage ties weaken, an increasing proportion of the population would
seem to be available for new political forms. No one can predict with pre¬
cision what the future political pattern will be.
Whoever the ultimate victors in the political struggle may be, they will
face a long-standing Greek problem. Political resources, largely produced by
economic growth, must be increased to allow the increasing number of
demands to be satisfied, either through the traditional patronage system
or through some more rational set of priorities. Is this possible? Many
observers seem to think so. Benjamin Ward concluded on the basis of var¬
ious demographic and socioeconomic data from the mid-^o’s, that the
Greek population was “better prepared, both physically and mentally, than
those of most developing countries to meet the heavy demands of modern
society.”20 Richard Westebbe, using more recent data on economic growth,
has suggested that “Greece has broken out of patterns characteristic of under


The Political Elite 3I5
development.”"1 George Coutsoumaris, another prominent economist fa¬
miliar with Greek affairs, reports that Greece “is on the way to a second
stage of industrial development.”22
This optimism is reinforced by a comparison of Greek development with
that of Western Europe. The gross national product per capita in Greece
during the early 1960’s was equal to that in Great Britain about 100 years
ago. Moreover, the rate of growth of both GNP per capita and government
expenditure is now several times greater than it has been in Britain at any
time during the last two centuries. In the last decade, the Greek economy
has expanded at a rate equalled in only a few countries. This is especially
evident when one examines the ratio of industrial income to gross national
product, an important measure of economic structural change.
Unfortunately, economic growth in itself does not preclude relative scar¬
city. As Myron Weiner notes in regard to India, “The argument that eco¬
nomic growth provides government with greater revenue, thus enabling
it to satisfy more of the demands made on it, assumes a constancy in demand
for which there is neither historical precedent nor theoretical justification.”23
All evidence suggests that the rapid social mobilization of previously quies¬
cent population sectors in Greece, pardally due to economic growth itself,
has caused a vast increase in the magnitude and variety of political demands.
The Greek political system, traditionally the focus for all demands, cannot
accommodate this increase. The structure of the consociational system im¬
poses limits on flexibility in the allocation of resources; it does not allow
easy access to the bargaining level for all segments of the Greek population.
Ultimately, however, the basic limitation is still the limited quantity of
Greek resources.
Obviously, Greece has insufficient supplies of the natural resources that are
needed for development. Moreover, she is poorly located for trade with the
industries and markets of Western Europe. In consequence, “The possi¬
bility of development of a significant industrial pole in Greece appears very
small.”24 Although uneven internal development is not uncommon in any
developing economy, the particular sectors that are most advanced in Greece
are those least able to promote general development. Exports have not yet
reached the level of imports, and industrial commodities account for a very
small proportion of total exports. The major Greek exports are luxury goods
that must cope with an elastic market and stiff competition. The Greek
economy is tied to agriculture; but land scarcity, excessive farm fragmenta¬
tion, rough terrain, and poor soil make any extensive development of com


POLITICAL RECRUITMENT
316
mercial agriculture problematical. The few advantages enjoyed by Greece
in international competition, her climate and her antiquities, though they
attract tourists and revenue, have not been extensively exploited.25 Plans
for substantial long-term economic growth necessarily depend on condi¬
tions outside Greece. This limits the options available to the Greek political
elite, and also relieves them of some responsibility.
As long as the available resources are unable to satisfy mounting demands,
the Greek consociational system will probably be characterized by an un¬
stable equilibrium as the major components compete for advantage; there
will be a general malaise, with occasional chaotic outbursts. So far, the
Greek system has not solved the basic questions of legitimacy, in that its
people have never developed a loyalty to any office or institution for its own
sake; moreover, the governmental institutions have never been able to
cope with the demands of operation in a participatory democracy. These
two failures have produced pressures that the political system is unable to
bear. Conflict between traditional and modern, or parliamentary and ex¬
traparliamentary elements seems likely to continue for the indefinite future.
What is more, this may indeed be the typical pattern of politics in many
underdeveloped countries.


Appendixes




Appendix A:
Research Methods
For this study, I have used three general methods of investigation. First,
techniques of ecological research were utilized to identify specific groups in
society and to relate them to particular political groups. For the years before
1928, historical materials were used; after 1928, census data were available
to identify patterns of refugee settlement and urbanization. These variables
were used in my subsequent analysis of electoral data. Once particular
groups in Greek society were identified, I attempted to determine the pat¬
tern of political recruitment by examining the social and political back¬
grounds of deputies from three Parliaments (1936, 1946, and 1964), using
both published biographical data and the personnel records of the Parlia¬
ment itself. Information on age, occupation, education, place of birth, and
family political involvement was available from these sources. Perhaps the
most serious lack was the absence of data on recruitment into the military
and the bureaucracy. This deficiency was somewhat compensated for by a
similar analysis of the backgrounds of all cabinet members from 1843 to
1965. Cabinets of a military or bureaucratic complexion, formed during the
breakdown of normal parliamentary institutions, were analyzed along with
the others. By and large, published biographical data was the basis for this
analysis.
If one attempts to describe a political elite by concentrating on formal
officeholders alone, it sometimes happens that the real powerholders in the
society are neglected; however, this does not seem to be a problem in the
Greek case. Judging from the number of aspirants for parliamentary office
and from the fact that candidates come from all sectors of Greek society, the
Greek parliament, because it normally does allocate resources for the whole
society, contains the real holders of power in the Greek political system.
Another possible deficiency in this type of analysis is the formal under¬
representation of emergent groups in the society, particularly the Left; this
was overcome by an investigation of all candidates for election. The Greek


APPENDIX A
320
electoral system has usually been willing to recognize any group as a po¬
litical party and to give it a chance at parliamentary seats.* My collation of
available data on all parliamentary candidates from 1926 to 1963 brought out
family political histories, individual political histories, and regional patterns
of candidate recruitment.
Finally, political socialization and recruitment were investigated through
interviews with a sample of deputies from the parliament elected in 1964.
The inspiration for these interviews came from the study made by John
Wahlke and his colleagues in The Legislative System. A sample of 55 was
drawn at random from the 300 members of the 1964 parliament. Five of
these could not be contacted or refused to cooperate, and five more deputies
with the same party affiliations and from the same constituencies were
selected as replacements. The sample matched the whole parliament very
closely in terms of party and age distribution, regional representativeness,
and occupation. The party distribution in the 1964 parliament was: 57%
EK, 34% ERE, 7.3% EDA, and 1.7% KP. The corresponding sample dis¬
tribution was 58%, 31%, 7-4%, and 3.6%. Other statistical data are pre¬
sented in Table A.
Table A. Comparison of Selected Characteristics of Members of the
ig64 Parliament and a Sample of 55 Deputies
Age Region Occupation
Parliament Sample Parliament Sample Parliament Sample
N 293* 55 300 55 291* 55 Mean 5.61 5.74 6.64 6.13 5.81 5.31
Variance 3.85 3.63 6.49 5.46 2.88 2.58 Standard deviation 1.96 1.90 - - - 
*Total less than 300 because some information was unavailable for some deputies.
The interviews took place in Athens, from September 1964 to March 1965.
In about one-third of the cases, I used the interview schedule (see p. 000) as
a written questionnaire. Otherwise, the interviews were conducted from the
schedule with the aid of an interpreter. (In six cases, I was able to conduct
interviews in English.) The interpreter, a young journalist working as the
parliamentary correspondent for a leading Athens daily closely linked with
the Papandreou forces, was invaluable in arranging meetings. The average
deputy was flattered that a journalist and an American scholar would want
* Of course this is only true when parliamentary institutions are operating. The Communist Party was proscribed in 1947; however, this did not prevent its cadres from entering politics under another label until the 1967 coup suspended all electoral activity.


Research Methods 321
to talk to him. Moreover, it was clear that talking with me was viewed as
a favor to the journalist, who could, in return, mention the deputy favorably
in a news account. Several deputies who were reluctant to participate were
brought around by the implied threat of a news blackout of their parlia¬
mentary activities. The fact that the interpreter represented a pro-govern¬
ment newspaper did not seem to make any difference.
The interview schedule itself resembled that used by Wahlke et al., but
was shortened for several reasons. First, many of the Wahlke items were
either irrelevant in the Greek context or beyond the scope of this study.
Second, some of the questions could be viewed as too “personal” or too con¬
troversial in the Greek setting, even though they would be acceptable here.
Finally, Greek deputies were generally much too busy to spend more than
an hour with the author and the interpreter. The time factor finally forced
us to leave some printed interview schedules for later return. Questions se¬
lected for inclusion were translated into Greek by the interpreter; another
translation was made by a Greek trained in American social science. The
two versions were compared, amended, and tried out on several deputies
not part of the sample. They were printed in a form that could be used
either as an interview schedule or as a questionnaire for later return.
By and large, the deputies did not understand the purpose of the inter¬
views. After the interview had commenced, and the seemingly irrelevant
and innocuous nature of the questions became evident, most deputies were
quite relaxed. They enjoyed talking about themselves, but they would have
been apprehensive about any questions calling for policy opinion. The in¬
troduction to the interview and the questionnaire stated that no names
would be used, but few deputies believed that their responses would be
secret. In fact, several were upset that we didn’t want their names. One
implied that he didn’t intend to be “a mere number.” Nearly every returned
questionnaire was signed with a flourish.
THE INTERVIEW SCHEDULE
The present study is aimed at finding out why deputies decide to enter politics. The information and opinions you give will be tabulated along with responses from your colleagues. Finally, we will tabulate it with similar information about deputies from other countries. Of course, no names will be used, and what you say will be “off the record.”
i. First, a few questions about your background. a. Where were you born? b. In what year? c. What is the name of your father? d. Are you married? e. How many children do you have, and what are their ages?


322 APPENDIX A
2. In what part of the country did you grow up? a. Did you spend most of the years when you were growing up in a city, town, or
village? b. What was your father’s occupation?
3. Now, would you tell me a little bit about your education—where you went to
school?
4. What has been your own principal occupation? a. Has this been your occupation all your life?
b. What other work have you done? c. In addition to your job as deputy, do you have any other current connections
with a business firm, law office, or farm, etc.?
5. How did you become interested in politics? For example: a. What is your earliest recollection of being interested in it? b. What other members of your family or close relatives held elective office before
you yourself did? (1) Do any of these relatives still hold elective office? (2) Do any of your wife’s relatives hold elective office? c. What clinched your decision to stand for the Vouli yourself? d. When did you first stand for election? With which list? In which electoral
district? e. Were you successful the first time you ran for the Vouli? To what do you
ascribe your success or defeat? f. From your first election as deputy have you remained in the same party group?
In the same election district? g. Have you ever held appointive positions in the civil service or in other public
legal entities? If so, what?
6. Have you ever been a minister? In your opinion, what makes a deputy most eli¬
gible to be selected as a minister?
7. Now, a few questions about the job of being a deputy:
a. How would you describe the job of being a deputy? What are the most im¬ portant things you should do? b. Are there any important differences between what you think this job is and the
way your constituents see it? c. How often do you visit your constituency? Approximately how many con¬ stituents visit you in Athens per week?
8. Is there any particular subject or field of interest in which you consider yourself particularly expert? I mean, when it comes to dealing with proposed legislation in that field? What is this?
a. Is there any group within the population that you act as spokesman for?
b. Are you a member or officer in any trade union, professional organization, commercial organization, or veterans’ group?
c. Do representatives of organized groups such as those mentioned above contact you to give you their opinions on proposed legislation?
9. Who are some of your closest personal friends in the Vouli—I mean the members you see most outside the Vouli, at lunch or on social occasions?*


Research Methods 323
io. In general, on what issues would you say your party differs from the others repre¬ sented in the Vouli?
n. Do you consider yourself to be Orthodox, Orthodox who frequently goes to church, or something else?*
12. In regard to government and politics in general, what interests you most, and which interests you least: international affairs, national affairs, or local affairs?
* These questions, because of poor responses, were deleted after about io of the 55 interviews
had been completed.


Appendix B:
Classification of Eparchies by Party Competition
In the following lists, the various Greek eparchies are grouped according
to their voting record for the eight elections that took place in the period
1946-63. The parties or groups of parties, categorized as Right or Center,
that received over half of the vote are considered the winners; and each
eparchy is classified by winner, although it may have returned some depu¬
ties from other political groups. In each category, eparchies are listed by
region. Urban eparchies (those with 50 per cent or more of the population
living in communes of 10,000 or over) are in italics. The regional classifica¬
tion used in Greek government documents is followed, except that the
Cyclades and the Dodecanese, because of their very different political his¬
tories, are separated from the Aegean Islands category. The transliteration
of Greek place-names follows Greek government usage.
One-party Right. In these eparchies groups defined as conservative won
all eight elections in the period 1946-63.
Cyclades: Andros, Paros, Thera.
Ionian Islands: Corfu, Paxoi.
Old Greece: Aegina, Kythera, Troezenia.
Peloponnesus: Epidavros-Limiras, Ghythion, Gortynia, Kalamata, Ky
nouria, Lakedaemon, Mantinia, Messini, Nauplia, Oety
los, Pylia, Trifylia.
One-party Center. Groups defined as “Center” won all eight elections.
Crete: Apokoronon, Ierapetra, Kissamos, Kydonia, Malevizion, Mir
ambello, Monofatsion, Pedias, Selinon, Vianon.
Dodecanese: Kalymnos. (Center won seven elections; the Dodecanese
became part of Greece in 1950.)
One-party traditional. One set of political groups consistently received a
majority of votes in each election. However, the vote switched from Center


Classification of Eparchies 325
groups to conservative groups when the major political leader in the area switched.
Crete: Sfakia.
Cyclades: Kea.
Epirus: Arta, Dodoni, Konitsa, Metsovon, Paramythia, Pogonion.
Macedonia: Fiorina.
Thrace: Komotini, Samothraki, Sapae.
Thessaly: Skopelos.
One-party Right, one exception. The right-wing political groups captured
the majority of votes in every election except one. The year of exception
is noted in parentheses.
Cyclades: Milos (1950), Naxos (1950), Syros (1950), Tinos (1950).
Ionian Islands: Kranaea (1950), Zante (1951).
Macedonia: Grevena (1950), Kastoria (1950).
Old Greece: Attica (1951), Fthiotis (1950), Khalkis (1950), Misolon
ghion (1950), Parnassis (1963), Spetsae (1950).
Peloponnesus: Argos (1950), Ermionis (1950), Kalavryta (1950), Kor
inthia (1950), Megalopolis (1950).
One-party Right, two exceptions. The right-wing political groups cap¬
tured the majority of votes in every election except two. The years of ex¬
ception are noted in parentheses.
Ionian Islands: Ithaki (1961, 1963).
Macedonia: Almopia (1950, 1951), Arnaea (1950, 1951), Fyllis (1950,
1951), Khalkidiki (1950, 1951), Kilkis (1950, 1956), Ko
zani (1950, 1951), Pangheon (1950, 1951), Sintiki (1950,
1951), Visaltia (1950, 1951), Voion (1950, 1951).
Old Greece: Hydra (1950, 1951), Karystia (1950, 1963), Naupactia
(1950, 1951).
Peloponnesus: Aighialia (1950, 1963).
Thrace: Orestias (1950, 1951), Souflion (1950, 1951).
Competitive districts, tendency Right. In these districts, the political
groups of the Right have won five of the eight elections. There is no pattern
to indicate that the districts have changed affiliation because of changing
personnel, changing party labels, or any particular national issue.
Aegean Islands: Samos.
Ionian Islands: Sami.
Macedonia: Drama, Langadas, Serres.
Old Greece: Doris, Thebes, Trichonis.
Peloponnesus: Olympia.


326 APPENDIX B
Thessaly: Aghia, Almyros.
Thrace: Didymotichon.
Even districts. Each of the two major political groupings has won four
elections in the period 1946-63.
Aegean Islands: Chios.
Epirus: Thyamis.
Macedonia: Eordaea, Paeonia, Yannitsa.
Old Greece: Evritania, Lokris, Megaris, Vonitsa-Xiromeron.
Peloponnesus: Ilia.
Thessaly: Elasson.
Competitive districts, tendency Center. In these districts, the political
groups of the Center have won five of the eight elections.
Dodecanese: Rhodos. (Won five of seven elections; the Dodecanese did
not become part of Greece until 1950.)
Epirus: Nikopolis-Parga.
Macedonia: Edessa, Pieria.
Old Greece: Domokos.
Peloponnesus: Patras.
Thessaly: Farsala, Kalambaka, Karditsa, Trikala.
Thrace: Xanthi.
One-party Center, two exceptions. The Center political groups captured
the majority of votes in every election except two. The years of exception are
in parentheses.
Aegean Islands: Limnos (1946, 1961).
Crete: Amarion (1952, 1956), Mylopotamos (1952, 1956).
Macedonia: Imathia (1946, 1958), Nestos (1946, 1952).
Old Greece: Istiaia (1946, 1958), Levadhia (1946, 1958), Valtos (1952,
1962).
Thrace: Alexandroupolis (1946, 1961).
One-party Center, one exception. The Center political groups captured
the majority vote in every election except one.
Crete: Aghios Vasilios (1952), Kaenourghion (1958), Lasithion (1946),
Pyrghiotissa (1958), Rethymni (1952), Sitia (1946), Temenos
(t958).
Competitive three-party. These are districts in which any of the three
major groupings have a chance at winning a majority. In ordinary circum¬
stances, there is no majority, only a plurality.
Aegean Islands: Ikaria, Mithymni, Mytilini, Plomarion.
Ionian Islands: Levkas, Pali.


Classification of Eparchies 327
Macedonia: Kavala, Naousa, Thasos, Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki City,
Thessaloniki Suburbs.
Old Greece: Athens City, Athens Suburbs, Piraeus City, Piraeus Sub¬
urbs.
Thessaly: Larisa, Tirnavos, Volos.
Unclassified. These are districts with substantial shifting of party label by
deputies, but with unexplained victories by the opposite political group.
Dodecanese: Karpathos, Kos.
Epirus: Filiates, Margarition.


Appendix C:
Abbreviations of Greek Political Parties
Agrot Agrotikon Komma (Agrarian Party). There have been many
political groups using this label or variants of it. In the election
of 1936, this party split into two fragments; the left-wing one
was closely associated with the Communists. Since the war,
three men with personal followings can be viewed as the suc¬
cessors to the prewar “right-wing” Agrarians: Alexander My
lonas, with strength in the Epirus; Augustos Pagoutsos in
Thessaly (especially Trikala); and Alexander Baltadzis from
Thrace. In 1946 and 1958 there were electoral alliances that
combined the various Agrarian fragments. In other elections
the factions have run independently or have joined with the
larger political parties.
DE Demokratiki Enosis (Democratic Union). The name used by
Papandreou’s Center coalition and the EDA during their elec¬
toral alliance in 1956.
DP Demokratiki Parataksis (Democratic Front). A party formed
by various left-wing groups, including remnants of the Com¬
munist Party, for the 1950 elections. This party was the prede¬
cessor of EDA.
DS Demokratikos Sinaspismos (Democratic Coalition). A coali¬
tion of small Center groups led by Alexander Papanastassiou,
George Papandreou, and George Kafandaris in 1936.
EDA Eniaia Demokratiki Aristera (United Democratic Left).
Formed in 1951 from several minor Left parties. It was gen¬
erally thought of as a substitute for the outlawed Communist
Party. The EDA itself was outlawed by the military junta after
April 1967.


Abbreviations
EF
EK
EKE
ELK
EPE
EPEK
EPEL
EPK
ERE
329
Eleftherofronon (Free Opinion Party). Founded and led by
General Ioannis Metaxas in the 1920’s and 1930’s. It was a minor
right-wing personalist following in 1936.
Enosis Kendrou (Center Union). The Center party founded by
Papandreou in 1961. This has remained the label for most of the
Center since that time.
Ethnikon Komma Ellados (National Party of Greece). A post¬
war party formed by Napoleon Zervas from the members of his
wartime guerrilla group. It participated in the 1946 and 1950
elections, and then its cadres scattered to other parties, mainly
in the Center.
Enosis Laikou Komma (Union of Populist Parties). A splinter
party that contested the 1958 elections. Its leaders were Ste¬
phanos Stephanopoulos, Panayotis Kanellopoulos, and Con¬
stantine Tsaldaris. It was mainly composed of right-wing nota¬
bles from the Peloponnesus.
Ethniki Politiki Enosis (National Political Union). A coalition
composed of the Venizelist Liberals led by Sophocles Venizelos,
George Papandreou and his Social Democrats, and Panayotis
Kanellopoulos and his National Unity Party. It contested the
1946 election.
Ethniki Proodeftikon Enosis Kendrou (National Progressive
Center Union). This was the label used by a Liberal coalition
led by General Nicholas Plastiras and former premier Emman¬
uel Tsouderos in 1950 and 1951. The party has since merged
into the EK, although the successors of the founders still main¬
tain a party office.
Ethniki Parataksis Ergazomenou Laou (National Front of
Working People). A coalition of small personalist parties that
contested the 1950 election. Several leaders were former associ¬
ates of General Metaxas.
Ethnikon Phileleftheron Komma (National Liberal Party).
Formed by Stulianos Gonatas from various Liberal Party ele¬
ments in 1946. It lasted until 1950, when most of its members
returned to the parent party.
Ethniki Rizospastiki Enosis (National Radical Union). The
political group founded in 1956 by Constantine Karamanlis. It


33° APPENDIX C
was composed primarily of right-wing elements from the
Greek Rally, although after 1956 many Center politicians were
involved.
ES Ellinikos Synagermos (Greek Rally). A political group created
by Field Marshal Alexander Papagos in 1951. It won the elec¬
tions of 1952 and passed from the scene in 1955 after the death
of Papagos. Initially, its cadres came mainly from the Populist
Party and some Center groups. Most of its deputies later went
into the ERE.
GLRE Geniki Laiki Rizospastiki Enosis (General Populist Radical
Union). A 1936 right-wing political coalition including Gen¬
eral George Kondylis and his National Radicals, John Theo
tokis and the National Populists, and John Rallis and some as¬
sociated independents.
HPE ‘Inomeni Parataksis Ethnikofronon (Coalition of National¬
ists). A coalition of three parties that fought the 1946 election.
It included the Populist Party led by Constantine Tsaldaris, the
Reformist Party of Apostolos Alexandris, and the National Lib¬
erals of Stulianos Gonatas.
KGP Komma Georgiou Papandreou (Party of George Papandreou).
This was a continuation of Papandreou’s prewar Democratic
Socialist Party. It ran in 1950 and 1951, but won no seats in 1951.
Papandreou himself collaborated with the Greek Rally in the
election of 1952.
KKE Kommounistikon Komma Ellados (Communist Party of
Greece). This party was founded in 1918; with several lapses, it
was active in Greek politics throughout the interwar period. It
was outlawed (with other political parties) by Metaxas in 1936.
Its cadres formed the key elements in the resistance movement
and the ensuing civil war. It was again outlawed in 1947, and
remains so today.
KP Komma Proodeftikon (Progressive Party). This is a minor
right-wing party founded by Spyros Markezinis after his de¬
parture from the Greek Rally in 1955. It was largely composed
of personal followers who had been involved in his earlier party,
the Neon Komma (New Party), which contested elections in
1950. It has participated in elections since 1956, usually in col¬
laboration with one of the major political coalitions.


Abbreviations 331
LK Laikon Komma (Populist Party). This party can trace its an¬
cestry to the personalist groups found in Greek politics in the
last part of the nineteenth century; it did not take a cohesive
form until the first decades of this century. Until 1951 it was one
of the major political groups, but at that time most of its cadres
shifted to the Greek Rally. The LK leader, Constantine Tsal
daris, continued the party office, but the LK has not been directly
involved in electoral politics since it entered a coalition in 1961.
MEA Metopon Ethnikis Anadimiourgias (National Regeneration
Front). This was the label used by Panayotis Kanellopoulos for
his political group in 1950. It was a successor to his National
Unity Party.
MK Metarruthmistikon Komma (Reformist Party). A Populist
Party splinter led by a leading notable in Macedonia in 1936. It
reappeared to join the Coalition of Nationalists in 1946, and then
disappeared.
PADE Proodeftiki Agrotiki Democratiki Enosis (Progressive Agrarian
Democratic Union). A coalition of Right and Center personali¬
ties that contested the 1958 elections.
PAME Pandemokratiki Agrotikon Metopon Ellados (Pan-democratic
Agrarian Front of Greece). The label used by the EDA in the
1961 elections.
PAP Politiki Aneksartitos Parataksis (Independent Political Front).
A coalition of two personalist parties that contested the 1950 elec¬
tions. One of the leaders, Constantine Maniadakis, had been in
charge of internal security during the Metaxas regime.
PDK Phileleftheron Demokratikon Kendrou (Liberal Democratic
Union). A splinter from the Center Union founded by Ste¬
phanos Stephanopoulos and other notables after the termina¬
tion of the Papandreou government in the summer of 1965.
This party was composed of EK members who defied Papan¬
dreou and accepted posts in the later government.
PK Phileleftheron Komma (Liberal Party). This was the party
founded by Venizelos in 19x0. It has gone through innumerable
transformations, and its present lineal descendant is the EK.
SD Demokratikon Socialistikon Komma (Democratic Socialist
Party). Founded by George Papandreou in 1935, it ran in the


332 APPENDIX C
VenPK
“X”
National Political Union in 1946 and was later changed to the
George Papandreou Party.
Venizelikon Phileleftheron Komma (Venizelist Liberal Party).
This splinter group from the Liberal Party was formed by
Sophocles Venizelos (the son of the former premier) to partici¬
pate in the 1946 elections. At that time the PK itself was led by
Themistocles Sofoulis. The splinter reentered the Liberal Party
in 1947.
Komma Xiton Ethnikis Antistasseos (“X” National Resistance
Party). Founded by General George Grivas in 1946, largely
from extreme rightists in his own National Defense Battalion.
The name was changed in 1950 to Ethnikon Agrotikon Komma
Xiton (“X” National Agrarian Party). After 1950 the party dis¬
appeared.


Notes




Notes
Complete authors’ names, titles, and publication data are given in the Bibliography,
PP- 349-54
Introduction
1. See Ginsburg, Atlas of Economic Development. On indices of birth or death rates, physicians per capita, and students in secondary or higher education per capita Greece ranks in the upper quartile of all nations, although below most Western European states. On other measures, such as gross national product, calories consumed per day, adult literacy, and the proportion of the population in cities of 20,000 or more, Greece is found in the second quartile. 2. Russett, pp. 28-30. 3. See S. P. Huntington, “Political De¬ velopment and Political Decay,” in Welch, pp. 207-9. See also Curtis, Com¬ parative Government and Politics. 4. See de Schwienitz, Industrialization and Democracy. 5. Diamant, “The Nature of Political Development,” in Finkle and Gable, p. 96. 6. Apter, “Political Systems,” p. 2. 7. Almond and Powell, p. 22. 8. Riggs, pp. 41&-23. 9. Apter, “Political Systems,” pp. 8-9. 10. Riggs, pp. 39-40. 11. Almond and Powell, p. 34. 12. Ibid., p. 35. 13. Ibid., p. 285. 14. Ibid., p. 25. 15. Ibid., p. 19. 16. Ibid., pp. 34,285-86. 17. Apter, “Political Systems,” p. 19. 18. Ibid., p. 21. 19. Pye, “Typologies and Political De¬ velopment,” p. 10.
20. Arthur L. Kalleberg, “The Logic of Comparison: A Methodological Note on the Comparative Study of Political Systems,” World Politics, XIX (Oct. 1966), p. 73. 21. Robert Brown, Explanation in So¬ cial Science (Chicago: Aldine, 1963), p. 171. 22. Lijphart, p. 7. 23. Riggs, p. 4. 24. Ibid., Chap. 13. 25. Ibid., Chap. 7. 26. Ibid., p. 117. 27. Apter, “Political Systems,” p. 1. 28. Apter, Politics of Modernization, p. vi. 29. Ibid. 30. Apter, “Political Systems,” p. 21. 31. Ibid., p. 20. 32. Ibid., p. 11. 33. Ibid., p. 19. 34. Ibid., p. 27. 35. Ibid., p. 19. 36. Ibid., p. 22. 37. Apter suggests that this is charac¬ teristic of Latin America, where the gov¬ ernment acts primarily as a mediator be¬ tween power blocs. 38. Apter, “Political Systems,” p. 17. 39. Ibid., p. 22. 40. Ibid., p. 20. 41. Apter, Politics of Modernization, p.65. 42. Almond and Powell, p. 30. They seem to use “function” and “variable” interchangeably. 43. Ibid., Chap. 8 and p. 190. 44. Ibid., p. 195.


33^
45- Ibid., pp. 64-72,47-48. 46. Ibid., p. 23. 47. Ibid. See also the table on p. 217
and the illustration of relationships on p. 308. 48. Ibid., p. 208.
49. Ibid., Chaps. 9-10. 50. For a critique, see Lijphart, pp. 4-6,13-14. 51. None of these authors elaborate the concept of regression or stagnation very satisfactorily. For a more complete dis¬ cussion, see Samuel P. Huntington, Polit¬ ical Order in Changing Societies (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1968), Chap. 1; and S. N. Eisenstadt, “Break¬ downs of Modernization” Economic De¬ velopment and Cultural Change, Vol. 12,
July 1964, pp. 345-67. 52. Apter, Politics of Modernization,
p. 260. 53. Almond and Coleman, p. 33.
54. Godoy and Fortin, pp. 14-15. 55. Janowitz, p. 7. 56. Ibid., p. 9. Janowitz notes that mili¬ tary traditions in the Ottoman Empire facilitated military intervention in poli¬
tics. To some extent, Greece can be viewed as a part of that tradition. 57. The standard presentation is Duverger. Political Parties. See also Gio¬ vanni Sartori, “European Political Par¬ ties: The Case of Polarized Pluralism,” in LaPalombara and Weiner, pp. 137-76. 58. LaPalombara and Weiner, p. 25. 59. Ibid., p. 3. 60. Ibid., p. 6.
61. See, for example, Namier, The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George IIP, and Rustow, The Politics of
Compromise: A Study of Parties and Cabinet Government in Sweden. 62. LaPalombara and Weiner, p. 13. 63. Ibid., p. 18.
64. Lijphart, pp. 3-44. 65. David Apter (in The Political
Kingdom in Uganda) is cited by Lijphart as using the term “consociational” to
apply to a system in which “constituent units do not lose their identity when
Notes to Pages 12-25
merging in some form of union.” By and
large, the emphasis in the Apter formu¬ lation is on structural characteristics,
which range from loose alliances to fed¬
eralism. 66. Lijphart, “Typologies of Democrat¬
ic Systems,” pp. 22-23. 67. Lehmbruch, p. 3.
68. Binder, p. 54. 69. Horowitz, “Political Legitimacy,”
p. 48. 70. Janowitz, p. 29. 71. Stanley Hoffman, “Heroic Leader¬ ship: The Case of Modern France,” in Edinger, p. 115. His concept of “homeo
rhetic change” is similar to the mecha¬ nism suggested here. 72. Pye, “Typologies and Political De¬
velopment,” p. rx.
73. Riggs, pp. 411-12. 74. Apter, “A Comparative Method for the Study of Politics,” p. 223. 75. Almond and Powell, pp. 39-40. 76. See the Conclusion in Ward and Rustow, Political Modernization in fapan and Turkey. 77. Godoy and Fortin, p. 13. 78. For a similar application, see Grossholtz, p. 5. 79. Hoffman, in Edinger, p. 112.
80. Rosenau, p. 65. 8r. Godoy and Fortin, p. 13. 82. For an excellent corrective to the
usual assumptions, see Myrdahl, Asian Drama, Vol. I, Pt. III. 83. Apter, “Political Systems and De¬ velopmental Change,” p. 18. He notes
that the long-term prospect in moderniz¬ ing countries is a constant shifting be¬ tween bureaucratic and reconciliation
types. 84. Lucian Pye, Politics, Personality and Nation-Building (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962), p. 44.
85. Lester G. Seligman, “Elite Re¬ cruitment and Political Development,” in Finkle and Gable, pp. 329-30.
86. See Almond, “A Developmental
Approach to Political Systems,” in Finkle and Gable, pp. 116-18.
87. Almond and Powell, p. 14.


337
Notes to Pages 25-53
88. Apter, Politics of Modernization,
PP- 131-3789. Ibid., p. 137.
90. Riggs, Chap. 4.
1. The Character of Gree\ Society
1. This parliamentarian was one of our sample of 55.
2. Banfield, p. 87. 3. Tarrow, p. 59.
4. Banfield, p. 10.
5. Tarrow, p. 56.
6. Banfield, pp. 139-40. 7. Almond and Powell, p. 207. 8. Banfield, p. 17.
9. See, for example: Boorsdn, Colonial
Experience and National Experiment; and Potter, People of Plenty. 10. Pitt-Rivers, p. 139. ix. Ibid., p. 154.
12. Ibid., p. 108. 13. Ibid.,p. 141.
14. Tarrow, p. 68. 15. Wylie, p. 41.
16. Petropulos, p. 53. 17. Ibid., p. 236.
18. Grossholtz, pp. 86-91, 184. 19. Almond and Powell, p. 209. 20. Tarrow, p. 56. 21. Sanders, p. 15.
22. Grossholtz, p. 90. 23. Sanders, p. 12. 24. Banfield, pp. 146-52. 25. Friedl, Vasilipa, pp. 80-81. 26. Ibid., p. 18. 27. Petropulos, p. 56.
28. Friedl, Vasilika, pp. 49-51. 29. Petropulos, p. 56. 30. Friedl, Vasili\a, p. 31. 31. Ibid., p. 14. 32. Friedl, “Hospital Care,” p. 25.
33. Sanders, pp. 127-28. 34. Easton, p. 40.
35. Campbell, pp. 218-23. 36. Petropulos, p. 59. 37. Sanders, p. 283-94.
38. Friedl, Vasili\a, pp. 34-35. 39. Friedl, “The Role of Kinship,”
P- 34
40. Moustaka, p. 14.
2. The Development of the Modern Gree\ State
1. This chapter is a survey only. For
more detailed accounts, see: Finlay, His¬ tory of the Gree\ Revolution-, Kaltchas,
Introduction to the Constitutional His¬ tory of Modern Greece-, Petropulos, Poli¬ tics and Statecraft in the Kingdom of Greece, 1833-1843-, and Woodhouse, The Gree\ War of Independence.
2. Woodhouse, pp. 24-25. 3. Ibid., p. 26. 4. Ibid., p.35. 5. Ibid.
6. Petropulos, pp. 38-39. 7. Ibid., p. 36. 8. Kaltchas, pp. 9-10. 9. Petropulos, p. 102. 10. Woodhouse, p. 36. 11. Petropulos, p. 72. 12. Ibid., pp. 48-49.
13. Woodhouse, pp. 43-47. 14. Forester, p. 9.
15. Petropulos, p. 41. 16. See, for example, Woodhouse,
P-4i17. Petropulos, pp. 39-40. 18. Ibid., p. 25. 19. Ibid., p. 37. 20. Ibid., p. 41. 21. Woodhouse, p. 57. 22. Petropulos, p. 29. 23. Ibid., pp. 27-28. 24. Ibid., p. 34. 25. Kaltchas, p. 30. 26. Petropulos, p. 33. 27. Kaltchas, p. 37. 28. Petropulos, p. 20. 29. Woodhouse, pp. 94-95. 30. Petropulos, p. 109. 31. Ibid., p. 108.
32. Finlay, II, 109. 33. Petropulos, p. 119. 34. Finlay, II, 227. 35. Kaltchas, p. 37. 36. Petropulos, pp. 175-80. 37. Ibid., p. 193. 38. Ibid., p. 213.


33^ Notes to Pages 54-69
Average or Countries Rank, of Item percentage sampled Greece
Population living in cities of over 20,000 Average annual increase in population of
37.4% 120 24
cities over 20,000 0.6% 50 10 Percentage of population in armed forces (1959) 1-7% Percentage of eligible population voting in election
88 13
of 1958 73.3% 100 35 Newspaper circulation per 1,000 population 125.0 125 35 Items of domestic mail per capita 23.0 76 34 Radios per 1,000 population 89.9* 118 46 Annual cinema attendance per capita Students in higher educational institutions per
6.3 104 46
1,000 students (1960) Percentage of population 5-19 in primary and
320.0 105 39
secondary schools 53.0% 125 49 Percent literacy in population 15 or older 80.0% 118 35
* The average annual increase in radios per capita was 7.3%.
39. Ibid., p.215. 40. Ibid., pp. 270-71. 41. Ibid., p. 373.
42. Ibid., p. 441. 43. Kaltchas, p. 98. 44. Petropulos, p. 455. 45. Kaltchas, p. in. 46. Ibid. 47. For the Cretan rebellion of 1866, see Stillman, The Cretan Insurrection of 1866-J-8. For the decade of the 1890’s, see Howard, Theatre of Life, Vol. II; and Pallis, The Cretan Drama: The Life and Memoirs of Prince George of Greece. 48. Chandler, p. 199. 49. For a discussion of events causing the emancipation of women in a similar setting, see Frey, p. 151.
50. See: Eddy, Greece and the Greek. Refugees; Pallis, Greece’s Anatolian Ven¬
ture; the League of Nations, Greek Refu¬ gee Settlement; and Pentzopoulos, The Balkan Exchange of Minorities and Its Impact Upon Greece. 51. McNeill, p. 51.
52. Woodhouse, p. 60.
53. Moustaka, The Internal Migrant, p. 62.
54. Russett, et al., World Handbook of Political and Social Indicators. Accord¬
ing to these data, which rely on materials
prior to 1961, Greece ranked in various aspects of modernization as shown in the
tabulation above.
5. The International Factor
1. This is not to imply that systemic
factors are not recognized in the study of comparative politics. Studies of indi¬ vidual countries, however, although pay¬
ing homage to external variables, gen¬ erally proceed on the assumption that domestic politics are self-contained. 2. For a good example, see Chaconas, Adamantios Korais. 3. Pallis, Greece’s Anatolian Venture,
p. 1. 4. Rosenau, p. 65. 5. Petropulos, p. 44. 6. Kaltchas, p. 87. 7. Petropulos, p. 48.
8. Kaltchas, p. 103. 9. Petropulos, pp. 145-46. 10. Ibid., p. 166.
11. Kaltchas, p. 103. 12. Petropulos, p. 431.
13. Prince Alfred got 230,000 out of 240,000 votes. See Mavrogordato, p. 56.
14. Daphnes, Ta Helleni\aPoliti\a Kommata, Chap. 7.
15. Petropulos, pp. 434-38.


339
Notes to Pages 69-102
16. Levandis, p. ix.
17. Pepelasis, p. 173. 18. Levandis, p. ix.
19. Break and Turvey, p. 207. 20. For two views of Allied activities in Greece during World War I, see Thomson, The Allied Secret Service in
Greece, and MacKenzie, Gree\ Memo¬ ries.
21. Pentzopoulos, pp. 41-45.
22. Sakellaropoulos, He S\ia tes Duseos.
23. See Barros, The Corfu Incident of 1923.
24. Xydis, p. 5. 25. Ibid., Chaps. I and II. 26. Ibid., p. 40. 27. Ibid., p. 105. 28. Ibid., p. 263. 29. Sweet-Escott, p. 63. 30. McNeill, p. 67.
31. Rousseas, p. 31. 32. McNeill, pp. 67-71.
33. Xydis, Chap. IV, describes the de¬ velopment of postwar territorial claims. 34. Rousseas gives an account of die coup and the events leading to it as a convinced Papandreou supporter. Later
events have made his comments on the role of the monarch in the coup question¬ able.
35. Rousseas, pp. 31-35. 36. New Yor\ Times, May 21,1967,
P- 337. Pentzopoulos, Chap. III. 38. Cited in Xydis, p. 57. 39. See Appendix A for the Interview Schedule. 40. Several deputies had photographic
displays of themselves with prominent American or European political personal¬
ities in their offices. 41. Hanrieder, p. 977.
4. Consensus and Dissensus
1. Strong, p. 3. 2. Deutsch, Nationalism and Social Communication, p. 105.
3. Deutsch, et al., pp. 26-41. 4. Deutsch, p. 188.
5. Fairchild, p. 6.
6. Petropulos, p. 20. 7. Ibid., p. 35.
8. See Bent, The Cyclades. 9. Petropulos, p. 19. 10. Rodd, pp. 52-54.
11. See Kirkwall, Four Years in the Ionian Islands, Vols. I and II. 12. Rodd, p. 53. 13. See Chap. 2, Note 47.
14. See Wace and Thompson, Nomads of the Balkans; and Campbell, Honour, Family and Patronage.
15. During World War I, the clergy
was split into pro-Venizelist and proConstantine factions. During the Ger¬ man occupation, several clerics were ac¬ cused of collaboration. Similarly, in the civil-war period, there were several bish¬ ops involved in the Communist-domi¬ nated groups. In the recent upheaval, the church hierarchy was again reshuffled, at least in part for political reasons. 16. For an example, see Sanders, p. 25. He notes that the ancient god Helios has been replaced by St. Elijah. 17. Ibid., p. 263.
18. Ibid., p. 260. 19. Ibid., p. 254. 20. Friedl, Vasiliha, p. 56. 21. /bid., p. 46. 22. Peaslee, Constitutions of Nations,
II,9i. 23. See Sanders, p. 251, for a table showing the distribution of hours among
the various subjects in the Greek school curriculum. 24. Lasswell and Kaplan, p. 126. 25. Almond and Verba, pp. 17-18. 26. Munkman, p. 101.
5. Interest Groups
1. Almond and Powell, p. 75. 2. Weiner, pp. 37-38. 3. Tarrow, p. 40. 4. Almond and Powell, p. 78. 5. Ibid. 6. Cf. Grossholtz, p. 243. 7. Almond and Powell,
pp. 76-77


340
8. Tarrow, p. 69. 9. Binder, p. 153. 10. LaPalombara, p. 285. 11. Weiner, p. 13.
12. Almond and Powell, p. 75. 13. Weiner, pp. 32-34. 14. LaPalombara, p. 196. 15. Grossholtz, p. 236. 16. Almond and Powell, p. 83. 17. Weiner, p. 16. 18. See Pepelasis, “The Legal System and the Economic Development of
Greece.” 19. Dahl, p. 226. 20. For a general survey, see Break and
Turvey. 21. Ibid., p. 121. 22. Ibid., p. 38. 23. Strong, p. 119. 24. Statistical Yearboo\ of Greece, 1963,
p. 261. 25. Alexander, p. 29. 26. Ibid., p. 48. 27. Break and Turvey, pp. 24-28 and Chap. 7. 28. See Binder, p. 140, for a similar case. 29. Alexander, p. 77. 30. For more detailed information con¬ cerning the connections between Greek banking and industry, see Meynaud, pp. 356-65. 31. Psilos, pp. 204-5. 32. Ibid., p. 187.
33. Bower and Bolitho, p. 56. 34. Break and Turvey, p. 35. 35. Kayser and Thomas, p. 222. 36. Pentzopoulos, p. 229. 37. Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1961, p. 158. 38. Ibid., 1963, p. 137.
39. Coutsoumaris, Morphology of Gree\ Industry, p. 65.
40. Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1963,
P- 14341. Ibid., p. 261.
42. Ibid.
43. Kousoulas, p. 32. 44. Meynaud, p. 376. 45. Tarrow, p. 35.
Notes to Pages 102-35
46. Sanders, p. 209. 47. Ibid., p. 238.
48. Weiner, p. 13. 49. Campbell, p. 230.
50. Sanders, p. 304. 51. Campbell, pp. 235-40.
52. Weiner, p. 31. 53. Grossholtz, p. 243.
54. Sanders, p. 198. 55. Ibid., p. 199.
56. Ibid., pp. 195-96. 57. Weiner, p. 120. 58. LaPalombara, pp. 83-84. 59. Weiner, p. 16. 60. Grossholtz, p. 243. 6r. Weiner, p. 70. 62. Grossholtz, p. 6. 63. LaPalombara, p. 10. 64. Binder, p. 227.
6. Political Parties
1. LaPalombara and Weiner, p. 3. 2. Ibid., p. 6. 3. Ibid., p. 5. 4. Ibid., p. 7.
5. Weber, ‘Tolitics as a Vocation,” in Gerth and Wright, pp. 102-7; Duverger, pp. xxiii-xxxvii.
6. Petropulos, pp. 501-15. 7. See Daphnes, Ta Helleni\a Politiha
Kommata, for a historical survey of Greek parties.
8. LaPalombara and Weiner, pp. 14-20. 9. Ibid., p. 17.
10. For a thorough survey of the inter¬ war period, see Daphnes, He Hellas metaxu Duo Polemon.
11. Riggs, p.132.
12. The material on party organization is summarized from Meynaud, pp. 233
53 for the ERE and pp. 273-77 f°r the EK.
13. Interview with Panayotis Kanellopoulos, March 25,1965.
14. For a full listing, see Meynaud, pp. 467-83.
15. See, for example: Weiner, p. 13; Key, p. 37; Tarrow, p. 78; and Clubok, “Political Party Membership and Sub


34i
Notes to Pages 135-95
leadership in Rural Japan,” in Silberman and Harootunian, Modern Japanese Lead¬ ership.
16. Stycos, p. 59. 17. Friedl, Vasilina, pp. 94-96.
18. See Daphnes, Ta Helleni\a Politiha Kommata, pp. 179-90, for the period 1926-58. Data from official election re¬
turns were used for the years 1961 through 1964.
19. Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1962,
P- 3l620. U.S. Department of State report, p. 14. 21. For a detailed, documented report (although from a partisan source) on the election irregularities in 1961, see Mavri Biblos. 22. Scalapino and Masumi, p. 67, note that the major difference between the two conservative parties in postwar Japan was also personal and factional. 23. Key, p. 304. 24. The survey of party policies is con¬ densed from Meynaud, pp. 254-58 for the ERE and pp. 287-91 for the EK. 25. Heurtley, et al., p. 169. 26. See, for example, the short sum¬ mary prepared by Paul A. Samuelson, “The Greek Tragedy,” Newsweek, May
22, 1967, p. 89. 27. Key, p. 307. 28. Russett, et al., p. 108. 29. U.S. Department of State report,
p. 14.
7. Politics at the Parliamentary Level
1. For a discussion of the decline of legislatures, see Hitchner and Levine, pp.
154-552. Rose, p. 209.
3. Lijphart, p. 21. 4. Padgett, pp. 82-85.
5. Binder, p. 227. 6. Ibid., Part VI. 7. Grossholtz, p. 6.
8. Ibid., p. 124. 9. Riggs, pp. 232-33.
10. Couloumbis, p. 49. 11. Triantis, Part B, pp. 63-112. 12. See Pepelasis, pp. 173-98. 13. Coutsoumaris, Morphology of Gree\ Industry, p. 21.
14. Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1961, p. 382.
15. Pepelasis, p. 195. 16. See Psilos, Chap. 8. 17. Break and Turvey, p. 60.
18. Riggs, p.308. 19. Coutsoumaris, Morphology of Gree/{ Industry, p. 137. 20. Thompson, p. 23.
21. Riggs, Chap. 9. 22. Break and Turvey, Chap. 2. 23. Riggs, pp. 304-6. 24. Binder, p. 229. 25. Petropulos, p. 214. The early Greek
political leaders viewed rules, budgets, and changes of government in the same light as their modern heirs. 26. Wahlke, et al., pp. 380-81. 27. Ibid., p. 246.
28. Ibid., pp. 465-68. 29. Ibid., p. 467. 30. Ibid., p. 247. 31. See Vouli Ton Hellenon, To Syn¬ tagma tes Hellados \ai O Kanonismos tes
Voulis. 32. Wahlke, et al., p. 248. 33. Ibid., pp. 277-80. 34. Ibid., p. 272.
8. Politics at the Extraparliamentary Level
1. Janowitz, pp. 5-8. 2. Daphnes, He Hellas metaxu Duo
Polemon, Vols. I and II. 3. O’Ballance, p. 156. 4. Ibid. 5. Janowitz, p. 47. 6. Ibid., p. 74. 7. Meynaud, p. 340.
8. Kaltchas, p. 140. 9. Meynaud, p. 340. 10. Interview with Panayotis Kanello
poulos, March 25, 1965. 11. Kaltchas, p. 141.


342
12. For a full discussion of precedent and constitutional interpretation in light
of the 1965 controversy, see Foseis ten Politikin Krisin Pou Syne\lonisi ten Hel
lada. 13. Chandler, p. 21.
14. Kousoulas, p. 237. 15. Meynaud, pp. 195-97. This mate¬ rial was supplemental to an interview
with the press secretary of the EDA. 16. EDA, Weekly Press Bulletin 227
(Feb. 11,1965), p. 3. 17. Meynaud, p. 217. 18. As set forth in United Democratic Left, For a National Democratic Change.
See also Meynaud, pp. 202-4. 19. Peaslee, p. 109. 20. EDA, Weekly Press Bulletin 278 (April 28,1966), p. 7. 21. United Democratic Left, p. 19. 22. See, for example, S. G. Triantis, Common Market and Economic Develop¬
ment. 23. United Democratic Left, p. 56. 24. Burks, p. 70. 25. The figures for 1936-58 are found in Daphnes, Ta Hellenika Politika Kommata, pp. 184-90. The figures for 1961 through 1964 come from official election
records. 26. The figures were: N = 147, r = .27, P < .05. Correlation analysis using area in cash crops such as wheat, tobacco,
and cotton did not produce significant correlations. Even rural population per square kilometer is a poor indicator, since only 7 per cent of the variance is so ex¬ plained.
27. Pentzopoulos, Chap. 4. 28. Alexander, p. 62. 29. Pentzopoulos, pp. 182-83.
30. Daphnes, Ta Hellenika Politika Kommata, Chap. 10.
31. Burks, p. 58.
32. Pentzopoulos, p. 189. 33. Ibid., p. 186, provided figures for 1922-33. Figures for 1946, 1958, and 1964 were computed from biographical rec¬
ords in the personnel office of parliament. The data for 1936 were incomplete.
Notes to Pages 196-230
34. Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1963,
PP- 32-33- N = 42,r = .22. 35. Kayser and Thompson, p. 404.
N = 147, r = .010. 36. Burks, p. 40. 37. Moustaka, pp. 69-70. 38. Calculated from election statistics
in the period. 39. LaPalombara, p. 90. 40. Janowitz, p. 16.
41. New York Times, June 4,1951,
p. 11. 42. Couloumbis, p. 37. 43. Calculated from data in Statistical
Yearbook of Greece, 1967, p. 330. 44. Couloumbis, p. 187.
9. Military Oligarchy:
The Coup of 196J
1. See Janowitz, The Military in the
Political Development of New Nations.
2. Rousseas, p. 28. 3. Ibid., p. 30. 4. Ibid. 5. Ibid., p. 39. 6. Ibid., pp. 46-47. 7. Christian Science Monitor, Apr. 29,
1967, p. 4. 8. New York Times, Apr. 24,1967,
p. 1. 9. According to C. L. Sulzberger in
the New York Times, May 3, 1967, p. 44. 10. New York Times, Mar. 3,1968,
p. 28. 11. Time, Apr. 28,1967, p. 29. 12. Statement of Premier Kollias broad¬ cast on the day of the coup. Quoted in Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, Vol.
XVI (1967-68), p. 22024.
13. New York Times, May 1,1967, p. 2. 14. Ibid., May 3,1967, p. 4. 15. Horowitz, p. 270.
16. New York Times, May 6, 1967, p. 1. 17. Ibid., May 12,1967, p. 1. 18. See Rousseas, Part II; and New
York Times, May 7, 1967, IV, 4.
19. New York Times, May 20,1967, p. 14.
20. lbid.,Mzy 16,1967,9. 18.


343
Notes to Pages 230-64
21. Rousseas, p. 27.
22. Smith Hempstone, “Greece,” Atlan¬ tic, July 1967, p. 2i.
23. New Yorft Times, Apr. 26, 1967, p. 1. 24. Ibid., Oct. 15,1967, p. E5.
25. Ibid., June 25,1967, p. 20.
26. Ibid., Apr. 28,1967, p. 3. 27. Ibid., Oct. 8,1967, p. x.
28. Washington Post, June 24, 1968, p. A2 r.
29. New Yorl\ Times, June 1,1967, p. 6.
30. Christian Science Monitor, Apr. 29,
1967, P-431. New Yor\ Times, May 6, 1967, p. 1. 32. Quoted by C. L. Sulzberger in the New Yor\ Times, May 7, 1967, p. 10. 33. New Yor\ Times, June 2,1967, p. 16. 34. Ibid., Oct. 8,1967, p. 4. 35. Ibid., May 15,1967, p. 13. 36. Ibid., May 11,1967, p. 1. 37. Ibid., May 3,1967, p. 1. 38. Ibid., Apr. 30,1967, p. 1. 39. Ibid., June 4,1967, p. 1.
40. Ibid., Mar. 3,1968, p. 22. 41. Ibid.
42. Ibid., June 3,1967, p. 5. 43. Ibid., June 15, 1967, p. 3. 44. Ibid., June 27,1967, p. 6. 45. Ibid., June 25,1967, p. 8.
46. Christian Science Monitor, Apr. 29, 1967, p. 4.
47. Psilos and Westebbe, p. 6. 48. Statement of Premier Kollias, print¬ ed in Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, XVI (1967-68)^. 22025.
49. New Yor\ Times, May 15,1967,
P- 1350. Ibid., May 28,1967, p. 14. 51. Ibid. 52. Ibid., May 7, 1967, p. 1.
53. Shils, “The Military in the Political Development of the New States,” in John¬ son, p. 58.
54. See Scalapino and Masumi, pp. 19-20. 55. New Yor\ Times, May 18,1967,
p. 12.
56. Ibid., Apr. 28,1967, p. 3.
57. Ibid., May 28,1967, p. 14. 58. Lucian Pye, “The Army in Burmese Politics,” in Johnson, p. 232.
59. Washington Post, June 24, 1968, p. A21.
60. New Yorl( Times, May 9,1967, p. 1.
61. To Vima, Oct. 1, 1968, p. 1.
10. Socialization and the Family
1. Pye, Politics, Personality and Nation Building, pp. 44-45. 2. Wahlke, et al., pp. 77-78.
3. The comparative data in this and the following tables, unless otherwise noted, are drawn from Wahlke, et al., Chap. 4. The states considered were New Jersey, California, Tennessee, and Ohio. The individual state totals were used to compute an overall average. 4. Wahlke, et al., p. 82. 5. See Barber, The Lawmakers. This figure was computed from tables giving political background data for each of Barber’s four types of legislators. 6. Wahlke, et al., p. 91. 7. Edinger and Searing, p. 437.
8. The Kennedys, Rockefellers, and Roosevelts come immediately to mind. However, the most spectacular examples would seem to be in transitional societies: for example, the succession of Mrs. Indira Gandhi in India. D. S. Senanayake, the first prime minister of Ceylon, was suc¬ ceeded first by his son and then by his nephew. When S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike died in the same office, having no brother and a young son, his wife became prime minister. 9. Namier, p. 4. 10. Ibid., p. 168. 11. Ranney, p. 113. 12. Dogan, “Political Ascent in a Class Society,” in Marvick, pp. 57-90.
13. Ibid., pp. 84-85. 14. A. B. Clubok, Forrest Berghorn, and Norman Wilensky, “Family Rela¬ tionships, Congressional Recruitment, and


344
Political Modernization.” Unpublished
paper, Department of Political Science,
University of Florida. 15. Two cases have already been men¬ tioned: Eleutherios Venizelos was suc¬ ceeded by his son Sophocles as leader of
the Liberals; more recently, Andreas Papandreou was gradually assuming more and more of his father’s power. 16. Barber, The Lawmakers-, compiled from background data given for his four
legislative types. 17. Wahlke, et al., p. 82. 18. Marvick, p. 85. 19. Ibid. 20. Grossholtz, p. 227. 21. Singer, pp. 101-2. 22. McCracken, p. 90.
11. Occupational Backgrounds
and Local Connections
1. These particular distinctions are used, respectively, by the following au¬ thors: Dogan, “Political Ascent in a Class Society,” in Marvick, pp. 57-90; Loewenberg, Parliament and the German Polit¬ ical System; and Buck, Amateurs and Professionals in British Politics,1918-1959.
2. Marvick, p. 72. 3. Ibid. 4. See Loewenberg, pp. 109-10, for a summary. 5. Akzin, p. 577. 6. Loewenberg, p. no. 7. Berrington and Finer, p. 610. 8. Loewenberg, p. 62. 9. Marvick, p. 90. 10. Loewenberg, p. no.
11. Scalapino and Masumi, p. 176. 12. Tarrow, pp. 83-84. 13. Frey, p. 181. 14. The number of lawyers in the
United States Congress—65 per cent in the Senate and 55 per cent in the House —is substantially higher than in most other western parliamentary bodies.
However, there is a substantial difference between American lawyers and their
Notes to Pages 265-96
Greek counterparts in terms of differen¬ tiation and representation. See Loewen¬
berg, p. 109. 15. Thompson, p. 20.
16. Ferriman, pp. 4-5.
17. Tarrow, p. 62. 18. Wahlke, et al., p. 488. 19. Loewenberg, p. 75. 20. Hamon, p. 548. 21. Sartori, p. 587.
22. Ranney, pp. 38,151. 23. Frey, p. 187. 24. Ibid., p. 188.
25. Ibid., p. 192. 26. Ranney, p. 78.
27. Berrington and Finer, p. 607. 28. Hamon, p. 557.
29. Loewenberg, p. 51. 30. Harold D. Lasswell, quoted in
Wahlke, et al., p. 73. 31. Wahlke, et al., p. 96.
32. Ranney, pp. 108,197. 33. Scalapino and Masumi, pp. 171,
r7334. Frey, p. 98.
35. Loewenberg, p. 93. 36. Dogan, p. 79.
37. Compiled from incidental ma¬ terials.
38. Calculated from data in Odigos, i960,1963, and 1964. 39. Ibid.
40. Calculated from data in Odigos for 1963 and 1964, and from records of the Ministry of the Interior for 1954.
41. In 1961, some 82 per cent of the Greek population was literate. Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1963, p. 77. The
same volume (p. 108) reported a total of 97,600 graduates of higher educational institutions, including teacher training
institutes; of these, 56,600 were in the Athens metropolitan area.
12. The Political Elite
1. See Pye and Verba, Political Culture and Political Development.
2. Nordlinger, p. 496.


Notes to Pages 296-316
3. Portions of this chapter appeared in my article “Political Recruitment and
Political Crises: The Case of Greece,” Comparative Political Studies, I (Jan. 1969).
4. See Schlesinger, Ambition and Pol¬ itics.
5. Heidenheimer, p. 127. 6. Blondel and Godfrey, p. 50. 7. Moodie, p. 75.
8. For an excellent discussion of turn¬ over and opportunity, see Schlesinger, Chap. 3. 9. Guttsman, p. 79. 10. Edinger, p. 289. 11. Lerner, p. 399.
12. In 1961 there were 97,600 gradu¬ ates of higher educational institutions, including teacher training institutes. Of these, 56,600 were in the Athens metro¬ politan area. Statistical Yearbook of
Greece, 1963. 13. A total of 931 persons held cabinet rank from 1843 to 1965. Some social back¬
ground information was secured for al¬ most all of them. The gaps were largely in biographies for early ministers and for ministers who had served in nonpolitical, service governments. The calculation of general trends was made with data for the full cabinet membership. Biographi¬ cal information on early cabinet minis¬
345
ters came from Megale Helleni\e En\ylo
paideia. For recent cabinet ministers, the 1962 and 1965 editions of Ellini\on Who’s Who were used. The records in the per¬ sonnel division of the Greek parliament were also used for data on ministers after 1936. 14. For additional discussion of occu¬
pation and politics, see Matthews, U.S. Senators and Their World, Chap. 2. 15. It is probable that the category of “politician” is a function of the biograph¬
ical sources. When a biographer surveys a man’s entire career, he is likely to clas¬ sify the man as a politician; however, when a man has assessed his own occupa¬ tion, as is the case for much of the recent source material used here, he is more likely to have listed one of the liberal pro¬
fessions. 16. See Daphnes, Ta Helleni\a Politika
Kommata, Chaps. 8-9. 17. Guttsman, p. ior.
18. Wahlke, et al., p. 82. 19. Ward, p. 8. 20. Ibid., p. 10. 21. Westebbe, p. 10. 22. Coutsoumaris, Morphology of Gree\ Industry, p. 249.
23. Weiner, pp. 238-39. 24. Triantis, p. 58. 25. Ibid., p. 59.




Bibliography




Bibliography
Ailianou, Tsingou D. The Greek Governments and Presidencies of Parliament and Senate, 1926-1959. Athens, 1959.
Akzin, Benjamin. “The Knesset,” International Social Science Journal, XIII, No. 4 (1961).
Alexander, Alec. Greek Industrialists. Athens: Center for Economic Research, 1964.
Almond, Gabriel A., and G. Bingham Powell, Jr. Comparative Politics: A Develop¬ mental Approach. Boston: Little, Brown, 1966.
- and James S. Coleman, eds. The Politics of the Developing Areas. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, i960. - and Sidney Verba. The Civic Culture. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Apter, David E. “Political Systems and Developmental Change.” A paper presented at the Seventh World Congress of the International Political Science Association, 1967. - The Politics of Modernization (Phoenix ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1967. - The Political Kingdom in Uganda: A Study in Bureaucratic Nationalism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961. - “A Comparative Method for the Study of Politics,” American Journal of Soci¬
ology, LXIV (Nov. 1958).
Banfield, Edward C. The Moral Basis of a Backward Society (paperback edition). New
York: Free Press, 1967. Barber, James D. The Lawmakers. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1965. Barros, James. The Corfu Incident of 1923. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1965. Bent, J. Theodore. The Cyclades. London: Longmans, Green, 1885. Berrington, H. B., and S. E. Finer. “The British House of Commons,” International
Social Science Journal, XII, No. 4 (1961). Binder, Leonard. Iran: Political Development in a Changing Society. Berkeley: Uni¬
versity of California Press, 1962. Blondel, Jean, and E. Drexel Godfrey, Jr. The Government of France. New York:
Crowell, 1968. Boorstin, Daniel J. The Americans: The Colonial Experience. New York: Random
House, 1958. - The Americans: The National Experiment. New York: Random House, 1965. Break, George, and Ralph Turvey. Studies in Greek Taxation. Athens: Center for
Economic Research, 1964. Buck, Philip W. Amateurs and Professionals in British Politics, 1918-1959. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1963.


350 Bibliography
Burks, R. V. The Dynamics of Communism in Eastern Europe. Princeton, N.J.: Prince¬
ton University Press, 1961.
Campbell, J. K. Honour, Family, and Patronage. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964. Carey, Andrew G., and Jane P. Clark Carey. The Web of Modern Greek Politics. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1968. Chaconas, Stephen C. Adamantios Korias. New York: Columbia University Press, 1942.
Chambers, William N. Political Parties in a New Nation: The American Experience,
1776-1809. New York: Oxford University Press, 1963. Chandler, Geoffrey. The Divided Land. London: Macmillan, 1959. Couloumbis, Theodore A. Greek Political Reaction to American and NATO Influ¬
ences. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1966. Coutsoumaris, George. Analysis and Assessment of the Economic Effects of US PL 480.
Athens: Center for Economic Research, 1965. - The Morphology of Greek Industry. Athens: Center for Economic Research,
i963Curtis, Michael. Comparative Government and Politics. New York: Harper, 1968.
Dahl, Robert. Who Governs? New Haven: Yale University Press, 1961. Daphnes, Gregory. He Hellas metaxu Duo Polemon, 1923-1940. Athens: Ikaros, 1955.
2 vols. - Ta Hellenika Politika Kommata. Athens: Galaxias, 1961. de Schwienitz, Karl. Industrialization and Democracy. New York: Free Press, 1964. Deutsch, Karl W. Nationalism and Social Communication (2d ed.). Cambridge, Mass.:
M.I.T. Press, 1966. -et al. “Political Community and the North Atlantic Area,” reprinted in Inter¬ national Political Communities: An Anthology. Garden City: Anchor Books, 1966.
Duverger, Maurice. Political Parties. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1955.
Easton, David. A Systems Analysis of Political Life. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1965. Eddy, Charles B. Greece and the Greek Refugees. London: Allen and Unwin, 1931.
Edinger, Lewis J., ed. Political Leadership in Industrialized Societies. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1967. Edinger, Lewis J., and Donald D. Searing. “Social Background in Elite Analysis: A
Methodological Enquiry,” American Political Science Review, LXI (June 1967).
Fairchild, Henry Pratt. Greek Immigration to the United States. New Haven: Yale University Press, 19 n.
Ferriman, Z. Duckett. Home Life in Hellas. London: Mills and Boon, 1910.
Finkle, Jason, and Richard Gable, eds. Political Development and Social Change. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1966.
Finlay, George. History of the Greek Revolution. London: Blackwood, 1861. 2 vols.
Forester, Edward S. A Short History of Modern Greece (2d ed.). London: Methuen, 1958.
Foseis ten Politikin Krisin Pou Syneklonisi ten Hellada. Athens: Istorika Ekthoseis, 1965.
Frey, Frederick W. The Turkish Political Elite. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965. Friedl, Ernestine. “Hospital Care in Provincial Greece,” Human Organization, XVI (winter 1958).


Bibliography 351
- “The Role of Kinship in the Transmission of National Culture to Rural Vil¬ lages in Mainland Greece,” American Anthropologist, LXI (Feb. 1959).
- Vasilika: A Village in Modern Greece. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Win¬ ston, 1962.
Gerth, Hans, and C. Wright Mills, eds. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (Galaxy ed.). New York: Oxford University Press, 1958.
Ginsburg, Norton. Atlas of Economic Development. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961.
Godoy, Horacio H., and Carlos Fortin. “Some Suggestions for a Typology of Latin American Political Systems.” A paper presented to the Seventh World Congress of the International Political Science Association, 1967.
Greece, Parliament of. To Syntagma tes Hellados kai O Kanonismos tes Voulis. Athens, 1958.
Grossholtz, Jean. Politics in the Philippines. Boston: Little, Brown, 1964.
Guttsman, W. L. The British Political Elite. London: MacGibbon and Kee, 1963.
Hamon, Leo. “Members of the French Parliament,” International Social Science Jour¬ nal, XIII, No. 4 (1961).
Hanrieder, Wolfram F. “Compatibility and Consensus: A Proposal for the Conceptual Linkage of External and Internal Dimensions of Foreign Policy,” American Po¬ litical Science Review, LXI (Dec. 1967).
Heidenheimer, Arnold J. The Governments of Germany, 2d ed. New York: Crowell, 1966.
Heurtley, W. A., H. C. Darby, C. W. Crawley, and C. M. Woodhouse. A Short History of Greece from Early Times to 1964. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press,
1965. Hitchner, Dell G., and Carol Levine. Comparative Government and Politics. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1967. Horowitz, Irving L. “Political Legitimacy and the Institutionalization of Crisis,” Com¬ parative Political Studies, I (Apr. 1968). - Three Worlds of Development. New York: Oxford University Press, 1966. Howard, Esme (Lord Howard of Penrith). Theatre of Life, Vol. II. London: Hodder
and Staughton, 1936.
Janowitz, Morris. The Military in the Political Development of New Nations. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1964. Johnson, John J., ed. The Role of the Military in Underdeveloped Countries. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1962.
Kaltchas, Nicholas. Introduction to the Constitutional History of Modern Greece. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1940. Kayser, Bernard, and Kenneth Thompson. Economic and Social Atlas of Greece.
Athens: Center for Economic Research, 1964.
Key, V. O., Jr. Southern Politics. New York: Knopf, 1949. Kirkwall, Viscount. Four Years in the Ionian Islands, Vols. I and II. London: Chapman
and Hall, 1864. Kousoulas, Dimitrios. Revolution and Defeat. London: Oxford University Press, 1965. Ktenavea, S. Ai Hellenika Kuverneseis ai Ethnika Syneleuseis Kai ta Dimopsifismeta
apo to 1821 mechri Simeron. Athens, 1947.


^2 Bibliography
LaPalombara, Joseph. Interest Groups in Italian Politics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1964. - and Myron Weiner, eds. Political Parties and Political Development. Prince¬
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1966. Lasswell, Harold D., and Abraham Kaplan. Power and Society. New Haven: Yale Uni¬
versity Press, 1965. League of Nations. Greek Refugee Settlement. Geneva, 1926. Lehmbruch, Gerhard. “A Non-Competitive Pattern of Conflict Management in Liberal Democracies: The Case of Switzerland, Austria, and Lebanon.” A paper presented
at the Seventh World Congress of the International Political Science Association,
I9^7Lerner, Daniel. The Passing of Traditional Society. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1958. Levandis, John A. The Greek Foreign Debt and the Great Powers, 1821-1898. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1944. Lijphart, Arend. “Typologies of Democratic Systems,” Comparative Political Studies,
I (Apr. 1968). Loewenberg, Gerhard. Parliament in the German Political System. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1966.
MacKenzie, Compton. Greek Memories. London: Chatto and Windus, 1939. Marvick, Dwaine, ed. Political Decision Makers. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1961. Matthews, Donald R. U.S. Senators and Their World. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, i960. Mavri Biblos. Athens: Enosis Kendrou, 1962. Mavrogordato, John. Modern Greece. London: Macmillan, 1931.
McCracken, J. L. Representative Government in Ireland. London: Oxford University Press, 1958. McNeill, William H. Greece: American Aid in Action, 1947-1956. New York: Twen¬ tieth Century Fund, 1957.
Megale Helleni\e En\yXlopaideia. Athens, 1933. Meynaud, Jean. Les Forces politiques en Grece. Lausanne: Etudes de Science Politique,
1965Moodie, Graeme C. The Government of Great Britain (2d ed.). New York: Crowell, 1964.
Moustaka, Calliope. The Internal Migrant. Athens: Social Sciences Center, 1964. Munkman, C. A. American Aid to Greece. New York: Praeger, 1958.
Myrdal Gunnar. Asian Drama: An Enquiry into the Poverty of Nations. New York: Random House, 1968.
Namier, Sir Lewis. The Structure of Politics at the Accession of George III. London: Macmillan, 1957.
Nordlinger, Eric A. “Political Development: Time Sequences and Rates of Change,” World Politics, XX (Apr. 1968).
O’Ballance, Edgar. The Greek Civil War. New York: Praeger, 1966.
Odigos. Athens: published yearly by Ellinikos Organismos Dimosion Skheson “Orizon.”
Padgett, L. Vincent. The Mexican Political System. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1966.
Pallis, A. A. Greece’s Anatolian Venture and After. London: Methuen, 1937.


Bibliography 253
- ed. The Cretan Drama: The Life and Memoirs of Prince George of Greece. New York: Robert Speller and Sons, 1959.
Peaslee, A. J. Constitutions of Nations, Vol. II. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1956.
Pentzopoulos, Dimitri. The Balkan Exchange of Minorities and Its Impact Upon Greece. Paris: Mouton, 1962.
Pepelasis, A. A. “The Legal System and the Economic Development of Greece,” Jour¬ nal of Economic History, XIX (June 1959).
Petropulos, John A. Politics and Statecraft in the Kingdom of Greece, 1833-1843. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1968.
Pitt-Rivers, J. A. The People of the Sierra (Phoenix ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961.
Potter, Charles M. People of Plenty. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1954.
Power, Leonard, and Gordon Bolitho. Otho I, King of Greece. London: Selwyn and Blount, 1899.
Psilos, Diomedes. Capital Market in Greece. Athens: Center for Economic Research, 1964.
- and Richard M. Westebbe. Public International Development Financing in Greece. New York: Columbia University School of Law, 1964.
Pye, Lucian. Politics, Personality, and Nation-Building. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962.
- “Typologies and Political Development.” A paper presented at the Seventh
World Congress of the International Political Science Association, 1967. - and Sidney Verba. Political Culture and Political Development. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1965.
Ranney, Austin. Pathways to Parliament. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press,
I9<55'
Riggs, Fred. Administration in Developing Countries. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1964.
Rodd, Rennell. Customs and Lore of Modern Greece. London: David Stott, 1892. Rose, Richard. Politics in England. Boston: Little, Brown, 1964.
Rosenau, James N. “Pre-Theories and Theories of Foreign Policy,” in R. Barry Farrell,
ed., Approaches to Comparative and International Politics. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1966.
Rousseas, Stephen. The Death of a Democracy: Greece and the American Conscience.
New York: Grove Press, 1967.
Russett, Bruce M. Internadonal Regions and the International System: A Study in Po¬ litical Ecology. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1967.
-, Hayward Alker, Karl Deutsch, and Harold D. Lasswell. World Handbook of
Political and Social Indicators. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964.
Rustow, Dankwart. The Politics of Compromise: A Study of Parties and Cabinet Gov¬
ernment in Sweden. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1955.
Sakellaropoulos, K. M. He Skia tes Duseos (2d ed.). Athens, 1961.
Sanders, Irwin T. Rainbow in the Rock. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1962. Sartori, G. “Parliamentarians in Italy,” International Social Science Journal, XIII, No. 4
(1961). Scalapino, Robert. Democracy and the Party Movement in Prewar Japan. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1953.


354 Bibliography
and Junnosuke Masumi. Parties and Politics in Contemporary Japan. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1962. Schlesinger, Joseph A. Ambition and Politics. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1966. Silberman, Bernard S., and H. D. Harootunian, eds. Modern Japanese Leadership.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1967. Singer, Marshall. The Emerging Elite. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1964.
Statistical Yearbook of Greece, 1956 through 1967. Stillman, W. J. The Cretan Insurrection of 1866-7-8. New York: Henry Holt, 1874.
Strong, Frederick. Greece as a Kingdom. London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Long¬
mans, 1842. Stycos, J. Mayone. “Patterns of Communication in a Rural Greek Village,” Public
Opinion Quarterly, XVI (spring 1952). Sweet-Escott, Bickham. Greece: A Political and Economic Survey, I939_I953- London:
Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1954.
Tarrow, Sidney G. Peasant Communism in Southern Italy. New Haven: Yale Univer¬
sity Press, 1967. Thompson, Kenneth. Farm Fragmentation in Greece. Athens: Center for Economic
Research, 1963. Thomson, Sir Basil. The Allied Secret Service in Greece. London: Hutchinson, 1931. Triantis, S. G. Common Market and Economic Development. Athens: Center for Eco¬
nomic Research, 1965.
United Democratic Left. For a National Democratic Change. Athens, 1961. United States, Department of State. Greek Attitudes Towards the United States, USSR, Great Britain, and France, Report No. 3. New York: Columbia University Bureau of
Applied Social Research, 1951.
Wace, A. J., and M. S. Thompson. Nomads of the Balkans. London: Methuen, 1914. Wahlke, John C., Heinz Eulau, William Buchanan, and LeRoy C. Ferguson. The
Legislative System. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1962. Ward, Benjamin. Greek Regional Development. Athens: Center for Economic Re¬ search, 1963. Ward, Robert, and Dankwart Rustow. Political Modernization in Japan and Turkey. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1964.
Weiner, Myron. The Politics of Scarcity: Public Pressure and Political Response in India. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962. Welch, Claude, ed. Political Modernization. Belmont: Wadsworth, 1967.
Westebbe, Richard. Savings and Investment in Greece. Athens: Center for Economic Research, 1964.
Woodhouse, C. M. The Greek War of Independence. London: Hutchinson, 1952.
Wylie, Laurence. Village in the Vaucluse (rev. ed.). New York: Harper and Row, 1964.
Xydis, Stephen G. Greece and the Great Powers, 1944-1947. Thessaloniki: Institute for Balkan Studies, 1963.


Index




Index
Academic profession, and polidcal careers, 281, 284 Academy of Athens, 100
Administration, see Bureaucracy
Advantaged groups, 106, 110-14, 155~5^See also individual occupations by name
Aegean Islands, 70, 86, 88,161; and politi¬ cal careers, 146,267, 285^ 310
Agrarian Party (Agrot), 147^ 150, 328 Agricultural Bank, 122 Agricultural Chamber, 100 Agricultural police, 135
Agriculture, and development, 23; in Greece, 43, 60-61, 83^ 118-23 passim, 315; and party policy, 106, 109, i55f, 203-9; and junta, 240; Minister of, 240, 243,298 Agrot, see Agrarian Party Akzin, Benjamin, 276
Albanians, in War of Independence, 48, 87 Alexander, Alec, 108 Alexander I, of Russia, 42 Alexandris, Apostolos, 330 Alfred, Prince of England, 66
Ali Pasha, 43 Allies, 58, 7of, 195. See also Foreign pol¬ icy; Great Powers; and individual coun¬ tries by name Almond, Gabriel A.: on development, 3,
32; system models, 11-15 passim, 21, 25; and interest group typology, 98-103 passim; on political culture, 96 Amendments, legislative, 171
Americans, Greek attitudes toward, 75, 229. See also United States Anatolia, see Turkey Andreadis, Stratis, 111
Anomic interest groups, 99. See also Strikes Anti-system party, 197. See also United Democratic Left; Political parties, mod¬ ern
Apter, David: on development, 3; system models, 8-14 passim, 20-25 passim, 336; party typology, 129 Archbishop of Athens, 236 Areal role orientation, 175
Aristocracy, 278. See also Status distinc¬ tions Armatoloi, see Chieftains Armenians, 88 Artists, 106 Aspida affair, 217-25 passim Assimilation, 82-83, 86-90 passim Associational interest groups, 98-124, i8of, 250, 253, 261 Associations, popular distrust of, 101,107,
122-23, l^7 Athanasiadis-Novas, George, 224 Athens-Piraeus: importance, 90, 113, 169, 207; and party competition, 132, 211, 213; and political careers, 146,267,285^
293, 308,310 Atrocities, 64 Austria, 65, 68, 70 Authority: as a variable, 9, 87, 128-29,
I32~33> attitudes toward, 37, 52-55 pas¬ sim, 91-96 passim, 165, 241-42; of
father, 58f
Balkan states, 153^ 230. See also indi¬ vidual states by name Balkan wars, 58, 68, 85-86,188. See also
Turkey Baltadzis, Alexander, 328


Index
358
Banfield, Edward, 3if, 35 Bank of Greece, hi
Bankers, 111, 281,284 Banks, in, 204 Barber, James, 252, 265, 272n Bargaining, 124, i63f. See also Clientage
system Battalions of National Security, see Na¬ tional Security Battalions Bavarians, in Greece, 52-56 passim Binder, Leonard, 20,102,124,164 Bismarck, Otto von, 67 Boulgares, Admiral, 300 “Broker” role orientation, 176,180 Budget, 173,214-18 passim, 222. See also Legislative process; Policy
Bulgaria, 67, 70,154 Bureaucracy: and social groups, 38-39,59, loyf, 110-20 passim, 135; operation, 54, 93-96 passim, 100-105 passim, 120-23, 166-69 passim, 190, 277, 280, 311; and political resources, 57, 8aff, 139, 171-73; recruitment to, 9 if, 94, 292; compared with other states, 103, i64f; and politi¬ cians, in, 165^ 182-83, 218-19, 288; and party policy, i54ff, 166,197-98; and the junta, 235-39 passim; and political
careers, 28if, 284,290-93, 305-6 Bureaucratic model, iof, 25 Burks, R. V., 207, 212 Business: and government, 105-13 pas¬ sim, nyf, 130, 135, 233-34, 240; and political careers, 281,284. See also Com¬ merce Byzantium, 44,46, 57, 68,90,105,278
Cabinet: members’ background, 133-34, 137, 302-11; characteristics, 195, 297301; and policy, 165-68, 189, 221. See also Ministers Cacique, in Mexico, 164 Capodistrias, Count John, 5off, 64 Caretaker government, 111,224 Center: support for, 139, 143^ 153, 159
60, 324-27; as a group, 141; and po¬ litical recruitment, 141-43, 148, 269, 284; and the military, 189, 216-17. See also Center Union Center for Economic Research, 155
Center-periphery cleavage, 90-92, 107,
123,172, 302 Center Union: organization, 129-33, I4&41, 196, 222, 226, 329; candidates and
deputies, 131, 134, 145-48 passim, i5off, 256-64, 269, 284, 290; and the military, 139, 217-18, 221-23, 233; and United Democratic Left, 140, 200-206 passim;
policy, 153-58, 221-22. See also Center Central Intelligence Agency, of Greece,
139 Certificates of Social Conformity, 157,216 Ceylon, family officeholding in, 267,243 Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
100, 106-7 Chamber of Craftsmen, 106-7 Chieftains, in War of Independence, 43f, 48f, 96,311 Churchill, Winston, 72
Civil liberties, 157, 238,245. See also Policy process Civil-military coalition, 15
Civil servants’ union, 104 Civil service, see Bureaucracy
Civil war, 58-59, 73-74,99, 186-96 pas¬ sim, 214, 254. See also Resistance Classical Greece, 90, 278
Cleavages, 81-97,264, 339 Clergy, 44-47 passim, 87,156,204, 339. See also Orthodox church
Clientage system: characteristics, 32-34, 83, ioif, 124, 162; and institutional de¬ velopment, 39, 52-57 passim, 82, 92ff,
121, 126-27, r33> r93> 31U and social change, 94f, 115-23 passim, 154-56, 186, 220, 314; and political parties, 95, 104, 128-43 passim, 149, 152, 159-62 pas¬
sim, 197, 313; and social groupings, 98124 passim, 156, 158; in other political systems, 102, 164^ 119; and bureau¬ cracy, 104, 169, 291; and parliament, 175-85 passim, 251; and the military, 188, 192, 233^ 24if, 244; and refugees,
2iof; and political recruitment, 255, 267,279-86 passim, 306, 309
Coalition of Nationalists (HPE), 148,150 Combative party, 18, 26,92,173,197. See
also United Democratic Left Comintern, 117


Index
Commerce, 48, 64, 86,168; Minister of, 107. See also Business Commercial Bank of Greece, hi Commercial class: and War of Indepen¬ dence, 43f, 46, 50-51, 82; and Revolu¬ tion of 1909, 68 Committees, parliamentary, 170-71. See also Legislative process Common Market, 76, 167, 202,228, 239 Communication: and political develop¬ ment, 39-40, 42, 60, 96, 140; military, 192 Communist Party of Greece (KKE): de¬ velopment, 62, 72, 128, 189, 313, 330; and the military, 77, 191, 216, 235; in the postwar period, 141-42, 152-58 pas¬ sim, 196, 20if, 206-7, 23°> candidates and deputies, 148, 150, 283-84; in re¬ sistance, 190, 196; and refugees, 209f; and trade unions, ii7f, 212; in Italy,
213
Compadrazgo, in Spain, 33 Compare system, in Italy, 33 Congress Party, India, 103,121 Consociational democracies, 19 Consociational system, i8f, 23,187,196, 214-26 passim, 314^ 336 Constantine 1,7of, 94f, 127,186,188, 209. See also Monarchy Constantine II, 195^ 215, 223ff, 23of. See also Monarchy Constantinople, 86, 88,153 Constituencies, i78f, 183,276,285-86 Constitution: prewar, 50, 55f, 65, 127; of 1952, 91, 95, 181, 195, 201, 223, 227; of 1968, 232,245 Continental Greece, see Old Greece
Cooperatives, 121-24, 234> 241. ^ee a^so Agriculture Coordination, Minister of, 155 Corfu Incident of 1923, 71 Corporations, 108,167-68. See also Business Corruption, 120,156-57,171,191. See also Clientage system Cotzamanis, Sotirios, 147 Couloumbis, Theodore, 166-67 Council of Europe, 228 Council of State, 120
359
Coup d’etat: in 1922, 189; in 1967, 75, 196, 226-28, 231, 314. See also Junta; Extraparliamentary level; Military es¬ tablishment Courts, see Judicial system Coutsoumaris, George, 315 Craftsmen’s and handicraftsmen’s orga¬ nization, 100 Crete, 67^ 70, 85, 88, i6of, 194, 227; and political careers, 145^ 267, 286, 292, 308,310 Crimean war, 67 Culture, and economic development, 68, 118, 155,168 Customs, 83 Cyclades, 43f, 49, 83-84, i6of; and politi¬ cal careers, 145^ 267,286,292, 308 Cyprus, 71-77 passim, 153^ 202,223,229
DE, see Democratic Union Defense, Minister of, 223 “Delegate” role orientation, 181-82 Deliyannis, Theodoros, 67 Demands: individual, 96, 101-4, 120, 136, 138, 176, 198; group, 108-9, II2> II5~ 17, 176, 311; and the political system, 166,172,184-85,315 Democratic centralism, 199 Democratic Coalition (DS), 147^ 150, 328 Democratic Front (DP), 147k 150,197, 328 Democratic Socialist Party (SD), 269^
33i Democratic Union (DE), 148,150, 200, 328 Demotic, see Language Denmark, 66,228 Dentists, 113-14 Deputies: and legislative process, 96, 171, i73ff, 181-83, 201; and groups, 104, 108, 116; privileges, 106, 113, 276; and local-level politics, no, 121, 134-36, 166, 183-84, 197-98, 251, 285-86; and higher-level politics, 131-39 passim, 144, 151-52, 199^ 221, 271-72; Greek atti¬ tude toward, 157, 175, 187; in other systems, 164, 275, 278, 286-87; r°le orientations, 175-85, 277, 287-88; fam


36°
ily and socialization, 251-73; occupa¬
tions, 275-88; officeholding experience,
288-93 Deutsch, Karl, 81, 85
Diamant, Alfred, 2 Disadvantaged groups, 92, 114-23, 186, 197. See also individual occupations by
name District, see Constituency
Distrust, see Mistrust; Trust Dodecanese Islands, 71, 74, 160; and po¬ litical careers, 308. See also Aegean
Islands Dogan, Mattei, 264,265-66, 276,289 Dowry system, 155, i68f, 195 DP, see Democratic Front DS, see Democratic Coalition
Duverger, Maurice, 126
EAM, 196 Economic development: Greek status, 1-2, 139, 154, 196; and political develop¬ ment, 8, 63, 91, io7f, i2iff, 127, 236; as a general goal, 22, 116, 164, 187, 235, 239, 313; possibilities in Greece, 23, 68, 168, 216, 228, 314-16; legislation, 73, 167-70; party views of, 116, 125, 127, 155, 202f EDA, see United Democratic Left
Edinger, Lewis, 255 Education, 250, 280; and political careers,
53. 91. 293. 295, 301-6, 313; and society, 89-91, 168, 193, 279, 236; Minister of, 155; policy, 156, 196, 205, 235-36, 302 EF, see Free Opinion Party Egypt, refugees from, 116 EK, see Center Union EKE, see National Party of Greece ELAS, 196
Elections, H3f, 119,129-41 passim, 14854 passim, 196, 202, 207, 218, 225
Electoral systems, 95, 104, 141-44, 149, 204, 225, 245; manipulation of, 139, 143,
197, 210, 218; and political recruitment, 161, 276 Elites, see Political elites ELK, see Union of Populist Parties
Employee, occupational category and po¬ litical careers, 281, 284. See also Worker
Engineering, occupational category and
Index
political careers, 281, 284. See also Tech¬
nical Enlightenment, 42, 44, 62 EPE, see National Political Union EPEK, see National Progressive Union of
the Center EPEL, see National Front of Working
People Epirus, 43, 67, 86ff, 71-74 passim, 161, 194; and political careers, i45f, 267, 286,
308,310 EPK, see National Liberal Party ERE, see National Radical Union ES, see Greek Rally
Eulau, Heinz, 289 Exile government, 72, 298 Extraparliamentary level, 18, 186-87, 2°67, 219. See also Left; Military establish¬
ment; United Democradc Left
Factionalism: and early state develop¬ ment, 5iff, 64; and society, 88, 1x7, 119; and political parties, 126, 136-37, 141
43. HA 149. !58,195.220 Family: in other political systems, 32, 102, 164, 268; and basic socialization, 35-38, 40, 90, 250, 262-63; and associations, 101, 107-16 passim, 159, 167; and po¬ litical recruitment, 133-36 passim, 145, 159, 164, 243, 256-57, 261-73 passim, 306-9, 343 Farmer, occupational category and politi¬
cal career, 281, 284. See also Agriculture Fichte, J., 42
Foreign models: for state institutions, 51, 63, 127, 187-88; for social groupings, 100,121, 196; in education, 295 Foreign policy, Greek: prewar, 50, 54-58 passim, 64-71, 100, 186-88, 194-95;
postwar, 72-78, 153-55, 167, 187, 202-4, 216, 228, 239-40. See also International system; and individual states by name Formalism, 105-6, 121,172. See also Political resources Fortin, Carlos, 15, 22
France: as a political model, 42f, 62f, 105, 291, 302-4; intervention in Greece, 64
71 passim, 126; political system com¬ pared, 255,264,266, 275^ 286, 299, 301 Franks, 47, 84


Index 361
Free Opinion Party (EF), 147^ 150,329 French Revolution, 42,44 Frey, Frederick, 287, 289
Friedl, Ernestine, 37, 40,90 Friendship, fraternal, 33, 38
Front organizations, 104
Garibaldi, Giuseppe, 62
Garofilias, Petros, 223 General Confederation of Labor, 100,
117
General Populist Radical Union (GLRE),
i47f, !50, 330 General secretary of ministry, and po¬ litical careers, 290-91 Geography, and the political system, 35,
83f, i45f, 155, 308-9 George I, 57, 66, 94, i94f George II, 72, 189,195 Germany: influence in Greece, 42, 155,
302ff; political system compared, 255,
276f, 286f, 289,299 GLRE, see General Populist Radical Union Gluecksburg dynasty, 94, 195. See also Monarchy; and names of individual
kings Godfather, see Kumbaros Godoy, Horacio, 15, 22 Gonatas, Stulianos, 329! Governor-general, of administrative
regions, 94 Great Britain: involvement in Greece, 64
68, 70-74, 84, 126, 153, 190, 194; po¬ litical system compared, 264, 276, 286f,
289,299, 301, 309 Great Powers: and War of Independence, 46, 52, 81, 84; later involvement, 57, 63,
66-70, 85. See also individual states by
name Greek Rally (ES), 129, i32f, 143,148#, 153,161, 330. See also Papagos Grivas, General George, 147,223, 332 Grossholtz, Jean, 34,103,123, 165,267,
27911
Hamon, Leo, 286f Health, Minister of, 114 Heptanesian Republic, 43
Herder, J., 42
Horowitz, Irving, 20, 229 Housing, iogf, 115
Hoffman, Stanley, 22
HPE, see Coalition of Nationalists
IDEA, 216
Ideological party, 20. See also United Democratic Left Ideology, i86f, 256-57 Illiteracy, 302
Independence, as political development, 22,127
Independent Political Front (PAP), 148,
i5o> 331 India, i02ff, 119,121,123, 315, 343 Individualism, 39,104f, in, 127! Industrialists, 209; and political careers, 281, 284 Industry, io6f, 117. See also Business Insecurity, 34. See also Mistrust
Insurance companies, m Insurance funds, 109,116 Insurrection of 1770, 41-42 Integration, crises of, 126,128,296,311 Interest articulation, 100,106-7, *66,181 Interest groups: general, 98; Greek, 99101, 104-22, 210; other systems com¬ pared, 102-3, 123-24 Interior, Minister of, 240 International agencies, intervention in Greece, 75 International system, as a restraint, 4, 22, 62-65 passim, 76-81 passim, 102, I72f,
214,316 Intervening variables, 9,20-22 Intervention, foreign, 56, 64-76 passim, 92,
189 “Inventor” role orientation, 176, 179-80 Ionian Academy, 55 Ionian Islands, 42f, 84-85, 161, 194; and political careers, i45f, 267,286, 3o8ff Iran, 102,164 Ireland, 268
Israel, 276 Istanbul riots, 153 Italy, 31-35 passim, 68-74 passim, 102-3, 123^ 196,213, 275-80 passim, 286, 302
Janowitz, Morris, i5f, 19,188, 192
Japan, 277,289


Index
362
Journalists, 106, 112-13; an^ political careers, 275, 28 r, 284 Judicial system, i2of, 168,237 Junta: and social groups, 118,233-36,24041; and political pardes, 227-28, 232-33; foreign policy, 229-30; and state institu¬
tions, 23if, 235ff; and the future, 235, 238-39, 242-43; and civil liberties, 236ff.
See also Military establishment Justice, Minister of, 140, 240
Kafandaris, George, 328 Kanellopoulos, Panayiotis, 130-33 passim, 147, 224-27 passim, 233, 329, 333. See also National Radical Union Karamanlis, Constantine, 133, 196; and
party politics, hi, 113, 130, 139, 258, 329; policies, 115, 120, 137, i53f, 157, 198, 218. See also National Radical Union Katharevusa, see Language Key, V. O., 149, 158 KGP, see Party of George Papandreou
Kinship ties, 31 KKE, see Communist Party of Greece Klephs, see Chieftains Kollias, Constantine, 227,231 Kondylis, General George, 147, 209, 330 Kotsonis, Archmandrite, 236 Kousoulas, Dimitrios, 196 KP, see Progressive Party Kumbaros, 33, 38,135,188,280
Labor, see Trade unions; Workers Labor, Minister of, 117 Lambrakis affair, 139 Lambrakists, 219 Landholding, pattern of, 43, 84^ 278, 311. See also Agriculture Landowners, in parliament, 281, 284 Land reform, 75,204,210. See also Agri¬ culture
Language, 45, 81, 87,205,236 LaPalombara, Joseph, i7f, 103,123,125f, 197
Lawyers: political advantages, 101, 135, 279f; other systems compared, 275-76, 278, 280; and political careers, 281, 284, 303-6,311-12
Leadership: early, 50, 53, 68, 95; attitudes
toward, 76, 82, 84, 95; social organiza¬
tion, 101, 104, 117, i2iff; political party,
128-33, 140-4 h x43) !50,223 Lebanon,43 Left: policy, 71, 87, 127, 157-58, 187, 216, 313-14; and extraparliamentary level,
83, 95, 120, i39f, 157, 214-20; organiza¬ tion, 104, 125, 129, 141; support, 115, 117, 128, i43f, 159-62, 207-13 passim, 218-19, 324-27; political recruitment,
141-43, i47ff, 206, 269, 283-85; parlia¬ mentary activity, 152-53, i56f, 174, 180, 216, 222, 314; and military, 187-91 pas¬ sim, 196, 216, 227, 232. See also United Democratic Left Legal system, and development, 96, io5f,
119, i67ff, 280 Legislative process, 105, 136, 150, 166-67, 170-77 passim, 224. See also Policy
process Legislative role orientations, see Role orientations Legislatures, decline of, 163-64 Legitimacy, and development, 126-27,
189,235, 296,311,316 Lehmbruch, Gerhard, 19 Liberal Democratic Center (PDK), 141,
224, 226,331 Liberal Party (PK), i32f, 147, 160, 209,
33if; and deputies, 145, I48ff, 210, 269^ 284 Lijphart, Arend, 3, 6,18-19 Litton Industries, 239 LK, see Populist Party Local autonomy, 44,46, 50, 57,93 Loewenberg, Gerhard, 276
Lotteries, 113
Macedonia, 7of, 86,161,209; and political careers, 146, 267, 285^ 310 McNamara, Robert, 229
Makarezos, Nikolas, 226,228f, 234. See also Junta
Makarios, Archbishop, 223, 230 Management Company of Greek State Monopoly Goods, 69 Maniadakis, Constantine, 331 Manufacturing, 118, 167. See also Industry; Business
Marines, 245. See also Junta


Index
Market economy, 155
Markezinis, Spyros, 151, 154, 330
Mass media, 192,250. See also Communi¬ cation; Press
Masumi, Junnosuke, 289 Mayors, 293-94
MEA, see National Regeneration Front Medical profession, ii3f, 279,28if, 284,
303-6 Membership, political party, 133,135, 200 Merchant seamen, 43,106, 117
Metaxas, General Ioannis, 71, n6f, 147, 186, 189, 195, 329; postwar influence, 228,254, 257, 260; cabinet, 298, 300, 313 Mexico, 164 Meynaud, Jean, 201
Middle class, 43, 51,155,168,188,204-5. See also Commercial class Middle East, 116,153
Migration, 62,118, 2x2 Military establishment: models, I5f, 20,
23> 95) 99) I9ti 241; foreign ties, 53, 72f, 75, 191, 229; and politics, 56, 83, 116,
139, r55f) 188-95 passim, 214-28, 310, 312; education and training, ^8£, 187
93 passim, 215, 250, 263, 312; and so¬ ciety, hi, 116, 191-92, 235, 241-44; other systems compared, 164^ develop¬ ment, 187-91; and political careers, 188, 192, 28if, 284, 295,303-6; wartime oper¬ ations, i8pf; and the monarch, 187^ 196, 230-32; threats to, 218, 225, 232, 242f, 314. See also Junta
Military League, 62, 68,188 Ministers: role of, 101, mf, 120, 132!?, 137, 166, 170-75, 195; background, 210, 298-309. See also individual ministries by name
Minorities, 59,86, 88
Mistrust, 35-36, 99,114,118,159,167,170 MK, see Reformist Party Mobilization system, 9, 25 Modernization, 21-22, 104, 222, 249, 275,
335) 338- See also Economic develop¬ ment; Political development Modernizing autocracies, see Bureaucratic model Mohammed Ali, 43 Monarchy: establishment, 52, 55, 63, 193^ constitutional position, 56, 65, 95, 191,
363
194-96, 215, 223; and foreign policy, 68,
72, 194; and domestic politics, 83,93-94, 106,127, 133,189-97 passim, 214-20 pas¬ sim-, and the military, 188, 191, 196,
230-32. See also individual kings by name
Moslems, 48f, 60
Moustaka, Calliope, 40,61 Munkman, C. A., 96 Mussolini, Benito, 62
Mutual obligations, see Clientage systems; Patron-client relationship Mutual veto, 20 Mylonas, Alexander, 328
Namier, Sir Lewis, 64 National Assemblies, 5of National Bank of Greece, in
National Economy, Minister of, 168,298 National Front of Working People (EPEL), i47f, 329
National Liberal Party (EPK), 269^ 329 National Liberation Movement (EAM), 196
National Party of Greece (EKE), 147^ 150,269^ 329 National Political Union (EPE), 148,150,
329 National Progressive Union of the Center (EPEK), i47f, 150, 329 National Radical Union (ERE): organi¬
zation, 129-33, T35) 329; candidates and deputies, 134,145-48 passim, 150!?, 25664 passim, 269, 284, 290; activities, I39f, 218-19, 224; policies, 151, 154-58, 166, 200-202, 205-6; and the military, 233. See also Right wing National Regeneration Front (MEA), 148,150, 331 National security, as a political issue, 51-52,206, 214-15 National Security Battalions (TEA), 139, 191, 215,222 National Unity Party (EE), I47f, 331 Nationalism, 39; and Orthodoxy, 45-46, 70, 88; early, 46f, 49, 52, 84; later de¬
velopment, 57, 65-66, 68, 86, 154; and the military, 191,235
Nationalist movements, 99 Nationalization, 204


Index
NATO, 75,77,153,167,191,202,217;
and the Coup of 1967, 226,228 Natural resources, 22f, 204, 315 Nazi occupation, 58, 190, 196
Neo-mercantilist system, see Bureaucratic model New Party (NK), 148, 330
Niarchos, Stavros, 113 NK, see New Party Nomarchs, 291-92 Nonassociational interest groups, 98, ioif Nordlinger, Eric, 296
Notables: in War of Independence, 43f, 47f, 96; and political parties, 134-36, i6of, 208, 304-5, 311. See also Clientage system
Obligations, see Clientage system; Patronclient relationship Occupations: in nineteenth century, 8384; socialization by, 250, 252; and po¬ litical careers, 275-88, 301-6 Officeholding, and elite status, 53, 57,104, 149, 276, 288, 301 Officers, see Military establishment Old Greece, 43,48f, 83^ 161; and political careers, 145!?, 161,267,286,292, 308 Ombudsman, office created, 244 Onassis, Aristotle, 113 Operation Pericles, 139, 217 Opportunities, political, 297-98 Origin associations, no Orthodox Church, 45, 53,70, 8r, 88f, 99, I93, 235^ 250. See also Clergy Otho, King of Greece, 52-56, 64-66, r 12, i93f, 300
Ottoman Empire, 33, 41-49 passim, 66-71 passim, 83-86 passim, 188. See also Turkey
PADE, see Progressive Agrarian Demo¬ cratic Union
Pagoutsos, Augustos, 328 Pan-democratic Agrarian Front of Greece (PAME), 148,150, 331 Pangalos, General, 209
Pan-Hellenic Confederation of Agricul¬ tural Cooperatives, 122
Pan-Refugee Congress, 115
PAP, see Independent Political Front Papagos, Alexander: party leader, 129,
149, 161, 216, 258, 330; premier, 133, 139, 153,218. See also Greek Rally
Papadopoulos, George, 226,228, 232. See
also Junta Papanastassiou, Alexander, 147, 328
Papandreou, Andreas, 221-26 passim, 233. See also Center Union Papandreou, George: premier, 75-76, nr,
117, 137, 152-57 passim-, as party leader, 130-34 passim, i4of, 147, 154, 22if, 291, 328f, 331-32; and crisis of 1965, 196, 217-18, 223fT, 233. See also Center Union
Paraskevopoulos, Ioannis, 224 Parliament: and the political system, 77, 96, 163, 185-86, 222, 224; other systems compared, 103, 164^ and political re¬
cruitment, 136-37, 277-81 passim, 311; and the military, 192, 216, 228; and the monarch, 195, 215; and the Left, 197, 199-200, 211. See also Legislative pro¬
cess; Policy process Participation, and political development,
128,296,311,316 Partido Revolucionaria Institucional (PRI), in Mexico, 164 Party of George Papandreou (KGP),
i47f, 150, 330 “Party” role orientation, 175
Patakos, Stylianos, 75, 226. See also Junta Patriarch, of Constantinople, 45f, 88. See also Clergy; Orthodox Church
Patron-client relationships, 21, 33, 38-40 passim, 76, 101, 116, 121, 135, 150. See also Clientage system Paul 1,133,215 PDK, see Liberal Democratic Center Peasant, see Rural Greek
Peloponnesus, 41-50 passim, 83f, i6of; and political careers, 146,267, 286, 292, 308 “Penetrated” political system, 22, 62-63 Pensioner, and political career, 284
Pensions, io8f, 112 Pepelasis, Adam, 167 Petropulos, John, 36,44,64
Phanariots, 43-46 passim, 96, 311 Philhellenism, 64
Philiki Hetairia, 38,43-44,46


Index
Philippines, 103, 123-24,165, 267,279n Philotimo, 39
Pipinellis, P., i3on
Piraeus, 211, 213. See also Athens-Piraeus Pitt-Rivers, J. A., 33 PK, see Liberal Party
Plastiras, Nicholas, 147, 329 Plebiscite, 195 Poland, 153
Police, 139. See also Agricultural police; National Security Battalions Policy: process in consociational system,
63, 77~78. 150. 166-67, I7I_77 passim, 193; cultural policy, 87, 339; educa¬
tional, 90-91, 156; administrative, 96, 156, 235; associational, 100, 107-8; busi¬ ness and industry, 106,112,172; finance,
in, 155-56, i72, 239; labor, 114, n7, 155, 234; refugees, 115-16, 209; social welfare, 115, 154, 156; agriculture,
1191?, 160-70, 234; national security, 151-53, 157-58; economic development,
154-55 Political communication, roi, 166 Political crises, and political development, 74,126-27 Political culture, 12,95 Political demands, see Demands Political development: models, 2-27, 98,
187; institutions, 38-39, 55-57 passim, 63-66 passim, 103-6, 124, 127, 192-96; institutional crises, 66-72 passim, 74, 93-95, 186-92 passim, 216-25 Political parties: and development, 16-18,
63, 99-104, 125-29, 186-87, 219-20, 31213; traditional parties, 83, H3f, 119-21
passim, 125-53, 158, 2I4f, 255; and in¬ terest groups, 101-4, in-13; modern parties, 128-29, 163, 180, 197-205, 210, 220, 222; and the extraparliamentary
level, 133, 187-95, 214-20, 232; party competition, 95, 159-62, 207!, 211,
324-27 Political prisoners, 157 Political recruitment: and the political
system, 24-27, 249, 276^ 296-97; dif¬ ferences in party style, 132-33, 136-44,
147-50, 199-200, 206; and candidates,
29I_95- See also individual parties by name
365
Political regression, see Political develop¬ ment
Political resources: creation, 99, 105-6,
!33, i38f, i49, 167, i7I_74 passim, 18183 passim, 192; distribution, in, 11415, 139, 156, 314; other systems com¬ pared, 165 Politician, as an occupational category, 281, 284, 305-6 “Politico” role orientation, 181-82 Polytechnic, 295 Population exchange, 115-16
Populist Party, 132^ 147!, 150,189, 209, 331; and deputies, 26gf Powell, B. G.: on development, 3, 32; sys¬ tem models, n-14 passim, 21, 25; in¬ terest group typology, 98-103 passim Premier, Greek: powers and practice, 95,
hi, 137, i7of, 194-95, 223f; demands on, 101-2, 120, i32f, i37f; tenure, 297301; other systems compared, 165 Press: character, 85, 87, 158-59; and the political world, 110-13, 131, 171, 198, 215 “Pressure-group” role orientation, 175 Professional classes, 56, 68, 90, 128, 135. See also Middle class; and individual professions by name Professors, n 1. See also Academic pro¬ fession Progressive Agrarian Democratic Union (PADE), 145,148,150, 269,284, 331 Progressive Party (KP), 145, 148, i5of, 219; candidates and deputies, 256-57, 259-60,269, 284, 290 Protestants, 88 Public works, 192 Purposive role orientation, 175-76
Pye, Lucian, 5,20,249,296
Radio, 60,159,192 Rallis, John, 330 Ranney, Austin, 264,286-87 Reconciliation system, 9-10,14-15,16,
25> 83 Reformist Party (MK), 148,150,331
Refugee Commission, 75 Refugees, 115-16; and Greek society, 39, 59-60, 86, 121, 128, 2o8ff, 313; political support, 95, 128,189,207-11 passim; po


366
litical recruitment, 2iof, 254, 257, 308, 310 Regent, 232 Representational role orientation, 175, 181
Research methods, 319-21 Resistance movement, 58, 72, 147,190, 196,203. See also Civil war Revenue, see Taxation
Revolution: of 1843, 55! °f 1862, 56; of 1909,128,188,194,228, 300, 305-6, 312 Riggs, Fred W., 3-8 passim, 14, 20-26 passim, 129,165,172,197
Right wing, i4of, 156, 189, 195; support for, 139, 153, 159-62, 324-27; political recruitment, 141-43,148,269,284 “Ritualist” role orientation, 176,178 Role conflict, 178-79, 182 Role orientations, 175-85,251,288 Roman Catholics, 88 Rosenau, James, 22 Rousseas, Stephen, 75 Royal Phalanx, 54 Rural Greek: contemporary period, 3337, 76, 119-23, 128, 135, 169-70, 212, 311; nineteenth century, 43, 47f, 51, 82-86,93. See also Agriculture Russett, Bruce, 61
Russia, 42,45f, 51,64-68 passim, 71,126. See also Soviet Union
Sacred Link of Greek Officers (IDEA), 216 Samos, 86 Sanders, Irwin, 39, 89,119 Sartori, Giovanni, 197
Scalapino, Robert, 289
Scarcity, 23, 32, 39-40, 92, 99, 107, 118-22 passim, 138, 166. See also Natural re¬ sources
SD, see Democratic Socialist Party Searing, Donald, 255
Security forces, see Battalions of National Security Senate, Greek, 100 Serfdom, 47 Serbia, 43. See also Yugoslavia Service occupations, 118
Shils, Edward, 241
Shipowners, 100,106, in, 1x3; and po¬ litical careers, 28 if, 284
Index
Size, as a factor in development, 102,107,
in, 118-24 passim, 159,288
Social change: causes, 3-5, 13-14, 57-61, 1:58—59; and clientage system, 35-39 pas¬
sim, 102, 123-24, 184-85, 220, 298; and
the Left, 197, 202f, 206 Social mobilization, 82, 90-95 passim, 99,
128, 185^ 212, 214, 3i3ff
Socialists, 62, 196-97 Socialization: defined, 24; content, 34-37,
39-40, 86-92 passim, 158, 235-36; of deputies, 249-74, 301-n
Sofoulis, Themistocles, 332 Soviet Union, 72, 153,202,210, 215. See also Russia
Spandidakis, General, 23m Sports associations, 104 Status distinctions, 47,278-79 Stephanopoulos, Stephanos, 224, 329, 331 Strikes and demonstrations, 18,101, n6f, 120,207, 224f Students, 213 Subject orientation, 119
Suffrage, 51,56-57, 84^ 104,126, 311
Tariffs, 100,106,171,174, 205 Tarrow, Sidney, 31-35 passim, 102,278 Taxation: character, 47-53 passim, 69, 84, 96, ii2f, 135; and development, io5f, 156,168-74 passim, 205, 241 TEA, see National Security Battalions Teachers, 89,135; in Europe, 275. See also Academic professions Technical occupations, and political careers, 281,284, 303-4
Territorial expansion, of Greece, 64-75 passim, 82-86 passim, 94-95, 194,298 Technical Chamber, 100,106-7 Their Majesties’ Fund, 113,193 Theodorakis, Mikis, 238 Theotokis, John, 330 Thessaloniki, 213,226, 293
Thessaly, 58, 67, 70, 85, i6if, 194, 311; and political careers, 146, 267,286,308, 310 Thrace, 74, 86, 88,161; and political careers, 146,267,285^ 310 Tobacco areas, 117,123 Tourism, 62,204,239, 316
Trade agreements, 153
Trade unions: organization, 100, 112,


Index
n6ff; and politics, 156,159,196-97, 204, 212,234. See also Worker
Transitional political systems, 2,6, 26-27 Treaty of London, 64
Treaty of San Stefano, 67
“Tribune” role orientation, 176,178-79,
185
Trikoupis, Charilaos, 67 Truman Doctrine, 73, 190 Trust, 31, 35, 115,122. See also Mistrust “Trustee” role orientation, 181 Tsaldaris, Constantine, 329, 331
Tsirimokos, Elias, 224 Tsouderos, Emmanuel, 71, 147, 329 Turkey: Greek relations with, 58f, 71, 153, 188, 194, 230, 278, 312; and refugees, 115, 209; system compared, 287, 289. See also Ottoman Empire Turks, in Thrace, 59, 88 Tutelary regime, 51-56 Typologies, 5-6, 12,129,188
Union of Communes and Municipalities,
234 Union of Journalists, 112,233 Union of Populist Parties (ELK), 145,
150, 284, 329 United Democratic Left (EDA): policy,
140, 151, 187, 197, 200-205, 213-17 pas¬ sim-, candidates and deputies, 145, 148,
i5°f, 206, 256-63, 269-73, 283-85, 293; organization, 180, 197-201, 206, 219, 328; and the consociational system, 187, 192, 203, 206-7, 227, 232; support for,
208-17 passim United General Confederation of Labor,
117 United Nations, 153 United States: involvement in Greece, 73
75, 77, J39, J53, 190-91, 203, 218, 22930, 239; political system compared, 251
52, 254, 264f, 275-76, 301, 309 United States State Department, 159
Universities, 87, 91, 100, 132, 187, 278-79, 302n; and political careers, 82, 133, 293,
295,345 UNRRA, 75 Upper class, see Wealthy; Advantaged
groups
367
Urbanization, effects of, 40, 81,9of, 162, 207,211-13 passim, 313
Values, 39-40, 82
Varkiza agreement, 72 Venice, 4if, 84
Venizelist Liberal Party (VenPK), 269^
332 Venizelos, Eleutherios: party leader, 58, 95, 128, i6of, 188, 209, 258^ 331; as premier, 68, 7of, 94,127,186,194^ 300 Venizelos, Sophocles, 113, i3on, 329,332
VenPK, see Venizelist Liberal Party Verba, Sidney, 96,296 Veterans’ association, 109-110 Village president, 135
Wahlke, John, 175,180, 252,254-55,265, 320-21
War of Independence, 41,44,49,50, 64 Ward, Benjamin, 314 Wealthy, 155,168,172,204. See also
Advantaged groups Weber, Max, 126 Weiner, Myron, iji, 98,102ff, 119-25 passim, 197, 315
Westebbe, Richard, 314-15 Western Europe: influence in Greece, 4246 passim, 62f, 93, 184-85, 197, 212; in¬ terest groups in, 103 Women, 58, 89,132,199, 205,207,302 Woodhouse, C. M., 41,47 Workers, 62, n6f, 155-56,204,211-12, 234,240. See also Trade unions
World War I, 58 World War II, 58f, 69 Wylie, Laurence, 33
“X” National Resistance Party, 147^ 332
Young Turks, 62, 68,312 Youth, 58,132,140,207,213,219; and socialization, 256 Ypsilantis, Alexander, 42f, 45 Ypsilantis, Demetrios, 46 Yugoslavia, 154,230. See also Serbia
Zervas, Napoleon, 147, 329 Zurich agreement, 154