Greece and the Inter-War Economic Crisis
Mark Mazower
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198202059.001.0001
Published: 1991 Online ISBN: 9780191675126 Print ISBN: 9780198202059
Search in this book
CHAPTER
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198202059.003.0006 Pages 143–176
Published: August 1991
Abstract
Keywords: Greek monetary policy, devaluation, gold standard, financial crisis, Venizelos
Subject: Economic History, European History, Modern History (1700 to 1945)
Collection: Oxford Scholarship Online
6 The Battle for the Drachma 
MARK MAZOWER
The shock waves from the European nancial debacle of 1931 reverberated through the Balkans. The
collapse of existing international monetary institutions on the heels of the British sterling devaluation
that autumn dealt the decisive blow to Liberal con dence. It led to a serious nancial crisis in Greece
that eventually pushed her o the gold standard. By staking so much on the outcome of his self
proclaimed ‘battle for the drachma’, Venizelos ensured that his failure to prevent devaluation would
precipitate a serious political crisis as well. His ebullient rhetoric would come to sound increasingly
hollow, and public opinion would swing towards the view expressed some time later by Dimitrios
Maximos, a leading anti-Venizelist, that ‘his incorrigible optimism had led him and the country into a
dreadful impasse’. This chapter charts the course of this stage of the crisis. It begins by sketching the
background to existing monetary arrangements in Greece. For relations between the new central bank
— the Bank of Greece — and the commercial banks left much to be desired. And as a result, the gold
standard operated in Greece in a way which was not to be found in any textbook on banking theory, and
which would have rather unexpected e ects on the impact of the nancial crisis there.
The bourgeois social order in Greece, and in the whole world too, is today undergoing its severest
trial.
(Venizelos, March 1932)
Joining gold in 1928 had heralded the reincorporation of the Greek economy into the international monetary
order, and by opening the way for foreign capital to ow into the country had lent prestige to the Liberal
Government, and credibility to its ambitious policies of economic development. The e ort to use these
funds to turn Greece into a synchronon kratos (modern state) had continued through the commercial crisis,
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


accompanied by increasingly unconvincing government denials of any serious economic problems ahead.
But though Liberal spokesmen shrugged o the di culties of currant growers and tobacco producers, they
too were eventually forced to acknowledge the unprecedented nature of the international depression.
The shock waves from the European nancial debacle of 1931 reverberated through the Balkans. The
collapse of existing international monetary institutions which followed on the heels of the British sterling
devaluation that autumn dealt the decisive blow to Liberal con dence. It led to a serious nancial crisis in
Greece that eventually—after a winter spent vainly ghting the ‘battle for the drachma’—pushed her o
the gold standard.
This was a turning-point. Before the nancial crisis it had seemed that the funds for national economic
development could be found abroad; after it, they would have to be obtained at home. The devaluation of the
drachma and default on her foreign debt e ectively barred Greece from Western capital markets, which
were anyway no longer able to go on lending abroad except on a very reduced scale. Because the use to which
domestic capital was put would depend at least in part on the decisiveness of the scal and monetary
policies of the state, the outcome of the nancial crisis marked a watershed in the relationship between
state and economy in Greece.
Furthermore, by staking so much on the outcome of his self-proclaimed ‘battle for the drachma’, Venizelos
ensured that his failure to prevent devaluation would precipitate a serious political crisis as well. His
ebullient rhetoric would come to sound increasingly hollow, and public opinion would swing towards the
view expressed some time later by Dimitrios Maximos, a leading anti-Vcnizelist, that ‘his incorrigible
optimism had led him and the country into a dreadful impasse’.
p. 144
1
This chapter will chart the course of this second stage of the crisis. We should begin by sketching in the
background to existing monetary arrangements in Greece. For relations between the new central bank—the
Bank of Greece—and the commercial banks left much to be desired. And as a result, the gold standard
operated in Greece in a way which was not to be found in any textbook on banking theory, and which would
have rather unexpected e ects on the impact of the nancial crisis there.
The Gold Standard in Practice
The smooth operation of the gold standard depended in theory upon several monetary mechanisms. The key
instruments available to a central bank under the gold standard regime were the discount rate and open
market operations. The Bank of England, for example, used movements in the bank rate both to control
domestic credit and to in uence short-term capital ows in and out of the country. By open-market
operations, involving the purchase or sale of government securities in the open market, the central bank
was in a position to regulate the supply of money. Flence, when its reserves fell, it could bring about a
contraction in the money supply by the latter method, or attempt to build up its reserves by raising the bank
rate.
These were the bare bones of the system which had operated in England before 1914, or rather, which those
men responsible for the international stabilization policies of the 1920s believed had existed then. For as de
Ceceo comments in a recent study:
The international monetary system, as it developed in the course of our period [i.e. 1890–1914] did
not however possess—except to a very small degree—those features which were attributed to it by
a bevy of postwar economists: men who were really seeking a magic formula to resurrect the
prewar world from its ruins.
p. 145
2
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


After 1928, when the establishment of a new central bank linked the drachma with gold, this system was
supposed to operate in Greece too; but a number of di culties soon became apparent. The commercial
banks were hostile to the Bank of Greece, as they had been since its inception, regarding it as a troublesome
upstart. For their part, the authorities at the Bank were under few illusions about the di culties involved in
bringing the commercial banks to accept the Bank’s authority over them. The Bank was in a vulnerable
position, handicapped by the terms of its foundation—for it was saddled with large quantities of
unrealizable government debt, whilst its gold and foreign exchange holdings were barely adequate to
maintain the reserve ratio.3
The commercial banks were arrayed behind its great rival, the National Bank of Greece, formerly the
country’s ‘uno cial’ central bank, which had, as a consequence of the terms of the Geneva Protocol,
increased its already considerable domination of the domestic banking system. Venizelos himself described
this situation as an ‘economic anomaly’. League members in Geneva agreed: at a meeting of the League of
Nations Financial Committee (LNFC) in May 1931 there had been lengthy discussion of the ‘enormous
strength’ and ‘practical monopoly’ exerted by the National Bank, and one speaker had declared that ‘the
situation might become dangerous, and if the Bank of Greece is not strong enough to cope, the authority of
the State should be called in to compel the National Bank not only to reduce its portfolio of drachma bills
and foreign exchange, but also to rediscount bills with the Bank of Greece’.4
In October 1928—just six months after the Bank of Greece opened its doors—the leading commercial banks
established the Union of Greek Banks: this was intended not only to help reduce competition between
members, but also to present a common front against the central bank. The Union waged an e ective
campaign against proposals to compel the commercial banks to keep obligatory deposits with the central
bank—a measure which both the Bank’s authorities and their supporters in Geneva regarded as
necessary. In the spring of 1931, Parliament debated the introduction of such measures, as part of a bill ‘On
Limited-Liability Companies and Banks’—designed to revise company law to take account of the enormous
changes that had occurred over the previous decade, and in particular to provide greater protection for
shareholders and bank depositors. But through the Union the commercial banks succeeded in weakening the
force of the bill considerably. Whereas the Bank of Greece, drawing on views Keynes had recently published
in A Treatise on Money, advocated that the commercial banks be compelled to maintain a liquidity ratio of at
least 15% of sight and savings deposits, 7% of which was to be deposited with the Bank, the law as it was
eventually passed in July 1931 stipulated only a 12% minimum liquidity ratio, which did not have to be held
at the central bank. If commercial banks did choose to hold deposits at the Bank of Greece, these only
needed to amount to 7% of their sight and savings deposits.
p. 146
5
Worse still, the new Bank of Greece had very restricted control over foreign exchange movements. Not only
did the commercial banks transact business in foreign exchange within Greece independently of the central
bank. They also attracted much of the exchange earned through either exports or invisibles to their
branches abroad; indeed, to facilitate this, the National Bank had founded a branch o ce in New York in
1929. Because of the great importance of invisibles such as emigrant remittances to the Greek balance of
payments, the central bank’s inability to acquire foreign exchange from these sources would weaken its
control of events once the crisis became more acute.
Neither of the two traditional instruments of British domestic credit policy—open-market operations and
changes in the o cial discount rate—worked with the same e cacy in the Greek context. The new Bank’s
limited capacity to rediscount bills, combined with the fact that short-term government stock was not
issued in Greece, meant that open-market operations were not feasible. At the same time, the commercial
banks, despite the pressures on them described earlier, were in a considerably healthier nancial position
than the Bank of Greece; they ignored its advice, and still had su cient funds to override changes in the
Bank’s discount rate, which was thus of limited value as an instrument of credit policy. Nor did
p. 147
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


movements in this rate a ect capital ows, for these were motivated by considerations of security rather
than interest rate di erentials. In short, the Bank of Greece found it had responsibilities but no power.
The net out ow of foreign exchange was temporarily reversed during 1930, thanks to loan proceeds, but
heavy net out ows were resumed in the last quarter of the year and continued through 1931. As its exchange
reserves diminished, the Bank should theoretically have attempted to contract the quantity of notes in
circulation. In fact it ignored the textbooks and did the opposite: in a bid to establish its control over the
commercial banks it began to compete with them directly, expanding its network of provincial branches and
o ering low interest rates in key local markets such as Kalamata and Patras, where it was reported to have
gained 80% of the export business. From Patras, a rival bank manager reported: ‘The Bank of Greece
embarked upon an open competition towards the other banks, and more especially the National Bank of
Greece, with the sole object of acquiring a commercial clientele under the lure of rates and excessive credit
facilities...A cut-throat competition was started between these two banks into which the other local banks
were gradually dragged...Naturally the local traders have made the best use of this wild competition.’6
Such a policy may have been useful in forcing the commercial banks to recognize the newcomer’s authority,
but it made the task of defending the drachma more di cult as balance of payments pressures built up. This
was exacerbated by the rather apathetic stance of its senior management, especially its Governor,
Alexandros Diomedes. H. C. Finlayson, the adviser appointed by the League of Nations to the Bank, warned
Venizelos at a meeting in 1930 that ‘the Bank of Greece, unlike all the other Central Banks in Europe, has
been content to play a purely passive role. It has not raised its discount rate nor tried in any way to cut back
its advances.’ When these problems were extensively debated at the meeting of the League of Nations
Financial Committee on 7 September 1931, Deputy Governor Emmanouil Tsouderos defended the Bank
against accusations that orthodox monetary policies were not being wholeheartedly applied, declaring that
‘in the present conditions, the rigid observation of the strictly orthodox principles governing the conduct of
central banks may lead to results contrary to those which were desired’.
p. 148
7
Table 6.1 Net foreign exchange movements at the Bank of Greece, 1928–1932 (quarterly, in million drachmas)
Source: K. Kostis, Oi trapezes kai i krisi, 1929–1932 (Athens, 1986), 139.
1928 1929 1930 1931 1932
1st quarter — −54.7 +289.5 −242.3 −680.0
2nd quarter — −248.3 −50.3 −290.7 +477.7
3rd quarter +37.0 −453.9 +260.5 −13.7 +71.9
4th quarter +284.6 −357.5 −476.1 −735.0 +32.3
Net annual movement +321.6 −1,114.4. +23.6 −1,281.7 −98.1
But Venizelos’s administration appeared oblivious to the weakness of the country’s balance of payments
position. By the spring of 1931, the fruits of the Liberal Government’s programme for economic
reconstruction were beginning to appear and the Government had just succeeded in oating a second Public
Works Loan abroad. The last three budgets had all o cially ended in surplus, and it was expected that the
1931–2 Budget would too. Government spokesmen declared that Greece had managed to avoid the worst
e ects of the international crisis, and predicted that the public works programme would be completed as
planned. The Finance Minister, George Maris, wound up the debate on the 1931–2 Budget with an attack on
8
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


the ‘pessimists’ who were always inclined to foresee doom, and defended the Government’s ‘justi ed
optimism’ in the ability of the Greek economy to withstand the crisis.9
The Government’s insistence on branding all critics of its economic policy as pessimists underlined its own
limited understanding of Greece’s vulnerability to unfavourable trends in the international economy.
Opposition attacks on the Government, it is true, were largely misdirected, concentrating on the high level
of taxation and extravagant public spending—arguments countered by the Government’s proclaimed
budgetary successes—rather than on the public debt position and Greece’s dependence on capital in ows.
Yet outside Parliament there were warnings of what was to come.
Two days after Maris closed the budget debate, Professor Xenophon Zolotas gave a speech to the
Thessaloniki Chamber of Commerce, in which he drew attention to the worrying growth in the public debt:
‘rather than being curtailed, in order that we may arrive at a healthy state of a airs, on the contrary,
through perpetual borrowing we are continually burdened, and there is necessarily a worsening of the
existing situation, which holds a danger of throwing the domestic economy into crisis if this policy is not
brought to a timely end’.
p. 149
10
At the end of June, Finlayson sent Venizelos a report on the preceding nine months, and accompanied it with
the warning that ‘there is not the least doubt that there is a serious lack of economic equilibrium still
persisting in Greece, and that unless remedial measures be taken, a serious situation might develop’. The
1931 Loan had, in fact, only been oated that spring with the greatest di culty. Three-quarters of the issue
had been left with the London underwriters and Montagu Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England,
had made it clear to the Greek authorities that London could no longer continue lending on ‘the normal
scale’.
11
12
News of the German nancial crisis over the summer nally changed the mood on the Athens Stock
Exchange. Government bonds, whose price had risen in the rst half of the year, largely owing to the
introduction of tax concessions, and heavy support buying by the major banks, peaked in June. Their fall
was not so steep as that of industrial shares, but more signi cant, since these bonds had been regarded as
safe investments by the commercial banks, who had increased their holdings of them substantially over the
previous 10 months. Outside the stock-market, further nancial indicators suggest that conditions were
tightening from June onwards. Money market rates rose from 8% to over 11% in the period July-September.
The steady withdrawal of deposits from the commercial banks continued, though it is worth noting that a
rapid withdrawal of drachma deposits was partly o set by a rise in foreign exchange deposits from 3,998.7
to 4,222.8 million drs.—a trend which suggests that people were worried more about the stability of the
drachma than about that of the banking system itself.
Nevertheless, the aggregate trend in deposits was downwards, and the banks, nding it di cult—despite
the rise in interest rates—-to liquidate their commercial advances, were forced to draw on their reserves.
The result was a gradual fall in their liquidity ratio, but the position of the commercial banks at this stage
was certainly not critical, and aroused little public disquiet. Banks were able to meet demands for foreign
exchange either out of their own reserves, or by purchasing exchange from the Bank of Greece. In this way,
they o -loaded the strains of the foreign exchange shortage on to the central bank.
p. 150
13
Faced with a steady out ow of exchange, the authorities of the Bank of Greece had foreseen problems
during the summer months. Towards the end of July, Tsouderos predicted that the coming weeks would be
critical. As the cover ratio slid down towards the 40% legal minimum, it was decided to appeal to the Bank
of international Settlements (BIS) for emergency credits. The BIS had already been involved in rescue work
of this sort; in May and June it had arranged international credits to shore up the Credit-Anstalt in Austria.
On 10 September, Tsouderos was instructed to request a loan of £1 million sterling.
14
15
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


The reply came back from Basle one week later: the BIS was unable to agree to the Bank of Greece’s request,
in the light of its inability to control the activities of Greek commercial banks. Acknowledging the
di culties the Bank of Greece faced in trying to restrict the note circulation, McGarrah, the BIS President,
nevertheless observed that the Bank would have made a better impression if it had made greater e orts to
force the commercial banks to co-operate: ‘However sound the policy of the Bank of Greece may be, we
would face great di culties in approaching other central Banks, insofar as the commercial banks in Greece
appear to be following a di erent policy.’ One of the chief di culties, the letter went on, lay in the foreign
exchange deposits held by the commercial banks. How could foreign bankers be expected to risk their own
exchange holdings, when there were still foreign currency deposits within Greece unused by the Bank of
Greece?
16
A few days earlier the same points had been made by the League of Nations Financial Committee, which had
advised Governor Diomedes of the need to discourage commercial banks from accepting deposits in
foreign currency, and also suggested tentatively that the discount rate be raised ‘in the near future’ and that
the Bank of Greece restrict short-term borrowing abroad.
p. 151
17
Thus it is clear that the position of the Bank by the third week of September had become exceptionally
strained. After the BIS reply, there was no hope in the near future of obtaining assistance abroad, and to
have sought help from the commercial banks within Greece would have publicized the Bank’s plight, and
strengthened the hand of its opponents. Unable to restrict the money supply, the Bank was forced to the
expedient of transferring government deposits from sight to time accounts in order to maintain the reserve
ratio.
The Onset of the Financial Crisis
In the early autumn, a sense of complacency was still current in government and business circles. To this
must be attributed the lack of urgency which marked the initial response to the sterling crisis in London.
One of the nancial weeklies reported on 20 September that ‘State bonds will certainly not fall far or long,
given the healthy state of government nances, and that the whole of our economy appears to be in a
satisfactory condition...Once the unease is past which has been caused in Athens by the tempest on the Stock
Exchange in London, Greek shares will quickly and easily again nd their correct level, that which in the last
word is determined by the true state of a airs.’18
But the true state of a airs was to come as something of a shock to many people. On the day the above
article appeared in Athens, the decision was taken in London to abandon the gold standard. And the very
next day a series of meetings was held in Athens to determine whether Greece should follow the British
example.
At this point a brief word may be useful on the nature of Greece’s economic ties in this period with Britain.
Commercial relations were of secondary importance: in the second half of the 1920s only 12% of Greek
exports went to Britain and only 13% of imports came from her. Her previously dominant position in Greek
trade was disappearing: Germany took more Greek exports, the United States provided more imports.
British economic in uence in Greece was primarily nancial. London was the essential source of support for
Greek loans, and had been drawn upon to an increasing extent over the previous decade, owing to the
borrowing requirements of the post-war reconstruction programme.
p. 152
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


Table 6.2 Greeceʼs trading partners (percentages for the average of trade values in 1925–1929)
Source: LN, Balance of Payments and Trade: 1927–29 (Geneva, 1930), 309, 331.
Country Greek exports Greek imports
Germany 22.1 8.2
USA 21.0 16.4
Italy 19.0 6.9
UK 12.2 13.4
France 5.9 7.7
Others 19.8 47.4
TOTAL 100.0 100.0
In return for credit Britain acquired an ability to intervene in Greek economic a airs through two bodies
which supervised Greek nances. One was the International Financial Commission (IFC) which in 1931 had a
British chairman, as well as French and Italian representatives. The other was the League of Nations
Financial Committee which had begun to monitor economic, and especially monetary policy in Greece at its
thrice-yearly meetings. Sir Otto Niemeyer, a director of the Bank of England, was also a member of the
Committee, and it was under that body’s aegis that he was shortly to go to Greece to write a major report on
the state of Greek public nances.
It was no accident that the Bank of England should be represented in this way on the Committee. Greece, like
most small countries at that time, was on a gold exchange standard rather than the gold standard proper. In
other words, the reserves backing the drachma were not kept exclusively in gold, but rather to a large extent
in foreign convertible currencies. In the Greek case they were kept mostly in sterling, which till 1931 had
been deposited with the Bank of England. At the time of the crisis, three-quarters of these sterling deposits
had been transferred to Paris and New York. Yet neither of the latter two centres rivalled Britain’s
involvement in Greek a airs. Over half of the Greek foreign debt was held by British subjects, and it was
this fact which in the last analysis underlay the depth of British interest in the country.
p. 153 19
At the initial meetings called by Venizelos, to which he invited bankers and government o cials, powerful
voices urged continued adherence to the gold standard. One reason was the authorities’ over-con dence,
re ected in Diomedes’s prediction on the night of the 21st, that Britain’s troubles would be ‘temporary’ and
that Greece, though she would be a ected, would be less severely hit than other countries.
20
The commercial banks, too, had good reason to resist a devaluation of the drachma. They had large foreign
exchange liabilities, and faced heavy losses if forced to meet these after such a move. Alexandros Koryzis,
the Deputy-Governor of the National Bank—a man whose opinion was valued highly by Venizelos at this
time—argued strongly in this direction. Moreover, devaluation would also be likely to cause the prices of
Greek government securities to plummet, reducing the overall value of the banks’ assets.21
For the Government too the economic arguments militated against devaluation. Abandoning the gold
standard would dramatically increase the drachma cost of servicing the foreign debt. General elections were
due within a year: having constantly pledged the Government’s commitment to defending the ‘national
currency’ and having frequently praised its success in doing so, Venizelos must understandably have had
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


qualms about throwing his whole achievement into question. One should bear in mind that before
stabilization in 1928, Greece had passed through a period of in ation, economic insecurity, and political
turmoil; it was natural to fear a return to those conditions if stabilization was abandoned—and devaluing
the drachma was regarded as the rst step in that direction.
The most outspoken critic of remaining on gold was Kyriakos Varvaressos, at that time an adviser to the
Bank of Greece, and one of the outstanding economists and administrators of the inter-war period. A
member of that generation which had begun to shape public a airs in Greece under Venizelos before 1914,
Varvaressos was a German-trained university professor who had remained aloof from party politics.
Unfortunately he found himself at this critical moment far from the frenetic atmosphere of Athens. From
London, where he was meeting o cials from the Bank of England, he telegraphed his disapproval: both he
and Niemeyer, he wrote, regarded the decision to remain attached to gold as ‘hasty and ill-considered’, and
he warned that despite o cial announcements from the British Government, bankers expected sterling to
remain o gold for well over six months. His advice went unheeded. The drachma was linked to the dollar,
which remained on gold, in place of sterling; apart from a prohibition on dealings in sterling, no exchange
restrictions were imposed.
p. 154
22
Varvaressos’s forebodings were soon justi ed. Already on 22 September, panic selling on the Athens Stock
Exchange had forced it to close. A run now began on the foreign exchange holdings of the Bank of Greece,
picking up speed as the week progressed: on the 21st it lost $194,660, the next day $432,573, the day after
that $726,568. By the end of the week its losses totalled $3.6 million. Combined with other losses she had
sustained as a result of sterling’s depreciation, this drain forced the Bank into the humiliating position of
having to borrow $5.5 million from the NBG and, on the 28th, to announce restrictions on foreign exchange
business. Finlayson, the League adviser to the Bank, had recommended such action the previous Tuesday
(22 September) but had been overruled by Diomedes.23
There was widespread criticism of the manner in which the authorities had handled the crisis. In the Press,
expressions of con dence that the crisis would be short-lived soon gave way to accusations that
Government action had been inept and ine ectual; not only had it permitted the unrestricted sale of dollars,
but its mistaken prohibition on dealings in sterling had caused the Bank to forgo a further £ 1 million
sterling o ered to it by panicking sellers. Once again the National Bank had been obliged to bail the
Government out.
Attempting to allay the general disquiet, Venizelos gave a speech on the 27th, in which he rea rmed that
monetary stability was a prerequisite for the economic recovery of the country; the productive works would
go ahead as planned with the aid of foreign credits which, he assured his audience, would certainly be
forthcoming. This was Venizelos’s optimism at its most far-fetched. He insisted that the drachma was
stronger than the dollar and indeed stronger than the French franc too! Few countries could match Greece’s
achievement of balancing the budget three years in a row,. He predicted that the budget for the coming year
would also end in balance, and expressed faith in the stability of Greek nances. The possibility that there
might be di culties in nding funds to continue the productive works was raised, only to be dismissed:
‘The pessimists will say: he talks about productive works—where’s he going to get the money for them? I
promise you they will be completed as planned. It would be a catastrophe analogous to abandoning the gold
standard if we could not nish them. We will surely nd abroad the few millions which we need...’.
p. 155
24
In reality the British crisis had shaken the Prime Minister deeply. He believed it was vital that the Labour
Party should lose the forthcoming British election; otherwise it would mean ‘the end of today’s capitalist
democratic order. Britain would sink to a second-rate power, and that would be disastrous for mankind,
since the world required leadership and only Britain could provide it.’ For Greece, abandoning the gold
standard meant at the same time the end of the programme of economic reconstruction. And if that
happened, the refugee question would reappear in an acute form. So he, and many others, believed.
25
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


In a blatant attempt to nd a scapegoat for the mishandling of the September crisis the Liberal premier
engineered the resignation of his loyal supporter, Alexandras Diomedes, charging that he had failed to
enforce exchange restrictions with su cient rigour. The result was to leave the Bank leaderless at a critical
juncture; and as the politicians fought over the nomination of Diomedes’s successor its prestige took a dive.
The Governorship was o ered rst to the Liberal Andreas Mikalakopoulos, whose political ambitions
Venizelos mistrusted, and then to Koryzis and to Dimitrios Maximos, a leading Populist and former banker.
The rst two candidates turned it down. And despite being favoured by Venizelos, Maximos was ruled out
when shareholders voted instead for Diomedes’s deputy, Tsouderos. Although Tsouderos’s ties to the
Liberal Party were close, he quickly realized that these would not be enough to secure either his own
position or that of the Bank of Greece. Venizelos’s feelings towards him were lukewarm. Maximos, after his
rejection, began to step up his attacks through the anti-Venizelist Press. Underlining the bad feeling
which existed between the new central bank and the commercial sector, the senior management of the
National Bank termed Tsouderos’s appointment a ‘national misfortune ’.
p. 156
26
For the new Governor and his colleagues, this was a period of ux and improvisation. The restrictions which
had come into force on 28 September, supplemented by others on 8 October, were not only a sign of the
Government’s belated recognition of the gravity of the crisis; in reality they marked the beginning of the
end of the gold standard in Greece. The Bank of Greece was released from its obligation to exchange its
banknotes for gold or foreign currency. The sale of exchange was only permitted in the case of ‘necessary’
imports, the criterion for which grew progressively tighter over time: at rst only luxury imports were
prohibited; then only industrial raw materials and foodstu s were permitted; nally foodstu s only. A
special committee was set up to examine all applications for foreign exchange. Greek exporters were obliged
to surrender their earnings to the central bank, from whom they received drachmas at the o cial rate. The
export of capital from Greece was forbidden.
27
The uncertainty and experimentation in o cial policy-making can be seen to good e ect in the monetary
authorities’ handling of interest rates. The central bank was beset, on the one hand, by the League of
Nations Financial Committee, which had advocated raising the discount rate to 15% or 20%, and on the
other, by domestic industrialists and merchants, who attacked any upward movement in the rate as
in icting further damage upon the domestic economy. On 26 September, the discount rate was raised from
9% to 12%. This belated action had no e ect on the demand for exchange, which remained strong after the
introduction of restrictions. Nor did it stem the ight of capital. But perhaps its function was intended to be
more symbolic than practical, aimed at de ecting criticism at the forthcoming LNFC meeting, where, as the
message from the BIS had made plain, o ers of assistance would depend upon potential lenders being
satis ed that proper banking practice was being observed. On 27 September, Venizelos had declared that he
was prepared to see the rate rise to 20% or even 50%, if the safety of the drachma was at stake; but he had
come in for criticism from business circles for this remark. Barely one month had elapsed before it was
lowered again to 11% for reasons which remain obscure. The most likely explanation is that the move
represented an attempt by the newly elected Tsouderos to win support from the business community. At the
beginning of October a letter had been sent to Venizelos by three in uential organizations of industrialists,
expressing concern at the consequences of any further tightening of credit. The Prime Minister was asked to
request the banks not to withdraw funds from commerce and industry. It was suggested that providing
further tax relief on capital assets would encourage the repatriation of Greek capital. Venizelos’s reply was
non-committal, provoking further outbursts at the October general meeting of the Athens Chamber of
Commerce against his Government’s over-restrictive credit policy.
p. 157 28
29
In fact it is doubtful whether the business men’s complaints about the tightness of credit were justi ed. The
position of the commercial banks remained surprisingly stable in the last quarter of 1931. Drachma deposits
actually increased by 3 %. Deposits in foreign currencies were provisionally frozen from 29 September,
though it is true that the banks must have been anxious at the prospect of losses when these were unfrozen
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


again. There was evidence of only a slight contraction of credit, bills and advances together falling by less
than 3%. The central bank, despite a 19% fall in its gold holdings, actually increased its drachma advances
by 138 million drs., an increase of 85% on the September gure. In the autumn of 1931, then, there was no
severe curtailment of credit. Undoubtedly the banks were worried about the future; many of their assets
were either unrealizable or else badly reduced in value. But they were able to improve liquidity by selling o
300 million drs. of their holdings of gold national loans; for them, the real squeeze did not arrive until early
1932.30
It quickly became obvious, however, that whilst the domestic money supply was little a ected, the
measures introduced by the Government were quite insu cient to prevent the Bank of Greece’s reserve
from draining away. In the nal quarter of the year there was a net out ow of 735 million drs., more than
double that which occurred in 1929 in the wake of the Wall Street crash. The Bank’s purchases of exchange
in December were over 700 million drs. down on the same period the previous year and the smallest
monthly purchase since the opening of the Bank in May 1928.
p. 158
Uncertainty about future exchange rate policy caused a postponement of export orders. At the same time
exporters were unwilling to surrender exchange at the o cial rate when black market rates were much
higher. Another problem was that remaining on the gold standard had encouraged importers to keep stocks
high, since devaluation would increase import prices. The Bank of Greece, wishing to keep down the cost of
living by selling exchange at the o cial rate, found import demand remaining strong. In its desire to
maintain the value of the drachma, the Bank thus found itself pursuing a policy which worsened the trade
de cit and increased its own di culties. To preserve the ction that the reserve ratio was still above the
40% mark, the Bank moved a number of accounts from sight to time deposits, where they were not counted
against the reserve for the purpose of computing the reserve ratio.
In early December, Tsouderos presented Venizelos and the Finance Minister, Maris, with a memorandum in
which he examined movements in the Bank’s reserves since its foundation. Referring to the current crisis he
observed that ‘we do not believe that it is realistic to express the hope that by the e orts of the State and the
Bank of Greece alone, we can balance our external accounts and at the same time avoid the gradual erosion
both of our remaining disposable funds in gold abroad, and of our exchange’. It was, according to
Tsouderos, necessary for the commercial banks to be made to surrender their foreign exchange in return for
the equivalent in drachmas. In this way the central bank would tighten its control of the available exchange
within Greece. To Tsouderos it was surely clear that the crisis could have one of only two possible outcomes
for the Bank—either abolition or increased powers over the commercial banks.
31
But of course the commercial banks were strongly opposed to any legislation which increased the Bank of
Greece’s control over them. In the Press their supporters renewed their attacks on the Bank, and called for
its dissolution. Maximos, at that time economic adviser to the Populist Party, published an article in which
he proposed that the central bank be amalgamated with the National Bank. Similar suggestions had gained
wide currency in preceding months, but this was the rst time they had been publicly expressed by a gure
of such prestige. Maximos’s hostility to the Bank had clearly not been lessened by Tsouderos’s actions as
Governor. It was, in his view, incapable of functioning as an independent institution. As events had shown,
it could not survive without the support of the National Bank, and this fact ought to be recognized.
32
p. 159
The article in which his proposed reform of the Bank appeared described a package of measures for dealing
with the crisis. The Bank reform was not the most controversial of these. To keep Greece on the gold
standard Maximos urged two further measures: rstly, the drawing up and application of a comprehensive
economic policy; and secondly, the declaration of an immediate suspension of all foreign debt payments, in
order to save the Bank of Greece’s reserve.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


Both proposals ran contrary to current government policy. In Parliament ministers insisted that because of
the unpredictable way in which the crisis was evolving, it was best to introduce temporary measures, as the
Government had done, rather than an overall plan which might have to be scrapped as circumstances
changed. As Venizelos announced after meeting Maximos and rejecting his proposals, Greece was waiting
for the Great Powers to co-operate in a strategy for international recovery, and was con dent that an o er
of assistance would be made. Such expectations not only made it unnecessary to formulate a plan along
Maximos’s lines, they also precluded unilateral action to reduce the foreign debt burden, for this would rule
out all chances of a sympathetic hearing abroad.
33
The Government’s position was not easy. Committed by their entire strategy to dependence upon foreign
capital in ows, they were now, in e ect, forced to sit and wait in the hope that these would eventually be
resumed. The con dence of a few months earlier was fast disappearing. The budgetary outlook had changed
completely as a result of import restrictions, which, though vital to save exchange, had the e ect of
curtailing a major source of government revenue. Maris had been forced to admit this to Parliament in the
debate on the economy on 18 November, though he would not state publicly that there was a chance of the
Budget ending in de cit. However, the Bank of Greece informed Venizelos that, according to its estimates,
revenues from import duties would fall at least 20% below the predicted level and that the Budget would
close with a de cit of over 300 million drs.34
Speaking in the same debate as Maris, representatives of the mainstream political parties rea rmed their
commitment to the gold standard. Papanastasiou asserted that all parties agreed on the need to remain on
gold, and he directed his criticisms at the Government’s inability to do more to reduce consumption! The
conservative Venizelist Zavit-sianos attacked the Government for its lack of calm in handling the early
stages of the crisis, whilst for the Populists all their leader Tsaldaris could come up with was to reproach
Venizelos for not adopting the new exchange restrictions earlier. There was a good reason for the Populists’
caution: Venizelos had threatened to call new elections early if they challenged his own handling of the
crisis without putting forward recommendations of their own. Equally alarmed by the prospect of victory or
defeat, Tsaldaris hastened to a rm his basic approval of Liberal policy. Venizelos himself raised for the rst
time the possibility that foreign credits might not be forthcoming. His view, typically, was that it would
make little di erence: ‘with the English crisis, and the fall of the English pound, I do not know when we will
be able to obtain a foreign loan for the completion of the productive works. The Government is convinced
that even without a foreign loan, it will manage to continue the productive works. They may proceed a little
more slowly, but not much.’
p. 160
35
But foreign loans were not required for the public works alone, nor were the works the most urgent item on
the agenda. This was the solvency of the Bank of Greece, where despite the restrictions the reserve was
diminishing daily. The Government planned to wait for internationally co-ordinated action. But the next
few months were to show that events could not wait that long.
The Second Stage
The period from January to March 1932 marked a second stage in the nancial crisis, when the authorities
explored the possibility of obtaining assistance from abroad. The Government’s search for help centred
around two missions: a visit by Venizelos to the states represented on the IFC in January, and the later
Niemeyer mission to Athens.
In the middle of January, Venizelos made a much-publicized journey abroad, ying rst to Rome, then on to
Paris and London. In each capital he had talks with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance. With
him he brought a memorandum which spelled out the di culties confronting Greece, ‘surprise par les
e ets de la crise mondiale en pleine reconstruction économique’, outlined the Government’s economic
p. 161
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


programme and the prudence with which it had so far conducted its a airs, and concluded with a request for
a ve-year suspension of the debt amortization payments administered by the IFC and, in addition, a $50
million loan over four years. The Governments were warned that if no assistance were forthcoming, Greece
would be compelled to leave the gold standard, and give herself up to in ation and social turmoil. They were
invited, in the event that they disagreed with the proposals contained in the memorandum, to empower the
IFC or the LNFC to make alternative suggestions.36
Niemeyer met Venizelos during the latter’s stay in London and discussed the Greek proposals with him. To
Finlayson he declared con dentially that in his opinion they were ‘contradictory and, I fear, mistaken’.
Neither he, nor the IFC, whose views had also been solicited, ruled out a moratorium on amortization
payments if it proved to be necessary. But the problem was how could one then hope to raise further loans?
The Greek Government sought a long-term recovery scheme, but there was a danger of making unrealistic
demands on creditors’ sympathy. The point was to recur in the coming months, as the LNFC tried to
persuade the Greeks that a gradual approach might carry a better chance of success than the ambitious plan
embodied in Venizelos’s memorandum.
37
But if the Greeks approached matters with what seemed a rather unrealistic con dence, the involvement of
the Powers was characterized by considerable uncertainty and a reluctance to be seen to get involved. This
becomes apparent when one looks at the circumstances in which the Niemeyer mission was arranged.
The original idea to invite an expert to Athens to report on the state of the economy seems to have come
from the Bank of Greece. After the rebu from the BIS the previous autumn, some other authoritative
backing was required before overtures could begin anew for economic aid. The question was discussed when
Tsouderos visited the Bank of England in December. He reported that Niemeyer planned to visit Greece,
but wished to attract as little publicity as possible, pretending that the visit was a simple holiday, with no
o cial character. The date of arrival was to be ‘around the middle of January’.
p. 162
38
The absurdity of this idea must quickly have become evident and after a week Niemeyer himself changed his
mind, suggesting that it would be preferable to channel matters through the LNFC: the Greek Government
should make a request to the Committee for an expert to be sent, and if this was approved, he would be
prepared to go.39
Bringing the mission under the auspices of the League of Nations had important consequences. Unlike the
Bank of England, it had no funds of its own and little political in uence. The Greek Government was aware
of the Financial Committee’s reluctance to depart from its traditional role as policy adviser and nd itself
actively helping the Greeks to obtain loans. Yet such help was exactly what the Greeks wanted, or at the very
least a report which would give strong support to their case.
For these reasons the Greek application to the Financial Committee was ambiguous. Tsouderos, in his letter
to the President of the Committee, phrased the request in the most general terms: ‘In our desire that our co
operation with you for the opportunity [sic] facing of the situation should be based on a precise and
complete knowledge of the situation by both sides, I request you to send here a member of your Committee
who should study on the spot the actual position of the Bank of Greece, and of our public nances, and
confer with us upon the policy to be adopted.’40
A few days later, at a regular meeting of the Committee in Geneva, Varvaressos was asked to explain the
purpose of the mission. He was franker than Tsouderos, who had mentioned neither the intended report,
nor plans to use it in requesting help from abroad: ‘the expert could perhaps give us useful advice of an
alternative policy to follow. He could draw up an objective report which might be useful to us in the event
that the Government believes it necessary to seek international assistance.’41
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


The Greek request was approved, but it was not until the middle of February when Niemeyer nally arrived
in Athens. Moreover, despite mutual goodwill, it became clear that the two sides held di erent views about
what the mission could achieve, and this disagreement, re ected in two di ering approaches for dealing
with the crisis, ultimately led to the breakdown of co-operation.
p. 163
Niemeyer arrived in Athens on 16 February, where he remained two weeks gathering material for the report
before leaving to draft it in consultation with the other members of the Financial Committee. On the eve of
his departure he warned Venizelos of the di culties that might be caused by a unilateral suspension of
amortization payments. He emphasized the necessity, if the damage to Greece’s credit was to be minimized,
of having the support of the League, which would be conditional upon the suspension being for one year
only (rather than the ve years Venizelos had suggested). He also repeated his objections to the proposed
fusion of the central bank with the National Bank, concluding his remarks with the observation that such a
move would ‘involve the exclusion of Greece from international relationships in the sphere of Central
Banking’. It was a threat which was rapidly losing its force.
42
Within Greece, conditions worsened markedly in the rst quarter of 1932. From December onwards, import
restrictions began to bite and—in Finlayson’s words—‘brought commerce to a standstill’. There was
increasing unrest from business men and merchants, who had previously accepted the need to support the
Government. State policies were accused of being improvised and makeshift, re ecting the ‘hostile stance of
the State towards commerce’. Import merchants were embittered by rumours that they might be
supplanted by o cial import-distribution agencies. Exporters criticized the lack of o cial encouragement
for exports, which were penalized both by the relative appreciation of the drachma and by the ‘tax’ imposed
on exporters by virtue of their obligation to surrender foreign exchange at the o cial rate. Dissatisfaction
among the urban poor also increased. When import restrictions caused textile works at Naoussa, in
northern Greece, to close, workers and their families demonstrated, demanding bread. Unemployed men
smashed the windows of a bakery in Xanthi. In Nigrita gendarmes opened re on a crowd of demonstrating
workers who had tried to stop lorries loaded with tobacco leaf leaving the town; the Liberal Minister of
the Interior put the blame on a ‘few communists’ in the crowd. In Salonika there were similar tensions. By
February the gendarmerie, supported by an infantry and a cavalry regiment, were patrolling the streets of
the city to prevent further demonstrations there. A local eyewitness reported the ‘Widespread and terrible
distress through lack of food, ring, housing and clothing, especially in such a cold and prolonged winter’.
43
44
p. 164
45
Industrialists demanded a reduction in interest rates and an expansion of credit, claiming that they could
not increase output to take advantage of import restrictions if credit was tight. From this quarter too there
were complaints at the lack of co-ordination in o cial policy, and calls for a ‘dictator of production’. The
Athens Merchants’ Federation appealed for greater economic and monetary co-ordination, declaring that
these demands were ‘neither republican nor royalist, neither liberal nor anti-liberal’. And the ex-Governor
of the Bank of Greece, Diomedes, gave a speech on the e ects of the crisis, in the course of which he stated
that ‘the crisis had at least brought this bene t, that it opened many people’s eyes, and demonstrated that
those nations which genuinely wish to make progress, should not shrink from undertaking a comprehensive
economic programme’.46
As factories were forced to shut down for lack of funds, the commercial banks came under re. Predictably,
they were held responsible for much of the trouble ‘having originally been far too generous in granting
credits, and now being over-cautious, exacerbating our di culties’. In fact the commercial banks,
especially the smaller ones, were in no position to increase their lending. Their situation which had already
been precarious, worsened in early 1932, with the liquidity ratio of four major banks dropping from 16.8% in
December to 9.7% in April, and from 17.8% to 12.5% for the system as a whole. In February public
con dence slumped further with the news that the Cosmadopoulos Bank, closely associated with the
Thessaly grain trade, had been forced to suspend operations. The withdrawal of deposits accelerated,
outpacing the banks’ e orts to liquidate their commercial advances. From their point of view, credit was not
47
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


tight enough: their cash base (cash in till + cash with other banks + cash at the Bank of Greece) fell by
one-third between December and March. Saddled with a large amount of illiquid assets, they turned for
assistance to the Bank of Greece.
p. 165
48
Thus in the rst quarter of 1932 the central bank came into its own as a lender of last resort. It was an
important turning-point. Given the exigencies of the crisis, the commercial banks were obliged to
reconsider their previously hostile attitude towards the newcomer. In the rst four months of the year, the
Bank increased its commercial advances from 300 million drs. to 733 million drs.; of the latter sum, some
500 million represented direct advances to the commercial banks. In Finlayson’s judgement ‘the Bank of
Greece...in its quality as lender of last resort, intervened at the proper time and adopted the wisest course’.49
But supporting the domestic banking system inevitably a ected the Bank of Greece’s own balance-sheet. In
the rst quarter of the year, the quantity of notes in circulation fell only 2.5% despite a 19.5% drop in the
Bank’s cover. The reserve ratio was now well below the minimum 40% laid down in the Bank’s charter.
50
Rediscounting bills held by the commercial banks was not the only cause of the increase in the Bank’s
advances. It had also been obliged to extend advances to the state, and those drachma advances were in
large part immediately converted into exchange to meet the state’s external obligations. In January and
February $5 millions were sold to the state, out of a total sales of $14 millions; over the same period the net
out ow from the Bank’s reserve was $8.4 millions. By the rst week in March the reserve was down to
£6.5 millions. Unless foreign credits were quickly forthcoming, adherence to the gold standard could not
last long.
51
52
Defeat
In March attention switched to Paris where the LNFC was due to meet to discuss the ndings of the
Nierneyer mission at one of its regular meetings. The outlook was grim. Tsouderos had talks at the Bank of
France, but reported that the French were unlikely to provide help. All depended on getting a favourable
report from the League. Without this approaches to London or Paris were destined to fail. Venizelos appears
to have been con dent that with the Committee’s support he would be able to nd the money abroad. ‘Leave
it to me,’ he assured Finlayson. But he also hinted that lack of assistance might force him to resign.
p. 166 53
54
At the Bank of Greece there were again worries over renewed calls in the anti-Venizelist Press for the Bank’s
dissolution: the Bank had shown itself incapable of managing the monetary system; the inevitable
abandonment of the gold standard would make its position redundant. Venizelos should stop ‘making comic
speeches about his optimism’ and withdraw the privilege of note issue from the Bank. Tsouderos was
alarmed by these attacks and suggested that the Committee include in its report a defence of the Bank to
serve ‘as a sort of guiding basis to all Greek Governments’.55
On 10 March the LNFC session opened with a presentation by the Finance Minister, Maris. He traced the
origins of the crisis back to the previous September when ‘our resistance gave way at its weakest point, that
is, our monetary stability’. E orts to combat the exchange shortage had created new strains on the
Budget, whilst failing to halt the diminution of the Bank’s reserves. The prospects for the 1932–3 Budget
were not good—even after every possible economy, a de cit of 1300 million drs. seemed unavoidable. He
repeated the Government’s request for a long-term loan, rejecting short-term credits as destabilizing and
inadequate.
56
He was followed by Tsouderos, who concentrated upon the immediate problems caused by the fall in export
earnings and the scarcity of foreign exchange. Estimated exchange requirements for the coming six
months, he warned, exceeded the reserve at the Bank by some $2 millions. Without assistance very soon,
57
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


stabilization was doomed, and with it all hope of balancing the current budget. There would also be ‘another
tragic consequence’, namely, ‘the incapacity of the country to continue to honour its obligations towards
foreign countries’. Should Greece’s problems be considered within the context of the overall recovery plan
for Central and Eastern Europe that the League was about to debate? No, said Tsouderos, the formulation
of this plan would be a lengthy matter, and Greece’s problems were urgent. Thus at the outset, the Greek
delegation made it plain that only a massive transfusion of funds swiftly provided would, in the
Government’s opinion, be of any use.
p. 167
But the members of the LNFC were by no means satis ed that the Greek authorities were willing to make
su cient sacri ces on their own part; they regarded the proposals as an e ort to throw the burden of the
crisis on to their foreign creditors, and to enlist the help of the Committee in doing so. At further meetings
both Niemeyer and de Chalendar, the French delegate, closely interrogated Maris about his budgetary
policy, and urged the importance of further cuts—de Chalendar in a draconian vein recommending the
closure of schools and 20% cuts in public employees’ salaries—if there was to be any chance of persuading
foreign Governments to give the go-ahead for another loan. But Maris insisted on questioning his own
Budget Director’s estimates of yields from possible tax increases, and continued to demand that the
Committee accept a lengthy suspension of amortization payments, whilst ruling out major increases in
taxation. The Committee’s sympathy for the Greek case began to wane.58
On the Greek side there were di ering reactions to the way events were turning out. The contrast between
Tsouderos and Maris—two representatives of the Venizelist élite—is instructive. The former, despite an
indecisive meeting of the League’s Banking Sub-Committee, continued to remain in favour of working
through the League. As a key gure in Greece’s economic negotiations with the West over the past decade,
Tsouderos combined loyalty to the Liberals with a strong belief in the bene ts of internationalism. At a time
when the central bank was under attack within Greece, the League was an indispensable protector and ally.
Moreover, Tsouderos was a cautious man, by nature inclined to prefer formulating policy and protecting his
interests within an established framework.
Maris, on the other hand—a ‘good political boss, but neither a nancier nor a statesman’—-saw
advantages in intransigence. He was much closer than Tsouderos to Venizelos, and formed part of his inner
circle of advisers. Placating the League for Maris took second place to ensuring continued Liberal rule at
home. The likely political repercussions of carrying out the de ationary policies demanded by the LNFC
were not di cult to foresee. The Government’s term expired in the autumn, and during the coming
electoral campaign it risked sacri cing considerable popularity if it tried closing schools and raising taxes.
At the end of the 15 March debate, Maris angrily withdrew, warning the Committee that it was endangering
the entire economic programme of the Government, and that Venizelos might feel compelled to resign.
p. 168
59
60
In Athens relations between the major parties were marked by growing bitterness. Venizelos wanted to
resign and pave the way for an all-party government. His ostensible reason, that such a government would
be free to take the steps that he was honour-bound not to take (i.e. suspending debt repayments from 1
April), prompted the accusation that he was trying to evade responsibilities that were properly his. But in
reality his strategy had weightier motives behind it. The opposition Populist Party, with its monarchist past,
had denied the constitutionality of the Republic since its inception in 1924. By inviting the opposition to join
the Government, Venizelos hoped to gain whatever the outcome. Acceptance would bring the Populist Party
within the republican fold, as well as giving them a share of the blame if unpopular measures needed to be
taken. Refusal could be interpreted as cowardice and indecision. In the event, the opposition leader, Panayis
Tsaldaris, turned the idea down and, in so doing, reinforced the popular image of himself as a weak and
unimaginative politician who lacked concrete proposals for handling the situation.61
Having failed to secure Tsaldaris’s co-operation, Venizelos dramatically changed tack. At the end of March
he attacked the Populist leader ercely, criticizing his failure to defend the ‘bourgeois world’ and accusing
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


him of waiting to complete the destruction of the country which his side had crippled in 1922. He thus
deliberately recalled the question of responsibility for the Asia Minor katastro , provoking an
uncharacteristically sharp reply from Tsaldaris. Yet whilst both sides sought to pin the blame for the crisis
on the crimes and errors committed by their opponents a generation earlier, Venizelos continued to project
a con dence which the realities of the situation were far from justifying. One of his messages to the public
boasted de antly: ‘Despite defeatist cries, our country can victoriously face the world crisis and develop its
economy: even if the foreigners give us no aid, there is no danger of disaster.’
p. 169 62
But urgent decisions awaited him. Even if the Financial Committee’s report recommended credits, these
would not be immediately forthcoming: the next two months were critical. Maris wanted an immediate
suspension of the debt service payments, but there was little chance of the Committee agreeing to this.
French o ers of credits to tide Greece over the April payments were made and then withdrawn. On 23 March,
one day before the Committee published its report, the Government still had not decided whether or not to
make the April transfer. It was also pondering removal of its gold holdings in Paris out of the country,
perhaps anticipating their seizure by the French in the event of repudiation.63
Foreign advisers were pressing the reluctant Venizelos to accept that the ‘battle for the drachma’ was lost,
in the hope that depreciation would take the strain o the exchange reserves. Finlayson had recommended
this course to Venizelos as early as February. The following month in Paris Tsouderos was advised by a
member of the League’s Financial Committee to ‘abandon stabilization and postpone the debt service’. Back
in Athens Tsouderos passed on these thoughts to the Prime Minister ‘with circumlocutions, so as not to
make him angry right away. He listened with annoyance but without expressing an opinion.’ The advice in
fact so angered him that his rst thought was to dismiss the new Governor until it was pointed out to him
what a poor impression this would make. Cooler counsels prevailed and by early April Venizelos seems to
have resigned himself to the inevitable.64
The Financial Committee’s report, when it appeared in late March, emphasized the severity of the crisis in
Greece, and the need for rescue action. It stated that ‘the problem to be solved in Greece is... rst and
foremost one of a transfer of exchange, but it is also a budgetary one. Of the two problems, the more
di cult, and more urgent, in the Committee’s opinion, is undoubtedly the exchange problem.’ The
Committee had evidently tried to make concessions to the Greek position without encouraging excessive
expectations of foreign assistance.65
They did not want to provoke Venizelos into resignation. On the other hand there was little point in
promising what could not be delivered. In the event, their recommendations were much as had been
predicted: suspension of the transfer of all foreign debt amortization payments for one year, the drachma
equivalents being deposited with the Bank of Greece, and made available to the Government for necessary
expenditures connected with the public works programme. As Tsouderos had requested, there were
emphatic expressions of disapproval for plans to abolish the Bank of Greece. The report urged that public
spending be curtailed and conveyed a clear rebuke to Maris in the demand that there should be ‘greater
e orts to secure a properly balanced budget’. Government spending abroad, apart from the debt service,
had to be restricted, if Greece was to appeal successfully to foreign lenders. The terms on which the
Committee was ready to support such an appeal were left to the end. Venizelos’s long-term solution was
implicitly rejected. Rather, Greece was to be included in the League’s general recovery plan. The Committee
recommended that Greece receive ‘in the near future, a loan of no more than $10 millions, guaranteed by
international supervision’.
p. 170
At rst the Government reacted hesitantly. According to Maris, the report was ‘in many respects better than
had been expected’. Yet the possibility of holding back the April transfer was not immediately discarded.
When eventually the payment was made, Venizelos warned that ‘we cannot make any further interest
66 67
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


payments from the dwindling reserve of the Bank of Greece, unless the Council of the League of Nations
responds more fully to our requests than the Financial Committee has done’.68
Rather than break with the League at this point, the Government chose to wait for the Lausanne Conference
in June. Venizelos hoped to gain a sympathetic hearing for Greece at the Council meeting in April, and
there were rumours, though they proved nothing more, of emergency credits to tide Greece over till the
summer. Maris told Parliament that even if the Council meeting did not produce an improvement in terms,
there was still the likelihood of a satisfactory solution being reached at the proposed Conference in June.
69
70
71
But the pledges of support for the League were chie y for public consumption. Behind the scenes, o cial
opinion in Greece was now following the foreign lead and shifting in favour of devaluation. The leading
commercial banks, whose views had been solicited by the Government, were almost unanimous in
advocating abandonment of the gold standard. Continued adherence to gold after September had led
according to one major bank—to ‘withdrawals of bank deposits, an increase in the circulation of banknotes
in its most unfavourable form, stagnation in the export trade, signs of di culty among agricultural
producers, excessive pro ts for certain importers at the expense of the community as a whole, etc.’.
p. 171
72
Only the National Bank, which had su ered far less than the other banks, dissented. For the National Bank
devaluation would mean heavy losses on its foreign exchange deposits, which had risen during the crisis at
the same time as they had fallen with the other banks. By April, the NBG held two-thirds of the sight and
time deposits in foreign exchange. Having used its strength in the foreign exchange markets as a weapon
against the central bank, it now found the tables turned. What the National Bank desired, not unnaturally,
was a continuation of the system in force, where a free market in exchange was uno cially tolerated, and it
held the whip hand.73
But the National Bank now represented the minority view. On 8 April, Epaminondas Charilaos, a leading
industrialist, called for Greece to leave the gold standard even if Venizelos returned from Switzerland with
the desired help. For industrialists, devaluation was seen as a way to stimulate exports and permit a more
relaxed credit policy. According to one business man, the money supply could be increased by 25% without
in ationary consequences. It was pointed out that Greece had defacto abandoned gold when exchange
controls and import restrictions were introduced the previous autumn, and that she was now su ering all
the disadvantages and reaping none of the bene ts that full devaluation would have o ered. The state—it
was argued—should embark upon a coherent economic programme to achieve external balance, and, as
part of such a plan, the Bank of Greece should become the chief regulator of foreign exchange, with
increased powers over the commercial banks.
74
75
76
Events in Geneva, where the League of Nations Council was meeting in the second week of April, nally
cleared the way for devaluation. On 13 April, Venizelos met the British and French Foreign Ministers and
warned them that payments due on 1 May could not be made without immediate foreign assistance. Sir John
Simon made no comment, while Tardieu objected weakly. Venizelos also met uno cially with members of
the Financial Committee, to whom he hinted that Greece might be forced to leave the gold standard, rather
than exhaust the central bank’s reserves by transferring the May and June interest charges. Far from
protesting, the Financial Committee seems to have recognized that this was the only practicable option.
Caught between the ambitious schemes of the Greek authorities and the caution of their own superiors at
home, they had simply run out of time. At Geneva they counselled Finlayson that departure from the gold
standard was the only way out. He noted that ‘it is indeed curious to re ect that the same persons who had
advised Greece to stabilize its currency in 1928 should have been compelled to advise departure from gold in
1932, but I am certain that they were right in each case; stabilization was necessary in 1928 to surmount an
in ation crisis, the opposite course is indicated today to meet a de ation crisis’.
p. 172
77
78
79
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


The utter inconsequentiality of the Council’s deliberations, when it met on 15 April, served to emphasize
that the limits of international co-operation had now been reached. The Greek Prime Minister warned the
Council in sombre tones to ‘bear in mind that if you leave the small states without assistance, a black future
awaits Europe’. But his oratory had little e ect: a decision on the general part of the Financial
Committee’s report was deferred until the following month. The Council’s verdict on the matter of a debt
moratorium was that this was something to be settled between the Greek Government and the foreign
bondholders alone. No opinion was given as to whether Greece ought to suspend the May debt payments,
nor did it mention the need to raise a further loan.
80
81
This was taken in Greece as an indication that default would be tolerated. Venizelos remarked: ‘We have
crossed the Rubicon.’ Maris resigned as Finance Minister, after failing to persuade Venizelos to hold the
immediate elections which he argued were necessary if the Liberal Party was to avoid being blamed for
abandoning the gold standard. He was succeeded by Kyriakos Varvaressos, who now had the doubtful
satisfaction of seeing his criticisms of government policy borne out. On 25 April Varvaressos brought before
Parliament the legislation which marked the o cial abandonment of the existing parity. The Bank of Greece
was henceforth relieved of the obligation to exchange its notes for gold, and was given greatly increased
powers to supervise all gold and foreign exchange transactions. New measures now came into force altering
the terms on which export earnings had to be surrendered to the central bank. A further law announced
sweeping ministerial powers to enforce further import restrictions. Management of the exchange rate was
henceforth to be left to the central bank’s discretion.
82
p. 173
On Wednesday, 27 April, the new system came into force and Greece o cially departed from the gold
standard. Because this event had been widely predicted, it caused little surprise. The measures were
implemented at the beginning of Holy Week, so most of the banks remained closed for a week. When they
reopened business was calm and there was no panic. But on the exchanges the drachma fell swiftly,
dropping against sterling from 456 to 539 on 5 May; it continued its downward movement for the rest of the
year, bottoming at 628 in January 1933.
Consequences
The persistent struggle of the Liberal Government to keep Greece on the gold standard raises the question:
was it worth it? Was it not clear, as one author argued later, that devaluation was inevitable, and that the
best policy would have been to protect the Bank of Greece’s reserves as soon as possible?83
The situation was rich in ironies. Venizelos, who had been lukewarm about the merits of the original
monetary stabilization scheme, became the drachma’s staunchest defender. The members of the LNFC, who
had insisted in 1927 that Greece join the gold standard, realized by the winter of 1931 that devaluation was a
necessary step if the new central bank was to survive. Hence in the spring of 1932 banking experts at Geneva
found themselves urging Venizelos to abandon gold.
p. 174
Venizelos’s reluctance to take their advice seems to have been prompted by three concerns. Firstly, he hoped
that the disruption of the London money market would be short-lived—when it reopened Greece would be
able to resume borrowing with greater ease if the drachma remained at par. Secondly, if Greece left gold, it
was di cult to say where the exchange rate should be xed: the earlier experience of oating rates in the
early 1920s had not been encouraging. For most Greek policy-makers, depreciation was a step backwards
with potentially hazardous domestic consequences. Thirdly, and this was perhaps uppermost, adherence to
the gold standard had been invested with political signi cance: the defence of the ‘national currency’—as
elsewhere in Europe—became a test of political virility, which explains why no party in Greece
recommended leaving gold. In the parliamentary debate on 18 November 1931, there was unanimity over the
need to defend the drachma and Tsaldaris even felt obliged to deny that he had suggested the gold standard
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


should be abandoned. In a country where appeals to the sense of national honour found a ready response,
abandoning the gold standard would have been (and was to be) interpreted as a mark of Liberal weakness.
84
It is easy to be wise after the event. Nevertheless, the Liberal Government’s indi erence to strains in the
international economy, and in the country’s balance of payments, blinded it to unpleasant truths. There had
been no shortage of commentators, from Montagu Norman downwards, to warn the Greek authorities that
their borrowing policies would have to be drastically revised. In the Greek case, the chronic balance of
payments de cit and the idiosyncratic functioning of the banking system made devaluation inevitable; even
had the political will been present, the Bank of Greece could not have enforced a de ationary policy on a
su ciently severe scale to bring the external current account into surplus.
p. 175
The fact that ultimately Greece did abandon gold, unlike a number of other countries in Europe, does not
indicate that policy-makers had woken up to the advantages of this policy. On the contrary, they were
pushed into it by fear of the alternatives, notably the domestic implications of severe de ation in an election
year. Ironically the extent of Greece’s indebtedness, and the strain this put on the balance of payments made
leaving gold inevitable if the country’s exchange reserves were not to be totally depleted. Other countries,
less in debt, or with political élites less sensitive to popular pressure, faced a more di cult choice. Once the
drachma was allowed to fall, the sudden increase in the drachma cost of servicing the foreign debt made
some form of default inevitable. And default in turn precluded an eventual return to the resources of
Western capital markets. Thus the nancial crisis of 1931–2 marked the end of the reconstruction strategy
of the 1920s.
The culmination of the nancial crisis in the spring of 1932 was regarded as signalling the bankruptcy of the
Liberal Government’s economic policies. In fact it did more: it made the charismatic Venizelos look
ine ectual. The US Consul in Salonika reported on 6 April that ‘considerable discontent with the present
government prevails, not only among those who are opposed to Venizelos in principle, but amongst the
Liberals who supported him in 1928...Even the refugees, who have always supported Mr. Venizelos to the full
have begun to show dissatisfaction with his present policies.’
If the failure of the ‘battle for the drachma’ had disappointed many staunch Liberals, on the Left of the
Venizelist camp there were others who remained unconvinced that the battle should have been fought at all
The Communist Party argued that Vcnizelos’s defence of the gold standard had been at the expense of the
labouring classes. Dimitris Pournaras, the theoretician of the increasingly popular Agrarians, took a similar
line:
The majority of working Greeks were literally proletarianized and yet the Liberal Party insisted
that only scal normalcy would save the country. The drama of the provincial or the peasant
was unimportant compared with the danger facing those friends who stood to lose from a fall in
the drachma. The economic policy of the bourgeois state ceased long ago to have even super cially
a popular basis. It rests openly and brazenly on native capitalism and party cronies.
p. 176
Thus the nancial crisis forced wider the ssures that had already begun to open up between radical and
moderate forces within the Venizelist camp. For the Liberal Prime Minister, his charisma waning, a
turbulent summer lay ahead. On 21 May he resigned exhausted amid a wave of strikes, insisting that he
would not return unless Parliament approved far-reaching measures to increase the powers of the executive
and curb Press freedoms. But when the minority government of Alexandros Papanastasiou started to court
working-class popularity by announcing plans to bring in long-awaited legislation on social insurance,
Venizeios performed a quick volte-face. He brought down the Papanastasiou Government on the grounds
that it had been formed by a ‘social class party’, and formed a new Liberal administration to lead the
country into the autumn elections. All this suggested that Venizclos’s Tour years’ were ending in anxiety
rather than triumph. Yet the sense of failure was at least partly self-induced. The abandonment of gold
85
86
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


Notes
ironically turned out to pave the way for an unexpectedly swift upturn, based on the domestic economy.
With the collapse of international trade, the Greek economy moved uncertainly towards autarky.
1 Finlayson-Niemeyer, 26 Nov. 1932, AET 46/163.
2 M. de Ceceo, Money and Empire: The International Gold Standard, 1890–1914 (Oxford, 1974), 60. LN, International Currency Experience: Lessons of the Interwar Period (Geneva, 1944), ch. 4, compares the theory with the inter-war reality. 3 K. Kostis, Oi trapezes kai i krist, 1929–1932 (Athens, 1986), ch. 2.
4 ʻNotes of the discussions of our reports: Genevaʼ, 11 May 1931, AEV 342; E. Venezis, Emmanouil Tsouderos (Athens, 1966), 74.
5 Vouli ton Ellinon, Ekthesis epi tou nomoschediou ʻPeri anonymon etaireion kai trapezonʼ (Athens, 1931), 50–68; Bank of Greece, Dyo simeomata epi tou pros chediou nomou: ʻPeri anonymon etaireion kai trapezonʼ (Athens, 1930), 22–36; Kostis, Oi trapezes kai i krisi, pp. 52–3, 108–9.
6 IBA, Kalamata, YR 1930/1, 6; IBA, Patras, YR 1930/1, 10. 7 LNFC, 42nd session, procès-verbal, 8, p. 6, AET; Venezis, Tsouderos, p. 68. 8 On the background to the 1931 Public Works Loan, see K. Karamanlis, Ele herios Venizelos kai oi exoterikes mas scheseis: 1928–1932 (Athens, 1986), 272–7. 9 ESV, 27 Mar. 1931, 1,296. 10 Cited in N. Anastasopoulos, Istoria tis ellinikis viomichanias, iii (Athens, 1947). 11 Finlayson-Venizelos, 30 June 1931, AEV 343. 12 Tsouderos-Diomedes, 2 May 1931, AEV 342. Norman is reported as having said that ʻGreece was extremely lucky, first in being able to fund short-term debts at such a time, which England could not possibly do, and secondly in being able to finance a programme of twelve months, when most countries could not do so for twelve weeksʼ. 13 EV, 10 Feb. 1932. 14 Tsouderos-Diomedes, 28 July 1931, AKT 101/48. 15 Diomcdes-Tsouderos, 10 Sept. 1931, AET 101/52. 16 McGarrah-Diomedes, 17 Sept. 1931, AET 65/12. 17 Suvich (LNFC)-Diomedes, 11 Sept. 1931, AET ʻTexts Collected for a I Iistory of the Bank of Greeceʼ. 18 OT, 20 Sept. 1931. 19 Ministre des A aires Étrangères, La Grèce et la crise mondiale (Athens, 1933), 42; G. Andreopoulos, ʻThe IPC and Anglo
Greek Relations (1928–33)ʼ, Historical Journal, 31(2) (1988), 341–64, is informative 10.1017/S0018246X00012917 .
20 EV, 24 Apr. 1932, articles by Maris and Tsouderos. 21 E. Venezis, Chronikon tis Trapezis lis Ellados, 1928–1952 (Athens, 1955), 100–1; IBA, General Manager, YR, 1932/3, 3–4. 22 G. Pyrsos, Symvoli eis tin istorian lis Trapezis tis Ellados, i (Athens, 1936), 88–9; FO 371/15230 C8185/18, Ramsay (Athens)Sargent, 24 Oct. 1931. 23 Diomedes-Venizelos, 28 Sept. 1931, AEV343; FO 371/15230 C7450/18, Harvey-Reading, 28 Sept. 1931. 24 OT, 10 Oct. 1931. 25 Karamanlis, Exoterikes scheseis, p. 286. 26 G. Dafnis, I Elias metaxy dyo polemon, 1923–1940 (Athens, 1955), ii, 107–11; Karamanlis, Exoterikes scheseis, p. 282; FO 371/15230 C8185/18, Ramsay (Athens)-Sargent, 24 Oct. 1931. 27 N. Pyrris, La Crise monètaire en Crece (Paris, 1934), 173. 28 Pvrsos, Symvoliy pp. 90–1. 29 DEVE/A, Oct. 1931.
30 ʻSituation of the Commercial Banks in Greeceʼ, memo, bv Finlayson, Aug. 1932, AET 74/1. 31 ʻSituation and Development of the Coverʼ, unsigned memo., 4 Dec. 1931, AET 65/1. 32 Proia, 5 Dec. 1931. 33 Dafnis, Metaxy dyopalemon, ii. 111–13. 34 PSV, 18 Nov. 1931, 10; also Bank of Greece-Venizelos, 17 Oct. 1931, AEV 344; Tsouderos-Venizelos, 5 Dec. 1931, AEV 180. 35 PSV 19 Nov. 1931, 25–30; USNA 868.00/659, Skinner (Athens)-State, 19 Nov. 1931; FO 371/15229 C8807/18, Ramsay (Athens)-Simon, 20 Nov. 1931. 36 ʻMemorandum remis par le Prèsident du Conseil aux Gouvernements anglais, fraéais et Italienʼ, n.d., AET 8/1. 37 Niemeyer-Finlayson, 29 Jan. 1932, AET 65/15. 38 Tsouderos (Paris)-Bank of Greece, 12 Dec. 1931, AEV 179.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


39 Niemeyer-Tsouderos, 22 Dec. 1931, AET 56/2. 40 Tsouderos-LNFC, ijan. 1932, AET 56/4. 41 LNFC, 44th session, 11 Jan. 1932, proces-verbal, 2, p. 32. 42 Niemeyer-Venizelos, 29 Feb. 1932, AEV 345. 43 Bank of Athens, Bulletin Économique et Financier (Dec. 1931), 2,000–1; Finlayson—Venizelos, 10 Feb. 1932, AET 65/20. 44 Charilaos to Athens Chamber of Commerce, 16 Feb., 1932 in DEVE/A, Apr.-May 1932. 45 FO 371/15966 C2092/462, Ramsay-FO, ʻSalonica Monthly Report no. 23ʼ, 7 Mar. 1932; PSV, 17 Feb. 1932, 294–5; GonatasVenizelos, 5 Mar. 1932, 17 Mar. 1932, AEV 173/110. 46 DEVE/A, Mar. 1932; EV, 21 Mar. 1932; A. Diomedes, Mela tin krisin (Athens, 1935)66. 47 EV,16 Jan. 1932. 48 ʻSituation of the Commercial Banks in Greeceʼ, unsigned memo., 9 Mar. 1933, AET 74/1; USNA 868.00 Gen. Cond/13, Morris (Athens)-State, 21 Mar. 1932. 49 ʻSituation of the Commercial Banks in Greeceʼ, AET 74/1. 50 ʻThe Policy of the Bank of Greece and the Situation of the Commercial Banksʼ, memo, by Finlayson, 31 May 1932, AET 72/5; ʻThe Extension of Credit and Exchange Restrictionsʼ, unsigned memo., 16 May 1932, AET 46/168. 51 Tsouderos-Niemeyer, 16 Mar. 1932, AEV 173. 52 Tsouderos-Niemeyer, 19 Mar. 1932, AET 56/36. 53 Tsouderos-Nicmeycr, 10 Mar. 1932, AET 56/14. 54 Finlayson-Niemeyer, 8 Mar. 1932, AET 56/6. 55 Tsouderos-Niemeyer, 8 Mar. 1932, AET 56/11. 56 LNFC, 44th session, 10 Mar. 1932, procès-verbal, 6, p. 4. 57 Ibid., 11 Mar. 1932; see under AET 54/2. 58 LNFC, 45th session, 15 Mar. 1932, procès-verbal, 14, pp. 7–8. 59 Maris-Venizelos, 15 Mar. 1932, AET2/24; USNA868.00/675, Morris-State, n.d. 60 LNFC, 45th session, 15 Mar. 1932, procès-verbal, 14, p. 8. 61 FO 371/15959 C956/324, Ramsay (Athens)-Sargent, 23 Jan. 1932; USNA 868.00/672, Morris-State, 31 Mar. 1932. 62 EV, 20 Mar. 1932, 30 Mar. 1932. 63 Ibid., 15 and 24 Mar. 193 2; Tsouderos (Paris)-Bank of Greece, 23 Mar. 1932, AET 2/40–2. 64 Tsouderos-Venizelos, 21 Mar. 1932, AEV 345; Venezis, Tsouderos, pp. 88–9. 65 Taprotapeninta chronia tis Trapezis tis Ellados (Athens, n.d.), app.; ʻUno icial Notes of a Meeting held in Genevaʼ, 13 Apr. 1932, AET 62/9. 66 EV, 24 Mar. 1932. 67 Bank of Greece-Tsouderos (Paris), 24 Mar. 1932, AET 2/47. 68 Dafnis, Metaxy dyo polemon, ii. 125. 69 EV, 25 Mar. 1932. 70 Ibid., 26 Mar. 1932. 71 PSV, 31 Mar. 1932, 645. 72 ʻMemorandumʼ by the Popular Bank, 2 Apr. 1932, AFLT 60/3. 73 ʻMemorandumʼ by the NBG, n.d., AET 60/1. 74 DEVE/A, June 1932, minutes of the council meeting of 8 Apr. 75 Ibid. 76 EV, 23 Apr. 1932.
77 D. Kaiser, Economic Diplomacy and the Origins of the Second World War (Princeton, NJ, 1980), 40–52; Karamanlis, Exoterikes scheseis, p. 306.
78 ʻGreeceʼs Departure from the Gold Standardʼ, memo, by Finlayson, 9 May 1932, AET 77/1, p. 4. 79 Ibid.
80 Karamanlis, Exoterikes scheseis, p. 306. 81 Dafnis, Metaxy dyo polemon, ii. 126.
82 Karamanlis, Exoterikes scheseis, p. 307. 83 Pyrsos, Symvoli, pp. 90–1. It is instructive to set the Greek ʻbattle for the drachmaʼ in a comparative context. In Sweden a combination of destabilizing speculative outflows and intellectual backing (from Myrdal and others) for the abandonment of gold led the Swedes to devalue just one week a er the British: see B. Thomas, Monetary Policy and Crises: A Study of Swedish Experience (London, 1936), passim. In most other countries the intellectual and policy consensus was, as in Greece, in favour of defending existing parities. This point is made forcefully for Germany by K. Borchardt, ʻCould and Should Germany have Followed Great Britain in Leaving the Gold Standard?ʼ, Journal of European Economic History, 13(3) (Winter 1984), 471–99. The lack of support for devaluation in France emerges from Tom Kemp, ʻThe French Economy
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024


under the Franc Poincarèʼ, Economic History Review, 24(1) (1979), 82–99. The variety of country experiences in Latin America is surveyed in Diaz Alejandro, ʻLatin America in the 1930sʼ, in R. Thorp (ed.), Latin America in the 1930s (London, 1984), 23–4. It is clear that in almost all cases those advocating devaluation or depreciation were a tiny minority—the Swedish economists being an exception. Policy-makers insisted on remaining on gold unless or until they were pushed o it. Greece was exceptional in European terms in the extent of her devaluation though this was matched in Japan and Latin America. 84 FO 371/15229 C8807/18, Ramsay-Simon, 20 Nov. 1931; the application of martial slogans to economic crises was, of course, common outside Greece. For striking South European parallels see S. Ben-Ami, Fascism from Above (Oxford, 1983), 338; A. Lyttelton, The Seizure of Power: Fascism in Italy, 1919–1929 (Princeton, NJ, 1988), 333, 342. 85 USNA 868.00/673, Morris-State, 26 Apr. 1932; FO 371/15966 C3474/462, Ramsay-Simon, 23 Apr. 1932; D. Pournaras, I oikonomiki thesis ton agroton (Athens, 1932), 95.
86 FO 371/15966 C4868/462, Ramsay-Simon, 5 June 1932.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/book/32987/chapter/279558204 by London School of Economics user on 05 June 2024