Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe
Matthias Morys
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314 Landmark Publications on Central, East, and South-East Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319 Gerschenkron (1962, 1965) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320 Hajnal (1965) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322 Berend and Ránki (1974) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323 Lampe and Jackson (1982) and Kaser and Radice (1985–1989) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325 Long-Term Factors Impeding Economic Growth in CESEE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328 The “Rise and Fall” of Serfdom in the Historiography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328 Institutional Weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333 Demography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335 Market Access and Market Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336 Where Did the CESEE Economies Stand by the Time Central Planning Was Introduced? . . . 339 Late Tsarist Russia and the Soviet Union Until 1928 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339 Economic Achievements of the State Socialist Period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
Abstract
Following a brief historiography of cliometric research on the Eastern half of Europe and a summary of six pioneering publications, this chapter discusses the main answers given to the three defining research questions in this field. First, what were the long-term factors impeding economic development in the region? Second, how backward was Eastern Europe by the time the command economy was introduced? Third, how has research assessed the state socialist period?
M. Morys (*) University of York, York, UK e-mail: mm585@york.ac.uk; matthias.morys@york.ac.uk
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 C. Diebolt, M. Haupert (eds.), Handbook of Cliometrics, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35583-7_53
313


Keywords
Serfdom · Central and Eastern Europe · State socialism · Path dependency · Market integration
Introduction
Cliometric approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe1 (CESEE) are of recent vintage. Their emergence went hand in hand with the political and economic transformation in the region after the fall of the Berlin Wall (1989) and the collapse of the Soviet Union (1991). Only then could the modern economic history approach make its way into Eastern lands and bear academic fruit. There were two sets of important precedents stretching back to the 1960s. They were not cliometric, but have exerted an important influence on economic history research on Eastern Europe.2 While their statistical techniques were limited, they formulated the research questions of the future. The first strand is concerned with fundamental questions of long-run economic growth. While global in theory, in practice such research focused on Europe, positing a fundamental dichotomy between a more successful Western European experience and a less benign Eastern European one. The paradigmatic case is John Hajnal’s (1965) “European Marriage Patterns in Perspective” which provided statistical evidence for two different demographic regimes separated by a well-defined line between St. Petersburg (Russia) and Trieste (Italy, on the country’s border with Slovenia): a more benign demographic regime to the West of this line and a less growth-conducive one to the East of it. In theory, Hajnal claimed to dichotomize between the Western European experience which he referred to as the European Marriage Pattern – and the rest of the world. In actual research practice, most of his evidence (certainly for the periods before 1900) came from Western and Eastern Europe. Similarly, Alexander Gerschenkron’s grand theory on economic backwardness was meant to be relevant to the historical experience of all countries in their endeavors of catching up with England. His famous collection of essays of 1962 should be seen in the context of the Cold War and decolonization, two important
1Reflecting a long and well-established scholarly tradition, we will distinguish between Central Europe, East Europe, and South-East Europe. Central Europe refers to the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia. East Europe relates to the European successor states of the Soviet Union (Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Russia, and Ukraine). South-East Europe (also referred to as the Balkans) encompasses the successor states of the Ottoman Empire on the Balkan Peninsula (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Romania, Serbia, and Slovenia). The number of independent countries on this territory has increased from four (Austria, Prussia, Russia, Ottoman Empire) to 22 over the past two centuries, and the sharp distinction between the three sub-regions has become blurred in the process. We will occasionally refer to “Eastern Europe” to avoid repetition of the acronym CESEE; in this case (“Eastern” as adjective) we mean CESEE as a whole.
2By “Eastern Europe” we mean CESEE as a whole. Please see the previous footnote.
314 M. Morys


post-World War II developments reaching new heights in the early 1960s, and calling for historical precursors and guidance. Yet his work was empirically motivated by the continental European experience in which Eastern Europe took an important function. He saw Tsarist Russia and post-independence Bulgaria as the quintessentially backward countries and used their economic histories to substantiate his views on long-term economic development. The second strand of pioneering literature was concerned with Eastern European economic history per se. While also not cliometric, its protagonists from Eastern Europe were aware of the fundamental methodological changes in U.S. economic history in the 1960s, and they made an honest effort to underpin their more conventional economic histories by an abundance of – largely unprocessed statistical data. One of the earliest (and also most influential) contributions of this strand of literature is Berend and Ránki’s (1974) magisterial “Economic development in East-Central Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries,” which gives a succinct economic history account of Central Europe and South-East Europe (with the exception of Greece) from ca. 1800 to 1949. While not free from Marxist ideological biases, such work acted as an important bridge between East and West during the Cold War. Among others, it summarized (and translated) historical research carried out in Eastern Europe and made it accessible to Western scholars. It was not by coincidence that both authors hailed from Hungary. The country allowed greater access to Western academia than other Soviet bloc countries, including regular conference attendance and prolonged research stances in the United States and Western Europe.3 Cliometric work on Eastern Europe only began with Ph.D. students at leading U.S. institutions in the late 1960s and 1970s. The three pioneers were Paul R. Gregory (Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1969), Jacob Metzer (Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1972), and John Komlos (Ph.D. in History from the University of Chicago in 1978, followed by a Ph.D. in Economics from the same institution in 1990). Their earliest contribution (discussed in this chapter) is Jacob Metzer’s “Railroad Development and Market Integration: The Case of Tsarist Russia” (1974), a reworked chapter of his Ph.D. obtained two years earlier. Metzer’s article constitutes a very “pure” example of early cliometric work in that it took one of the key areas of the new methodological approach – namely, the importance of railroads for economic development – and addressed it for an under-researched part of the world. John Komlos’ 1983 book, “The Habsburg Monarchy as a Customs Union: Economic Development in Austria-Hungary in the Nineteenth Century,” was a broader cliometric contribution. The book addressed a number of academic debates on Austrian and Hungarian economic development by means of econometric methods, and it can reasonably be seen as the first cliometric monography on Eastern
3For example, from the eleven contributors born or raised in Eastern Europe contributing to Kaser and Radice (1985–89) – described below – Hungary was the only country where authors were mainly based in Eastern Europe (Hungary: 1 émigré vs. 3 academics in the country; Poland: 1 émigré vs. 1 academic in the country; Czechoslovakia and Romania: émigrés only (4 and 1, respectively)).
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 315


Europe. Finally, Paul R. Gregory’s “Russian National Income 1885–1913” (1982) was the first application of historical national accounting (another important area of early cliometrics) to the region, revising (upwards) our view on the late Tsarist economy and setting the stage for GDP reconstructions for Austria-Hungary by Schulze (2000), for Greece by Kostelenos et al. (2007), for Bulgaria by Ivanov (2012), for Romania by Axenciuc (2012), and for Serbia by Mijatović and Zavadjil (2023). Such early contributions to the cliometrics of Eastern Europe were of high quality and remain historiographical landmarks to this day. Yet they were limited in number. Eastern European scholars did not practice cliometrics at the time, and Western scholars would typically need an “Eastern” biographical link to work on the region (John Komlos, for instance, was born in 1944 in Budapest and emigrated in 1956 to the United States after the failed Hungarian uprising). In addition to “supply constraints” (of good scholars), there also was limited demand in the West for quantitative research into Eastern European economic history, with the possible exception of Russia. Western interest at the time was motivated by Cold War needs and hence focused on the current economic performance of the state socialist economies. This is evidenced, among others, by the excellent studies by the CIA, the United States Congress Joint Economic Committee, and the “Research Project on National Income in East Central Europe” (under Thad P. Alton), which continue to form the basis of our GDP estimates for Eastern European countries for the period 1950–1989 (they will not be discussed further, given their statistical rather than cliometric focus; cf. Vonyó and Markevich (2021) for a detailed discussion). John Lampe and Mervyn Jackson’s (1982) towering “Balkan Economic History, 1550–1950: From Imperial Borderlands to Developing Nations” stands out as an exception which proves the rule (cf. section “Landmark Publications on Central, East and South-East Europe”). It was only with the fundamental political and economic changes of 1989–1991 that both the supply of scholars and the demand for research into Eastern Europe increased. Western scholars enjoyed a head start, as evidenced by Paul R. Gregory’s “Before Command. An Economic History of Russia from Emancipation to the First Five-Year Plan” (1994), Michael Palairet’s “Balkan Economies c. 1800–1914. Evolution without Development” (1997), and Robert C. Allen’s “Farm to Factory. A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial Revolution” (2003). They all stood, each in their own way, for a renewed interest in the region. As the transition economies left their communist past behind, Western academia wanted to know what had preceded the state socialist period. Not surprisingly, such contributions often spoke to particularly difficult situations as they had emerged in the transition era. Palairet’s book helped inform debate on the deeper origins of the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s. More ambitious still was Allen’s contribution. Only 12 years after the demise of the Soviet Union and the turbulent 1990s in Russia, he attempted to provide an explicitly positive assessment of the state-led industrialization efforts of the Soviet Union starting with the first five-year Plan in 1928.
316 M. Morys


It took another decade for a new generation of scholars coming from Eastern Europe to produce cliometric work on their home region. Initially, such scholars would typically work as postdoctoral fellows with established Western scholars and co-author the relevant work (Andrei Markevich with Mark Harrison (2011) discussed below; Alexander Klein with Steve Broadberry (Broadberry and Klein 2011) in this text; Martin Ivanov with Adam Tooze (2007) discussed below). Later on, they would get acquainted with cliometric work during their Ph.D. studies at Western institutions and choose topics from their own country (Cvrcek 2013, Malinowski 2016, 2019) or Eastern Europe in general (Vonyó 2017, Vonyó and Klein 2019). Cliometric work on Central, East, and South-East Europe has been greatly strengthened by this new generation of scholars from the region, yet it is not confined to them. Scholars from Germany (Kopsidis, Morys, Schulze, Wolf) and the United States (Dennison, Gregg, Nafziger) have been particularly active in recent years. This internationalization of research resulted recently in a collective effort by a group of 24 scholars from North America, Western Europe, and Eastern Europe to give an up-to-date account of quantitative economic history research on the region. Edited by Matthias Morys, “The Economic History of Central, East and South-East Europe, 1800 to the Present” (2021a) provides a thematic approach to the economic history (and the respective historiography) on all countries in the region, beginning with four countries in 1800 (Austria, Prussia, Russia, and the Ottoman Empire) and ending with 22 countries in the book chapters devoted to the post-1990 transition period. The current conditions for quantitative economic history research into CESEE therefore look good, but there are a number of particular challenges. While some of them will vanish over time, others are likely to persist. In particular, even three decades after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the number of publications – both the stock and the flow – on Eastern Europe remains far smaller than on Western Europe. Will these research imbalances persist? To begin with, linguistic barriers are far higher in the Eastern European case. None of the East European languages is one of the prevalent languages in historical research (English, French, German, and to a lesser extent Italian and Spanish), making market entry for outsiders more difficult. Slavic languages dominate, but are often not mutually understandable. Some regional languages even form their own linguistic groups, either within the Indo-European languages (Albanian, Greek) or outside of it (Estonian, Hungarian). It is worth substantiating the resulting impediments to research with two examples. John Lampe and Mervyn Jackson were able to transcend country-specific Balkan studies and write their magisterial “Balkan Economic History, 1550–1950: From Imperial Borderlands to Developing Nations” (1982) partly because they mastered three regional languages (Bulgarian, Romanian, and Serbian) and found ways to cover the other two (Albanian and Greek). It is perhaps not surprising that no similar attempt to cover all SEE countries has been made since. Likewise, while Hungary’s economic history is far betterknown in the West than that of any other East European country except Russia,
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 317


almost all of this work has been carried out by Hungarian mother tongue speakers (Berend, Ránki, Komlos, Vonyo). Second, the instability of borders, the emergence of new countries, and the submergence of old ones are a mixed blessing for historical research. While many Western European countries have hardly changed their borders since the High and Late Middle Ages (England, Spain, and Portugal in particular, to a lesser extent France), border changes were frequent (and often sizeable) in Eastern Europe. Russia’s current attempts to redraw the map of Ukraine help illustrate this point in dramatic fashion. Even large countries could “disappear” altogether, Poland being the paradigmatic case.4 In the best case, the historical challenges of the region are turned into exciting research today. As exemplified by recent work on the Polish experience between 1505 and 1772 (Malinowski 2019), the travails of state formation might even constitute one of the region’s comparative advantages in cliometric research. Somewhat similar in spirit, Bukowski (2019) uses the Polish partitions of the late eighteenth century as a “natural experiment” to analyze the long-run effects of different education systems (namely, the Prussian, the Russian, and the Austrian systems) on learning outcomes in Poland today. Likewise, the long and often complicated history of sizeable minorities in Eastern Europe has recently inspired research on the transfer and diffusion of skills and technology in host countries (Vasilenok and Natkhov 2021, Nikolic et al. 2022). Yet such comparative advantages come with two important caveats. Late state foundation and weak bureaucracies imply poor historical records and statistical material. Balkan economic history is a good case in point, where our understanding of economic history after political independence in the nineteenth century is far greater than for the period before (Lampe and Jackson 1982, Palairet 1997, Morys and Ivanov 2015). Moreover, who “owns” the economic history of a particular stretch of land in Eastern Europe when borders changed and settlement patterns were mixed? Poland-Lithuania (1386–1795) was for centuries the largest state in Eastern Europe, covering at times (partly or fully) the territories of Poland, Lithuania, Ukraine, Latvia, Belarus, and Russia in today’s borders. Should we expect the historical experience to be of interest to all “successor states,” or only to Poland and Lithuania? In a world of Open Science, such considerations should not matter, yet in actual practice they do (funding by national research agencies, linguistic proximity, etc.). Latvia offers another good example. From the available economic, social, and demographic evidence, we know that the Baltic countries – and the region around Riga in particular – were early developers in Eastern Europe (Morys 2021a). Yet tiny Latvia, a country with a population of less than two million inhabitants, lacks the resources, and neighboring Russia (to which the territory belonged until 1991 with the exception of the interwar period) lacks the interest to conduct the necessary research.
4Divided three times between Austria, Prussia, and Russia in 1772, 1792, and 1795, respectively, the country re-gained independence only after World War I.
318 M. Morys


Finally, future research on CESEE is likely to focus on the region as a whole, rather than separately on its three constituent parts, namely Central Europe, Eastern Europe, and South-East Europe. This new approach reflects current interest, but also recognizes that four decades of state socialism created a shared historical experience for a set of countries previously thought of as only loosely connected. Traditionally, research divided Eastern Europe – that is, Europe to the East of the German- and Italian-speaking lands – into three distinct regions. South-Eastern Europe, that is the successor states of the Ottoman Empire on the Balkan peninsula (initially Greece, Serbia, Romania, Bulgaria, and Albania; today also including the six successor states of Yugoslavia other than Serbia); Central Europe, namely the Visegrad countries of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia (in some sense the successor states of Austria-Hungary, including all of Poland but excluding Austria itself) and East Europe, that is the European successor states of the Soviet Union (Russia, the three Baltic countries, Belarus, Ukraine, and Moldova). This classification leaves some ambiguity, as Romania and the Baltic countries demonstrate. It might even seem archaic, as its starting point is the three long-defunct Austro-Hungarian, Russian, and Ottoman Empires. Yet the historiographical weight of these three distinct traditions (cf. next section) is clear to anyone trying to escape them. Recent overview articles show that both approaches currently co-exist, for example Zhuravskaya et al. (2023) with their focus on Russia only as opposed to Morys (2022) who reviews evidence from the entire region. Only future research can show whether the three distinct research traditions are worth being kept alive and separate, or whether amalgamating them into something new is more promising.
Landmark Publications on Central, East, and South-East Europe
Six pioneering publications have helped set an agenda for CESEE economic history to this day. None of them would classify as a cliometric publication in the narrow sense of the word, even though they all contain considerable amounts of quantitative information. Yet Gerschenkron’s famous collection of essays (Gerschenkron 1962), the two book chapters to an edited volume (Gerschenkron 1965, Hajnal 1965), and the three monographs (Berend and Ránki 1974, Lampe and Jackson 1982, Kaser and Radice 1985–1989) described in this section, all ask fundamental questions related to Eastern Europe, transcending the economic history of a particular country and embedding it in a regional context. The sharpness of their questions – rather than necessarily the answers they found – allowed subsequent cliometric research to formulate testable hypotheses, confirming as often as contradicting the initially advanced position. We will introduce these six publications and subsequently condense their main research questions into three analytical questions that have guided CESEE economic history research ever since. Academic contributions responding to these three areas will then be discussed in sections “Long-term Factors Impeding Economic Growth in CESEE,” “Where Did the CESEE Economies Stand by the Time Central Planning Was Introduced?,” and “Economic Achievements of the State Socialist Period.”
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 319


Gerschenkron (1962, 1965)
Almost certainly, the most influential thinker on Eastern European economic history was Alexander Gerschenkron (1904–1978). He originated from Odessa in presentday Ukraine, fled in 1920 from the Russian Civil War (1918–1921) to Austria, and, from there, after the Anschluss (1938) to the United States, eventually becoming professor of economic history at Harvard University in 1948. Gerschenkron developed a grand theory of economic backwardness, which he thought of as applicable to the economic development of all countries. Yet he developed, and empirically substantiated, his views with the experience of the continental European countries in their attempts to catch up with England.5 In his theory, Eastern Europe played an important role in that it constituted the most backward part of the continent in the mid-nineteenth century. From the large European countries, Tsarist Russia lagged behind England, France, Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy (in that order in his view, cf. Gerschenkron 1962: 44). Looking at all European countries, Gerschenkron found the case of Bulgaria particularly noteworthy for its complete failure to industrialize between de facto independence in 1878 and World War II. Detailed case studies of Tsarist Russia, the early Soviet Union and Bulgaria – accounting for nine of 14 chapters in his 1962 collection of essays – allowed Gerschenkron to develop the two theories which continue to play an important role in CESEE cliometric research to this day, namely (1) economic backwardness and the role of the state in overcoming it and (2) the detrimental impact of serfdom for economic development.
Economic Backwardness and the Role of the State
Gerschenkron (1962) offered a wide panorama of industrialization in the various continental European countries since the mid-nineteenth century, and their efforts to catch-up economically with England as the first industrial country and economic leader of the time. His grand theory of economic backwardness has three key tenets. First, the economic development of backward countries (all countries minus England) is different from prior English economic development by the virtue of being backward. Gerschenkron argues against Karl Marx’s famous dictum that “The industrially more developed country presents to the less developed country a picture of the latter’s future” (preface to Das Kapital) by highlighting factors that differentiate the position of a backward country from that of England. Positive factors include the possibility of technology transfer from abroad; on the downside, backward countries are often left with no choice other than to industrialize quickly in the face of foreign competition by more advanced economies. Second, a country’s development path is shaped by exactly how backward it is: there are “gradations of backwardness,” each requiring their own response. France and Germany, epitomizing what Gerschenkron calls “mild” backwardness, lacked
5Note that Gerschenkron had England in mind as a reference point, and not the larger geographic, political, and economic units of Great Britain or the United Kingdom.
320 M. Morys


enterprises with sufficient capital as a “prerequisite for industrialization” (in the event, to pursue large-scale infrastructure investments typical for the nineteenth century). In such circumstances, both countries created “substitutes” for “prerequisites” by establishing banks focusing exclusively (France) or partly (Germany’s Universalbanken) on investment in precisely such infrastructure businesses. England had not needed such banks, as company profits accrued over long periods of time fulfilled the same purpose. Investment banks were a suitable “substitute” for the missing “prerequisite” of English-style company-internal finance. Yet this solution relied on private households with sufficient savings and a business culture ruled by law and relying on mutual trust (so that banks could actually channel savings into investments). Countries lacking these “prerequisites” as well – of which Gerschenkron saw Tsarist Russia as the paradigmatic case – needed to go one step further and use the state’s coercive power to forcibly achieve the resource allocation, which in the milder French and German cases had been achieved voluntarily (market-based) by the new system of investment banks (Gerschenkron 1962). Put differently, if banks (or other private institutions) were not available as “substitutes for prerequisites,” the state itself had to take over this role, becoming the ultimate “substitute” in the process. The third – and often overlooked – tenet of Gerschenkron’s theory is that the economic trajectory might change when a country starts developing and becomes less backward. Gerschenkron illustrated this with reference to Russia’s industrial and infrastructural policies, comparing the 1880s and 1890s to the early twentieth century (Gerschenkron 1962). In the early period, the state was the only substitute available for economic development. Yet the very success of this state-sponsored industrialization gave rise to commercial banks and a more stable business culture, allowing the government to withdraw from its early interventionism after the turn of the century and transitioning to “substitutes” associated with “mildly” backward countries such as Germany. Gerschenkron did not advocate a strong role for the state in economic development per se. He rather saw it as an ultima ratio for very backward countries, to be phased out as the economy matured and allowed for more flexible “substitutes.”
The Detrimental Impact of Serfdom on Economic Development
Gerschenkron viewed Russia as the quintessential backward country, yet what had led to this unfortunate position in the first place? He was unequivocal in stating that “(t)he main reason for the abysmal economic backwardness of Russia was the preservation of serfdom until the emancipation of 1861” (Gerschenkron 1962: 17). This harsh verdict on the detrimental impact of serfdom on Russian economic development led to a great fascination with this system of forced labor allocation a fascination only amplified by the fact that this institution had died out in Western Europe during the Middle Ages but had been reinforced (or even re-instituted) in Eastern Europe in the Early Modern period in a process known as the “Second serfdom.”
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 321


Gerschenkron was critical of the institution of serfdom while in operation as much as of the specific way in which it was abolished in Russia in 1861. In his view, serfdom suffered from manifold inefficiencies: it did not provide incentives for the serf to either increase productivity or acquire higher human capital. Moreover, serfdom tied the serf to the land he worked on, thereby preventing structural change, urbanization, and ultimately, industrialization. In short, he viewed serfdom as the ultimate roadblock to modern economic growth. Furthermore, Gerschenkron argued that the specific way in which serfdom ended prevented unleashing the productive forces typically associated with such a step. At the time of emancipation, serfs were not turned into small-scale farmers with full property rights over the plots of land they had previously worked on as serfs. In this scenario, agricultural productivity presumably would have risen as a result of profitmaximizing decisions of the new landowners; other farmers would have preferred to sell their land, thereby enabling structural change, urbanization, and, ultimately, industrialization. Yet as part of the 1861 legislation, the serfs became communal owners of the land previously belonging to a particular estate and administered their affairs through the village commune (obshchina). As the village communes were, among others, responsible for the redemption payments owed to the erstwhile lord, they had every interest in keeping tight control over the serfs-turned-communal farmers. In Gerschenkron’s view then, the former serfs remained effectively tied to the land, and were not in a position to easily improve agricultural productivity on their plots of land (as they were communal) or sell them off and move to the cities (in the absence of full property rights). In his view, the growth-inducing effects only materialized with the 1906/10 reform of Prime Minister Stolypin, which made it possible for the peasants to sever their connection with the village commune through a simple and advantageous procedure (Gerschenkron 1962). In sum, Gerschenkron argued that Russian economic development was held back by serfdom not only until formal emancipation in 1861, but until Stolpyin’s reforms of the early twentieth century.
Hajnal (1965)
Gerschenkron’s grand theory aims to explain backwardness and “substitutes” for “prerequisites of industrial development” that backward countries find in their catchup efforts. The East European experience played an important role in this approach in that it constituted the most extreme example of economic backwardness. Gerschenkron’s theory was motivated by, and spoke directly to, CESEE economic history. The reverse is true for Hajnal’s path-breaking 1965 contribution on the “European Marriage Pattern,” that is a favorable demographic regime prevalent in Western Europe but absent in the rest of the world. Hajnal’s work was primarily concerned with Western Europe, and the statistical regularity he encountered should have been labelled properly as “West” European marriage pattern. Yet most of the empirical evidence he contrasted his findings with were from Eastern Europe, and the
322 M. Morys


sharpness of the frontier he suggested between the two halves of the continent – a straight line between St. Petersburg and Trieste – meant that the impact of his theories on research was similarly profound in Western and in Eastern Europe. Based primarily on census data from 1900 and supported by less systematic evidence for earlier periods, Hajnal detected two empirical regularities setting Western European demography apart from the rest of the world: women married later and many of them did not marry at all. For example, by their late 40s, almost all Bulgarian women had married, while celibacy in Belgium remained high even in this age group (the percentage of unmarried women aged 45–49 stood at 3% in Bulgaria but at 17% in Belgium). Based on countries as units of analysis (and not regions or even smaller units on the sub-national level), Hajnal demonstrated that there was a well-defined line from St. Petersburg to Trieste dividing the two halves of Europe, while only admitting to a limited number of (partial) inconsistencies in this sharp distinction (e.g., Greece and Hungary, cf. Hajnal 1965: 103). Hajnal also corroborated evidence for periods before 1900 that supported the idea of a unique West European Marriage Pattern, although the evidence became less systematic and less comparable as he went back in time (Hajnal 1965). Comparing Gerschenkron (1962, 1965) and Hajnal (1965), two points are worth mentioning. First, Hajnal’s focus was purely demographic. He was concerned with providing statistical evidence in favor of two radically different demographic regimes. As will be shown below, this did not prevent Hajnal’s theory from quickly becoming a crucial ingredient of a much wider interpretative scheme, according to which the European Marriage Pattern (EMP) was conducive to escaping from the Malthusian trap. Second, while both authors agreed there had been substantial differences between Western and Eastern Europe for a long time, they differed in their assessment whether the distinction was sharp or gradual. Gerschenkron conceptualized the European experience as “gradations of backwardness,” that is becoming increasingly more backward by moving East (and South) on the European continent. For Hajnal, by contrast, the two halves were separated by a straight line (St. Petersburg – Trieste), with no transitional zones in between.
Berend and R  ́anki (1974)
The seminal works of Gerschenkron and Hajnal benefitted from a straightforward interpretative scheme (“economic backwardness” and “European Marriage Pattern,” respectively) and substantial empirical evidence mustered in support of it. Theory and evidence broadly matched. There is far more ambiguity in the work of Iván T. Berend and György Ránki, the two leading Hungarian economic historians of the second half of the twentieth century. In their case, the interpretative scheme and the empirical evidence often did not match. Yet rather than undermining their work as a whole, theory and evidence took a life of their own and became influential in their own ways. Some biographical explanation might explain this. Berend and Ránki, both born in Budapest in 1930, were prodigious scholars keen on writing the economic history of their native Hungary in a regional context. Yet they were forced
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 323


to do so under the guiding principles of a Marxist perspective. The quality of their research gave them regular contact with Western Europe and North America, including visiting professorships. As a result, Berend and Ránki wanted to keep both audiences happy: the Hungarian authorities by subscribing officially to a Marxist world view and Western academia by providing meticulous historical research. Yet such was the quality of their work that Berend and Ránki did not feel compelled to adopt a conventional Marxist perspective, and they certainly avoided the specific terminology that goes with it. Instead, they connected their work to the “World Systems School” of Immanuel Wallerstein (1974), which hypothesized that the global economy was exploitative in nature and was characterized by the political and economic dominance of “core countries” over “peripheral countries.” In this view, underdevelopment and income inequality between countries were the result of a particular international “system” that perpetuated stagnation of the poorer countries to the benefit of rich nations. Such a theoretical approach offered “diplomatic” as well as content advantages to Berend and Ránki. It connected their work to one of the dominant Western social science paradigms of the time, while offering sufficient proximity to conventional Marxist thought (in that the concept of exploitation played an important role). This framework comes out most clearly in their 1982 book, but its essence can be found already in their magisterial 1974 contribution discussed here. It allowed the two authors to explore the economic relationships which the Central European “peripheral” countries had with the Western “core” economies. Yet this is precisely where the mismatch between theory and evidence, as alluded to earlier, begins. In the first half of the book devoted to the period 1750 to World War I, the authors show in chapter after chapter how trade, capital flows, political influence, and Westerninspired institutional change spurred on the backward Central European countries. If in some cases modernization seems to have failed, foreign investment and trade with core countries were not to blame. Instead, the authors argue that foreign influence failed because there was not enough of it. While paying lip-service to dependency theory, Berend and Ranki effectively turn the argument around and point out that countries located more closely to the core countries (such as Hungary) benefited more than countries further away (for instance Romania). This important insight also explains the lasting appeal and legacy of Berend and Ranki: the empirical evidence they present is fully consistent with modern concepts of economic geography. Gerschenkron had been concerned with domestic reform, and the failure thereof, in closing the gap with England. Berend and Ranki, by contrast, were the first to systematically point out that the economic development of Central Europe can only be understood by its integration and interaction with economically more developed Western Europe. The second cornerstone of Berend and Ranki was an overall negative assessment of the interwar period. The disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires led to frictions that the new nation states, small and inexperienced as they were, could not overcome in the 1920s. Capital flows and trade resumed in the 1920s, but both processes were thrown into reverse by the impact of the Great
324 M. Morys


Depression. The World Systems School is construed as providing a justification for incorporation into the Soviet bloc after 1945: the Central European periphery broke loose from the capitalist system and its West European core, which had done little favor to it in the interwar period.
Lampe and Jackson (1982) and Kaser and Radice (1985–1989)
We are compelled to include another two contributions, namely John Lampe and Mervyn Jackson’s “Balkan Economic History, 1550–1950: From Imperial Borderlands to Developing Nations” (1982) and the five-volume “Economic History of Eastern Europe, 1919–1975,” edited by Michael Kaser and E.A. Radice and published between 1985 and 1989. Both publications are eclectic in approach, but encyclopedic in depth and breadth, and they have established themselves as indispensable reference points on South-East Europe and Central Europe, respectively. Both are fundamentally different from the earlier four publications, which were all characterized by an overarching idea and unifying concept. Lampe and Jackson (1982) and Kaser and Radice (1985–1989) avoid grand interpretative schemes, but instead expose the reader to a myriad of qualitative and quantitative information. Where the earlier contributions provoke and polarize, Lampe and Jackson (1982) and Kaser and Radice (1985) reach for consensus. This difference is probably explained by the time of writing, the specific research efforts undertaken, and the overall message the authors wanted to achieve. The earlier contributions were all written at the height of the Cold War, and offered a clear message. Hajnal, writing from London, contrasted a “good” West European Marriage Pattern with a “bad” East European one. Berend and Ranki, writing from Budapest, found fault with exploitative core countries, which, after 1945, all happened to be to the West of the Iron Curtain. Gerschenkron’s work, for its part, was often read as justifying an overarching role for the state in economic development, in line with actual practice in CESEE after World War II.6 Lampe and Jackson (1982) and Kaser and Radice (1985), by contrast, breath the spirit of the 1970s and 1980s “Entspannungspolitik” (policy of détente). This is obvious in the five volumes of Kaser and Radice, who assembled a team of 14 scholars, ten of whom worked in Western Europe and four worked in Eastern Europe (Hungary: Berend, Ehrlich, Ránki; Poland: Tomaszweksi). From the ten Western-based scholars, seven were émigrés from Czechoslovakia (Drabek, Hauner, Krejci, Teichova), Hungary (Nötel), Poland (Brus), and Romania (Spigler). Various academic exchanges, typically centered on St. Antony’s College, University of Oxford, made this multi-author endeavor possible. Yet the same is true for Lampe
6Gerschenkron never endorsed this reading of his book and the third tenet of his approach (cf. above) runs against such an interpretation in our view. Yet it is worth mentioning that his books were easily accessible in Eastern Europe as a result of a presumed proximity to official state socialist thinking.
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 325


and Jackson’s opus magnum, which relied on year-long archival access to Bulgaria, Romania, and Yugoslavia as well as funding from West Germany, the main driver behind the “Entspannungspolitik.” Consequently, both author teams portrayed the post-World War II economic developments as providing a viable alternative to the Western economic and political system. It is not by coincidence that Kaser and Radice close their volume with the 1975 Helsinki Final Act, which was understood at the time as mutual recognition of the political status quo. The price for making a success out of this West-East cooperation was to eschew grand interpretative schemes. Western academia focused instead on obtaining full access to historical research on Eastern Europe (including on the scholars conducting it), ridding it from any overtly Marxist perspective and translating it into English: research as the art of the possible. Yet it would be unfair to reduce these two important contributions to information without inspiration, and to deny them a deeper message. In the case of Lampe and Jackson (1982), two aspects stand out. First, they held firm to the old historiographical idea of a distinct Balkan history, that is a history of South-East Europe as unique and different not only from Western Europe, but also from Central and Eastern Europe. They provide the coherent account of a region that did not exist at the time of their writing. Greece was firmly in the Western camp, Yugoslavia pursued its own hybrid version of market socialism, and Albania had retrenched into autarky after falling out with Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, and eventually China. It took courage and good mastery of local languages – to write a book about South-East Europe at the time, but the revitalization of research on South-East Europe in recent years has vindicated their approach. Second, their highly empirical approach allowed them to overcome the approach of Gerschenkron (and to a lesser extent of Berend and Ranki) who equated economic development with industrialization. They provided a great deal of evidence that the primary sector carried an important role in the overall economic development of all Balkan countries well into the interwar period. With the possible exception of Romania, industrialization remained limited; hence the development of the South-East European economies can only be understood if the development of agriculture is properly analyzed. The five-volume “Economic history of Eastern Europe 1919–1975,” published between 1985 and 1989 and edited by Michael Kaser and E.A. Radice, was an even more ambitious project, bringing together 14 contributors. The five volumes summarized research carried out since the late 1960s, most of which had some connection to St. Antony’s College, University of Oxford, where two of the contributing authors (Brus and Kaser) were based. St. Antony’s College also hosted a contributor’s conference in preparation of the publication in 1972. The five volumes constitute the ultimate outcome of academic “Entspannungspolitik.” They are less theoretical and even more eclectic than Lampe and Jackson (1982). Their main purpose was to summarize an important body of research and preserve it for a time in which uninhibited research could again be conducted. If one wanted to distil a main message, probably two aspects would stand out. First, the authors emphasize the big developmental differences between Western and Eastern Europe during the interwar period and until the communist take-over in the late
326 M. Morys


1940s. Consequently, any achievements – or possible underperformances – of the state socialist period should be measured against a lower benchmark. Second, the various authors provide an overall negative assessment of the interwar period. While acknowledging rapid growth in certain sectors of industry, the Central European countries lacked overall economic and industrial development. In the authors’ view, this was explained by “capital deficiency,” that is a lack of domestic savings (or the inability to channel such savings into investment) coupled with an inability to access foreign savings (due to deficient capital markets). Superficially, both points relate to the interwar period, yet their main implication concerns the state socialist period. Incorporation into the Soviet bloc after World War II might have helped overcome structural problems plaguing Central Europe in the interwar period. In any event, success or failure in the region needed to be measured against a lower benchmark than in the European economies located further to the West. In sum, the specific interpretation of the interwar period advanced in Kaser and Radice (1985) makes developments after World War II appear in a more positive light. The six contributions discussed above have had a powerful and long-lasting impact on quantitative economic history research on Central, East, and South-East Europe. They are all wide-ranging, yet in essence circle around three questions. We summarize them as follows and will draw on them to provide structure to the discussion of later academic work responding to them (sections “Long-term Factors Impeding Economic Growth in CESEE,” “Where Did the CESEE Economies Stand by the Time Central Planning Was Introduced?”, and “Economic Achievements of the State Socialist Period”).
• What were the long-term factors impeding economic growth in CESEE? Serfdom was proposed as an early answer and still enjoys wide currency as we will see. Non-agricultural explanations can typically be divided into three strands: demography, institutional weaknesses, and market access and integration.
• How backward was Eastern Europe by the time of the communist take-over? For Russia, this question either relates to economic development until the 1917 October Revolution or to where the economy stood at the end of the “New Economic Policy” (NEP) in 1928, when the introduction of the first fiveyear plan under Stalin completely changed the trajectory of the Soviet economy. For all other countries, the transition to the command economy occurred after World War II. This question is not confined to a narrow GDP per capita comparison, but involves a broad analysis of structural change and the preconditions for sustainable income per head growth. It addresses, implicitly or explicitly, the counterfactual question whether the CESEE countries could have prospered under a liberal political and economic regime.
• How should we assess the state socialist period? In the absence of political and civic liberties under communism, economic history from Gerschenkron onwards has focused on an evaluation of the economic achievements of the state socialist period. Was central planning necessary to industrialize and develop the backward Eastern European economies, and how successful was it at that? This question is different from the previous one, though not unrelated: the more positive the
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 327


assessment of the pre-communist economic situation, the less credit state socialism can take for overall economic development. The connection between the second and the third question will become particularly clear when discussing Russian economic development between 1917 and 1928. That is, after the political take-over by the Bolsheviks but before the transition to central planning. Was there only one way to socialism, or were there several paths (of which the wrong one was taken)?
Long-Term Factors Impeding Economic Growth in CESEE
The “Rise and Fall” of Serfdom in the Historiography
As explained above in greater detail, Gerschenkron argued for the inefficiency of serfdom, and he saw in this institution the single most important factor impeding growth in late Tsarist Russia. He also took issue with the specific form in which emancipation was implemented in 1861 in that it did not result in full property rights for individual farmers, but effectively substituted peasant communities and collective decision-making for the erstwhile landlord. In his own words, the peasant land commune “tended to preserve, if not reinforce, the traditionalism and the inefficiency of peasant agriculture” (Gerschenkron 1965: 747). Productivity increases were delayed until the early twentieth century reforms under Prime Minister Stolpyin, who recognized the limitations of the earlier reforms and allowed the emergence of ubiquitous small-scale independent farmers. In a didactic oversimplification, Gerschenkron’s position can be summarized as follows: If serfdom had not existed at all or had been abolished earlier than, in practical terms, the early twentieth century, Russia would have been less backward and might have developed along Western European lines. Subsequent research challenged this hypothesis by unpacking its individual parts:
• Was serfdom necessarily inefficient or did this institution emerge as an efficient solution to specific economic circumstances? How homogeneous or heterogeneous was serfdom over time and across space? If the latter was the case, were there some varieties of serfdom more efficient than others (Dennison 2006, 2011, Malinowski 2016)? • What were the consequences of the emancipation on agricultural productivity, urbanization, and industrialization? Did the effects of the 1861 legislation materialize quickly or have to wait until the early twentieth century (Markevich and Zhuravskaya 2018, Nafziger 2010)?
The Efficiency of Serfdom
Serfdom is usually seen as having a negative impact on economic growth and development, being characterized as a rent-seeking institution tailored to benefit landlords. More precisely, serfdom has been held responsible for: (1) constraining
328 M. Morys


mobility between the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors, (2) discouraging improvements in agricultural productivity by undermining incentives, (3) hampering the accumulation of human capital, (4) being wasteful because of the costly way that it transferred resources from workers to employers, and (5) decreasing the purchasing power of villagers (Ogilvie and Carus 2014, Acemoglu and Wolitzky 2011, Klein 2014). Recently, a number of authors have complemented these qualitative and theoretical investigations with quantitative analysis. Alexander Klein and Sheilagh Ogilvie (2016), analyzing a dataset covering nearly 7000 villages in mid-seventeenth century Bohemia, established that serfdom discouraged rural non-agricultural activities of peasants. These authors demonstrate that, even though landlords might have stimulated some demand for non-agricultural goods and services, they tended to crowd out serf crafts and commerce by siphoning off labor and stifling enterprise through surveillance and rent extraction. Yet in recent years, serfdom has seen a reassessment, with some authors arguing that it was a dynamic institution sustaining a considerable rate of economic growth (Moon 1996, Cerman 2012, Stanziani 2014). In essence, this strand of literature argues that serfdom was an efficient response to specific economic circumstances. If agricultural productivity is low, peasants might find such arrangements beneficial. Bush (1996) and Epstein (2001), for instance, argued that serfdom, precisely because it was based on surplus extraction from risk-averse peasants, might have allowed for the development of large-scale commercial farming, encouraged the commercialization of agricultural production, and stimulated city growth. In this view, rising agricultural productivity in the late Middle Ages might have changed incentives for farmers in Western Europe, resulting in the demise of the institution. By contrast, as agricultural conditions did not improve to the East of the river Elbe, the institution persisted in Central and Eastern Europe and was even strengthened over time in a process typically referred to as “second serfdom.” Yet confronting such theories with data typically encounters a number of problems. First, does low agricultural productivity lead to serfdom, or does serfdom trap the agricultural sector in low productivity? Second, it is not easy to establish testable hypotheses for “efficiency,” reminding us of Ogilvie’s (2007) critical remarks on the practical use of the concept for historical research. Consequently, the same set of results can on occasions be interpreted both in support of and against efficiency of serfdom; an important point made in a thoughtful recent contribution by Malinowski (2016) who tested the Bush/Epstein hypothesis for the case of early Modern Poland. Both drawbacks are correlated with the fact that we often know little about the emergence of serfdom (or continuation/re-emergence in the case of the second serfdom), and certainly far less than about the eighteenth and nineteenth century emancipation acts, which all required explicit legislation. Serfdom was typically a lived reality for centuries before we encounter the first piece of legislation related to it (Markevich and Zhuravskaya 2018); not surprisingly, given that the essence of serfdom was for the landlord to do as he pleased, that is to act uninhibited by regulation from the state. The large discretion enjoyed by the landlord also explains why serfdom was far more heterogeneous than the emancipation acts suggest; in
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 329


clear parallel to slavery in the U.S., which avoided a clear-cut legal definition and was typically referred to in the opaque words of the “peculiar institution.” Turning to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, our perspective might be biased for yet another reason. Enlightenment reformers resisted the institution for its lack of personal liberties but not for its alleged inefficiency; given their urban background, they would typically have very little practical understanding of what serfs on a particular estate actually did. This is precisely where the research from Tracy Dennison (2006, 2011) comes in. Her approach is not cliometric, but we hope that by including her study in this handbook future research will follow her lead. Dennison’s starting point is that there is little point in theorizing about the origins of Russian serfdom. In addition, it is potentially misleading to rely – as so many researchers including Gerschenkron did on “outsider” accounts of government documents, the legal code, or testimonies of upper-class observers. In her ground-breaking study titled “The institutional framework of Russian serfdom,” she studies serfdom as it actually existed on one particular estate in central Russia, namely the Voshchazhnikovo estate in the central non-agricultural province of Iaroslavl ca. 250 km to the North-East of Moscow. Her research focusses on various social, economic, legal, and administrative aspects of serf life on the estate. Her careful marshalling of evidence from household tax lists, petitions to the estate administration, contracts between serfs, work passport records, and myriad other types of documents add up to a complete evisceration of any simple conceptualization of serfdom as completely backward, inward-looking, or economically stagnant. She successfully undermines the long-held stereotype of the peasant and the peasant economy: impervious to outside influences, market-averse, egalitarian, satisficers not maximizers. She provides evidence to show that some landlords were able to credibly commit to follow rules that fixed the amount of the obligations of peasants, avoiding the so-called ratchet effect and maximizing the stream of payments over a longer term horizon. In her account, peasants were rational actors who responded to incentives like any other economic agent would do. In this view, serfdom emerges as an institution “fit for its time” – not least because serfdom was not a single unified system, but there was enormous institutional heterogeneity in the Russian empire, and variation in economic outcomes seems to correspond to this variation in institutional arrangement.
The Consequences of Emancipation on Agricultural Productivity, Urbanization, and Industrialization
Markevich and Zhuravskaya’s (2018) study on “The economic effects of the abolition of serfdom: Evidence from the Russian empire” is the most detailed and up-todate study on the second question outlined above. Their econometric findings support Gerschenkron’s basic premise that serfdom held back economic development. Yet they modify his view by demonstrating that the growth enhancing effects materialized, for the most part, quickly after 1861 and did not have to wait until the further set of reforms in 1906/10 by Stolypin.
330 M. Morys


The authors measure the impact of emancipation on agricultural productivity and industrial output in 46 European provinces of the late Tsarist Empire.7 Employing a difference-in-differences methodology and exploiting pre-1861 cross-province variation in the share of serfs (as percentage of total agricultural laborers), the authors estimate the effect of the abolition of serfdom on the two outcomes. Crucially, their estimation technique allows them to disentangle the emancipation itself from the subsequent land reform. Emancipation happened immediately in 1861, granting personal freedom to all serfs. At this point, the obligation of former serfs to landlords was fixed as the institutionalized rent payment for land use. Fixing the level of peasant obligations meant that landlords could no longer unilaterally increase them; a widespread practice under serfdom, creating perverse incentives for the serfs. By contrast, the subsequent land reform was a process stretched out until 1882. This second stage marked the actual transfer of ownership over the land in exchange for an immediate payment, the terms of which were regulated by the buyout contract between the landlord, the peasant commune, and the state. Markevich and Zhuravskaya (2018) report three key findings. First, the abolition of serfdom improved agricultural productivity considerably, and three quarters of this effect materialized in the first decade after emancipation. The speed of this effect suggests that the single most important change of emancipation was the cessation of the ratchet effect, as described above (as opposed to other possible mechanisms such as investment in land or human capital, which would have taken longer to show positive effects). Second, the positive effect of emancipation was counteracted by the subsequent buy-out procedure involving the transfer of land into the hands of the peasant commune. In their estimations, the transfer into communal lands halved the positive effects of prior emancipation (to be precise, only 56.5% of the reform potential was realized). Still, their view of the abolition as “glass half full” contrasts positively with Gerschenkron’s view that the modalities of the land transfer essentially cancelled all positive effects of emancipation. Third, the authors find a large effect on industrial development. Assuming that industry was not (negatively) affected by the abolition of serfdom in provinces where labor was free to begin with, the difference-in-differences estimates yield that, in an average province where 45% of rural population comprised serfs, the abolition of serfdom led to an additional increase in industrial output of 39% throughout the second half of the nineteenth century. This result is consistent with findings on the substantial level of labor migration within provinces from villages into the provincial industrial sector in the late nineteenth century in spite of the constraints erected by the peasant commune (Borodkin et al. 2008, Nafziger 2010). When projecting these results on the national level, the authors find that the abolition of serfdom led to an increase of Russia’s GDP of 17.7%. The research by Nafziger (2010) is another example of a positive re-appraisal of the 1861 emancipation act. It challenges Gerschenkron’s assertion that the postemancipation land commune restricted household behavior to the point that it
7Excluded are the Baltic provinces, where serfdom had been abolished between 1816 and 1819.
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 331


cancelled out any positive effects from the abolition of serfdom. Under the emancipation legislation, peasant households were assigned membership into villages, which entitled them to a share of their village’s communal property endowment while making them liable for a corresponding portion of collective taxes and land payments. The village/communal assembly of household heads was granted legal control over access to collective property resources, the distribution of fiscal obligations, and household decisions regarding off-farm labor and exit from the commune. Gerschenkron’s reasoning was based on the observation that the legal position of the land commune was very strong, and the position of individuals correspondingly weak. In moving away from a narrow legal focus, Nafziger asks a simple but important question: did communal enforcement of collective property rights and fiscal liabilities make it impossible for households to effectively allocate their land and labor endowments? Based on household-level data from a sample of communal villages in Moscow province at the end of the nineteenth century, Nafziger analyzes the workings of rural factor markets in this specific institutional context. He documents land and labor market participation by peasant households. Particularly noteworthy is the significant involvement of households in non-agricultural pursuits, in the hiring of agricultural workers, and in renting shares of the communal allotment land. These market transactions allowed households to adjust land and labor holdings in ways that sharply contrast a conventional view of Russian peasant autarky. This rehabilitation of the “backward Russian peasant” is not equivalent to saying that the post-1861 institutional set-up was “efficient,” as Nafziger rightly emphasizes. He merely contends that emancipated peasants participated in land and labor markets as well as they could, given the institutional constraints at the time. His results are consistent with Markevich and Zhuravskaya’s (2018) finding (cf. above) that the transfer into communal lands undermined, but by no means eliminated the positive effects of prior emancipation. The current consensus is therefore that the abolition of serfdom increased agricultural production and allowed former serfs to participate in rural factor markets, but also to leave the countryside altogether, fostering urbanization and industrialization. Gerschenkron’s skeptical views have therefore largely been overcome in recent research. But there also is consensus that emancipation remained an incomplete step, and that economic development would have benefitted from transforming the system more fundamentally. Yet important questions remain, of which only one shall be briefly mentioned here. Despite all their differences, the research summarized above has the same direction of causality in mind: from agricultural productivity growth to the twin processes of urbanization and industrialization. Yet what if causality runs the other way, that is that a more urbanized population requires more food and hence spurs agricultural growth in its environment? In this view, agriculture reacted to urban and industrial development rather than shaping it. This is exactly what Kopsidis and Wolf (2012) demonstrate for late nineteenth century Prussia, where the more urbanized and industrialized Western part witnessed dramatic agricultural improvements in response to urban demand, far more so than in the Eastern lands of this far-flung
332 M. Morys


country. This line of research potentially provides yet another explanation for the second serfdom. The less urbanized part of Europe to the East of the river Elbe failed to provide sufficient urban demand for agricultural productivity growth; and as productivity remained low, serfdom (re-)emerged as an efficient solution along the lines proposed by Bush and Epstein (cf. above).
Institutional Weaknesses
Research into the economic backwardness of CESEE is much wider than only agriculture and serfdom, partly because this school of thought could never conclusively rule out the possibility of reserve causality (from economic underperformance to the establishment of serfdom) nor explain why South-East Europe was equally poor even in the absence of serfdom. An alternative explanation has focused on institutional weaknesses, but much of the detail has remained obscure or not been put to a testable hypothesis. The allure of this hypothesis is that we know today that institutions in CESEE countries are weaker than in their Western European counterparts. But can we be sure the same was true for past periods? Malinowski’s (2019) “Economic consequences of state failure. Legal capacity, regulatory activity, and market integration in Poland, 1505–1772” is a recent attempt to break free from such deficiencies of earlier research. He studies the relationship between state capacity and commodity market integration for the region’s largest state in the Early Modern period, namely Poland between 1505 and 1772 (First Polish Partition at the hands of Austria, Prussia, and Russia). The basic idea is that a more active parliament will pass more legislation, including laws and regulations conducive to foster market integration; conversely, if legal capacity is low (as proxied by the number of days the Polish parliament, the Seym, was in session each year), there will be less regulatory activity of parliament (as measured by the laws relevant to the economy passed each year) and markets will fragment. In the successful economies of North-Western Europe, all three quantitative indicators used by Malinowski (2019) – parliamentary activity, regulatory output of parliament, and market integration – would probably grow over time, potentially resulting in spurious econometric results. This makes Poland a historically interesting and econometrically attractive case study, as parliamentary activity did not grow over time. Rather, an initially very active parliament was severely undermined by the introduction of the so-called liberum veto in 1652; a stipulation which gave a single member of the aristocratic parliament the right to suspend proceedings, effectively introducing unanimity into the Seym. Consequently, Malinowski can show econometrically that the introduction of the liberum veto reduced the regulatory output of the Seym and reversed the high levels of market integration that a more active Polish parliament had achieved initially. An important consequence of the liberum veto was that it gave foreign powers an easy tool to intervene in the domestic affairs of the Polish aristocratic republic. By aligning themselves with a single Polish aristocrat represented in the Seym, foreign powers could undermine the Polish state; an easy tool of foreign interference, which
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 333


ultimately contributed to the complete dissolution of the Polish state in the three partitions of 1772, 1793, and 1795. Poland is an extreme example, yet it points to a broader regional pattern that has spurred institutionalist research in recent years: the role of West European countries in the economic development of the poorer, and often small, CESEE countries. An older qualitative literature tended to highlight the negative role of foreign countries. This was the case in particular if written from a dependency theory perspective (Berend and Ránki 1974) or under residual influence from nineteenth century nationalistic historiography. Yet the more recent literature has tended to focus on the positive role played by foreign countries. Clavin (2013) observes that the League of Nations, while global in name, in actual practice was an international body chiefly concerned with stabilizing the political and economic conditions of the Eastern European countries in the interwar period. Some of this research has made an explicit institutionalist argument. Tooze and Ivanov (2011) and Morys (2021b), for instance, argue that policy-makers in South-Eastern Europe acquiesced into foreign financial supervision not because they necessarily had to, but in an attempt to compensate for domestic institutional weaknesses. Recurring problems of Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, and Serbia/Yugoslavia with large external debts before World War II led to the introduction of financial control by the countries’ West European creditors on various occasions. From the perspective of the dependency theory, such arrangements are typical examples of how core countries control peripheral countries, undermining their sovereignty in the process. By contrast, the authors show that there were strong domestic constituencies in favor of these arrangements (in the same vein as Tuncer 2015, Chap. 7). Foreign creditors constrained monetary policy and, to a lesser extent, fiscal policy. Yet such constraints were appealing to a large part of the domestic constituency, which blamed a legacy of fiscal deficits and debt monetizations (known as “fiscal dominance” in the relevant literature) for the country’s inability to follow the gold standard. In this view, foreign financial supervision acts as an external commitment mechanism in the presence of weak domestic institutions. Using a Granger causality analysis of time series for budget deficits and debt monetizations for all SEE countries between nineteenth century political independence and World War II, Morys (2021b) shows that a prevailing pattern of fiscal dominance was broken only under financial supervision, when the treasury’s influence on the central bank was scaled back. Only then were central banks able to stabilize their exchange rates. An accompanying political economy analysis shows that financial supervision was politically acceptable as it made successfully adhering to gold more likely in the view of contemporaries. The research by Malinowski (2019), Tooze and Ivanov (2011), and Morys (2021b) is primarily concerned with institutional weaknesses, what they led to, and how CESEE countries tried to address them. They stand in a long tradition dating back to Gerschenkron (1965) and reflect the perception that institutions in the region were part of the problem, not the solution. Only the recent literature has seen a change of tact with a more balanced view on institutions in CESEE. An early example is Nafziger (2011), who analyzes the functioning of the zemstvo, an institution of local government created as part of the emancipatory reforms of the
334 M. Morys


1860s. While the peasants were heavily underrepresented in this new institution, they did have, for the first time ever, some political voice in a decision-making body that was extensively involved in providing local public services, from school and medical care, to agronomy and road maintenance. Nafziger presents econometric evidence that peasant electoral power in the zemstvo was positively associated with relative tax rates (shifting the burden in the peasantry’s favor) and spending per capita, especially on education – which was arguably the category of expenditure most attractive to the peasantry. As with his research on rural factor market participation by former serfs after 1861, Nafziger takes an intermediate position: despite the zemstvo being confined to the local level and despite the heavy underrepresentation of peasants, this was a step in the right direction with beneficial effects for the farming population. Other contributions with a more positive assessment of institutions include the recent work of Gregg (2020) and Gregg and Nafziger (2019) on corporations and other business forms and the work by Chuchko (2022) on tariff policy. Interestingly enough, all three contributions relate to Russia and to the late Tsarist period in particular. Institutionalist research on Central Europe, by contrast, retains a decisively critical undertone while noting positive aspects more on the sidelines. The fine work of Cvrcek (2020) on “Schooling under control. The origins of public education in Austria 1769–1869” would constitute an excellent example for this (continued) historiographical trend. An intermediate position is taken by research such as Tuncer and Weller (2022): They acknowledge that the CESEE countries were more autocratic than their Western European counterparts, yet argue that bond markets rewarded the East European countries during the 1870–1914 period by lower bond yields, as investors viewed such countries as reliable tax collectors unimpeded by complicated political processes.
Demography
Not unlike the way Gerschenkron continues to shape the debate on serfdom, Hajnal (1965) remains a cornerstone for demographic research. His strong assertion of a line from St. Petersburg to Trieste, separating a growth-conducive Western regime from a less benign Eastern one, has polarized and antagonized for half a century now. Countries and regions intersected by this line have witnessed considerable research efforts trying to undermine or even completely overcome this sharp distinction. Polish research in particular has played an important role in these endeavors (Szoltysek 2007, Szoltysek and Zuber-Goldtein 2009). Yet recent research has tended to reconfirm Hajnal’s strong assertion, at least as far as his main findings on Eastern Europe were concerned. Based on a large dataset for 39 European countries/societies between 1500 and 1900 and drawn from 365 publications in historical demography, Tracy Dennison and Sheilagh Ogilvie (2014) provide more details than Hajnal (1965) ever could. In particular, they are able to systematically cover four centuries, whereas Hajnal’s strongest evidence was confined to population censuses from 1900. The article is written against the
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 335


European Marriage Pattern (EMP),8 which makes it all the more powerful that Hajnal’s Eastern European results not only survive but emerge strengthened. We confine ourselves in the following to the author’s findings for the 14 CESEE countries/regions included in their study. Dennison and Ogilvie’s (2014) approach is to estimate demographic differences between the 39 European countries related to the two indicators that mattered most for Hajnal (1965), namely female age at first marriage and female lifetime celibacy. Controlling for differences over time within one country and choosing England as the numeraire, their coefficients measure how many years older/younger a woman typically was at first marriage compared to her English counterpart (Table 2 on p. 661) and how many more/fewer women remained unmarried in a specific country compared to England (Table 3 on p. 665). For example, over the period 1500–1900, a woman marrying in what is Bulgaria today was typically 6.8 years younger than her English counterpart; and among all Bulgarian women, lifetime celibacy was 12.6% lower than in England. While their results contract conventional wisdom for Western Europe, their findings on Eastern Europe are supportive of Hajnal’s original research. From the 12 countries with the lowest female age at first marriage, 11 are in CESEE (EE: Russia, Ukraine, Belarus; CE: Poland, Hungary, Slovakia; SEE: Serbia, Croatia, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania). Likewise, the ten countries with the lowest female lifetime celibacy were all located in CESEE. The only three countries from the region that were systematically different are the three Baltic countries, Bohemia, and Slovenia; precisely the countries located (at least partially) to the West of the St. Petersburg – Trieste line. Hence, the one way of reconciling Hajnal (1965) and Dennison and Ogilvie (2014) is to see both contributions providing evidence of a distinctively different East European Marriage pattern.
Market Access and Market Integration
Agricultural, institutional, and demographic approaches have been very prominent in explaining CESEE backwardness. Despite their many differences, they all imply (to a varying degree) that backwardness was “a home-grown problem” and could have been overcome by specific policies. By contrast, recent approaches have emphasized market access and market integration (and the lack thereof) as a key issue bedeviling the CESEE economies. Such approaches are not entirely new, as our discussion of Berend and Ránki (1974) showed. Komlos (1983: 23), for whom the driving forces of growth in the nineteenth century Habsburg monarchy were “not in government policies but in the interaction of market forces,” would be another
8The article is written against two important pillars of the EMP school. First, it provides evidence against the idea that the more extreme version of the EMP necessarily coincides with the North Sea area where modern economic growth is said to have begun. Second, it challenges the idea that the EMP, where it was present, necessarily led to higher growth. We will not go into this discussion here, as we are concerned with the implication of this article on Eastern Europe.
336 M. Morys


example. But the meteoric rise of economic geography over the past two decades has equipped such research with new tools and instilled greater confidence to counter the other three schools of thought. There are a limited number of studies on market access and industrial location choice, yet they are confined to individual countries (Wolf 2007 on Poland, Nikolic 2018 on Yugoslavia). Notwithstanding the substantial data requirements to conduct such a study, this research avenue is potentially very promising; not least because we know for the post-1989 period that economic geography forces pulled the Visegrad economies of Central Europe toward the West (Czech republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia), whereas the gravitational center for countries such as Belarus and Ukraine are more ambiguous (Kossev and Tompson 2021). Prima facie, there are many more publications on market integration. Such studies require only price data for a single commodity (typically grain) collected for a large number of markets, and are hence much easier to conduct. Yet on closer inspection, the studies we currently possess often do not speak sufficiently to the CESEE experience, offer little comparative perspective vis-à-vis better integrated markets or are difficult to reconcile with results for other parts of Europe and the world. There clearly is an opportunity for research here in the years to come. To begin with, CESEE is poorly covered in pan-European studies. Chilosi et al. (2013), for instance, conduct one of the largest studies on the integration of European grain markets in recent years. Covering the long period from 1620 to 1913, they are able to include 100 cities into their sample; yet only six of them are located in Central Europe and their data do not contain a single observation of historical Russia or of South-East Europe. Federico et al. (2021) address some of this imbalance by including observations for Russia, but there are again no observations for the entire Balkan peninsula with the exception of Greece. From their sample of 500 cities, less than 10% belong to the Eastern half of the European continent. A partial exception to this incomplete coverage is Jacks (2005) who includes Austria-Hungary and Russia among the ten countries for which he investigates intra- and international commodity market integration in the Atlantic economy, 1800–1913. There are a number of country-specific market integration studies, but they are all confined to AustriaHungary (Komlos 1983, Good 1984, Schulze and Wolf 2012) and Russia (Metzer 1974, Goodwin and Grennes 1998). It remains unclear to what extent their findings can be generalized with respect to the many small CESEE countries. Federico’s (2012) verdict that there is a lack of market integration studies for CESEE still holds true almost a decade later. With this caveat in mind, we shall now discuss the six most important studies on CESEE market integration. The first two studies by Metzer (1974) and Goodwin and Grennes (1998) both relate to grain markets in late Tsarist Russia. Metzer’s (1974) early study – which can be seen as the first cliometric publication on CESEE (cf. section “Introduction”) studies domestic market integration as shaped by railroad construction. He shows that only with the introduction of the railways did transportation costs come down to the point where a national market for agricultural goods could emerge. In his calculations, 83% of the decline in the price differentials between different Russian cities could be attributed to the railroad-induced decline in transportation
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 337


costs. Goodwin and Grennes (1998) support Metzer (1974) on both accounts – the strength of market integration and the role of railways therein – but add an international dimension to it. They compare market integration of the world’s largest wheat exporter (Russia) with market integration of the world’s largest wheat producer (U.S.). They show that by the 1880s, a strong connection had been established between Russian ports and cities at the center of the world wheat trade. Deviations from equilibrium price relationships were eliminated more rapidly for trade between Odessa and England than for wheat trade between New York and England. The findings of Metzer (1974) and Goodwin and Grennes (1998) for Russia are not easy to reconcile with the results of Jacks (2005) for Austria-Hungary 1800–1913 (Jacks’s findings for Russia cover only 1893–1913 and are excluded from our discussion). Where the former two studies document increasing market integration both internally and externally, Jacks holds up Austria-Hungary as the quintessential case (among the ten countries he studies) of a country with a strong domestic market integration but weak international one. This is surprising, as distances to Western Europe and tariffs vis-à-vis them were lower for the dual monarchy than for Russia. Another potential inconsistency between CESEE-centered and pan-European/global approaches relates to what drove market integration. The CESEE-centered research has tended to highlight infrastructure improvements – and the railways in particular – as the driving force behind market integration, whereas the more general research has argued, in recent contributions anyway, that most of the price convergence process had already taken place by the time such improvements happened (Jacks 2006, Federico et al. 2021). Some of the inconsistencies mentioned might be attributed either to the fact that Austria-Hungary and Russia were relatively closed economies with large domestic markets; or that infrastructure improvements related to the railway had a much larger impact on the region given that riverine transportation had played a bigger role earlier on in Western Europe. But there are very few studies allowing us to make such a claim. One of the few studies investigating trade integration (as a driving force behind business cycle synchronization, which is the main focus of the article) for the small SEE countries is Morys and Ivanov (2015). Their story is more conventional in that they document exceptionally low but then steadily rising levels of trade integration (and business cycle synchronization) for Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, and Serbia/Yugoslavia between 1875 and World War II. In fact, it is one of the few studies speaking both to market access and trade integration: the authors show that proximity to British, French, and German markets mattered, and that countries located more to the West (Serbia) or with easy shipping (Greece) enjoyed higher levels of integration than Bulgaria and Romania. Last but not least, some research has tried to show that market integration was no simple process, neither economically nor politically. Studying market integration between 1878 and 1910 in Austria-Hungary, Schulze and Wolf (2012) demonstrate that market integration was “asymmetric”: markets became more integrated across the dual monarchy, but even more so between cities sharing the same languages. Ethno-linguistic networks emerged within the Austro-Hungarian empire, which in
338 M. Morys


many respects presage the borders as they came into place between the various successor states of the dual monarchy after its dissolution at the end of World War I.
Where Did the CESEE Economies Stand by the Time Central
Planning Was Introduced?
The second main area of research has been to evaluate where the CESEE countries stood economically by the time the communist parties gained political power and imposed central planning. Central planning and “big push” industrialization have been justified – by contemporaries and subsequent scholars alike – on the grounds that they were the only solution to overcome economic backwardness. As communism arrived earlier in the case of Russia, it is worth distinguishing between the Soviet Union, on the one hand, and all other CESEE countries on the other.
Late Tsarist Russia and the Soviet Union Until 1928
In the Russian case, discussion has evolved around two questions: First, how was economic performance in the final decades of the Tsarist Empire? Second, how was economic performance between 1913 and 1928, a period that covers World War I, the Russian Civil War (1918–1921), and the New Economic Policy (1921–1928)? In 1928, the relatively market-friendly New Economic Policy gave way to Stalin’s first five-year Plan and hence central planning of the entire economy. The first question was addressed in one of the first cliometric contributions on CESEE, namely the GDP calculations by Gregory (1982). Contrary to earlier research, Gregory found that the late Tsarist economy grew rapidly in its final three decades. In his calculations, GDP increased by 3.25% per annum between 1883 and 1913. Given rapid population growth, this translated into a GDP per head growth rate of 1.6%, making Russia one of the fastest growing European economies at the time. Gregory’s basic finding, novel at the time, has stood the test of time, as evidenced by Schulze and Kopsidis (2021), who calculate a 1.5% per capita growth rate for the same period. They also confirm Gregory’s suspicion of much lower growth in the 1860s and 1870s by extending their GDP calculations back to 1861. The increasing dynamism of the late Tsarist economy captured on the macro-level by Gregory (1982) and Schulze and Kopsidis (2021) is consistent with the modern view of the economic effects of the abolition of serfdom, which has emphasized growing agricultural productivity, urbanization, and industrialization (cf. section “Long-term Factors Impeding Economic Growth in CESEE”). Yet while there is a broad consensus on these successes of the late Tsarist economy, it is an entirely different matter whether such high growth rates could have been sustained. A great deal of that growth was owed to the boom in the world market for wheat, for which Russia was able to establish itself as the largest exporter following emancipation and the construction of the railways. Yet the pace of structural transformation remained
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 339


low (Schulze and Kopsidis 2019); in particular, it has been argued that the rate of industrialization was not high enough compared to the rate of population growth to shift the structure of the economy away from agriculture (Allen 2003). The assessment of the 1913–1928 period has remained more controversial. The end points of this period are defined as the last full year prior to World War I (1913) and the year in which the Soviet Union introduced the first five-year plan (1928). 1928 is also conveniently close to the 1927 national census, one of the first reliable sources of Russian economic history after the convulsions of World War I, the Russian Civil War, and the subsequent famine (1921–1922). 1913 and 1928 can be estimated with considerable certainty, and the key estimates by Gregory (1982) and Markevich and Harrison (2011) largely concur. In their estimates, and controlling for border changes (the Soviet Union in its 1925–1939 borders is smaller than Tsarist Russia by Finland, the Baltic countries, Poland as well as parts of Belorussia and Ukraine), GDP increased by 6.5% but population by 10% (Markevich and Harrison 2011). Consequently, GDP per capita in 1928 was down by ca. 3% compared to 15 years earlier. Far less certainty reins for the period between 1913 and 1928, encompassing three main events, namely World War I (1914–1918), the Russian Civil War (1918–1921), and the New Economic Policy (1921–1928). Given that the prolonged war periods coincide with poor statistical material, no definite answer will ever be found. Yet recent research (Markevich and Harrison 2011) has argued convincingly that the Civil War was far more disastrous both in terms of GDP and population losses than World War I. Despite continuously high fertility, the population (on the Soviet territory) declined by five and a half million between 1918 and 1921 as a result of combat, infectious diseases, famine, and outward migration; by contrast, high fertility fully counteracted war-related deaths (“excess deaths”) during World War I, preventing a population fall between 1914 and 1918 (Markevich and Harrison 2011). A great deal of research has been conducted on the New Economic Policy between 1921 and 1928. It was introduced in March 1921 after the end of the Civil War, ending the period of “war communism” (1918–1921) in which the Bolsheviks had essentially tried to gain control over the entire economy for a combination of economic, political, and military reasons. The New Economic Policy reintroduced private property rights (including for the farming population, i.e., the bulk of the Russian population) and market mechanisms; only large-scale industry and banking remained in state hands, but they were run as capitalist enterprises at the time (and not under the so-called soft budget constraint of later periods). In so doing, NEP improved the legal and factual position of Russia’s farming population to unprecedented levels, turning peasants into a political force to be reckoned with. The first five-year plan of 1928 and the transition to the command economy reversed this process by collectivizing agriculture and nationalizing small- and medium-scale industrial enterprises. Controversy about the NEP has focused on two questions. First, was the NEP successful in overcoming the economic consequences of the extended war period from 1914 to 1921? Second, to what extent would the NEP have been compatible with Stalin’s big push industrialization, or was abrogating it an essential ingredient in
340 M. Morys


delivering rapid industrialization and higher consumption levels in the late 1930s? The answers to the two questions are typically correlated for one and the same author. A skeptical view on the NEP’s actual operation between 1921 and 1928 will hold that it was incompatible with Stalin’s industrialization. By contrast, a more benign view of the NEP argues that it was brought to an end in 1928 not for its own shortcomings, but for purely political reasons (in the event, to undermine the peasantry as a potential political force). The first view is well represented by Harrison (1980) and Markevich and Harrison (2011) and the second by Allen (2003). How do the different authors argue? First, there is some consensus that the NEP saved a moribund Russian economy from completely collapsing. GDP per capita in 1921 stood at approximately one third of its 1913-value, but had (almost) climbed back in 1928 (Markevich and Harrison 2011). Yet beneath this success on the macro level, Markevich and Harrison (2011) detect sectoral weaknesses that would not have allowed for rapid industrialization in the 1930s under the NEP. In their view (and data, cf. Table 5 on p. 680), the main mechanism of recovery was the exploitation of spare capacity in large-scale industry, but agriculture (and small-scale industry) remained stagnant. Consequently, if the market-based agricultural system of the NEP had continued, the necessary resource transfer from the first to the secondary sector needed for rapid industrialization could not have been achieved. By contrast, Allen (2004) takes a more benign view of agricultural developments between 1921 and 1928. He presents evidence that Russian farmers were willing to increase sales substantially in response to only moderate price increases. As a result, he argues, Russian peasants might well have voluntarily supplied Soviet cities with enough food and raw materials to permit rapid industrialization. His positive view is further strengthened by the observation that the 1920s witnessed a process in the Russian countryside in which large and more productive producers were increasingly squeezing out smaller, less efficient farming units. Turning to the second question, there is agreement that achieving the resource transfer from agriculture to industry, from the countryside to the city, or, in Allen’s words, from “farm to factory” was essential for rapid industrialization; the controversy centers on how this was achieved. If this could only be achieved by coercive means, then collectivization – including the many million lives it cost and the hardship it brought to the countryside – was inevitable (and the end justifies the means, although there is discernible reluctance to say so). Yet if NEP was a viable alternative, then the question is how much difference did collectivization make to the economic outcome achieved in the late 1930s? Next to a purely market-based solution (no government investment strategy and a hard budget constraint for all companies), Allen (2003) compares two scenarios: the two factors of cardinal importance to Soviet industrialization (an investment strategy emphasizing heavy industry and the imposition of high output targets in conjunction with a soft budget constraint), but coupled with collectivization in one scenario ( forced resource transfer) and with NEP in the other (voluntary resource transfer). In his simulation exercise, these two scenarios perform much better than the capitalist option in terms of growth in capital, output, and per capita living standards; yet there is little
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 341


difference between the two “socialist” scenarios. Put differently, adding collectivization to the other two pillars of Stalin’s policies (favoring heavy industry and maximizing output, not profits) contributed little to growth, but came at heavy human cost and, in the view of Allen, “corrupted socialism” (p. 171).
Central Europe and South-East Europe
In the case of all other CESEE countries, the communist take-over and the introduction of central planning occurred only after World War II. Consequently, research similar to the case of late Tsarist Russia and the early Soviet Union would need to focus on where the Central and South-East European economies stood in the late 1930s. Yet not much research has been conducted on this topic in recent years. For the most part, we have only the older research by Kaser and Radice (1985–1989) (section “Landmark Publications on Central, East and South-East Europe”), which gave a negative account of this period, indirectly justifying the “big push” industrialization as it then happened in the Soviet bloc countries. Most recent research has instead focused on the pre-World War I experience, providing new national account data (Mijatović and Zavadjil 2023 on Serbia) and/or presenting the overall economic development and the structural change in particular in a more positive light (Ivanov and Kopsidis 2023 for Bulgaria). This is surprising, given that some of the economies had already achieved – or at least covered substantial ground toward – structural transformation that Soviet-style industrialization was meant to achieve (Morys 2021). Czechoslovakia, for instance, had more people working in industry than in agriculture by 1930; its sectoral composition was more “modern” than the Southern European countries, which then all industrialized after World War II under market-based systems. In the case of Czechoslovakia after 1948, central planning and the command economy were “rolled out” for a country that clearly did not need them, and can only be “justified” on political grounds. The situation might look differently for more backward countries in CESEE, one of which was 1930s Bulgaria, a country in which more than 80% of its labor force was still in agriculture. In such cases, the idea of communism as the only way toward industrialization has maintained followership among serious academics, even after the political changes of 1989–1991 (Avramov 2001). Yet Ivanov and Tooze (2007) show a more nuanced picture of the Bulgarian achievements by the late 1930s. While population growth had consumed most of the GDP advances in the four decades between 1890 and 1930 and per head income growth was insignificant as a result, the country had laid important pre-conditions for rapid growth thereafter. The authors highlight three achievements in particular. First, the agricultural sector had broken with decades of extensive development and begun to move decisively toward intensification. As agriculture became more productive, the preconditions for the resource transfer toward industry were in place. Second, starting from very low initial levels in 1900, Bulgaria achieved mass literacy by 1945, providing an urban workforce ready to work in the industries soon to be established. Third, the country underwent virtually complete demographic transition in the space of only three generations, allowing it to escape the Malthusian trap that had kept per head income
342 M. Morys


levels almost unchanged between the 1890s and the 1930s. In sum, before the advent of a strategy of state-centered economic policy, three vital preconditions for accelerated growth had already been established.
Economic Achievements of the State Socialist Period
The third area of CESEE cliometric research is an assessment of the economic achievements of the state socialist period. Following an earlier Western literature during the late state socialist and early transition period, this strand of research has seen important additions and revisions in recent years; it remains narrowly interested in GDP and is typically analyzed in an economic convergence framework similar in methodology to studies on the Western European growth experience after World War II. Consequently, this research relies on accurate GDP estimates for an economic system with a non-functioning price system; an issue widely discussed in the literature but not seen as invalidating the research (Vonyó and Markevich 2021). Socialist economic development has been traditionally interpreted as investment driven. Centrally planned economies were seen as relatively successful in mobilizing resources, but stifled innovation and creative entrepreneurship. They achieved a relatively satisfactory performance in the phase of extensive growth, but began to fall behind when capital accumulation reached diminishing returns and total factor productivity increases remained low (Bergson 1987; Ofer 1987; Easterly and Fischer 1995). The Soviet Union operated this system for the longest period (1928–1991) and has been analyzed in detail by Allen (2003). He interprets Soviet industrialization as “Feldman and Preobrazhensky” in action (the two economists behind Stalin’s first five-year plan in 1928) and demonstrates that the capital-intensive growth model prevailed until the fall of communism, with noticeably diminishing returns toward the end of the period. The implication of a “rise and fall” of the Socialist economy is not confined to convergence growth models, however. Broadberry and Klein (2011) investigate industrial labor productivity for Czechoslovakia between 1921 and 1991, comparing the state socialist strongest economy (alongside East Germany) to Britain over seven decades. The authors show that Czech productivity levels held up relatively well with Britain in the first two decades after World War II, even rising to approximately 75% by the early 1960s. Yet this was followed by relative decline and deterioration, returning productivity to one third by the 1980s. In the authors’ view, “central planning was able to cope with mass production technology as well as the regulated market system that existed in Britain at the same time” (p. 48). Yet the decline became inevitable, as economies in West and East shifted toward more flexible production technologies. While coming from a different methodological framework, Broadberry and Klein’s (2011) finding is consistent with the GDP-centered literature, which has portrayed command economies as strong in extensive but weak in intensive growth. Recent research has been more critical of the achievements of the state socialist period, including for the 1950s and 1960s dominated by extensive growth. Vonyó
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 343


and Klein (2019) show that communism allowed the CESEE countries to perform well against their own past (and the interwar period in particular), but not against capitalist economies in the post-World War II period. Convergence in GDP per capita occurred both in Western and Eastern Europe. Yet there were two “convergence clubs,” with the Western economies enjoying more rapid growth at the same level of initial income (GDP per capita in 1950). They also show that a simple convergence framework better explains the actual growth performance of Western economies, suggesting that convergence forces in the East were more disturbed by frictions typically associated with command economies. Pars pro toto and choosing the one country of CESEE that remained capitalist after World War II, Greece grew faster, for four decades, by almost one percentage point per year than neighboring Bulgaria, even if the two countries began at roughly the same income level after World War II. These results, based on a standard convergence framework, are consistent with two more recent findings, which have further weakened the older perspective of the relative strengths of communisms. They relate to the command economy’s supposedly superior ability (1) to push structural change and (2) to enable fixed capital formation. In both cases, it was thought that the coercive nature of communist political regimes was conducive to achieving these results better than capitalist economies. Vonyó and Klein (2019) and Vonyó (2017) are critical of communist economic performance on both accounts. Vonyó and Klein (2019) demonstrate that structural change in the Western European periphery went further than in Eastern Europe. While structural change proceeded quickly in the East and in line with its initial income levels, it slowed down considerably starting in the 1970s – while it continued to proceed along expectations in the Western European periphery. The authors conclude that market forces generated the macroeconomically beneficial outcome of structural change better than the forces of command did. Secondly, Vonyó (2017) throws doubt on the success of the CESEE economies in generating high levels of fixed capital formation. Recalculating the investment numbers for the period 1950–1989, he documents that fixed capital formation in CESEE was initially high (in line with earlier accounts from Western economists), but then declined and essentially collapsed in the 1980s (with the exception of the Soviet Union). As the political legitimacy of the communist regimes was increasingly challenged, the political need to support consumption increasingly clashed with the economic imperative to ensure high investment rates. In the authors’ view, this (political economy) rational also explains why the Soviet Union could continue along the old path of high investment rates. The country had retained more financial room for maneuver, as it was the only Soviet bloc country to benefit economically from the oil price shocks of the 1970s. As an oil exporting economy, it made financial gains, which it used to maintain high investment rates until the end of the state socialist period. In sum, recent work is markedly more critical than earlier work which tended to portray state socialism in a relatively benign light at least until the oil price shocks of the 1970s. A rare exception to this broad historiographical trend is the recent work by Bukowski and Novokmet (2021) on long-term trends on inequality in Poland. They attribute a substantial fall of inequality to the advent of state socialism in the late 1940s.
344 M. Morys


Conclusion
Cliometric approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe have become very popular in the past 20 years, and they are likely to shape our views on Eastern Europe in years to come. The 2021 publication of “The Economic History of Central, East and South-East Europe, 1800 to the present day,” the first-ever quantitative economic history of Eastern Europe, has contributed to a further consolidation of this relatively new field of research. Quo vademus? Two of the three research areas discussed in this chapter are not only crucial to our academic understanding of the East European experience, but connect to everyday concerns in the region. The economic gap with Western Europe has never been closed; the percentage gap in income levels between the two halves of Europe has remained stubbornly stable over the past two centuries (at approximately one third of the West European level if based on GDP data not adjusted for purchasing power parity). Likewise, the controversial assessment of the achievements of state socialism is mirrored by a political discourse in the region between veneration for an idealized communist past, on the one hand, and a complete rejection of the state socialist experience, on the other. The economic grievances in the region have been superseded recently by the war between Russia and Ukraine. Yet the war itself might be partly driven by economics: Ukraine performed particularly poorly during the transition period 1991–2008 (Voskoboynikov 2021), making it easy prey in the view of Russia’s leadership; and Russia fell on hard economic times after the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, possibly tempting President Putin into playing the nationalistic card more strongly than he would have if the benign 2000–2008 economic conditions had continued. Recent political events might therefore reinforce our need to understand better not only the political but also the economic history of Central, East, and South-East Europe, including how they interact with each other. Some of this research has already emerged, as recently published (Naumenko 2021) and currently reviewed work on the Ukrainian famine of 1933 (Markevich et al. 2022) demonstrate. For better or for worse, the fragile economic and political situation in much of the region will ensure that the quantitative economic history of Central, East, and South-East Europe remains high on the agenda in years to come.
References
Acemoglu D, Wolitzky A (2011) The economics of labor coercion. Econometrica 79(2):555–600 Allen RC (2003) Farm to factory. A reinterpretation of the soviet industrial revolution. Princeton University Press, Princeton Avramov, Rumen. The economic twentieth century of Bulgaria (in Bulgarian). Sofia: 2001 Axenciuc V (2012) Produsul Intern Brut al Romȃnieri 1862–2000. Serii Statistice Seculare ‚si Argumente Metodologice, vols. 1, 2. Editura Economicȃ, Bucarest
Berend I, Ránki R (1974) Economic development in east-Central Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries. Columbia University Press, New York/London, p 1974
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 345


Berend I, Ránki R (1982) The European periphery and industrialization 1780–1914. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Bergson A (1987) Comparative productivity: the USSR, Eastern Europe, and the west. Am Econ Rev 77(3):342–357 Borodkin L, Granville B, Leonard CS (2008) The rural/urban wage gap in the industrialisation of Russia, 1884–1910. Eur Rev Econ Hist 12:67–95 Broadberry S, Klein A (2011) When and why did eastern European Economies begin to fail? Lessons from a Czechoslovak/UK productivity comparison, 1921–1991. Explor Econ Hist 48:37–52 Bukowski P (2019) How history matters for student performance: lessons from the partitions of Poland. J Comp Econ 47(1):137–175 Bukowski P, Novokmet F (2021) Between communism and capitalism: long-term inequality in Poland, 1892–2015. J Econ Growth 26:187–239 Bush M (1996) Introduction. In: Bush M (ed) Serfdom and slavery. Studies in legal bondage. Longman, London/New York Cerman M (2012) Villagers and lords in Eastern Europe, 1300–1800. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke Chilosi D, Murphy TE, Studer R, Tuncer AC (2013) Europe’s many integrations: geography and grain markets, 1620–1913. Explor Econ Hist 50:46–68 Chuchko M (2022) Business representation in an autocratic regime: tariff policy and exchange committees in late tsarist Russia. Econ Hist Rev 75(3):801–829 Clavin P (2013) Securing the world economy: the reinvention of the league of nations, 1920–1946. Oxford University Press, Oxford Cvrcek T (2013) Wages, prices, and living standards in the Habsburg empire, 1827–1910. J Econ Hist 73(1):1–37 Cvrcek T (2020) Schooling under control. In: The origins of public education in Austria 1769–1869. Mohr-Siebeck, Tuebingen Dennison T (2006) Did serfdom matter? Russian rural society, 1750–1860. Hist Res 79(203):74–89 Dennison T (2011) The institutional framework of Russian serfdom. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Dennison T, Ogilvie S (2014) Does the European marriage pattern explain economic growth? J Econ Hist 74(3):651–693 Easterly W, Fischer S (1995) The Soviet economic decline. World Bank Econ Rev 9(3):341–371 Epstein S (2001) Introduction. In: Epstein S (ed) Town and country in Europe, 1300–1800. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Federico G (2012) How much do we know about market integration in Europe? Eco Hist Rev 65(2): 470–497 Federico G, Schulze M-S, Volckart O (2021) European goods market integration in the very longrun: from the black death to the first world war. J Econ Hist 81(1):276–308 Gerschenkron A (1962) Economic backwardness in historical perspective. A book of essays. Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA Gerschenkron A (1965) Agrarian policies and industrialization, Russia 1861–1917. In: Habakkuk H, Postan M (eds) The Cambridge economic history of Europe (VI). The industrial revolution and after: incomes, population and technological change (2). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 706–800 Good DF (1984) The economic rise of the Habsburg empire 1750–1914. University of California Press, Berkeley Goodwin BK, Grennes TJ (1998) Tsarist Russia and the world wheat market. Explor Econ Hist 35:405–430 Gregg A (2020) Factory productivity and the concession system of incorporation in late Imperial Russia. Am Econ Rev 110(2):401–427 Gregg A, Nafziger S (2019) Capital structure and corporate performance in late Imperial Russia. Eur Rev Econ Hist 23(4):446–481
346 M. Morys


Gregory PR (1982) Russian national income 1885–1913. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Gregory PR (1994) Before command. An economic history of Russia from emancipation to the first five-year plan. Princeton University Press, Princeton Hajnal J (1965) European marriage patterns in perspective. In: Glass DV, Eversley DEC (eds) Population and history. Edward Arnold, London, pp 101–145 Harrison M (1980) Why did NEP fail? Econ Plan 16(2):57–67 Ivanov M (2012) The gross domestic product of Bulgaria 1870–1975. Ciela, Sofia Ivanov M, Kopsidis M (2023) Industrialisation in a small grain economy during the first globalisation: Bulgaria c. 1870–1910. Eco Hist Rev 76(1):169–198 Ivanov M, Tooze A (2007) Convergence or decline on Europe’s southeastern periphery? Agriculture, population, and GDP in Bulgaria, 1892–1945. J Econ Hist 11:672–704 Jacks DS (2005) Intra- and international commodity market integration in the Atlantic economy, 1800–1913. Explor Econ Hist 42:381–413 Jacks DS (2006) What drove 19th century commodity market integration? Explor Econ Hist 43:383–412 Kaser MC, Radice EA (1985–1989) The economic history of Eastern Europe 1919–1975. Clarendon Press, Oxford Klein A (2014) The institutions of the “Second Serfdom” and economic efficiency: review of the existing evidence for Bohemia. In: Cavaciocchi S (ed) Schiavitu e servaggio nell’economia europea. Secc. XI–XVIII. /slavery and serfdom in the European economy from the 11th to the 18th centuries. XLV settimana di studi della Fondazione istituto internazionale di storia economica F. Datini, Prato 14–18 April 2013. Firenze University Press, Florence Klein A, Ogilvie S (2016) Occupational structure in Czech lands under the second serfdom. Eco Hist Rev 69(2):496–521 Komlos J (1983) The Habsburg monarchy as a customs union. Economic development in AustriaHungary in the nineteenth century. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ Kopsidis M, Wolf N (2012) Agricultural productivity across Prussia during the industrial revolution: a Thünen perspective. J Econ Hist 72(3):634–670 Kossev K, Tompson W (2021) Political and economic integration with the Western economies since 1989. In: Morys M (ed) The economic history of central, east and south-East Europe. Routledge, London, pp 434–476 Kostelenos G, Vsiliou D, Kounaris E, Petmezas S, Sfakianakis M (2007) Gross domestic product, 1830–1939. Centre of Planning and Economic Research, Athens Lampe JR, Jackson MR (1982) Balkan economic history, 1550–1950: from Imperial borderlands to developing nations. Indiana University Press, Bloomington Malinowski M (2016) Serfs and the city: market conditions, surplus extraction institutions and urban growth in Poland, 1500–1772. Eur Rev Econ Hist 2:123–146 Malinowski M (2019) Economic consequences of state failure. Legal capacity, regulatory activity, and market integration in Poland, 1505–1772. J Econ Hist 79(3):862–896 Markevich A, Harrison M (2011) Great war, civil war, and recovery: Russia’s national income, 1913 to 1928. J Econ Hist 71(3):672–703 Markevich A, Zhuravskaya E (2018) The economic effects of the abolition of serfdom: evidence from the Russian empire. Am Econ Rev 108(4–5):1074–1117 Markevich A, Naumenko N, Qian N (2022) The causes of the Ukrainian famine mortality 1932–33 (NBER working paper number 29089). Marx K (1867) Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Ökonomie. Erster Band, Hamburg Metzer J (1974) Railroad development and market integration: the case of tsarist Russia. J Econ Hist 34(3):529–550 Mijatović B, Zavadjil M (2023) Serbia on the path to modern economic growth. Econ Hist Rev 76(1):199–220 Moon D (1996) Reassessing Russian serfdom. Eur Hist Q 26(4):483–526 Morys M (ed) (2021a) The economic history of central, east and south-East Europe, 1800 to the present day. Routledge, London
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 347


Morys M (2021b) The gold standard, fiscal dominance and financial supervision in Greece and south-East Europe, 1841–1939. Eur Rev Econ Hist 25(1):106–136 Morys M (2021c) Economic growth and structural change in central, east and south-East Europe, 1918–1939. In: Morys M (ed) The economic history of central, east and south-East Europe. Routledge, London. 277-302161-187 Morys M (2022) Has Eastern Europe always lagged behind the west? Historical evidence from pre-1870. Rev Income Wealth 68(S1):S3–S21 Morys M, Ivanov M (2015) The emergence of a European region: business cycles in south-East Europe from political independence to world war II. Eur Rev Econ Hist 19:382–411 Nafziger S (2010) Peasant communes and factor markets in late 19th century Russia. Explor Econ Hist 47:381–402 Nafziger S (2011) Did Ivan’s vote matter? The political economy of local democracy in Tsarist Russia. Eur Rev Econ Hist 15:393–441 Naumenko N (2021) The political economy of famine: the Ukrainian famine of 1933. J Econ Hist 81(1):156–197 Nikolic S (2018) Determinants of industrial location: kingdom of Yugoslavia in the interwar period. Eur Rev Econ Hist 22(1):101–133 Nikolic S, Blum M, Vonyo T (2022) Immigration and development. German-speaking agricultural settlers in the kingdom of Hungary, CEPR discussion paper number 17567 Ofer G (1987) Soviet economic growth: 1928–1985. J Econ Lit 25(4):1767–1833 Ogilvie S (2007) ‘Whatever is, is right’? Economic institutions in pre-industrial Europe. Economic History Review 60(4):649–684 Ogilvie S, Carus AW (2014) Institutions and economic growth in historical perspective. In: Aghion P, Durlauf SN (eds) Handbook of economic growth, vol 2. Elsevier Science, Burlington Palairet M (1997) The Balkan Economies c. 1800–1914. Evolution without development. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Schulze MS (2000) Patterns of growth and stagnation in the late nineteenth century Habsburg economy. Eur Rev Econ Hist 4(3):311–340 Schulze M, Kopsidis M (2021) The long 19th century (1800–1914). Economic growth and sectoral developments. In: Morys M (ed) The economic history of Central, East and South-East Europe. Routledge, London, pp 39–68 Schulze M, Wolf N (2012) Economic nationalism and economic integration: the Austro-Hungarian empire in the late 19th century. Economic History Review 65(2):652–673 Stanziani A (2014) Russian serfdom: a reappraisal. Ab Imperio 2:71–99 Szoltysek M (2007) Central European household and family systems, and the ‘Hajnal–Mitterauer’ line: the parish of Bujakow (18th–19th centuries). Hist Fam 12(1):19–42 Szoltysek M, Zuber-Goldtein B (2009) Historical family systems and the great European divide: the invention of the Slavic east. Demográfia 52(5):5–47 Tooze A, Ivanov M (2011) Disciplining the ‘black sheep of the Balkans’: financial supervision and sovereignty in Bulgaria, 1902–1938. Econ Hist Rev 64:30–51 Tuncer C (2015) Sovereign debt and international financial control: the Middle East and the Balkans, 1870–194. Palgrave Macmillan, London Tuncer C, Weller L (2022) Democracy, autocracy, and sovereign debt: how polity influenced country risk on the peripheries of the global economy, 1870–1913. Explor Econ Hist 85:101449 Vasilenok N, Natkhov T (2021) Skilled immigrants and technology adoption: evidence from the German settlements in the Russian empire. Explor Econ Hist 81:101399 Vonyó T (2017) War and socialism: why Eastern Europe fell behind between 1950 and 19890. Economic History Review 70(1):248–270 Vonyó T, Klein A (2019) Why did socialist economies fail: the role of factor inputs reconsidered. Economic History Review 72(1):317–345 Vonyó T, Markevich A (2021) Economic growth and structural developments, 1945–1989. In: Morys M (ed) The Economic History of Central, East and South-East Europe. Routledge, London, pp 277–302
348 M. Morys


Voskoboynikov I (2021) Economic growth and sectoral developments during the transition period, 1990–2008. In: Morys M (ed) The economic history of Central, East and South-East Europe. Routledge, London, pp 383–412 Wallerstein I (1974) The modern world system: capitalist agriculture and the origins of the European world economy in the sixteenth century. University of California Press, Berkeley Wolf N (2007) Endowments vs. market potential: what explains the relocation of industry after the polish reunification in 1918? Explor Econ Hist 44:22–42 Zhuravskaya E, Guriev S, Markevich A (2023) New Russian economic history. J Econ Lit. forthcoming
Cliometric Approaches to Central, East, and South-East Europe 349