ISSN: 0306-6150 (Print) 1743-9361 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/fjps20
A reply to Tsoucalas
Nicos Mouzelis
To cite this article: Nicos Mouzelis (1980) A reply to Tsoucalas, , 7:4, 503-506, DOI: 10.1080/03066158008438120
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/03066158008438120
Published online: 05 Feb 2008.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 25
View related articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fjps20


Notes and
Memoranda
A Reply to Tsoucalas
Nicos Mouzelis*
I found C. Tsoucalas' review of my book Modern Greece: Facetsof Underde
velopment (JPS Oct. 1979 pp. 122-128) judicious in terms of his balanced
account of my main themes, as well as the dispassionate tone with which he
elaborates points of both agreement and disagreement. Since some of the latter
seem to stem from different uses of basic terms, I would like to make a few
relevant comments.
1. On theterm 'neo-Marxism'
This term is not one I have invented, but is widely used in sociology of
development literature, especially in Anglo-Saxon countries. My use of it does
not imply that I consider the majority of theorists of Marxist inspiration to have
'departed from the fundamental concepts of Marx'. Although there are of
course obvious methodological and substantive differences between neo
Marxists like Baran, Frank and Amin and the mature works of Marx, I
definitely do not accept the Althusserian thesis which brands all neo-Marxist
writings as 'ideological' and non-Marxist. I tried to make this point very clear
in the second chapter of my book, where I argue against the Althusserian
critique of the neo-Marxist approach to development.
2. Concerningmy critique of Poulantzas' theory onthe riseand fall of thedictator
ship
My main criticism of Poulantzas is not that he does not provide enough
empirical material to support his thesis; it rather has to do with the basic
structural cleavage (on the level of 'objective class places') which Poulantzas
discerns between two fractions (comprador and interior) of the Greek
bourgeoisie, and on which he bases his entire explanation of the rise and fall of
the Greek junta. In my view there is no such cleavage in the Greek social
formation—not because empirical data are lacking to demonstrate its exis
tence, but because the interests of these two fractions are not antagonistic but
in fact complementary. This complementarity becomes quite obvious from the
model of capitalist accumulation in Greece during the twentieth century.
*London School of Economics


504 TheJournal of Peasant Studies
3. On clientelism
I myself do not see any fundamental disagreement between Tsoucalas' and my
own view of the relationship between clientelism and class structure. If there is
any, it is again a matter of terminologies. If, for instance, instead of 'class
politics' I had used the equally acceptable 'politics of horizontal incorpora
tion', we would probably have had no differences at all in this respect. Now
when I contrast clientelistic with class politics, I certainly do not mean that in
clientelist politics patronage networks 'develop in a social void', nor that they
have 'no class determination whatsoever'. As is made perfectly clear by my
criticism of the way functionalist political scientists deal with clientelism (c/.
ch. 3, section 2), it is my contention that it is impossible to understand
patronage politics without examining the more or less direct links between
clientelist political practices and the underlying class structure. With reference
to Greece, I tried to show that the variations in the importance of clientelism in
relation to more 'horizontal' forms of political integration can be explained
in terms of the development of the capitalist mode of production and the
changing class structure.
4. On theconcept of underdevelopment
By arguing that in underdeveloped countries the capitalist mode of production
takes on an 'enclave' form, I do not mean that the non-capitalist modes are not
linked with or integrated into the capitalist sector at all. The question is not one
of integration versus non-integration, but rather ofwhatsort ofintegration, what
sortof links there are between capitalist and non-capitalist sectors in third
world formations. To be more specific: by saying that capitalism in Greece took an enclave
form, I mean (a) that the capitalist mode of production (CMP) did not expand
as much as in the West European economies, and hence the extraordinarily
large number of simple-commodity production (SCP) units in both industry
and agriculture; (b) that the articulation between CMP and the non-capitalist
sector is more negative in Greece (in comparison always with West-European
capitalist development). By this negativity I do not at all imply the dualist
notion of a total absence of any links of the non-capitalist sectors with the
overall capitalist economy. What I do imply is malintegration rather than
absence of integration—malintegration, or lack of organic complementarity
between capitalist and non-capitalist sectors (as well as between technologi
cally advanced and backward sectors within the former).1
Of course, to demonstrate empirically and in detail the considerable strength
of the negative links between sectors (always comparatively speaking) requires
statistical data which, for obvious reasons, do not exist at this time. But on a
more general level the non-complementariness or malintegration between
sectors is quite obvious if one takes into account that historically the develop
ment of the CMP was a much more indigenous process in Western Europe than
in Greece, where capitalist forces and relations of production were more or less
forcibly imported from abroad.


A Reply To Tsoucalas 505
The timing of capitalist industrialisation, as well as the peripheral/depen
dent position of Greece within the international capitalist division of labour
during this process, can easily explain the relative malintegration of the Greek
economy along the lines suggested in my book. General indicators of this
malintegration are, of course, easy enough to find. One such is the lack of any
substantial vertical integration and the low value-added of Greece's manu
facturing industry. Another is the inability of the industrial capitalist sector,
despite its spectacular post-war growth, to absorb redundant labour from the
simple-commodity sectors—an inability which has resulted in massive labour
migrations to Western Europe. Huge and growing social inequality is, of
course, a third such indication. Finally (although it is not possible to develop these arguments here), qualita
tive differences in the structure of political and cultural institutions between
Greece and Western Europe are even more easily demonstrated. The above 'facets of underdevelopment' notwithstanding, Greece also has
characteristics which differentiate her sharply from most of the third-world
peripheral capitalist societies. Not only does her impressive post-war indus
trialisation set her apart from all those countries which are still predominantly
agricultural, but Greece is also very different from countries like Brazil or Iran
which, despite their great industrial advances, have been quite unable to
eliminate the twin problem of large-scale poverty and unemployment. How
can this situation be explained? A full elucidation would have to take into
account the historical development of the Greek bourgeoisie from Ottoman
times onwards, but the following factors especially are relevant to the situation
as we find it today:
—the relatively small size of the Greek population and its exceptionally
low birth rate;
— massive migrations of the Greek labour force into Western Europe;
— considerable invisible earnings (tourism, shipping, emigrants' remittances) which more or less suffice to cover the trade gap;
—Greece's geographical position which, especially since the crisis in the
Lebanon, has made Athens the financial and business centre of the
Eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East.
All of these factors together have contributed to Greece, despite its underdeveloped structures, having been able to eliminate the usual concomitants of underdevelopment (i.e. abject povery and large-scale unemployment).
5. Comparative method and evolutionism
Tsoucalas' criticism of my brief comparison of developed and underdeveloped
capitalist formations (where I argue that as a rule the disadvantaged classes in
third-world countries are more exploited, politically more repressed and
ideologically more disoriented), prompts me to make the following comments,
(a) I do not employ the term 'exploitation' in its strict Marxist sense—if for


506 The Journal of Peasant Studies
no other reason than that such a strict definition does not permit discussion of
exploitation in the non-capitalist sectors. Within the comparative framework
in which I have used the term, exploitation for me means simply that wealth
and income inequalities are greater and tend to grow much faster in underde
veloped than in developed capitalist formations. (b) Tsoucalas argues that 'by insisting on "more" exploitation, as well as
"more" manipulation and "more" ideological disorientation, one runs the risk
of returning to the linear and gradualist approaches to development' (p. 127).
This is a position I disagree with profoundly. The risk of linear, evolutionist
conceptions of development does not lie in comparisons or the identification of
differences per se, whether quantitative or qualitative. On the contrary, there are not enough systematic comparative analyses of different types of capitalist trajectories. What could be more interesting, for example, than a serious
comparative study showing the differences between England and Greece in
terms of income distribution, how such differences developed historically, and
how they are linked with the different developments of capitalism in the two
formations? In other words; it is not the comparison as such which leads to
evolutionist views of development, but how it isused to explain the differences it
demonstrates. For instance, neo-evolutionist theories explain the differences
between developed and 'developing' countries within a context where power
and dependency relationships, whether at national or international level, do
not exist—hence their optimistic view that the further diffusion of capitalism
will eventually eliminate all differences. I have already shown the fallacy of
such views in many parts of my book.
NOTE
1. It is quite true that the 'enclave' concept has, especially in the Latin-American context, been
used for analysing situations where 'invested capital comes almost exclusively from abroad,
profits are exported, the products are destined for foreign markets, and the only effective
articulation with the internal market consists in the paying of wages and taxes, and the
utilisation of raw materials' (p. 128). I myself do not use the term enclave in that sense.
Tsoucalas himself acknowledges that this is obvious from my analysis of the process of
capitalist accumulation in Greece. However, I do now realise that it would have avoided
confusion if I had used some term other than 'enclave'.