Response to Bruce Caldwell
Heath Pearson
Bruce Caldwell's thoughtful critique of my threefold negation has three facets of its own, which I shall address in tum. His first point is that my claims, when tme, are quite uncontroversial; this would seem to apply particularly to my argument that "historical" economics was neither distinctively German nor dogmatically antitheoretical. Well, yes, to a degree: my claims are of course unoriginal and uncontroversialuncontroversial, that is, among those scholars who have devoted much of their lives to the study of nineteenth-century political economy. The problem is that this segment of humanity could fit into a small conference room, if not a large elevator; and if we limit our population to "new institutionalists," graduate students, and undergraduates, I suspect we are dealing with a nearly empty set. Such at least was my conclusion from perusing the standard histories of economic thought, a sobering encounter that originally motivated the article in question. A good pedagogical mle of thumb is that when you're dealing with something that is both tme and important, the point is not to say it till it's been said (i.e., once), but till it's been understood. To note that we've not yet reached understanding is putting it mildly, and my shameless crib from Voltaire, one of the great pamphleteers of the ages, was meant to get us on track.
Correspondence may be addressed to Heath Pearson, Department of History, tJniversity of Califomia, 3229 Dwinelle Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720; e-mail: hpearson@socrates.berkeley.edu. I am grateful for the comments of Jurgen Backhaus, Knut Borchardt, Thomas Brady, Michael Gruettner, Karl Hauser, Bertram Schefold, and Richard Swedberg.
History of Political Economy 33:3 © 2001 by Duke University Press.


656 History oi" Political Economy 33:3 !2(K)i)
Caldwell's second objection is that my proposed remedies are procrustean. that I would see all non-Ricardian economists forced into a "cultural school." an "evolutionary school," or some other such unholy amalgam. Again, my response runs along the lines of '"Yes, but."' Yes, my goal was to simplify. Yes, simplicity exacts its toll in terms of precision. And yes, it would be truly appalling if 1 had envisioned razing the temple of the German historical school only to erect another, even ungainlier school in its place. But this is emphatically not what I envisioned. I studiously avoided attaching the word school to any of my alternative denominations, and if I nevertheless gave the impression of such intent, let me herewith apologize and clarify. My general position is that too many of us teach intellectual history the way Chagall painted, in bright monochromes and broad brushstrokes; the result is generally pleasing, but naive and phantasmagorical. Whal we need instead is something more akin to pointillism, where forms are permeable to diffuse colorations, and where more differences are of degree than of kind. Only the most impermeable figures in such a landscape would deserve the label "school." Thus I agree fully with Caldwell's claim that "the identification of well-defined schools of thought in economics is often very difficult." I would merely add that school is also a term of abuse, and one need not be a Foucauldian to see in its deployment a discursive strategy of deligitimization, a brushstroke of tar. It was done to Smithians (by List); it has been done to Austrians (although not by Caldwell, who seems to prefer a softer focus on the Austrian "tradition"); it has been done to Chicagoans; and it has been done, not least, to Germans. 1 would question the term's fairness in each case, and I would in no case wish to add to this dismal tradition.
This leads directly to Caldwell's third and major objection, that the GHSE really was a school, even by this more damning standard. Specifically, he points to the supposedly despotic and arbitrary "Althoff system," and to its role in enforcing grim uniformity on the German university system. For German economics the result was apparently a ruthless Lysenkoism, with Schmoller playing the role of that deluded agronomist. Once again, let me start by acknowledging the grain of truth in Caldwell's position. Friedrich Althoff did gain great fame for challenging the ancient privileges of the university faculties under his administration. Needless to say, this made him many enemies, some of whom charged him with quashing academic freedom. Nevertheless I consider Cald


Pearson / Comment on Caldwell 657
well's conclusions to be dramatically vitiated by the following considerations. First, let us not lose sight of the fact that the GHSE was spread throughout the lands that became the German Empire, and it lasted for the better part of a century. Althoff, though, controlled only the nine universities located in the Kingdom of Prussia, and then only for twentyfive years. I Thus, even supposing that his influence was as baleful as here depicted, it is hard to imagine him masterminding a school when in fact many of Germany's foremost universities (including Leipzig, Munich, Freiburg, Heidelberg, Jena, and Tubingen) were outside Prussia, and that many members of the GHSE taught in those institutions, or in Austria or Switzerland (including Roscher, Hildebrand, Knies, Bticher, Brentano, Weber, Inama-Stemegg, Cohn, Philippovich, Schonberg, and Diehl). It is even harder to spy Althoff's cunning hand at work in the decades preceding his appointment (1882) or following his death (1908). Second, the Althoff system was not in fact as baleful as its detractors have alleged. No one disputed the legal right of Althoff's ministry to appoint professors as it saw fit, and yet the brute fact is that in Althoff's day far fewer calls went out "over the head" of the faculties concemed than previously (Brocke 1980, 89-90). What made the Althoff system so effective—and so infuriating, in the view of some—was the very fact that it did so little violence to the trappings of academic autonomy. If Althoff nevertheless did have absolutist ambitions (and most observers agree that he did), his was a strikingly enlightened absolutism, especially when contrasted to the prejudices of the university faculties against which he so expertly maneuvered (Ringer 1969, 51-53; Brocke 1980, 87-89; 1988, 17; Lischke 1990; Backhaus 1993; McClelland 1980, 29; Lindenfeld 1997, 267; Dawson 1919, 2:411). His appointments were necessarily "political," in the sense that he willingly enforced laws banning "seditious" elements from the civil service (a criterion which of course excluded most Social Democrats).2 Within those constraints, though, Althoff's policies were fairly open-minded. He pursued what
1. It has sometimes been alleged that Althoff exerted informal influence over his counterparts in the other German states, but to my knowledge those charges have never been substantiated, nor have they ever extended to the process of professorial appointment. 2. Althoff did, however, oppose, on grounds of academic freedom, the lex Arons, which extended the ban on socialist professors down to the rank of Privatdozent (Brocke 1980, 9699). Similarly, he insisted on Wemer Sombart's appointment as untenured professor (extraordinarius) at Breslau, despite Sombart's open association with the political Left—and over the objections of the Breslau faculty.


History of Political Fcdiiomy 33: ^ i 200!
might be called a policy of "aftimriative action" in favor of Catholics. Jews, labor sympathizers, atid women (Brocke 1987, 206-8; 1988. 17: McClelland 1980. 295: Backhaus 1993. 13). In economics, this selfconscious policy of balance led him to support certain appointments at least partly on the gtounds that the candidates opposed the outlook associated with Schmoller and the Verein fiir SocialpoUtik (Lindenlaub 1967, 70-71: Lindenfeld 1997. 274). Althoff was also a pioneer in ititernational academic exchange, which he defended as "selfless intellectual commerce," as the best way "to pave the way to a true world-civilization" (quoted in Brocke 1987. 211,213). These are hardly the words or actions of the obscurantist martinet of legend. From a closer reading of history Althoff emerges as a figure quite comparable to Voltaire's friend Frederick 11, himself an energetic child of the Enlightenment and a convinced enemy of medieval privilege, but one who was not especially scrupulous about the means by which he pursued his goals. Certainly he was no Tsar Nicholas, still less a Stalin. Max Weber's harsh judgment deserves serious consideration, but it also deserves to be weighed in the balance against the views of two other men of principle, Adolf von Harnack and Friedrich Paulsen, who deemed academic freedoms to have reached unprecedented heights under Althoff (Brocke 1980, 106-7). Weber himself acknowledged the ambiguity of the Althoff era:
It is very difficult to speak about this tnan. He was not only a good human being in the specific sense of the word, but he was also a man of very large perspectives. He could indeed say of himself: I see things more broadly than the gentlemen at the individual universities. . . . There was no room for nepotism where he was, certainly not in the sense in which it is ordinarily understood. He could of course tnake mistakes and he did in fact do so. But his choices were often much more brilliant choices than those of the German universities. (1973, 26-27: see also 46)
Finally there is the question of Schmoller's role. Was he in fact a stultifying, doctrinaire eminence grise of German economics under Althoff? I would argue against that position. In the first place, Schmoller was not the only economist whom Althoff consulted: Wilhelm Lexis (another friend and colleague from his Strasbourg days), Johannes Conrad, Ludwig Elster, and Robert Friedberg also had Althoff's ear, and they by no means agreed with Schmoller on all questions. It is simply not true that Schmoller always got his way. More to the point, Schmoller


Pearson / Comment on Caldwell 659
repeatedly showed himself to be unprejudiced and pluralistic in matters of academic appointment, repeatedly supporting the candidacies of economists who disagreed with him on matters of method and substance (Lindenlaub 1967, 142, 148, 363; Ringer 1969, 142).3 Weber touched on this theme several times in his lengthy critique of the German university system: he named Schmoller as a leader in the Berlin faculty's strenuous—and ineffectual—protests against a law passed specifically to exclude SPD members from the rank of docent (1973, 16); he named Schmoller among the foremost victims of the "Bemhard Affair," when an economist was called to Berlin, apparently on political grounds, against the wishes of the faculty (8, 32); and he named Schmoller as a supporter of Wemer Sombart's application to be habilitated at Berlin, a striking case not only in view of Sombart's crypto-Marxist past and his bohemian lifestyle (both poles apart from Schmoller's own), but also because this application was peremptorily rejected—by the faculty, not the ministry (12). Let me be clear about what this digression on the Prussian university system has and has not accomplished. It has not argued that the Althoff .system was a good idea, any more than benevolent despotism ever has been. On Althoff's watch the Prussian system of higher education prospered mightily;4 but it did so at the cost of many personal injustices. Its victims included Ferdinand Tonnies, Georg Simmel, Ignaz Jastrow, and probably many more whose names are lost to history. An even more dubious aspect of the system is its role in the destruction of academic courage and self-esteem, with disastrous consequences in the long term. Much as Frederick the Great paved the way for nefarious successors, Althoff has rightly attracted some share of the blame for the German universities' supine response to Nazism a generation later. More to the point, the foregoing considerations have not proven that the GHSE was not a school; nor could they. Their purpose was to relocate the discussion back where it belongs: back to the economists' texts and engagements themselves. Here I believe the weight of scholarly opinion is squarely on my side (Lindenlaub 1967; Kruger 1983; Bruch 1980). Let
3. Schmoller's open-mindedness extended beyond matters of academic appointment. It is rarely recalled, for example, that in his Grundrifi he termed the much-remarked contrasts between Austrian and German approaches "illusory" (scheinbar) and credited Menger and BohmBawerk with major analytical accomplishments (1900-1904. 1:119). 4. For example, of the fifty-eight Nobel Prize winners for nalural science up to 1918, eighteen worked in Gennany, and of those sixteen worked in Prussia (Brocke 1987,211). Germany's attractive force for American economics students of the day is also well documented.


660 Historv of Political Economv 333 l2()()l)
us henceforth scratch our heads over questions like this: What policy positions, if any, did Roscher, Sombart, Schmoller, Biicher, and Brentano hold in common? That Caldwell has cited Haim Barkai's (1991) work on Schmoller's monetary views is certainly a step in the right direction. In point of fact I am not convinced that Barkai's expose can perform the work that Caldwell asks of it: Barkai's charge—that Schmoller's monetary theory was flawed, that many of his students nevertheless believed him, and that some of those students went on to help make a hash of the Weimar macroeconomy—is intriguing; but even if it is true it hardly turns Schmoller and his peers into a school, much less a "historical" school. To my eyes this is just one more knot in the crooked timber of the academy, such as we know it the world over. Pending further debate, which I welcome. I will close with this simple catechism on the economists who were once miscast as the German historical school: Fallible? Quite. Speculative? Yes, occasionally to the point of delusion. Prolix? Excruciatingly so. But sectarian? No, that is going too far.
References
Backhaus, Jijrgen G. 1993. The University as an Economic Institution: The Political Economy of the Althoff System. Journal of Economic Studies 20.4:8-29. Barkai, Haim. 1991. Schmoller on Money and the Monetary Dimension of Economics.//0P£ 23.1:13^39. Brocke, Bemhard vom. 1980. Hochschul- und Wissenschaftspolitik in PreuBen und im Deutschen Kaiserreich 1882-1907: Das "System Althoff." In Bildungspotitik in Preuften zurZeit des Kaiserreichs. edited by Peter Baumgart. 9-118. Vol. I of Preufkn in der Geschichte. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
. 1987. Friedrich Althoff. In Wissenschaftspolitik in Berlin, edited by Wolfgang Treue and Karlfried Grlinder, 195-214. Vol. 3 oiBerlinische Lebetisbilder. Berhn: Colloquium. . 1988. Von der Wissenschaftsverwaltung zur Wissenschaftspolitik: Friedrich Althoff. Berichte zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte 11:1-26. Bruch, Rudiger vom. 1980. Wissenschqft. Politik un offentUche Meinung: Gelehrtenpolitik im wilhelminischen Deutschland. Historische Studien. no. 435. Husum. Germany: Matthiesen. Dawson. W. H. 1919. The German Empire. 1867-1914. 2 vols. New York: Macmillan.
Kruger, Dieter. 1983. Nationalokonomen im wilhelminischen Deutschland. Kritische Studien zur Geschichtswissenschaft, no. 58. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.


Pearson / Comment on Caldwell 661
Lindenfeld, David. 1997. The Practical Imagination: The German Sciences of State in the Nineteenth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lindenlaub, Dieter. 1967. Richtungskampfe im Verein fur Sozialpolitik. Supplement to VierteljahrschriftfiirSozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Beihefte 52-53. Wiesbaden: Steiner. Lischke, Ralph-Jurgen. 1990. Friedrich Althoff—preuBischer Wissenschaftspolitiker und weitblickender Forderer der Wissenschaften. Zeitschrift fiir Geschichtswissenschaft 38.10:878-87. McClelland, Charles E. 1980. State. Society, and University in Germany. 1700-1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ringer, Fritz K. 1969. The Decline of the German Mandarins: The German Academic Community. 1890-1933. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Schmoller, Gustav. 1900-1904. Grundrifi der allgemeinen Volkswirtschaftslehre. 2 vols. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Weber, Max. 1973. Max Weber on Universities. Translated and edited by Edward Shils. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.