75
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
he period from the repeal of the corn laws to the First World War (or the Great
Depression of 1929) has been renamed the First Globalization in recent years, as a
kind of ex-post premonitory narration of our own contemporary globalisation. It
describes the phenomenon of successive and geographically expanding integration
of the world markets of goods, initially, capital, later, and labour, finally, into a
single international division of labour. Implicit in this narration is the beneficial
results of this long term development of productive specialization and market in
tegration for all parties concerned; once, again, in premonition of the advantages
globalisation supposedly offers to the present economic world of nations.
his relatively benign narration has substituted itself to a grimmer (but his
torically more realist) presentation of the process of hierarchical integration of
the different world economies into a single modern or capitalist world system as
conceptualised by Immanuel Wallerstein and the world-system analysis school.
his was a model of geo-economic incorporation rather than market integration,
which was fundamentally conflictual in its theoretical premises that derived from
a peculiar combination of Braudelian esprit and Neo-marxism.
During this first globalization the Eastern Mediterranean economy (or the Ot
toman imperial economy -as others might have called it) disintegrated on a regional
level and reintegrated the new global economy, centred around the industrial-fi
nancial cores of North-Atlantic and Central Europe. his entailed the integration
of its constituent parts in a different and larger international division of labour,
and it coincided and interacted with the profound transformation of its demo-eco
nomic system. he growth, crisis and subsequent transformation of the Greek
economy was closely dependent on the globalization process.1
1 On the effects of the First Globalization on the less developed economies, Williamson, Trade and Poverty.
Growth And Crısıs ın the Eastern
Medıterranean Durıng the Fırst Globalızatıon:
A Vıew From Greece
Sokrates PETMEZAS


76
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
In this paper I intent to briefly present the process of integration of Eastern-Mediterranean economy, into the new global division of labour, and its consequences from a Greek viewpoint. Independent Greece, whose structure and development was not very different from that of other provinces of the Ottoman heartland, was a small agrarian economy, by which I mean that more than half of its population lived and more than half of its output was produced in the countryside. As a primordially agrarian economy, in an era of world productive and demographic expansion and industrialisation, it faced the challenge of growth (measured in terms of per capita GDP or national income) and of economic development, by which I mean of course the process of structural transformation from an agrarian and rural to an urban and industrial economy, which would be engaged in a self-sustained process of unrelenting increase of labour productivity.
Table 1 shıppıng ıncome (sı) and gdp ın mıllıon golden drachmas ın 19th century greece2
Prımary Sector
Secondary Sector
Tertıary Sector
Shıppıng
Income GDP SI GNP
1835-45 60% 1% 12% 26% 76 27 103
1846-55 56% 3% 15% 26% 93 32 125
1856-65 65% 5% 17% 13% 159 24 183
1866-75 61% 6% 17% 15% 230 42 272
1876-85 64% 6% 20% 10% 333 36 369
1886-95 66% 6% 23% 6% 484 30 514
1896-05 62% 9% 24% 5% 584 31 615
1906-14 58% 13% 23% 6% 778 47 825
he minuscule kingdom of Greece founded in 1830, after a long, destructive and bloody war of independence, was thinly populated, financially and politically weak, and endowed with an economy almost exclusively dependent on its agricultural and shipping activities (see Table 1). he Greek economy was constituted of relatively backward provinces of the Ottoman heartlands in 1820, prior to the war of Independence, and although it re-oriented its trade relations towards the Western Mediterranean Europe and the UK in the decades following independence, it continued to share a part of its foreign trade exchanges with Ottoman provinces in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea, whence it imported wheat at growing quantities. While Greece was deepening its integration into the global World Economy, its relations with the eastern Mediterranean partners persisted
2 Harlaftis and Kostelenos, “International Shipping and National Economic Growth,” 1420.


77
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
but were constantly degraded to products incorporating lower value added.3 On
the contrary, trade with its European partners primarily involved products with
higher value added: imports of manufactures and exports of a few labour inten
sive agricultural products (mostly currants, and wine, and olive oil). During its
process of dependent integration into the globalizing European World Economy,
Greece (like other provinces of the Ottoman heartland) found its place in the new
world division of labour as exporter of labour-intensive agricultural products (and
later rough minerals) and importer of capital and higher value-added manufac
tures, on the one side, or lower value added land intensive agricultural products
(like wheat), on the other.4 Other provinces in the Ottoman heartland and the
Black Sea area found their position in lower echelons of the world division of la
bour as exporters of low value added products.
A major characteristic of Greek export trade (and it was not the only small
Mediterranean country to suffer from this) was its dependence on a few exported
goods: currants being by far the most important (see Figure 1). he export trade of
currants constantly covered more than half of the total value of Greek exports, and
in the long term it became the almost unique engine of dynamic growth of the Greek
Economy. Currants were a «natural» monopoly of Greece, and its growing pro
duction was usually consumed in England and -to a lesser degree- in some other
Northern European countries (Germany, Netherlands). From 1854-1888, per cap
ita exports grew exponentially in value, at an annual compound rate of 6%, while
the estimated value of land ameliorations (i.e. a proxy of fixed capital formation in
agriculture) at a rate of 3.8% (1848-1891). It has been calculated that exports were
responsible for 25% of the rise of the Greek GDP (1860-1890).5
Income from currant exports was not spent exclusively in the currant growing
provinces, since a large part of the seasonally working population were small-own
ers living in distant villages and seasonally migrating to work as wage earners in
the currant farms. his supplementary income was instrumental in the viability of
many small-owners of the Greek countryside, since there were precious little alter
native sources of supplementary income in the urban sector or in the countryside.
Currant exports were thus the cornerstone of supplementary income for a very
3 For the cases of important merchants of Kyparissia, who mostly traded with North Africa in the mid 1850s, Ǻερράρου, “ǹπό IJοȞ ΚIJηȝαIJία ıIJοȞ ǹγρόIJημ οȚțοȞοȝȚțοί țαȚ țοȚȞωȞȚțοί ȝεIJαıχηȝαIJȚıȝοί ıIJηȞ ΤρȚφυȜία IJοȞ 1λο
αȚώȞα.,” 341–343. he percentage of exports from and imports to the Ottoman Empire and dependent states fell from 24.5% and 24.9% in average in the 5-year period of 1859/64, to 12.2% and 9.5% respectively in average in 1905/10, see Petmezas, “Foreign Trade and Capital Flows in 19th Century Greece,” 465–66. 4 Petmezas, “Agriculture and Economic Development in Greece, 1870-1973,” 354. 5 Petmezas, “Foreign Trade and Capital Flows in 19th Century Greece,” 474 (table 12.7).


78
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
large part of the Greek countryside.6
Unfortunately, an export sector based on labour-intensive Mediterranean agricultural products such as currants was by its nature unable to create backward and forward sectoral linkages and thus initiating or invigorating a process of industrialisation, as Istvan Berend and Giorgy Ranki have underlined, long ago.7 Nevertheless, the dynamic equilibrium of the agricultural economy of Greece was founded on this one export product, currants, which was responsible for the observed relative prosperity of the Greek countryside and for the fact that the per capita GDP of Greece grew fast enough (1% in average from 1850s-1890s) to keep its distance from the advanced economies of Europe, and to secure its position in the world division of labour.8 But, growth did not imply a transformation of the economic structure. Agriculture remained the major productive sector and the observed industrialisation was timorous and introverted.
During the 19th century, the population of the kingdom of Greece grew at an unprecedented rate of 1,5% annually (doubling every 44 years), beginning its demographic transition in the middle of the 19th century and fully completing it a century later.9 his process of demographic transition in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans was not so much the direct result of economic development and social modernization, as the upshot of administrative centralization and state expansion and of regional integration into the new global social and cultural environment (in other words a by-product of globalisation). Greek population growth resulted in a rapidly deteriorating ratio of land to labour in the countryside. In just one generation (i.e. by roughly 1860) all the available arable land, now securely in the hands of its mostly small owners cultivators, was put to cultivation. Nonetheless, the rural population continued to grow while, of course, the ratio of land to labour rapidly deteriorated. Every new generation had less land in its disposal. he steady increase of the rural population, in the absence of a local or regional movement of industrialisation and urbanisation, could only be addressed by an increase in the yields and a shift towards more intensive culture-mix, which could achieve a better use of the limited productive factor: land.10 In a sense this was a case of Smithian growth through specialization and trade expansion. hat is why the first wave of globalisation, imposing (by any means -mostly military and diplomatic)
6 Petmezas, “Agriculture and Economic Development in Greece, 1870-1973,” 358–59. 7 Berend and Ranki, “Foreign Trade and Industrialization of the European Periphery in the XIXth Century.”
8 Pamuk, “Estimating and Explaining Economic Growth in Nineteenth-Century Southeastern Europe and Eastern Mediterranean,” 237; Kostelenos et al., ΑțαșαρȚıIJο ǼγχώρȚο ΠροϊόȞ 1κ30-1939, Chapter 9. 9 Hionidou, “ǻȘȝογραφία,” 87–89. 10 Petmezas, “Agriculture and Economic Development in Greece, 1870-1973,” 356.


79
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
“free trade” greatly facilitated this process of Smithian growth in Greece and other Eastern Mediterranean and Balkan cases.
Nonetheless, there is a structural limit to such a model of growth, a limit set by the size of the market where the products are effectively demanded and sold. Output growth and per capita rural income depends both on the unimpeded rise of demand for the exported products and on the rising yields and income per land surface. Both may (and did in fact in Greece) prove untenable in the long term. An economy, regional or national, with a weak urban-industrial sector, and which depends on export demand of a few labour intensive agricultural products can not both sustain a growing population and a steady level of per capita income. Greece was the perfect illustration of this developmental dead-end.
hus, as rural population grew in Greece, in the absence of new employment opportunities in the urban sector, the expansion of currant plantations (i.e. of currant exports) seemed to be the only possible source of employment for the newly added population. he expansion of the currant exports was dependent on foreign demand, and more distressingly on, really, just one market: the English. During the so-called Great or Long Depression (1873-1896), a period of falling cereal prices, the agriculture of Greece and of other Mediterranean countries, was relatively spared of the negative effects of price decrease by the unexpected rise of French demand for wine and grapevines, which was the result of the severe phylloxera disease that decimated the French vineyard. Lower quality currants were produced, almost exclusively destined to the French market of grapevines.11
he temporary bloat of the world demand for currants in a period of falling cereal prices (wheat has constantly been a product massively imported in Greece) ameliorated the net barter and the income terms of trade of Greece, which surprisingly moved in its favour in 1878-1893 -contrary to what was observed in other agricultural countries of central and eastern Europe (see Figure 2). But, this was an era of false promises of prosperity, also fed by the expanding foreign sovereign debt, used by the ambitious Greek government to finance a badly needed huge infrastructural construction programme (Railways, roads, lighthouse and port installations, the Corinth’ canal etc.) but also -and even mostly- used for large extravagances of military spending and a costly monetary chimera. In effect, world bankers advanced loans to Greece and other peripheral countries even when a ponzi situation was evident for all to see. he allurement of high interest rates was too tempting to resist. And the diplomatic and military backup generally offered by the European Great Powers produced a permanent situation of moral hazard
11 Petmezas, Πλοζεγόηεθα ΢IJηθ ΙıIJολέα Σημ Εζζηθδεάμ ΑγλοIJδεάμ Οδεοθοηέαμ Σου ΜεıοποζΫηου, 36–37.


80
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
for the world bankers. Almost no government of the Euro-Mediterranean, Middle Eastern and Latin American periphery escaped default and some sort of financial control.12 Greece was one of them. Its policy (initiated in 1878) of floating Greek sovereign bonds in foreign capital markets could not and did not last. As Greece was deepening its integration into the global capital markets, a decision taken both for economic and geopolitical reasons13, the economy was reaping short term advantages, but its “financial vulnerability” in the long term was increasing. he country could only face its foreign debt service thanks to its fiscal revenues and to exchange inflows from currant exports. Any financial market burst would derail this delicate equilibrium. he Barings’ Crisis in Argentina, in 1891, abruptly rose world interest rates and initiated a series of consecutive sovereign defaults (of Portugal, Spain, Greece, Serbia etc.) inflicted huge pain to the peripheral European, Mediterranean and Latin American economies.14
In Greece, the break-down of this delicate equilibrium begun in the export sector, which was, as I have explained, the major engine of growth of the economy. he imposition of a high tariff on imported substitutes of grapevines for wine-making in France, in July 1893, permanently close the French market to the low quality Greek currants, putting serious strain on the prices of all qualities of currants. Greek currant exports in 1893 were reduced in value by a staggering 50%, and there was no perspective of a quick return to high prices, since the Greek currant production was henceforward chronically exceeding the international demand by at least 15%-20%! It was the beginning of the chronic currant crisis in Greece which plagued the country for the next 15 years. When the crisis was finally under control, just before the Balkan wars, currant exports had long stopped to be the main engine of growth for the Greek economy (see Figure 3).15
he currant crisis was combined immediately, in December 1893, with the Greek default of payments of its sovereign bonds. he difficult negotiations between the foreign bondholders and the Greek government, which poisoned the diplomatic and financial relations of the country with the Great powers, went on until the country was unwisely dragged into a catastrophic war with the Ottomans over Crete, in April 1897. he crushing military defeat did not have any negative diplomatic repercussions (Crete -the apple of discord- was even upgraded to an autonomous principality under a member of the Greek royal family)16, but it was
12 Andréadès, “Les Contrôles Financiers Internationaux.” 13 Kostis, “he Formation of State in Greece, 1830-1914,” 28sqq. 14 Flandreau, he Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913, 51–54.
15 Petmezas, ȆȡοȜİγόȝİȞα ȈIJηȞ ǿıIJοȡȓα ȉηȢ ΕȜȜηȞȚțȒȢ ΑγȡοIJȚțȒȢ ȅȚțοȞοȝȓαȢ ȉου ΜİıοποȜȑȝου, 72–75. 16 Petmezas and Tzedaki-Apostolaki, ȀυȡȚαȡχȓİȢ ȀαȚ ȈυȞİȚįȒıİȚȢ ȈIJηȞ ΑȞαIJοȜȚțȒ ΜİıόγİȚο, 1880-1920.


81
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
instrumental in imposing a draconian and humiliating International Financial Control upon Greek public finances. For a brief moment, the precarious position of Greece (and its ruling class) in the world division of labour, was in question. here was a growing danger that the key sectors of the Greek economy (the currant sector or major banking institutions like the National Bank of Greece) would possibly come under the control of foreign capital groups, as it had happen in the Ottoman Empire, after the Muharrem Degree of 1881 and the imposition of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration.17
he Greek society and state has been able to repulse such a negative development, partly thanks to the relative strength of its financial sector, but nonetheless its rural population paid a huge price.18 As the volume of labour-intensive agricultural exports was now stagnating and their prices remained low, the only option left was the export (or rather the massive evacuation) of rough rural labour itself (Figure 4). he urban and industrial sector was unable to offer employment to this excess agricultural population, even though the devaluation of paper drachma, since the default of 1893, had positive effects on the industrial production which expanded (and even diversified in new sectors) but demand for labour did not increase at the necessary rate to absorb all the excess rural labour. Emigration was thus the only long-term solution. After integrating the world markets of goods and capital, Greece -and some Ottoman provinces followed suite- integrated the world labour markets exporting unqualified labour to the USA and other transatlantic destinations.
In a few years the rate of emigration jumped from quasi nil to 8.3o/oo and more than three hundred thousand Greeks, mostly young unmarried men, left the country. On a macroeconomic level the opportunity cost of these emigrants for the agricultural economy was nil. In spite of the fact that half of the vital demographic surplus (i.e. the surplus of newly born relative to the deceased) of the period 18961920 emigrated, the output of the rural economy increased, all the available arable land was cultivated and even currant plantations continued to expand! he seeded surface expanded, at the expense of fallow. It was a desperate move of distressed farmers, because it was not combined with the necessary increase of organic or chemical fertilizers. he catastrophic fall of yields in the next thirty years was the unavoidable outcome. Of course, labour productivity in the countryside peaked mechanically as the number of labourers in the denominator decreased. In fact, a larger fraction of the agricultural output was available in the monetized and commercial sector as the total number of consumers in the countryside decreased.
17 Birdal, he Political Economy of Ottoman Public Debt: Insolvency and European Financial Control in the Late Nineteenth Century, 52 sqq.
18 Hadjiiossif, “Η ‘ΜπεȜ Εποț’ Του ΚεφαȜαίου,” 311–19.


82
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
Furthermore, with a lapse of a few years a growing flux of remittances from migrants (and mariners -as the Greek merchant marine regain its former high rates of growth, after a short but disappointing period of relative stagnation in the 1880s and 1890s) was sent home though the Greek banking system, which was equally reinvigorated by such a steady flow of capital.19
Transatlantic emigration was a painful experience for many of those who left, but had fuelled the financial and monetary system of Greece with capital. By 1910 the Greek drachma was once again in par with the French franc and the public finances have been once again in a sound position, just in time for a long and bloody war decade. he Greek Banking system was strong enough to assure the control of key sector of the agrarian and industrial economy, the currants and the wine and brandy industry.20 It also displayed its extroverted character as it penetrated Eastern Mediterranean, Ottoman and Egyptian economies. Furthermore, the incoming remittances helped Greek farmers pay their debt and substitute for the lost supplementary income. Nonetheless, the perseverance of the rural small-owner households had a negative repercussion, as it secured the reproduction and the perpetuation of an agrarian structure founded on small, fragmented and under-capitalised farms, exhibiting low labour productivity and permanently low yields.
Greece was positively engaged into the global world economy for the greater part of the 19th century. he expanding export trade of currants became the engine of growth of the domestic economy. Nonetheless, the flip side of the coin was the structural weakness of the Greek urban and industrial sector. As long as world demand of the few Greek agricultural exports expanded, the growing Greek rural population was able to find a profitable employment for its labour despite the anaemic urban and industrial sector. his could not last eternally. he Greek agricultural sector was over-dependent of just one market, which would eventually arrive at saturation. When it did, the sudden and permanent decrease of the world demand for Greek currants was accidentally combined with the negative repercussions for Greece of its entanglement into the world financial system. In fact, after a few years of relatively cheap loans for the geopolitically ambitious and financially profligate government of Greece default was inevitable. he impoverished and over-taxed rural population of Greece made the best of its predicament: the unemployable rough rural labour was now massively evacuated to the transatlantic labour markets. In return emigrants send remittances back home, relieving Greek Finances, invigorating the Greek Banking system and helping it dominate
19 Kostis, ǿıIJοȡȓα ȉȘȢ ΕșȞȚțȒȢ ȉȡȐπİȗαȢ ȉȘȢ ΕȜȜȐįοȢ 1914-1940, Chapter 3; Hadjiiossif, “Η ‘ΜπİȜ Εποț’ ȉου ȀİφαȜαȓου,” 331–34; Dertilis, ǿıIJοȡȓα ȉου ΕȜȜȘȞȚțοȪ ȀȡȐIJουȢ 1830-1920, 1:575–581. 20 Petmezas, ȆȡοȜİγȩȝİȞα ȈIJȘȞ ǿıIJοȡȓα ȉȘȢ ΕȜȜȘȞȚțȒȢ ΑγȡοIJȚțȒȢ ȅȚțοȞοȝȓαȢ ȉου ΜİıοποȜȑȝου, 64–75.


83
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
the key sectors of the Greek economy, not a mean achievement when compared to other cases in the Eastern Mediterranean. he break down of the First Globalisation (1914-1929) coincided in Greece and the Eastern Mediterranean with a period of long and brutal wars, population exchanges and minorities’ destruction, financial debacle and monetary upheavals. Eastern Mediterranean moved directly to the dark 1930s without passing through the roaring twenties.
References
Andréadès, André M. “Les Contrôles Financiers Internationaux.” In ’Ǽȡγα ΑȞįȡȑȠυ Μέ ΑȞįȡİȐįȠυ, 2:63–159.
Athens, 1939.
Berend, Ivan T., and Gyorgy Ranki. “Foreign Trade and Industrialization of the European Periphery in the
XIXth Century.” Journal of European Economic History 9 (1980): 539–84.
Birdal, Murat. he Political Economy of Ottoman Public Debt: Insolvency and European Financial Control in the
Late Nineteenth Century. London: I. B. Tauris, 2010.
Dertilis, Georgeέ ǿıIJȠȡȓα ȉȠυ ǼȜȜȘȞȚțȠȪ ȀȡȐIJȠυȢ 1830-1920. Athens: Hestia Publishers 2010.
Flandreau, Marc. he Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913. Paris: OECD Publishing, 2004.
Hadjiiossif, Christos. “Η ‘ΜπİȜ ǼπȠț’ ȉȠυ ȀİφαȜαȓȠυέ” In ǿıIJȠȡȓα ȉȘȢ ǼȜȜȐįαȢ ȉȠυ 2ίȠȪ ΑȚȫȞα, edited by Christos
Hadjiiossif, 1:309–49. Athens: Vivliorama Publishers, 1999.
Hionidou, Violetta. “ǻȘȝȠγȡαφȓαέ” in Η ΑȞȐπIJυȟȘ ȉȘȢ ǼȜȜȘȞȚțȒȢ ȅȚțȠȞȠȝȓαȢ ȉȠȞ 1λȠ ΑȚȫȞα (1830-1914), edited by
Kostas P. Kostis and Socrates Petmezas, 1st ed., 81–101. Athens: Alexandreia Publishers, 2006.
Kostelenos, George, Socrates Petmezas, Emmanuel Kounaris, Michel Sfakianakis, and Dimitris Vassileiou.
ΑțαșαȡȚıIJȠ ǼγχȫȡȚȠ ȆȡȠϊȩȞ 1830-1939. Athens: KEPE, 2007.
Kostis, Kostas P. “he Formation of State in Greece, 1830-1914.” In Citizenship and the Nation-State in Greece
and Turkey, edited by haleia Dragona and Faruk Birtek, 18–35. London: Routledge, 2005.
Kostis, Kostas Pέ ǿıIJȠȡȓα ȉȘȢ ǼșȞȚțȒȢ ȉȡȐπİȗαȢ ȉȘȢ ǼȜȜȐįȠȢ 1λ1ζά1λζίέ ΑșȒȞαμ ǼșȞȚțȒ ȉȡȐπİȗα IJȘȢ ǼȜȜȐįȠȢ, 2003.
Pamuk, Şevket. “Estimating and Explaining Economic Growth in Nineteenth-Century Southeastern Europe
and Eastern Mediterranean.” In he Economic Development of Southeastern Europe in the 19th Century, edited by
Socrates Petmezas and Edhem Eldem, 225–50. Athens: Alpha Bank Historical Archives, 2011.
Petmezas, Socrates, and Lenas Tzedaki-Apostolaki, eds. ȀυȡȚαȡχȓİȢ ȀαȚ ȈυȞİȚįȒıİȚȢ ȈIJȘȞ ΑȞαIJȠȜȚțȒ ΜİıȩγİȚȠ,
1880-1920. Heraklio: EKIM, 2014.
Petmezas, Socrates. “A Tentative Estimation of the Greek Terms of Trade in the 19th Century (1851-1914).”
In State, Economy, Society (19th-20th Centuries). Essays in Honor of Emeritus Professor George B. Dertilis., edited by
Ada Dialla and Niki Maroniti, 245–61. Athens: Metaixmio Publishers, 2013.
Petmezas, Socrates. “Agriculture and Economic Development in Greece, 1870-1973.” In Agriculture and Eco
nomic Development in Europe since 1870, edited by Pedro Lains and Vicente Pinilla Navarro, 353–74. London &
New York: Routledge, 2009.


84
HISTORY, CULTURE AND POLITICS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SYMPOSIUM
Petmezas, Socrates. “Foreign Trade and Capital Flows in 19th Century Greece.” In he Economic Development
of Southeastern Europe in the 19th Century, edited by Socrates Petmezas and Edhem Eldem, 447–92. Athens: Alpha
Bank Historical Archives, 2011.
Petmezas, Socrates.Ν ΗΝ ǼȜȜȘȞȚțȒΝ ΑγȡȠIJȚțȒΝ ȅȚțȠȞȠȝȓαΝ ȀαIJȐΝ ȉȠȞΝ 1λȠΝ ΑȚȫȞαΝμΝ ΗΝ ȆİȡȚφİȡİȚαțȒΝ ǻȚȐıIJαıȘέΝ ΗȡȐțȜİȚȠμΝ
ȆαȞİπȚıIJȘȝȚαțȑȢΝǼțįȩıİȚȢΝȀȡȒIJȘȢ, 2003.
Petmezas, Socrates. ȆȡȠȜİγȩȝİȞαΝ ȈIJȘȞΝ ǿıIJȠȡȓαΝ ȉȘȢΝ ǼȜȜȘȞȚțȒȢΝ ΑγȡȠIJȚțȒȢΝ ȅȚțȠȞȠȝȓαȢΝ ȉȠυΝ ȂİıȠπȠȜȑȝȠυέΝ 1ȘΝ ȑțįȠıȘέΝ
ȃİȩIJİȡȘΝȀαȚΝȈȪγχȡȠȞȘΝǿıIJȠȡȓαέΝΑșȒȞαμΝΑȜİȟȐȞįȡİȚα, 2012.
Verrarou, Stavroula AέΝ“ΑπȩΝIJȠȞΝȀIJȘȝαIJȓαΝıIJȠȞΝΑγȡȩIJȘμΝȠȚțȠȞȠȝȚțȠȓΝțαȚΝțȠȚȞωȞȚțȠȓΝȝİIJαıχȘȝαIJȚıȝȠȓΝıIJȘȞΝȉȡȚφυȜȓαΝIJȠȞΝ
1λȠΝαȚȫȞα.” Unpublished PhD University of Crete, 2014.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. Trade and Poverty: When the hird World Fell behind. Cambridge, Mass.: Mit Press, 2013.