ExLibris
RapidILL
Rapid #: -20040401
CROSS REF ID:
LENDER:
BORROWER:
TYPE:
BOOK TITLE:
USER BOOK TITLE:
CHAPTER TITLE:
BOOK AUTHOR:
EDITION:
VOLUME:
PUBLISHER:
YEAR:
PAGES:
ISBN:
LCCN:
OCLC #:
Processed by Rapidx:
9255025190002021
KOMUS :: Social Science Campus
LSD :: Main Library
Book Chapter
The Dissemination of Economic Ideas
The Dissemination of Economic Ideas
The Dissemination of Economic Thought in South-Eastern Europe in the Nineteenth Century
Heinz Kurz
9780857935571
12/29/2022 6:39:46 PM
This material may be protected by copyright law (Title 17 U.S. Code)


7. The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe in the nineteenth century
Michalis M. Psalidopoulos and Nicholas J. Theocarakis
7.1 INTRODUCTION
The renaissance of the history of political economy towards the end of the twentieth century has given rise to several national histories of economic thought, together with analysis of its international diffusion (Cardoso, 2003). Psalidopoulos and Mata (2002) have explored the relationship between economic thought and economic policy in Europe’s less developed countries in the nineteenth century, while Augello and Guidi (2001, 2005) have examined the institutionalization and professionalization of economics and economists in European parliaments during the same period. We here continue this work, seeking a better understanding of the dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe during the nineteenth century. This was the century of nation-building on the periphery of Europe, and was marked by the coming of age of liberalism, protectionism and socialism. Newborn states, especially those that became independent from the Ottoman Empire, like Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria and Rumania (Albania had to wait for the next century), absorbed economic ideas and theories from Europe’s more developed countries. Striving to become rich and prosperous, they followed various routes into modernity. Doing so meant for them first and foremost building modern institutions, fighting illiteracy and spreading the use of their language in their territories. It also meant developing the nation economically. The economic interests of each South-Eastern European country therefore had to be defined, and a policy leading to growth and prosperity introduced. Intellectuals in these countries had travelled and studied abroad at a time when classical political economy had long defeated, ideologically and scientifically, the mercantilist doctrines of the past; it had achieved the
161


162 The dissemination of economic ideas
status of a science, perceiving itself as a requirement for personal liberty, freedom and growth. As economic liberalism in its various forms disseminated from the core European countries to the periphery, the newly born national states of South-Eastern Europe at first adopted a liberal approach to economic management. Very soon, however, they encountered difficulties in seeking to raise standards of living. In fact a modern scholar has described economic life in the nineteenth-century Balkans as ‘evolution without development’ (Palairet, 1997). Historical statistics reveal that economic growth rates in South-Eastern Europe were considerably lower than those of Western Europe, with the income gap growing instead of closing (Maddison, 1995). Liberalism did not bring convergence. This led politicians and public opinion in South-Eastern Europe to become more nationalistic with regard to their economic policies. To date no great attention has been given to the role of nationalism in economics, and in economic thought in particular, as a driving force in this context; for the most part, the issue of nationalism has been linked to the study of protectionism. The chapter comprises the following sections. Section 7.2 is devoted to the economic situation and the tradition of economic thought in the Ottoman Empire, out of which all South-Eastern European countries emerged. Here we review economic ideas shortly before its gradual dissolution. In section 7.3 we refer to the case of Greece, the first country to become independent, and especially the popularization of liberal economics in that country. In sections 7.4, 7.5 and 7.6 we discuss the case with developments in economic thought in other South-Eastern European countries. Finally, in section 7.7 we offer some preliminary conclusions that deal with the dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe in the nineteenth century.
7.2 THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE: THE DECLINE OF PROVISIONISM
Economic thought in the Ottoman state was organized in terms of three basic principles: (1) provisionism, that is, the uninterrupted supply of goods to the internal market, particularly the urban population; (2) traditionalism, a tendency to preserve existing conditions; and (3) fiscalism, the maximization of Treasury income (Geng, 1994, 60). The Ottoman state also pursued a policy of extensive accumulation, adding new territories. This policy came to an end in the late seventeenth century, leading to a fiscal crisis. The Treaty of Kiicgiik Kaynarca in 1774 resulted in loss of territory, but mainly loss of control of large areas of the Empire, strengthening the
The dissemination ofeconomic thought in South-Eastern Europe 163
hand of the Great Powers and of non-Muslim minorities who held important positions in the economic sector. The state tried to regain control by modernizing first the army and then other sectors of society. After initial failed attempts, Reform (Tanzimat) was finally introduced through the promulgation of Hatt-i Serifof Giilhane in 1839, and consolidated through the Hatt-1 Htimayun of 1856. The principal effect of Tanzimat was increasing foreign intervention, resulting in the diffusion of liberal ideas in the Ottoman Empire. In the Ottoman Empire the economy was ‘embedded’ in the social system, a fact reflected in Islamic economic thought (Ozveren, 2002, 129). In the early period Islamic teaching dictated economic policy (Baeck, 1994, 1996; Tomass, 1996; Ghazanfar, 2003), being suspicious of markets, while the ‘mirror of princes’ literature advised rulers how to administer prices and strengthen central power (Tietze, 1979-82). According to Sayar! in the pre-Tanzimat period the basic channels that affected economic policy, and implicitly economic thought, were Ottoman merchants, ambassadorial letters and foreign officials (cited in Dogan, 2006, 154). Foreigners were particularly significant in importing liberal ideas into the Empire. The Frenchmen Charles Tricon and Alexandre Blacque diffused liberal economic ideas through the pages of Le Spectateur Oriental, published from 1826. Blacque was later responsible for the French version of the official journal Le Moniteur Ottoman, published during Mahmud II’s reign (Biilbiil, 2007; Dogan 2006). Blacque was succeeded in the Moniteur by an official at the British Embassy, David Urquhart, the person credited by most scholars as having a decisive influence on the diffusion of liberal ideas. He wrote a book on Turkey (Urquhart, 1833) and he was instrumental in the signing of the Anglo-Ottoman Commercial Treaty of 1838 which gave distinct trade privileges to Great Britain. Thus, even though French was the lingua franca of liberalism and of Ottoman intellectuals, free trade doctrine was imported through England. Nassau Senior even visited the Grand Vizier to discuss economic matters (Biilbiil, 2007). The Tanzimat introduced economic education to the Ottoman Empire. The failure of the initial reforms was partly attributed to a lack of appropriate education. There was also the fear that foreigners and, to a lesser extent non-Muslims, were knowledgeable, whereas loyal subjects were not. Economics entered the curriculum of secondary education, while new university-level schools were created where economics was taught. A committee was created to recommend foreign texts for translation.’ Say’s Catéchisme d’économie politique was chosen as a textbook of economics and Sehak (or Sahak) Abru, an Ottoman Armenian, was commissioned to translate it, the translation appearing in 1852 (Doganalp-Votzi, 2007). In 1869 Mehmet Midhat translated the Petit manuel populaire d’économie


164 The dissemination of economic ideas
politique written by Otto Hiibner and adapted into French by Charles Le Hardy de Beaulieu. As one scholar observed, translations of foreign economic texts offered improved economic knowledge, leading to the ‘scientification of Urquhart’s liberalism’ (Berkes cited in Dogan, 2006, 159).3 Professors at the Mekteb-i Miilkiye —a school of political science for training civil servants founded in 1859 — wrote liberal economic texts and supported liberal policy positions. They include Mehmed Serif Efendi, the first Professor at the Milkiye, who wrote a textbook in 1863 (ilm-i emval-i milliye, [Science of national wealth], cited in Biilbiil, 2007, 5)* and Sakizh Ohannes Pasha, an Ottoman Armenian and civil servant, who studied economics in France and taught for 20 years at the school. His textbook written in 1881 (Mebadi-i ilm-i servet-i millel, [Introduction to the wealth of nations]) remained for many years the standard introduction to political economy (Biilbiil, 2007, 5; Dogan, 2006). Miinif and Portakal Mikael Pashas, prominent Ottoman liberals, were also teachers at the Miilkiye and authors of liberal texts. The German trained Miinif Pasha, while Minister of Education, was among the founders of the Society of Ottoman Science (Cemiyet-i IImiye-i Osmaniye) and editor of its periodical the Mecmua-i Fiinun [Review of sciences] founded in 1863. The Review was the first scientific journal in the Ottoman Empire and active in the diffusion of the sciences and liberal ideas through translations and original texts (Dogan, 2006; Budak, 2008; Seyitdanlioglu, 1998). Ohannes Pasha and Cavit Bey, Minister of Finance of the Committee of Union and Progress, a teacher at the Milkiye and author of an influential economics textbook in the early twentieth century, were contributors to the Review. The Armenian liberal Portakal Mikael Pasha became the first director of the Agricultural Bank (Gencer, 2002, 239). Liberal views did not go unchallenged. The Anglo-Ottoman Commercial Treaty created economic problems that brought a protectionist backlash. The intervention of the Great Powers in the political and economic affairs of the Ottoman Empire, their tendency to treat the country as a colony, and the partial failure of liberal reforms despite much effort, all contributed to growing dissatisfaction with liberal policies. The Ottoman state declared itself bankrupt, and in 1881 the Administration de la Dette Publique Ottomane was created, a foreign-owned company that supervised and controlled state finances. After the disastrous results of the 1877-78 OttomanRussian War, liberal policies fell out of favour and the state opted for an etatism that would dilute Ottomanism and herald a more nationalist approach. The non-Muslim minorities that made up the Ottoman bourgeoisie had to be complemented with a Turkish middle class, an idea reflected in the economic thought of the period (Adanir, 2003). The most popular and prolific writer of the times, Ahmet Midhat
Tr
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 165
Efendi, wrote a text called Political Economy in 1879 in which he argued that liberal policies in trade and tariffs were responsible for the decline of Ottoman industry, and that a nationalist and protectionist policy was called for (Dogan, 2006).° He popularized Friedrich List’s ideas in the Empire. During the Hamidian period, the Armenian liberals Sakizli Ohannes and Portakal Mikael were transferred from the Miilkiye to the Treasury so as not to exert influence over students. One of the most prominent authors of the period was Namik Kemal, who was trained in England in the 1860s, and who built on the notions of fatherland and freedom. Although nominally liberal in his economic views, he was opposed to the Anglo-Ottoman Commercial Treaty and suggested that liberalism could only be introduced once the economic problems of the state had been resolved. His approach was not theoretical but pragmatic, a common characteristic of Ottoman economic thought, especially of public officials. Economic policy remained liberal up until 1908, when a ‘national economy’ approach gained in popularity, personified by Ziya Gékalp (Parla, 1985). This teaching shifted the ethnic balance of power in favour of the Turks and against the other nationalities of the Ottoman Empire (Toprak, 1994). Liberalism thus lost its influence, and the appeal of liberal ideas was greatly diminished.
7.3 GREECE: THE DIFFICULTIES OF CLASSICAL
POLITICAL ECONOMY
The Greek economy was severely dislocated by the Struggle for Independence. Political autonomy was achieved de jure in 1830. Large areas with Greek populations that had participated in the revolt remained outside its territory, and irredentist aspirations were to dominate the Greek political agenda throughout the nineteenth century, sparking a series of wars. A republican government led by Ioannis Kapodistrias was soon followed — after his assassination in 1831 and a brief regency — by the monarchy of the Bavarian King Otto. He was ousted in 1862, having conceded a constitution in the wake of a popular rebellion in 1843. He was succeeded in 1863 by King George I of the Danish house of Gliicksburg. Political stability after 1864 enabled gradual economic advance. In 1871 public lands were distributed to landless peasants, relieving some of the tension of the land question. In 1881 territorial expansion led to growth in the agricultural sector. Nevertheless, low import tariffs and a weak infrastructure made the development of a dynamic manufacturing sector impossible. After 1879 a huge wave of public lending and the introduction of a new tariff system in 1884 led to economic expansion. However, this


166 The dissemination of economic ideas
period of expansion ended in bankruptcy in 1893, brought about by excessive lending and the Corinthian raisin crisis, the latter affecting revenues. In pre-revolutionary Greece the diffusion of Enlightenment ideas and the introduction of ‘Western’ sciences was a major project of the Diaspora Greeks, living mainly in France, Austria and the Danubian Principalities. The most important figure of the Greek Enlightenment, Adamantios Koraes, propagated metakenosis, the ‘transfusion’, or ‘decanting’, of Western ideas of rationalism and liberal humanism into Ottoman Greece ‘through translation of European books into modern Greek, so as to awaken her from her Ottoman slumber, “resuscitate” memories of Classical Hellenism, and, essentially, synchronize it with contemporary European culture’ (Zacharia, 2008, 9-10). Koraes himself published a translation in 1802 of Cesare Beccaria’s Dei delitti e delle pene. At the turn of the century there were translations published outside Greece of Fontenelle, Montesquieu, Locke, Condillac, Genovesi and Mably. Books on economic matters before the creation of the Greek state were not books on political economy. Financed by rich merchants, they were commercial handbooks or books of commercial arithmetic, weights and measures, and tables for the conversion of foreign exchange® (Sklavenitis, 1990). The most interesting of them was N. Papadopoulos’s The Gainful Hermes: Encyclopaedia of Commerce (five volumes, published in 1815 in Venice), where we find the first description in Greek of Adam Smith’s pin factory and the division of labour (I, 131-2). Books on political economy proper came after the independence of the Greek state, and were translations from the works of French liberal authors. The first such textbook was Jean-Baptiste Say’s Catéchisme d'économie politique (1821). It was translated and published in 1828 by George Chrysédis on the island of Aegina, the first capital of the not yet diplomatically recognized Greek state.’ In 1833 Anastassios Polyzoides, a judge and politician, translated in a conscious act of metakenosis (p. xxii) Joseph Droz’s Economie politique: ou principes de la science des richesses into Greek. French liberal ideas did not influence the policy of Kapodistrias and the Bavarians, which was decidedly autocratic. The building of a ‘model kingdom’ run by the King along cameralist lines meant that civil liberties and freedom of trade had to be curtailed. This led to an almost complete standstill in translations, only resumed after 1865. Political economy was during this period an entirely academic discourse. The most important academic figure of the nineteenth century was Ioannes Soutsos. He held the only academic position for political economy in Greece from 1837 to 1890 (Koundouris, 1998; Psalidopoulos and Stassinopoulos, 2009). He served in a number of positions in the
rT
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 167
administration and the judiciary, and became Rector of Athens University. A member of a prominent Phanariot family and a student of Pellegrino Rossi in Geneva, Soutsos was clearly influenced by the French liberal school, especially Jean-Baptiste Say and his own teacher Rossi. Soutsos published three major works on political economy: Treatise on the Production and Distribution of Wealth (1851), Manual of Public Finance or Theory of the Budget (1864) and Plutology (1868-69, 2nd edn 1882 and 1885). Soutsos argued that liberal principles must operate within a constitutional society and that: ‘in practice, the application of these absolute theories is suspended or altered by the elements of nationality, time, distance etc.’ (1851, 3; see also 1882, 12). Furthermore: ‘we have to take into account these elements, and not claim the direct application of unconditional principles’ (1851, 4). Nevertheless, he was a true liberal at heart; not very analytical but with a strong policy orientation. A review of the books translated after 1864, when a change in the Royal House occurred, reveals that in Greece a total of ten books were
translated between 1865 and 1903. With two exceptions, all translations were of francophone authors. The policy-oriented economic discourse in France (Schumpeter, 1954; cf. Mill, 1972 [1869]) was more suited to the needs of Greek society. These translations fall roughly into two categories. The first comprises books which are simple and elementary in style, liberal and anti-socialist, written as a dialogue or as a morality tale; these were popular throughout Europe, particularly on its periphery, and were translated into many languages. Greece was no exception. This category includes books by P.-H. Suzanne (1849), Jean-Jacques Rapet (1865, 1903), Jean Chaumeil (1882) and Maurice Block (1885).° The second category is that of books by liberal academic economists. These were not their more academic treatises, but comprehensive introductory texts. In this category we have the translations of Garnier (1869), Garrett Fawcett (1881), LeroyBeaulieu (1889, 1902) and Laveleye (1894).? Next to these translations, romantic reactions to commercial internationalism and anti-socialist literature were also present. Xenophon Zygouras, a student of Soutsos and an economics instructor in secondary education, is typical of this romantic stream of thought. In his books on home economics (Zygouras, 1878, 1892) he adopted a national and religious perspective, and recommending the thrifty and autarkic management of the household unit. A romantic author like Konstantinos Ramphos, in his 1868 theatre piece ‘The economist’s duck’, denounced classical political economy, condemning Smith and Say and ridiculing the concepts of saving and accumulation (Psalidopoulos and Theocarakis, 2011). Typical of the anti-socialist literature is the Précisfor the working people


168 The dissemination of economic ideas
or advice for manual labourers published in 1869 by the ‘Society of the
Friends of the People’ and distributed free to workers in major industrial
centres (Dragoumis, 1869; see Kordatos, 1931-32). Adapted by Nikolaos
Dragoumis, a Greek journalist and public official, from Théodore-Henri
Barrau’s Conseils aux ouvriers (1850), it called on workers to be obedi
ent, frugal, and churchgoing, admonishing them not to strike, to ignore
socialist theories and to avoid becoming ‘an instrument of dreamers,
schemers and trouble-makers’ (Dragoumis, 1869, 28). Socialist literature
is scant in this period, the most notable exception being Platon Drakoules
(1858-1942)."° The first translation of a Marxist text had to wait until the
twentieth century: The Communist Manifesto in 1908 (Marx and Engels,
1913 [1908]).
Among Soutsos’s successors in the Athens Law Faculty’s Chair of
Political Economy was Nikolaos Gounarakis. German-influenced, his
work Elements ofPolitical Economy (1892) provides a less liberal approach
than that of Soutsos, showing some sympathy for the predicament of the
Greek working class (Koundouris, 1998). Neokles Kazazis, trained in
Germany and France, was a staunch nationalist. Pro-business and anti
labour, he brought his contradictions to his work, which is a curious
mixture of supposedly liberal ideas and a belief in the organic nature of the
state (Kazazis, 1894). Ioannes Zografos trained in Heidelberg, was made
Professor of Public Finance at the University of Athens and attempted to
import aspects of the German Historical School into Greece. His policy
recommendations introduced Listian arguments into Greek economic dis
course, even though he remained formally liberal in his academic treatises, such as his Démosionomiké (Public finance) (1882).
Thus liberal economic ideas, disseminated through translations or works
locally produced in academia, gave way in the last decade of the nineteenth
century to romantic—organic ideas of state and society, together with pro
tectionist ideas. This tendency was to intensify during the first decades of
the twentieth century, when the influence of German thought became more pronounced.
7.4 RUMANIA: FROM ECLECTICISM TO STATIST
LIBERALISM AND BEYOND
Even though Rumania’s full independence came only in 1878, the rela
tive independence of the country from the Ottoman Empire and its
relationship with the Russian and the Austrian Empires made it more
open to Western influences.'' Enlightenment ideas were imported from
the West mostly through French texts, French being a language which
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 169
— together with Greek — was spoken by the Rumanian elite (Hitchins, 1996; Pompiliu, 1980). The sons of many landlords (boieri) were educated abroad. Ideological, political and economic discussions took place in this atmosphere of partial independence, so that by the time of the 1866 constitution the two major currents of thought that would characterize Rumanian society until the end of the Second World War, liberalism and conservatism, were in place (Hitchins, 1994, 1996). In Rumania, the defenders of liberalism were not bourgeois opponents of an absolutist state pursuing mercantilist policies, but members of the boieri landowning class who favoured liberalism as a means of opening markets for agricultural products and achieving full property rights to land (Love, 2002). Some of the smaller boieri supported liberal economic policies in order to develop an industrial base. Economic freedom was perceived as being in harmony with national rebirth, a key to Westernization and the road to civilization and economic progress. But this liberalism was limited. Boieri were unwilling to extend liberalism to the peasants, who even after independence remained in a state of quasiserfdom, a situation which persisted until the early twentieth century.’ Moreover, the independence of the country in 1878 coincided with the shift of economic policy in Europe’s more developed countries to higher tariffs and protectionism. This led to ‘statist liberalism’, combining the use of liberal ideology with a strong nationalist state, hostile to those who were not ethnic Rumanians, especially Jews,'* and to a lesser extent Greeks and other ‘foreigners’. In the first period of Rumanian liberalism (1820-78) economists were divided on the issue of the primacy of agriculture over industry. Many liberals were agrarianists believing that free trade would mean the development of agriculture, but that industry would remain underdeveloped, or at best an adjunct of agriculture. In this camp we have Nicolae Sutu (Soutzo), Alexandru D. Moruzi, Ion Strat and Ion Ghica. Sutu popularized the works of Smith, Ricardo, J.-B. Say and Michel Chevalier among the Rumanian elite (Love, 2002, 107). An important politician and man of letters, he believed that Rumania was essentially an agricultural nation, and that industry could develop only in relation to agriculture. Free trade, he thought, would guarantee high levels of grain exports, benefiting large-scale agriculture (Hitchins, 1994, 79-80).'* Moruzi was even more liberal than Sutu. He believed that free trade would transform agricultural production and make Rumania the marketplace of Europe and the East. His books, in French like Sutu’s, have telling titles: L’abolition des monopoles et l’amélioration de l’état du paysan en Moldavie (1860 [1941]) and Progres et liberté (1861 [1941]). Ion Strat, a professor of economics at the University of Bucharest and also Minister of Finance, was another


170 The dissemination of economic ideas
fervent free-trader who believed in agrarianism, and that industry would eventually develop if left unencumbered by artificial restrictions. He wrote A Complete Treatise of Political Economy in Rumanian in 1870 (Hitchins, 1994, 80). Ion Ghica, twice Prime Minister of Rumania and Bey of Samos, was the most influential free-trader of the second half of the nineteenth century. In his Economic Conversations, published in Rumanian in 1865, he treated agriculture as the principal activity of the Rumanian economy. Industry would eventually develop and help agriculture to modernize. He ‘rejected state intervention in “natural” economic processes as unnecessary and harmful. “Laissez faire, laissez passer” was his motto’ (Hitchins, 1994, 82). Another strand of liberalism favoured industrial development. Enric Winterhalder, Austrian but a naturalized Rumanian citizen, believed in laissez-faire and admired the West. He thought that liberal policies would eventually bolster industry, which did not therefore need protectionism to establish itself. The influential economist Dionisie Pop Martian was liberal in his views, but a protectionist in his recommendations — he had studied Law and Philosophy in Vienna and became the first Director of the Central Statistical Office in Bucharest. Even though he adhered to liberal principles, he believed that the Rumanian economy was doomed without a strong industrial base, so that the state should extend protection to industrial activity. He advanced an infant industry argument to strengthen the economy, state protection being removed only when industrial production had become fully established. In 1858 he wrote a book in Rumanian with the title Social Economy. Liberalism, however, was not the only influence present in Rumanian society, especially after 1878. From mid-century another world view began to form that was critical of liberalism and Western influences. This current was centred on the Junimea (Youth) movement, founded in 1863, and in which Titu Maiorescu was the most important member. Maiorescu was German-trained (Hitchins, 1994, 58), as were most of the Junimists, providing a contrast to a society that had since the 1830s been influenced by French liberalism (Campbell, 1944, 1971). Their ‘world-view was constructed in accordance with the principles of organic social development [and] it drew heavily upon the historicist theories of German romantic philosophy’ (Hitchins, 1994, 60-61). They adopted an evolutionary, traditionalist, anti-revolutionary perspective, believing that change should be effected by moral and cultural means, thus leaving the economic structure of agriculture intact. They believed that industry lacked a national character, being the creation of foreigners (Hitchins, 1994, 64-5). This agrarianist current continued into the twentieth century with Samdndtorism (from sdmandator, Rumanian for ‘sower’), a romantic, anti-capitalist movement
rT
The dissemination ofeconomic thought in South-Eastern Europe 171
that turned its back on the importation of capitalism and sought to preserve existing social structures. Its main animator was the prolific historian and sociologist Nicolae orga (Oldson, 1973). This ultra-nationalist movement saw capitalism as an ‘unnatural implantation’ and offered ‘education’ as the only solution to the country’s problems. The economic conditions of the later nineteenth century did not help the diffusion of classical liberalism. In Rumania a tariff war with the Habsburg Empire developed, and in 1886 the adoption of a customs tariff ended the brief affair with classical liberalism (Love, 2002). The era of protectionist ‘statist liberalism’ dawned. Its main proponent, Alexandru D. Xenopol, gave theoretical substance to the doctrine. There were other reactions to classical liberalism from two different quarters: the first was populism, whose most important representative was Constantin Stere. The other was Marxism, developed theoretically in the works of Cristian Racovski and, most importantly, of Constantin Dobrogeanu-Gherea. We will examine them in turn. Xenopol was a protectionist, and an exponent of industrialization. He had studied history, law and economics at the University of Berlin and became a professor of history at the University of Bucharest. Although he ‘classified himself as an economic liberal’ (Hitchins, 1994, 85), he was influenced by Friedrich List and Henry Carey, and introduced protectionist ideas into Rumanian economic discourse. His economic writings were published in 1879 as Economic Studies. He laid great emphasis on the importance of labour in society, clinging to the classical labour theory of value. He argued that the exchange of agricultural for manufactured goods constituted exploitation; that the international division of labour was a swindle; and that liberal economic theories were unscientific, serving the commercial interests of France and Britain (Love, 2002). He argued that the state should not only protect local industry, but also regulate economic life. The statist liberalism of the industrializing protectionists of the Liberal Party and the free-trader agrarians of the Conservative Party bore little relation to social reality (Love, 2002, 110). This led to the rise of Marxism and Populism (Poporanism), doctrines that declared war on absentee landlords, a powerful social class in Rumania, and sought to improve the lot of the peasants. Constantin Stere was born in Bessarabia, then part of the Russian Empire, and was was influenced by the Russian narodniks. Having served six years in Siberia for his revolutionary activities he moved to Rumania, where in 1906 he founded a journal, Rumanian Life, which served as the vehicle for his populist views. He later became a professor of constitutional law at the University of Jassy. His appeal to small property owners


172 The dissemination of economic ideas
increased after 1895. He denounced the evils of landlordism in combination with capitalist production for international markets, resulting in peasant poverty. His writings were political rather than economic treatises, offering an analysis of and policy recommendations for the peasant problem. Stere distanced himself from Marxism, arguing that industrial workers were of negligible importance compared to peasants. He objected to protectionism as a means of development, pointing to its failure over the previous 30 years to induce growth, overcome illiteracy and ameliorate the poor living standards of the peasantry. Rumania should, according to Stere, develop its agriculture and its cooperative movement and found its own civilization, based on free peasant producers, bearers of a community-type anti-capitalist developmental spirit. His agrarian populism was known as Poporanism. Opposed to Poporanism were two Marxist writers, Cristian Racovski and Constantin Dobrogeanu-Gherea. Both were born outside Rumania. Born in Bulgaria, Racovski was a prominent international revolutionary active in Bulgaria, Rumania, Russia and Ukraine. Always on the run from the authorities, he studied medicine in Berlin, Zurich, Nancy and Montpellier. He applied Marxist categories to the analysis of the Rumanian economy, arguing that capitalism in Rumania had begun to transform the agricultural sector, leading to the proletarianization of the peasants. He questioned the nature of the Rumanian economic formation, the theory of stages, the possibility of the emergence of a national bourgeoisie and whether capitalism was a necessary stage before the establishment of socialism. Racovski stressed the need for a political alliance between the urban and the rural proletariat, and in numerous publications he attacked Stere’s agricultural populism and underlined the relevance of Marxism (Love, 2002). Dobrogeanu-Gherea was the most original of Rumanian economic thinkers. Born Solomon Katz in Russia he studied at the University of Kharkov and, like Racovski, he was heavily involved in revolutionary activities. His analysis of Rumanian economy and society predated the centre—periphery and dependency theories debates of the later twentieth century. Dobrogeanu-Gherea argued in 1892 that as capitalism penetrated economically backward countries, existing traditional modes of production would be blocked in their development, causing production, income and growth imbalances. Changes in advanced capitalist countries necessarily affect developments in backward economies. In backward countries institutions, the superstructure, are developed in advance of the social and economic base, exactly the opposite trend from that in advanced countries. Thus Rumania had liberal institutions but a semi-feudal economy, its ruling class pretending to be a bourgeoisie. On the other hand, this
The dissemination ofeconomic thought in South-Eastern Europe 173
inversion of the Entsprechungsgesetz has its benefits, since it would be easier for backward countries to adopt socialism. He argued, against the agrarians, that industrialization was a historical task for Rumania which socialists should wholeheartedly endorse. In his magnum opus, Neoserfdom (1910), he gave a penetrating analysis of economic and social relations in the countryside, dissecting the semi-feudal relations that prevailed (Trotsky, 1915; Love, 2002; Hitchins, 1994). In Rumania, unlike Greece, liberalism was resisted by intellectuals after a brief period of success. In contrast to Greek intellectuals who were not involved in politics, most Rumanian economic thinkers combined their theoretical writings with active political involvement. In fact it was this involvement which gave rise to their theoretical analyses. In this respect, economic thinking in Rumania, following two centuries of partial independence, was much more original and appropriate to the circumstances of the society they sought to explain and change.
7.5 SERBIA: FROM LIBERALISM TO HISTORICISM
Serbia’s road to independence started early. After the revolution in 1804 and a precarious independence, the Principality of Serbia was established in 1817 with MiloS Obrenovic¢ as its Prince. De facto independence was achieved in 1867 when the Ottoman troops left the Principality, while formal independence had to wait until the Congress of Berlin in 1878. In 1882 the Principality of Serbia was proclaimed a Kingdom. The period was characterized by the rivalry of the two royal houses, the Obrenovi¢ and the Karadjordjevi¢, and problems relating to the constitution and the struggle between the three poles of government: the prince, the council and the legislative body (Jelavich and Jelavich, 1977). The economy was primitive. Serbia first minted its own coins in 1869, and created a Central Bank in 1884 (Gnjatovic, 2006; Sojic and Djurdjevic, 2006). Enduring fiscal problems hindered the formation of infrastructure. The construction of roads and a telegraph network started only after 1855. Peasants lived in primitive conditions and did not see their lot improve after the departure of Ottoman landlords. Petrovich (1976, 187) remarks that whenever peasants entered towns they felt they were “going into hostile territory’. In education matters were also rudimentary. In 1810 only two schools existed in Serbia, and the language of instruction was Greek (Lederer, 1969, 401-2). Since there was a dearth of people to fill positions in the administration, the government had to rely on transriparian Serbs from the Austrian Empire to do the job, an unsatisfactory solution (see


174 The dissemination of economic ideas
Stoianovich, cited in Jelavich and Jelavich, 1977, 62-3). To solve this problem between 1839 and 1855 the state funded around 50 scholarships for young Serbians to acquire university education abroad, mostly in Germany (Petrovich, 1976, 283). These scholars eventually became the intelligentsia of the new state. Up to the middle of the nineteenth century foreign trade was regarded as the engine of modernization. In the realm of ideas, ‘a curious blend of western liberalism and a romantic native populism based on the idealisation of the Serbian folk’ prevailed (Petrovich, 1976, 286), with especial emphasis on the self-sufficient agricultural unit, the zadruga. At first things did not change in the second half of the nineteenth century. From 1858 to 1868 ‘the government greatly neglected the economic progress of the country’ (Petrovich, 1976, 344). A scarcity of capital persisted. The economy was primarily agrarian. By the turn of the century: ‘almost 85% of the population was engaged in agriculture, only 7% worked in industry, around 5% in trade and the same percentage was affiliated with the government or working freelance’ (Josifidis, 2002, 145). Demographically the population more than doubled in the last half of the nineteenth century from less than | million to 2.5 million, even though this partly reflects the addition of new territories after the war with the Ottoman Empire in 1878. The economy was monetized and capitalism penetrated economic relations; the zadruga was gradually dissolved. In the process many peasants became landless and small-scale cultivation prevailed (Petrovich, 1976, 526-9). In the realm of political ideas, romantic thinking and socialist ideas made their appearance. The socialist Zivojin Zujovi¢, who studied in Munich, Zurich and St Petersburg, introduced Russian populists and Proudhon to the Serbs. Svetozar Markovi¢ studied abroad on a state scholarship in St Petersburg where he became acquainted with the ideas of the agrarian socialist and populist Nikolay Chernyshevsky. A formidable literary critic and editor of radical journals, Markovié was the founder of Serbian socialism. In his short and troubled life he produced a systematic critique of Serbian society, authoring 46 books and pamphlets (Petrovich, 1976, 377-9). Ridiculing the notion of a Greater Serbia, he was a proponent of democratic federalism. His Western influences included J.S. Mill, Marx and Proudhon (Batakovic¢, 2005, 173) even though he idealised the zadruga. Despite hostile criticism from the Romantic Movement, liberal economic thought persisted within the political system. As in other SouthEastern European countries, intellectuals involved in the nationalist uprising embraced a paternalistic liberalism. Jevrem Grujic, diplomat and politician, who had studied law in Heidelberg and Paris on a state
r
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe iW
scholarship, was characteristic of this tradition (Stokes, 1975, 47), as were Stev¢éa Mihailovic, Prime Minister in 1876, and Milovan Jankovié¢, a German-trained professor of economics and statesman. In the midnineteenth century Dimitrije Mati¢, a law professor who had studied in Heidelberg and Berlin and had also lived in Paris, was a natural law theorist and a representative of the liberal order. His pupil Vladimir Jovanovic, a leading figure of the Serbian uprising, had studied agriculture in Germany after his Belgrade degree (Stokes, 1975, 13; Tomasevich, 1955). At the close of the nineteenth century three major thinkers put their mark in economic thought: Kosta Cukié (1826-79), an eclectic liberal, Cedomilj Mijatovié (1842-1932), a follower of the German Historical School, and Mihailo Vuji¢ (1853-1913), another eclectic economist (Josifidis, 2002). The economic thought of developed Europe was disseminated into Serbia at that time, and Serbian economists reworked and adapted economic ideas, fitting them into the framework of their country. '° Cukié, a student of Karl Heinrich Rau in Heidelberg, held many important posts including the governorship of the first State Bank, Minister of Education, and a professorship for state sciences. He was the author of the first textbook on economics in Serbia. Cuki¢ was widely read, as was his liberal German mentor, and his work created a basis for discussion and debate. Following the German tradition he mixed classical, subjectivist and mercantilist concepts. Mijatovi¢, who studied economics in Munich, Ziirich and Leipzig and became Minister of Finance, wrote for the young and the general public. A leading Anglophile among Serbs, his contributions are more original in the domain of economic history, with for example his History of Trade (1893). A prolific writer and follower of the historical method, he made an impact on economic discourse and strengthened the tendency among Serbian economists to follow the lead of the German Historical School. Vujic, the last of the great Serbian authors of the time, followed, as did his predecessors, the National School tradition and gave it new prominence. He was anti-Marxist and anti-classical, and tried to combine neoclassicism with the historical approach. Serbian economics of the second half of the nineteenth century can, therefore, be described as a mixture of liberalneoclassical principles and of historical economics.!°
7.6 BULGARIA: FROM LIBERALISM TO
PROTECTIONISM
Amongst the states of South-Eastern Europe, Bulgaria was the last to become independent. The national awakening of the later nineteenth


176 The dissemination ofeconomic ideas
century moulded a national consciousness and led to an uprising whose major figures were Georgi Rakovski, Vasil Levski, Lyuben Karavelov and Hristo Botev. The last three of these formed the Bulgarian Revolutionary Central Committee which organized the ‘April Uprising’ of 1876. After a Russo-Turkish War and the treaties of San Stefano and Berlin in 1878, a Bulgarian Principality was created, and a Constituent Assembly was held in Tarnovo in 1879. Post-independence there were two major phases: (1) 1879-94, beginning with the creation of the new state and the constitutional order, and ending with the fall of the Stambolov regime; and (2) 1895-1918, during which there was major political restructuring, with new cleavages and conflicts becoming apparent, with the new bourgeoisie coming to terms with the working and agrarian classes. The Social Democratic Party was formed in 1891, and in 1899 the Bulgarian Agrarian People’s Union (Karasimeonovy, 1999, 40-41). The leading ideas of the revolutionary leaders and of many educated Bulgarians were not for the most part imported from Western Europe. As Jelavich and Jelavich observe:
whereas the Romanian youth had their views shaped by their French education, the Bulgarians were influenced by their studies in Greek schools, in Russian institutions and to some extent in the colleges of the American Protestant missionaries in Bulgaria and Constantinople. In all these places they were exposed to the liberal-national political ideology. (1977, 135-6)
In 1858 the Moscow Benevolent Society, a Panslavist organization, formed and provided scholarships for young Bulgarians to study in Russia, where they were exposed to the ideas of Herzen, Chernyshevsky, Dobroliubov and Pisarev, returning with a belief in a revolutionary social programme (ibid., see also MacDermott, 1962, 300; Rothschild, 1959, 10). The influence of populist Russian ideas, together with a strong nationalist attitude, is apparent in the first revolutionary leaders: Karavelov and Botev, who studied in Russia, were atheists and socialists, though not Marxists, influenced by Herzen and Chernyshevsky. Karavelov saw progress less through social and economic transformations and more through education, while Botev envisaged a ‘Golden Age’ of agrarian communities and opposed industrialization (MacDermott, 1962, 228). Rakovski, less clear in his social and economic views, was on the side of the ‘people’ against the chorbadzhii, and his vision was one of ‘progress’, there being a place for joint-stock companies in the promotion of economic development, but only if the shareholders were Bulgarian (MacDermott, 1962, 190). In newly independent Bulgaria economic ideas were little influenced by French or English Liberalism. Of the 15 finance ministers during the
r
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 177
nineteenth century, five were in part French-educated, three in economics. Ivan Geshov studied in Manchester, but he was no English liberal. Other places of study included Germany, Russia, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and Constantinople (Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Bulgaria, 2010). At university level, political economy, finance and statistics were included as part of the curriculum in the Faculty of Law that was established in 1892 in the First School of Higher Education. A separate Department of Political Economy had to wait until the twentieth century (University of Sofia, Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, 2010). What differentiated Bulgaria from other South-Eastern European states was the fervent discussion of economic ideas. Following independence, the country failed to industrialize in the manner expected. International treaties imposed low tariffs. Gershenkron (1962, 221) remarked that all the causes were present, but effects did not materialize. Independence was followed by economic decline (Palairet, 1997). In agriculture, freedom from taxation benefited the peasantry, whose consumption and leisure increased. The emigration of Muslim populations and the decline of transhumant stockraising led to a fall in agricultural productivity and a reduction in domestic demand. Even though proto-industrial development was followed partly by factory production, industrialization did not happen and the economy stagnated. As Lampe notes:
The issue of industrialization was more widely and hotly debated in Sofia than in any of the other Balkan capitals. In Athens, Bucharest and Belgrade, economic issues were secondary. Not so in Sofia. The key to national assertion seemed from the start to lie more with choosing the correct strategy for economic development than with pursuing the seemingly futile goals of parliamentary democracy or the claim to Macedonia . . . The start of the industrialization debate may be found in early issues of the journal of the Bulgarian Economic Society founded in 1895. '’ (1986, 38-9)
Educated Bulgarians looked to Germany or Russia, where the great majority of several thousand university graduates received their training. More of the country’s political leaders appear to have been trained specifically in economics than their counterparts elsewhere in the Balkans, where lawyers or engineers predominated (Lampe, 1986, 40). Interestingly enough, no works by Western economists were translated into Bulgarian during this period.'* Pragmatic economics dominated the agenda. It was only in the twentieth century that academic economics began to draw upon Western economic thought (Dimitrov, 2002). The question of industrialization preoccupied both liberal and socialist economists. A related matter was the role of foreign capital in economic


178 The dissemination of economic ideas
development. Among the most prominent liberal economists of the period was Ivan Evstratiev Geshov. Educated in Greek and Protestant institutions, he was trained as an economist in the heartland of English Liberalism, at Owens College Manchester, where his family was based. He served as Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, Finance Minister and eventually Prime Minister in 1911-13 (Gueshoff, 1915; Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Bulgaria, 2010). His economic views, however, belied his training. He was a protectionist, a German National Liberal of Listian views and an ardent proponent of industrialization (Lampe, 1986, 39-40). There were two policy tools for industrialization: increased tariffs and encouragement to industry. Tariffs were restricted initially by the Berlin Treaty to import taxes of 8 per cent and export duty of | per cent (Weiss-Bartenstein, 1916). In the 1890s treaties were signed with the Great Powers and Serbia that increased tariffs. Geshov drafted the legislation that exempted private firms in textiles, heavy industry and sugar refining from import tariffs and certain other taxes, and reduced railway rates (Lampe, 1986; Gershenkron, 1962, 199). Nevertheless, Geshov argued that protection should apply only to those industries for which there were favourable conditions of production in Bulgaria. Higher tariffs would hurt consumers and help to maintain unviable industries. Moderate tariffs would provide room for free competition (Weiss-Bartenstein, 1916, 158). He believed: ‘that a nation is politically independent only as long as it is economically so, and strenuously advocate[d] the idea of making Bulgaria as self- supporting as possible’ (Logio, 1919, 219). From the other side of the fence, the socialist politician Dimitir Blagoev was an even more fervent supporter of industrialization. Blagoev was the main representative of Marxism in Bulgaria. Educated in Russia on a Benevolent Society scholarship he was soon involved in revolutionary politics and in the establishment of the first socialist organization in Russia in 1883 (Crampton, 1995). Expelled to Bulgaria in 1885, he founded the Bulgarian Workers’ Social Democratic Party in 1891, and in 1919 he became the first leader of the Bulgarian Communist Party. Marxism came early to Bulgaria: translations of Marx appeared as early as 1886 (Rothschild, 1959, 14-16). In 1891 Blagoev wrote Shto e sotsializtim i ima li toi pochva u nas? [What is socialism and is there a basis for it here?]. The book, influenced by Plekhanov’s Our Differences (1885), argued the same case: ‘that the country must and will pass from the peasant economy into and througha capitalist phase to socialism, and that all hopes of avoiding this development through the resurrection of the largely defunct zadruga and of artisan industry are vain’ (Rothschild, 1959, 15). Blagoev believed that an industrial revolution was already under way in Bulgaria (Lampe, 1986, 35). He believed that: ‘the small peasant was destined to disappear
Tr
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 179
as agriculture inevitably moved towards capitalization and larger units worked by wage-labourers; today’s small peasants were therefore tomorrow’s rural proletariat’ (Crampton, 2007, 187). Gerschenkron remarks that:
In their positive attitude towards industrialization Bulgarian Marxians stood close to those relatively small group of Bulgarian intelligentsia which, influenced by List, thought in terms of ‘national production’ and ‘development of the nation’s productive forces,’ and which published, in the late 1880s, the journal Promishlenost (Industry) and somewhat later accepted the leadership of I.E. Geshov. (1962, 218)
Blagoev praised Geshov for his policies, but criticized him for not going far enough. The interests of the peasant class were consolidated politically with the creation of Alexandir Stamboliiski’s Bulgarian Agrarians National Union at the end of the century (Bell, 1977). Peasant society in Bulgaria was in fact the major obstacle to a policy of industrialization. Geshov had to tread carefully lest his measures place a major burden on the small peasants. In fact, objections to Listian doctrines came not from English liberalism but from the pragmatic need to protect the peasants and the artisanal class from the effects of industrialization (Gerschenkron, 1962, 226). Xenophobia and a mistrust of foreign capital, partly necessary to protect domestic industry (Weiss-Bartenstein, 1916), were endemic in Bulgarian economic life. According to one economic historian (Palairet, 1997, 330-39) this was the principal reason for the absence of foreign investment in Bulgaria. Liberalism was even more short-lived in Bulgaria than in the rest of the Balkans. Political rather than economic in orientation, it was soon eclipsed by advocates of industrialization, both bourgeois and Marxist, and it was only the interests of the peasant class that supported low tariffs, associated however with a non-liberal ideology.
7.7 CONCLUDING REMARKS
The European Enlightenment could gain no foothold during the later eighteenth century in a South-Eastern Europe that was still part of the Ottoman Empire. The Enlightenment project was instead taken up by the Diaspora and the leaders of the semi-independent principalities. The projects of progress, liberation and national rebirth, as well as the imagining of a national community, were developed together. A major intellectual force behind nationalist uprisings was the Enlightenment in general,


180 The dissemination of economic ideas
and liberal economic and political thought in particular (Djorjevic and Fischer-Galati, 1981). These projects were financed by the merchant communities operating across the divide between the Ottoman Empire and Western Europe, and the first efforts at translating texts in European languages were possible only because of the financial support from ‘conquering Balkan Orthodox merchants’ (Stoianovich, 1960), who were also the mediators of the liberal ideas of the French Revolution. Many independent states emerged in South-Eastern Europe during the nineteenth century. We have attempted to show that the political economy of nation-building in this region was dissimilar to that experienced in the core European countries two centuries earlier. British, French and German nation-building had their origins in mercantilist thought (Schmoller, 1884). Mercantilism advocated a positive balance of payments, an active population policy and a strong support for export trade, even using military means. The interests of a prospering commercial class had to be defended by the nation-state so that it might compete with its rivals. South-Eastern nationalism on the contrary arose when liberal economic thought, either as classical political economy or as French liberal economics, had already replaced mercantilism as the leading policy doctrine in Western Europe. Most intellectuals in South-Eastern Europe were liberals. They considered that the substitution of Ottoman authority by a liberal national government would be the sole guarantee of economic progress. Even in the heart of the Ottoman Empire, liberalism, with a healthy dose of imperial pragmatism, was seen as a solution to the economic and social problems faced by state and society. The failure of liberal policies to foster economic development generally coincided with the emergence of Germany as a European power, and German economic writings, from List to Schmoller, provided an attractive alternative. Towards the end of the century both Marxian socialism and romanticism provided further possibilities. But adherence to liberalism was never abandoned, if only as a pragmatic liberalism: modernizing, paternalistic and, paradoxically, statist. There were other approaches to economic policy alongside with liberalism. Agrarianists, socialists, romanticists, Slavophiles, interventionists and eclectic syntheses of the above blended with the liberal approach. In the Balkan States before national independence the idea of a free citizenry was alien. A ‘rational economic actor’ was a distant prospect. Competition was not thought to play an important part in economic progress, although it did form part of contemporary rhetoric. The Orthodox Church played no positive part in the adoption of free market capitalism (Sugar, 1985, 1996). For various reasons the merchant class in the newly independent states could not assume a leading role in economic
The dissemination ofeconomic thought in South-Eastern Europe 181
life. These were all agrarian economies with a very weak industrial base, reliant on a state whose intellectuals occasionally professed themselves ‘liberal’ in seeking to perform the duties of the modernizer. The key economic figure was the administrator, not the capitalist. The development of the state and territorial expansion had greater impact than business success. Successful national economic policy would follow the implementation of complete national independence, once the dust has settled and irredentist aspirations had reached their limit. While the limits of such liberal rhetoric became all too obvious throughout South-Eastern Europe, indigenous intellectual development was not sufficiently advanced to be able to produce original national economic thought of any importance. Such thinking came from the metropolis, and on the periphery it was simply adapted with a few cautionary words about making appropriate adjustments for national conditions, the political situation and the national psyche. Ruling political elites continued to make economic policy and create institutions almost without any reference to economics. In South-Eastern Europe the ruling political elite and economic interests became polarized. The spirit of capitalism was diffused; capitalism itself, however, could and did not flourish in this part of the world.
NOTES
1. A.G. Sayar (1986, 2000). This is the standard reference on Ottoman economic thought but is linguistically inaccessible to us. 2. Translation played an important role in a multi-ethnic society. In fact, the Translation Office became the major training ground of diplomats, bureaucrats and the new intelligentsia whose members were going to be the creators of the Tanzimat such as Sadik Rifat, Mustafa Resid, Ali and Fuad Pashas (Seyitdanlioglu, 1998, 154). 3. Other translations of textbooks in French into Ottoman Turkish include LeroyBeaulieu’s Traité de la science des finances (1880), Maurice Block’s Petit manuel d’économie pratique (1908), and Charles Gide’s Principes d’économic politique (1909). We would like to thank our doctoral student Selcan Kiigiik for her help with the Turkish bibliography. 4. It was, however, an English orientalist, Charles Wells, who published before them in 1860 in London, the first book on economics in Turkish. 5. The diffusion of economic ideas was also effected through the columns of the Ottoman newspapers. Sayar (cited in Biilbiil, 2007) writes that one newspaper was publishing both the lectures of Mehmed Serif Efendi and the economic writings of Ahmed Midhat Efendi. 6. Thus, K. Kokkinakis published in Vienna in 1809 a Greek translation of Joseph Nowack (1799). There is an anonymous translation published in Jassy in 1817 of Johann Georg Biisch (1801). Panagiotis Spanopoulos had earlier published a book on Commercial Arithmetic in Trieste in 1803. 7. The fact that Say was the first economist to be translated was no accident. He was by far the most translated economist of the period (Tribe, 2003, 162). Not only was he well known for his Philhellenic sentiments, but his views and style suited the Greek intelligentsia (Sklavenitis, 1994).


182
Ll.
12.
14.
15.
The dissemination of economic ideas
The original texts were P.-H. Suzanne (1826), Jean-Jacques Rapet (1858), Jean
Chaumeil (1882 [1881]) and Maurice Block (1872). Block’s Traité théorique et pratique de statistique also appeared in Greek in 1895. The original texts were Joseph Garnier (1846), Millicent Garrett Fawcett (1870), Paul
Leroy-Beaulieu (1888), Emile de Laveleye, (1882). We have translations into Greek of
two of Garnier’s books: Traité de finances in 1887 and Traité complet d'arithmétique
théorique et appliquée au commerce, a la banque, aux finances et a l'industrie in 1893.
Moreover, two of Laveleye’s books, on the future of the Catholic peoples and on con
temporary socialism, were translated into Greek in 1875 and 1894 respectively. There
is also another textbook in Greek, translated from the English without attribution
to an author, published in 1901 with the title Plutology for beginners, by 1. Marketis.
Strangely enough, the language of the text is an extreme demotic Greek in a period
when this linguistic form was associated with progressive and radical causes. The book, however, is as liberal as they come.
Platon E. Drakoules was born on the Ionian island of Zakynthos. He taught Modern
Greek literature at Oxford. His socialism was a peculiar mixture incorporating anar
chist, theosophical and utopian ideas. He published the first Greek Socialist magazine
(Ardén). He translated Kropotkin in 1886, and he had written pamphlets and books such as What Socialism Means? (1886b), The Worker's Manual, i.e., the Foundations of
Socialism (1893), History of the French Revolution (1890), The Anti-plutocratic Spirit (1910), and so on. Nicolae Rosetti-Rosnovanu, ‘well versed in the theories of J.B. Say, A Smith and D.
Ricardo’, visited Britain in 1818 (Georgescu, 1971, 73). Most intellectuals, however,
knew English liberalism through France (Hitchins, 1996, 133).
Serfdom was formally abolished in 1864. Dobrogeanu-Gherea has coined the term ‘neoserfdom’ (neviobdgia) to describe the peasants’ predicament (in Hitchins, 1994, 77).
On the anti-Semitic ideology of Rumanian intellectuals in the nineteenth century see Oldson (1991). His economic works include Notions statistiques sur la Moldavie (1849) (a Rumanian
translation appeared in 1852) and Quelques observations sur la statistique de la Roumanie (1867). Nicolae Sutu was the older brother of Ioannes Soutsos, the Greek economist (Psalidopoulos and Stassinopoulos, 2009). Both were liberal, but with dif
fering national allegiances: Nicolae with Romania, Ioannes with Greece. As common
in the Balkans, there was no ‘genetic’ or cultural Wahlverwandtschaft with respect to national consciousness: choice and circumstance were stronger determining factors. In terms of diffusion of economic ideas the production of translated of economic texts is really small. They include: Wilhelm Roscher’s Grundlagen der Nationalékonomie (1863);
Jean-Jacques Rapet’s Manuel de morale et d’économie politique (1872); Joseph Garnier’s Premieres notions d’économie politique, sociale ou industrielle (1876); and Emile de Laveleye’s De la propriété et de ses formes primitives (1899).
Perhaps an interesting contrast with Serbian economic thought is economic thought in Croatia, which is however beyond the scope of this chapter. Whereas in Serbia university education was non-existent, in Zagreb there had been a fully functioning tertiary
educational institution since the middle of the seventeenth century. In Zagreb the first
appointment of a Professor of Political-Cameral Studies was in 1769. He and his two
successors taught from Joseph von Sonnenfels’s Grundsdtze der Polizey, Handlung und
Finanzwissenschaft (1869-76). The fourth professor in line, Ivan Nepomuk Henfner,
wrote a liberal textbook in 1831 in Latin: Introductio in oeconomiam politicam alias nationalem. The first professor in a chair entitled “National Economy’ was Blaz Lorkovié who translated Rapet in 1880 and wrote Principles of Political Economy or General Economic Science in Croatian in 1889. He was influenced by English liberal
thinkers, especially Mill. It is only gradually that political economy differentiated itself
from Cameralism to becomea liberal discipline that could within the Empire be used as nationalist tool (University of Zagreb, 2010). This was the first society of its kind in South-Eastern Europe.
T
The dissemination ofeconomic thought in South-Eastern Europe 183
18. Dimitrov (2002, §14) A translation of Friedrich List’s Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie appeared in Bulgarian only in 1926.
REFERENCES
Adanir, F. (2003), ‘Religious communities and ethnic groups under imperial sway: Ottoman and Habsburg lands in comparison’, in D. Hoerder, C. Harzig and A. Shubert (eds), The Historical Practice of Diversity: Transcultural Interactions from the Early Modern Mediterranean to the Postcolonial World, Oxford: Berghahn Books, pp. 54-86. Augello, M.M. and M.E.L. Guidi (eds) (2001), The Spread of Political Economy and the Professionalisation ofEconomists, London: Routledge. Augello, M.M. and M.E.L. Guidi (eds) (2005), Economists in Parliament in the Liberal Age (1848-1920): A Comparative Perspective, London: Ashgate. Avramoy, R. and §. Pamuk (eds) (2006), Monetary and Fiscal Policies in South-east Europe: Historical and Comparative Perspectives, First General Meeting of the South-east Europe Monetary History Network, 13-14 April, Sofia: Bulgarian National Bank. Baeck, L. (1994), The Mediterranean Tradition in Economic Thought, London: Routledge. Baeck, L. (1996), ‘Ibn Khaldun’s political and economic realism’, in L.S. Moss (ed.), Joseph A. Schumpeter: Historian ofEconomics, London: Routledge, pp. 83-99. Barrau, T.H. (1850), Conseils aux ouvriers sur les moyens qu’ils ont d’étre heureux [Advice to workers on the ways by which they will be happy], Paris: Hachette. Batakovic, D.T. (2005), Histoire du peuple serbe [History of the Serbian people], Lausanne: L’Age d’homme. Beccaria, C. (1802), Peri amartematén kai poinén, politikés theéroumenén [translation by Adamantios Koraés of Dei delitti e delle pene (On crimes and punishments)], Paris: Baudelot et Eberhart. Bell, J. (1977), Peasants in Power: Alexander Stamboliski and the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union, 1899-1923, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Blagoev, D. [‘D. Bratanov’] (1891), Shto e sotsializim i ima li toi pochva u nas? [What is socialism and is there a basis for it here?], Turnovo: P.H. Panaiotov. Block, M. (1872), Petit manuel d’économie pratique [Little handbook of practical economics], Paris: J. Hetzel. Block, M. (1882), Mikron egcheiridion praktikés oikonomias [translation by K.A. Kypriadis of Block, 1872], Athens: Endsis. Block, M. (1895), Egcheiridion theérétikés kai praktikés statistikés [translation by P.A. Sakellariou of Traité théorique et pratique de statistique], Athens: P.A. Sakellariou. Block, M. (1908), Ameli Iktisadi dersleri {translation by Ahmet Muhtar of Block, 1872], Istanbul: Mahmut Bey Matbaasi. Budak, A. (2008), ‘The contributions of the Armenians over the constitution of a i life and literature in 19th century’, Ozean Journal of Social Sciences,
Bilbiil, Y. (2007), ‘Transfer of political economy by a traditional society: Ilm-I tedbir-i menzil in the Ottoman Empire’, paper presented at the XIII Jornadas de Epistemologia de las Ciencias Econoémicas, Facultad de Ciencias Econémicas


184 The dissemination of economic ideas
Universidad de Buenos Aires, 4-5 October, http://www.econ.uba.ar/www/
institutos/epistemologia/marco_archivos/ponencias/Actas”20XIII/Trabajos%20
Episte/BULBUL_paper.pdf.
Biisch, J.G. (1801), Vollsténdiges systematisches Lehrbuch der gesammten
Handlungswissenschaft [Complete systematic textbook of the entire science of
trade], Hamburg and Mainz: Gottfried Vollmer.
Biisch, J.G. (1817), Didaskalia entelés sustématiké apasés tés emporikés epistémés,
Jassy: Greek printing press [translation of Biisch, 1801].
Campbell, J. (1944), ‘The influence of western political thought in the Rumanian
principalities 1821-48’, Journal of Central European Affairs, 4, 262-73.
Campbell, J. (1971), French Influence and the Rise of Rumanian Nationalism, 2nd
edn, New York: Arno.
Cardoso, J.L. (2003), ‘The international diffusion of economic thought’, in W.J.
Samuels, J.E. Biddle and J.B. Davis (eds), A Companion to the History of
Economic Thought, Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 622-33.
Chaumeil, J. (1882), Mathémata politikés oikonomias dia ton laon ek tou gallikou
[translation of (1881) Legons populaires d’économie politique, a l’usage des écoles
et des familles (Popular lessons of political economy for use by schools and
families)], Athens: Aidn.
Crampton, R.J. (1995), ‘Blagoev, Dimitar’, in A.T. Lane (ed.), Biographical
Dictionary ofEuropean Labor Leaders, Vol. 1, Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
pp. 98-9.
Crampton, R.J. (2007), Bulgaria, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dimitrov, M. (2002), ‘Economics — Bulgaria’, in M. Kaase, V. Sparschuh and
A. Wenninger (eds), Three Social Science Disciplines in Central and Eastern
Europe: Handbook on Economics, Political Science and Sociology (1989-2001),
Berlin and Budapest: GESIS/Social Science Information Centre (IZ), Collegium
Budapest Institute for Advanced Study, http://www.cee-socialscience.net/
archive/economics/bulgaria/report] .html.
Djordjevic, D. and S. Fischer-Galati (1981), The Balkan Revolutionary Tradition.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Dobrogeanu-Gherea, C. (1910), Neoiobdgia; studiu economico-sociologic al prob
lemei noastre agrare [Neoserfdom: economic-sociological study of our agrarian
problem], Bucharest: Editura Librariei Socecu & Comp.
Doganalp-Votzi, H. (2007), ‘Aspekte der Rezeptionsgeschichte der Theorien der
Moderne im Osmanischen. Das erste osmanische Werk zur Nationalékonomie:
Sehak Abrus’ Ubersetzung des Catéchisme d’économie politique von Jean
Baptiste Say’ [Aspects of the reception history of the theories of modernity
in the Ottoman Empire. The first Ottoman work of political economy: Sehak
Abrus’s translation of Jean Baptiste Say’s Catéchisme d’économie politique], in
G. Neweklowsky (ed.), Herrschaft, Staat und Gesellschaft in Stidosteuropa aus
sprach- und kulturhistorischer Sicht [Government, state and society in South
Eastern Europe in a linguistic and cultural-historical perspective] Vienna:
Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp. 239-56.
Dogan, Necmettin (2006), “The origins of liberalism and Islamism in the Ottoman
Empire (1908-1914): a sociological perspective’, Doctoral dissertation, Freie
Universitit Berlin, Germany, _ http://www.diss.fu-berlin.de/diss/receive/
FUDISS_thesis_000000002669.
Dragoumis, N. (1869), Egkolpion tou ergatikou laou é sumvoulai pros cheirénaktas
[Précis for the working people, or advice for manual labourers], (adaptation of
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 185
-eostiat 1850) Series: Vivliothéké tés Etaireias t6n Philén tou Laou, Athens: ilaras.
Drakoules, P.E. (1886a), Ekklésis eis tous neous [An appeal to the tion of P.A. Kropotkin’s ‘Aux jeunes gens’, fee a ha sean
— P.E. (1886b), Ti sémainei sosialismos [What socialism means], Athens: stia.
Drakoules, P.E. (1890), Istoria tés Gallikés Epanastaseés kai ta ex autés didagmata [History of the French Revolution and the lessons from it]. Athens: Gabriélidis. Drakoules, P.E. (1893), To egcheiridion tou ergatou étoi ai baseis tou sosialismou [The worker’s manual, i.e., the foundations of socialism], Athens: Union of the Working Classes of Greece. Drakoules, P.E. (1910), To antiploutokratikon pneuma [The anti-plutocratic spirit] parliamentary speech, Athens: [s.n.] , Droz, J. (1829), Economie politique: ou principes de la science des richesses [Political economy, or principles of the science of wealth], Paris: Jules Renouard. Droz, J. (1833), Politiké oikonomia étoi archai tés epistémés tou ploutou [translated with many additions by A. Polyzoidis, translation of Droz, 1829], Nafplion: Tombras, Ioannidis & Athanasiadis. , Garnier, J. (1846), Eléments de l'économie politique: Exposé des notions fondamentales de cette science [Elements of Political Economy: presentation of the basic concepts of this science], Paris: Guillaumin. Garnier, J. (1869), Stoicheia politikés oikonomias [translation of Garnier, 1846] Athens: Passaris. , Garnier, J. (1876), Prvi pojmovi politicke druStvene ili industrijske ekonomije [translation of Premieres notions d’économie politique, sociale ou industrielle (First notions of political, social or industrial economy)], Belgrade: Drzavna Stamparija. Garnier, J. (1887), Oikonomologikon egcheiridion [translation by Ch. A. Zappas of Traité de finances], Bucharest: Tupografeion Ephémeridos Sullogoi. Garnier, J. (1893), Arithmétiké theérétiké kai efarmosmené gia to emporion, tas trapezas ktl. [Translation by I. Dyovounidtis of Traité complet d’arithmétique théorique et appliquée au commerce, a la banque, aux finances et a l'industrie (Complete treatise of arithmetic theoretical and applied to banks, finance and industry)], Athens: [s.n.]. Garrett Fawcett, M. (1870), Political Economy for Beginner. ies: illan’ School Class Books. London: Macmillan. Pe Sen ear a racing - ie 5 ahi tés politikés oikonomias di’archarious ranslation by E.I. Mavrokordatos of Garr iti
GIG Mien fear et Fawcett, 1870 (4th edition of
Geng, M. ( 1994), “Ottoman industry in the eighteenth century: general framework characteristics and main trends’, in D. Quataert (ed.), Manufacturing in the Ottoman Empire and Turkey 1500-1950, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, pp. 59-86. Gencer, Mustafa (2002), Bildungspolitik, Modernisierung und kulturelle Interaktion: deutsch—tiirkische Beziehungen (1908-1918) [Education policy, modernization =a cultural interaction: German-Turkish relations (1908-1918)]. Minster: it: Georgescu, V. (1971), Political Ideas and the Enlightenment in the Romanian Principalities, New York: Columbia University Press. Gerschenkron, A. (1962), ‘Some aspects of industrialization in Bulgaria,


186 The dissemination ofeconomic ideas
1878-1939’, in Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 198-234.
Ghazanfar, S.M. (ed.) (2003), Medieval Islamic Economic Thought: Filling the
‘Great Gap’ in European Economics, London: Routledge.
Ghica, I. (1865), Convorbiri economice [Economic conversations], Bucharest:
Tipografia Stefan Rassidescu.
Gide, C. (1909), ilm-i iktisadi dersleri [translation of Principes d’économie poli
tique], Istanbul: Kadar Matbaasi.
Gnjatovic, D. (2006), ‘Introduction of limping gold standard in the principality of Serbia’, in Avramov and Pamuk, op-cit., pp. 45-56.
Gounarakis, N.P. (1892), Stoicheia politikés oikonomias (Elements of political
economy), Vol. 1, Athens: Paliggenesia. Gueshoff, I.E. (1915), The Balkan League, London: John Murray.
Henfner, J. (1831), JIntroductio in oeconomiam politicam alias nationalem
{Introduction to political, alias national, economy], Zagreb: Franciscus
Suppan.
Hitchins, K.M. (1994), Rumania, 1866-1947, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hitchins, K.M. (1996), The Romanians, 1774-1866, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hiibner, O. (1869), Ekonomi terciimesi: Fenn-i idare [translation by Mehmet
Midhat of Petit manuel populaire d'économie politique (Little popular handbook
of political economy) which in turn is the translation-adaptation by Charles Le
Hardy de Beaulieu of Otto Hiibner Der kleine Ekonomist], Istanbul: Cemiyet-i Ilmiye Matbaasi.
Jelavich, C. and B. Jelavich (1977), The Establishment of the Balkan National
States, 1804-1920, Series: A History of East Central Europe, Vol. 8, Seattle,
WA: University of Washington Press.
Josifidis, K. (2002), ‘Aspects ofeconomic thought and policy in Serbia, 1850-1900’,
in M. Psalidopoulos and M.E. Mata (eds), Economic Thought and Policy in Less
Developed Europe: The Nineteenth Century, London: Routledge, pp. 145-71.
Karasimeonovy, G. (1999), ‘Between democracy and authoritarianism in Bulgaria’,
in K. Lawson, A. R6mmele and G. Karasimeonov (eds.), Cleavages, Parties,
and Voters: Studies from Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, Westport, CT: Praeger, pp. 37-45.
Kazazis, N. (1894), Genikai archai tés politikés oikonomias [General principles of political economy], Athens: Saliveros.
Kordatos, Y. (1931-32), Istoria tou ellénikou ergatikou kinématos [History of the
Greek labour movement], Vols 1-2, Athens: Panepistémiakon Vivliopdleion
Alex N. Kololou.
Koundouris, M. (1998), ‘E exelixé tés oikonomikés skepsés stén Ellada, 1837-1942’
[The development of economic thought in Greece, 1837-1942], Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Athens, Greece.
Lampe, J.R. (1986), The Bulgarian Economy in the Twentieth Century, London: Croom Helm. :
Laveleye, E. de (1882), Eléments d’économie politique [Elements of political
economy], Paris: Hachette.
Laveleye, E. de (1875), Peri tou mellontos t6n katholikén la6n [translation by S.A.
Vlastos of De I’avenir des peuples catholiques (The future of Catholic peoples)], Marseilles: [s.n.].
Laveleye, E. de (1894), Stoicheia politikés oikonomias [translation by K. Vournazos
of Laveleye, 1882 from the 3rd edn of 1890], Athens: Vlastos.
Tr
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 187
Laveleye, E. de (1894a), O sugchronos sosialismos [translation of Le socialisme contemporain (Contemporary socialism)], Athens: [s.n.]. Laveleye, E. de (1899), Svojina i njeni prvobitni oblici [translation of De la propriété et de ses formes primitives (On property and its primitive forms)], Belgrade: Drzayna Stamparija. Lederer, I.J. (1969), ‘Nationalism and the Yugoslavs’, in P.F. Sugar and LJ. Lederer (eds), Nationalism in Eastern Europe, Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, pp. 396-438. Leroy-Beaulieu, P. (1880), J/m-i usul-i maliye [translation by Hiiseyin Kazim of -tong de la science des finances (Treatise of the science of finances)], Istanbul: s.n.]. Leroy-Beaulieu, P. (1888), Précis d’économie politique, Paris: Librairie Ch. Delagrave. Leroy-Beaulieu, P. (1889), Egcheiridion ploutologias, é tés oikonomikés epistémés [translation by K.A. Kypriadés of Leroy-Beaulieu, 1888], Athens: Estia. List, F. (1926), Sistema na narodno stopanstvo i mitnicheska politika [translation by Racho P. Kosev of Das nationale System der politischen Okonomie (The national system of political economy)], Sofia: Diirzh. Knigoizd. Logio, G.C. (1919), Bulgaria: Problems and Politics, London: Heinemann. Lorkovi¢, B. (1889), Poéela politicke ekonomije ili nauke obcega gospodarstva [Principles of political economy or general economic science], Zagreb: Druzba ‘Braca hrvatskog zmajar’ [Society “Brothers of the Croatian Dragon’]. Love, J.L. (2002), “Resisting liberalism: theorizing backwardness and development in Rumania before 1914’, in M. Psalidopoulos and M.E. Mata (eds), Economic Thought and Policy in Less Developed Europe: The Nineteenth Century, London: Routledge, pp. 105-28. ime, M. (1962), A History of Bulgaria, 1393-1885, London: Allen & nwin. Maddison, A. (1995), Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992, Paris: OECD. Marketis, I. (1901), Ploutologia gi’archarious [Plutology for beginners] [translation from the English of an unidentified textbook], Athens: Estia. Martian, D.P. (1858), Studii sistemice in Economia politica. Prima parte. Economia sociald, [Systematic studies in political economy; first part: social economy] in N. Marcu and Z. Ornea (eds), (1961) D.P. Martian Opere economice, [Economic works], Bucharest: Editura Stiintifica. Marx, K. and F. Engels (1913), To koinénistiko manifesto [translation by Konstantinos Chatzopoulos of Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei (Manifesto of the Communist Party)], Athens: Tupografeio efémeridas t6n ergatén [originally published in series in Volos in 1908 in the periodical Ergatés (Worker)]. Midhat, A. (1879), Ekonomi politik [Political economy], Istanbul: Kirk Anbar Matbaasi. Mijatovic¢, C. (1893), Istorija trgovine [History of Trade], Belgrade: D. M. Doric. Mill, J.S. (1972 [1869]), ‘Letter no. 1497. To John Elliot Cairnes, Avignon, Nov. 16’, in F.E. Mineka and D.N. Lindley (eds), The Collected Works ofJohn Stuart Mill, Volume XVII; The Later Letters of John Stuart Mill 1849-1873, Part IV, Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Bulgaria (2010), ‘Ministers’, http://www. minfin.bg/en/page/226. Moruzi, A.D. (1860), L’abolition des monopoles et l’amélioration de l'état du paysan en Moldavie [The abolition of monopolies and the improvement of the


188 The dissemination ofeconomic ideas
state of the peasant in Moldavia], Galatz: Frédéric Thiel [reprinted in Slavescu, 1941].
seen A.D. (1861), Progrés et liberté (Commerce, Finances, Agriculture dans
les Principautés Unies) [Progress and freedom: commerce, finances, agriculture
in the United Principalities], Galatz: Frédéric Thiel [reprinted in Slavescu,
1941].
Moss, a (ed.) (1996), Joseph A. Schumpeter: Historian of Economics, London:
Routledge.
Nowack, J. (1799), GrundriB der Handlungsgeschichte [Outline of the history of
trade], Vienna: widow of J. Alberti. a
Nowack, J. (1809), Istorias tou emporiou epitomé [translation by K. Kokkinakis of
Nowack, 1799], Vienna: Georgios Vendotis.
Oldson, W.O. (1973), The Historical and Nationalistic Thought of Nicolae Iorga,
New York: Columbia University Press.
Oldson, W.O. (1991), A Providential Anti-Semitism: Nationalism and Polity in
Nineteenth Century Romania, Philadephia, PA: American Philosophical Society.
Ozveren, E. (2002), ‘Ottoman economic thought and economic policy in transi
tion: rethinking the nineteenth century’, in M. Psalidopoulos and M.E. Mata
(eds), Economic Thought and Policy in Less Developed Europe: The Nineteenth
Century, London: Routledge, pp. 129-44.
Palairet, M. (1997), The Balkan Economies, c. 1800-1914: Evolution without
Development, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Papadopoulos, N. (1815), Ermés 0 Kerdéos, étoi Emporiké Egkyklopaideia [The
gainful Hermes, i.e., encyclopaedia of commerce], 5 vols, Venice: Nikolaos
Glukus.
Parla, T. (1985), The Social and Political Thought of Ziya Gékalp, 1876-1924, Leiden: Brill.
Petrovich, M.B. (1976), A History of Modern Serbia, 1804-1918, New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovic.
Plekhanov, G.V. (1885), Nashi raznoglasiya [Our differences], Geneva:
Osvobozhdenie truda [Emancipation of labour], [English version, http://www.
marxists.org/archive/plekhanov/1885/ourdiff/index.html].
Pompiliu, T. (ed.) (1980), Enlightenment and Romanian Society, Cluj: Editura Dacia.
Psalidopoulos, M. and M.E. Mata (eds) (2002), Economic Thought and Policy in
Less Developed Europe: The Nineteenth Century, London: Routledge.
Psalidopoulos, M. and Y. Stassinopoulos (2009), ‘A liberal economist and eco
nomic policy reform in nineteenth-century Greece: the case of loannes Soutsos’,
History ofPolitical Economy, 41, 491-517. ;
Psalidopoulos, M. and N.J. Theocarakis (2011), ““The economist’s duck”: an anti
economist theatrical play of the nineteenth century’, unpublished manuscript,
University of Athens.
Rapet, J.J. (1858), Manuel de morale et d'économie politique a l'usage des classes
ouvriéres, [Manual of moral and political economy for the use of the working classes], Paris: Guillaumin.
Rapet, J.J. (1865), Démodes egcheiridion éthikés kai politikés oikonomias [transla
tion by M. Kanellopoulos and A. Skalidés of Rapet, 1858], Athens: Filomousos
Lesché.
Rapet, J.J. (1872), Narodna ekonomija; u prostu izvodu [translation of Rapet, 1858], Novi Sad: Fuks.
Tr
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 189
Rapet, J.J. (1880), Razgovori o narodnog gospodarstvu [translation by Blaz Lorkovié of Rapet, 1858], Zagreb: Matica hrvatska. Rapet, J.J. (1903), Egcheiridion éthikés kai politikés oikonomias [translation by E. Fotiadou of Rapet, 1858], Athens: Raftanis-Papagedrgiou. Roscher, W. (1863), Sistema narodne privrede: prvi deo; Osnovi narodne privrede [translation by Vladimir Jovanovié of System der Volkswirthschaft; Erster Band, die Grundlagen der Nationalokonomie (System of political economy; first volume; the foundations of national economy)]. Belgrade: Drzavna Stamparija. Rothschild, J. (1959), The Communist Party ofBulgaria: Origins and Development, 1883-1936, New York: Columbia University Press. Say, J.-B. (1821), Catéchisme d’économie politique, ou, Instruction familiére qui montre de quellefagon les richesses sont produites, distribuées et consommeées dans la société [Catechism of political economy, or, familiar instruction that shows the way in which wealth is produced, distributed and consumed in society], 2nd edn, Paris: Bossange pere. Say, J.-B. (1828), Politikés oikonomias katéchésis [translation by G. Chryséidis of Say, 1821], Aegina: [s.n.]. Say, J.-B. (1852), ilm-i tedbir-i menzil [translation by Sahak Abru of Say, 1821], Istanbul: Mihendisoglu Tabihanesi. Sayar, A.G. (1986, 2000), Osmanlt Iktisadi Diistincesinin Cagdaslasmasi [The contemporization of Ottoman economic thought], Istanbul: Otiiken. Schmoller, G. (1884), ‘Das Merkantilsystem in seiner historischen Bedeutung: stadtische, territoriale und staatliche Wirtschaftspolitik’, Jahrbuch _fiir Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft im Deutschen Reich, 8, 15-61. Schumpeter, J.A. (1954), History of Economic Analysis, New York: Oxford University Press. Seyitdanlioglu, M. (1998), “The rise and development of the liberal thought in Turkey’, Hacettepe Universitesi Edebiyat Fakiiltesi Dergisi Cumhuriyetimizin 75. Yi Ozel Sayisi [Special annual issue], 151-62, http://www.edebiyatdergisi. hacettepe.edu.tr/7SozelMehmetSeyitdanlioglu.pdf. Sklavenitis, T. (1990), ‘Ta emporika egcheiridia tés Venetokratias kai tés Tourkokratias kai € Emporiké Egkyklopaideia tou Nikolaou Papadopoulou’ [The commercial handbooks of the Venetian and Turkish occupation and the Commercial Encyclopaedia of Nikolaos Papadopoulos], Mnémon, Appendix 5, pp. 1-178. Sklavenitis, T. (1994), ‘O Spyrid6n Valetas kai é metaphrasé tés Politikés Oikonomias tou J. B. Say’ [Spyridon Valetas and the translation of J.B. Say’s Political Economy), Mnémén, Appendix 9, pp. 107-56. Slavéscu, V. (1941), Viata si opera economistului Alexandru D. Moruzi, 1815-1878 {Life and Works of the Economist Alexandru D. Moruzi], Bucharest: Academia Romana Studii $i Cercetari, Imprimeria Nationala. Sojic, M. and L. Djurdjevic (2006), ‘National Bank of Serbia 1884-2006: establishment and beginning of operation’, in Avramov and Pamuk, op. cit., pp. 141-56. Sonnenfels, J. von (1769-76), Grundsdtze der Polizey, Handlung, und Finanzwissenschaft [Principles of policy, trade and the science of finance], 3 vols, Vienna: Joseph Kurzbéck. Soutsos, I.A. (1851), Pragmateia peri paragégés kai dianomés tou ploutou [Treatise on the production and distribution of wealth], Athens: A. Koromilas. Soutsos, L.A. (1864), Egcheiridion démosiologias, é theéria peri protipologismou [Manual of public finance, or theory of the budget], Athens: N.G. Passaris.


190 The dissemination ofeconomic ideas
Soutsos, I.A. (1868-69), Ploutologia [Plutology], 2 vols, Athens: N.G. Passaris.
Soutsos, I.A. (1882 and 1885), Ploutologia [Plutology], 2 vols, 2nd edn, Athens: N.G. Passaris.
Spanopoulos, P. (1803), Emporiké arithmétiké [Commercial arithmetic], Trieste:
Katzatis printing press.
Strat, I. (1870), Tractat complectu de economie politica [A complete treatise of
political economy], Bucharest: Imprimeriile statului.
Stoianovich, T. (1960), ‘The conquering Balkan Orthodox merchant’, Journal of
Economic History, 20, 234-313.
Stokes, G. (1975), Legitimacy through Liberalism: Vladimir Jovanovic and
the Transformation of Serbian Politics, Seattle: University of Washington
Press.
Strat, L. (1870), Tractat complectu de economie politiga [A Complete Treatise of
Political Economy], Bucharest: Imprimeriile statului. Sugar, P.F. (1985), ‘The Enlightenment in the Balkans: some basic considerations’, East European Quarterly, 9, 499-507.
Sugar, P.F. (1996), Nationalism and Religion in the Balkans since the 19th Century,
the Donald W. Treadgold papers in Russian, East European, and Central Asian
studies, paper no. 8, Seattle, WA: Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies, University of Washington.
Sutu, N. (1849), Notions statistiques sur la Moldavie [Statistical data on Moldavia] Jassy: Henning.
Sutu, N. (1852), Nofiuni statistice asupra Moldaviei [translation of Sutu, 1849],
Jassy: Buciumul roman.
Sutu, N. (1867), Quelques observations sur la statistique de la Roumanie [Certain
observations on the statistics of Rumania], Focsani: [s.n.]
Suzanne, P.H. (1826), Principes généraux d’économie publique et industrielle, en
forme d’entretiens [General principles of public and industrial economics in the
form of interviews], Paris: L. Colas. Suzanne, P.-H. (1849), Genikai archai tés démosias kai vioméchanikés oikonomias
en eidei syndialexeés metaxu patros kai uiou [translation by M. Vernardos of Suzanne, 1826], Athens: Antoniadis. Tietze, A. (ed., transl.) (1979-82), Mustafa Ali’s Counsel for Sultans of 1581,
Vienna: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Tomasevich, J. (1955), Peasants, Politics and Economic Development in Yugoslavia, Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Tomass, M. (1996), ‘Al-Maqrizi’s Book of aiding the nation by investigating the
depression of 1406: translation and commentary’, in L.S. Moss (ed.) Joseph A.
Schumpeter: Historian ofEconomics, London: Routledge, pp. 110-52. Toprak, Z. (1994), ‘Nationalism and economics in the Young Turk era (1908
1918), in J. Thobie and S. Kangal (eds), Industrialisation, Communication et
Rapports Sociaux en Turquie et en Méditerranée Orientale, Paris: L’Harmattan, pp. 260-66
Tribe, K. (2003), ‘Continental political economy from the physiocrats to the
marginal revolution’, in T.M. Porter and D. Ross (eds), The Cambridge History
of Science Volume 7: The Modern Social Sciences, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 154-70. Trotsky, L. (1915), ‘Political profiles: Dobrogeanu-Gherea’, Nashe Slovo, 100, 29
May, http://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/profiles/gherea.htm. University of Sofia, Faculty of Economics and Business Administration (2010),
Tr
The dissemination of economic thought in South-Eastern Europe 191
‘History’, Retrieved from http://www.uni-sofia.bg/index.php/eng/faculties/ faculty_of_economics_and_business_administration/history. University of Zagreb, Faculty of Law, Department of political economy (2010), ‘The teachers who taught the subject of Political Economy’ [Sveucili8te u Zagrebu: Pravni Fakultet: Katedra za politi¢éku ekonomiju, ‘O nastavnicima koji su predavali predmet Politi¢éka ekonomija’], http://www.pravo.hr/PE/
onkp. Urquhart, D. (1833), Turkey and its resources... London: Saunders & Otley. Weiss-Bartenstein, W.K. (1916), ‘Bulgariens handelspolitische Entwicklung und das Auslandskapital’ [Bulgaria’s trade development and foreign capital], Zeitschrift fiir Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung, 25, 141-208. Wells, C. (1860), Zim tedbiri milk = The Science of the Administration ofa State’, or, An Essay on Political Economy, in Turkish: Being the First ever Written in that Language, London: Williams & Norgate. Xenopol, A.D. (1879), Studii economice [Economic studies], Jassy: Steaua Romaniei. Zacharia, K. (2008), ‘Introduction’, in K. Zacharia (ed.), Hellenisms: Culture, Identity, and Ethnicity from Antiquity to Modernity, Aldershot: Ashgate, pp. 1-18. Zografos, I. (1892), Démosionomiké: étoi episteme tés tin démosién chrématén dioikéseds [Public finance, i.e., the science of managing public money], Athens: Perris Bros. Zygouras, X.D. (1878), Epitomé oikiakés oikonomias [Compendium of home economics], Athens: Kouvelos & Trimis. Zygouras, X.D. (1892), Egcheiridion oikonomikés, étoi mathémata oikiakés oikonomias epistémonikés ektethenta, pros chrésin t6n anéter6n Parthenagégeién kai Didaskaleién t6n théleén [Manual of economics, i.e., lessons of home economics scientifically exposed, for use by girls’ high schools], Athens: Kouvelos & Delis.