Globalization and Promissory Representation
Christina J. Schneider University of California, San Diego
Robert Thomson Monash University
Abstract: Despite the centrality of promise keeping to representation, we know little about how it is affected by economic globalization, which is one of the modern world’s defining characteristics. We argue that globalization reduces governing parties’ ability to keep their campaign promises. We test the empirical implications of our theory with a mixed-methods approach that combines a large-n quantitative comparative analysis of pledge fulfillment with a typical case study to trace the underlying causal mechanisms of the theory. The findings indicate that international economic integration exerts a large negative effect on the likelihood of pledge fulfillment in a broad range of contexts and that the hypothesized mechanisms are clearly observable in the detailed case study. These findings have important implications for democratic representation in a globalized world.
Verification Materials: The data and materials required to verify the computational reproducibility of the results, procedures and analyses in this article are available on the American Journal of Political Science Dataverse within the Harvard Dataverse Network, at: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/XB5Q2J.
R
epresentative democracy is a system in which there is a “necessary correspondence between acts of governance and the equally weighted interests of citizens with respect to those acts” (Saward 1998, 51). Political parties play a vital mediating role in achieving congruence between public sentiment and public policies according to prominent accounts of contemporary mass democracy (Dahl 1956; Downs 1957). The idea of promissory representation, variants of which are found in the responsible party model and the mandate theory of democracy, is that this mediating role consists of parties making promises to voters during election campaigns and then keeping those promises after elections if the election results grant them sufficient authority to do so (Mansbridge 2003, 515). According to
popular understanding of how democracy works, parties that win the popular vote have a mandate to keep their promises. Campaign promises impose political constraints by creating a common understanding of the policies that governments should pursue if conditions do not change in ways that make the implementation of the promises infeasible (Manin 1997; Stokes 2001). Governing parties may break some promises for good reasons, but consistent promise breaking undermines parties’ reputations and the legitimacy of democracy.1 Given the prominence of promise making and keeping to the theory and practice of representation, large bodies of comparative research describe and explain patterns of promise keeping. These studies generally look inward toward domestic political institutions to
Christina J. Schneider is Professor, Department of Political Science, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093 (cjschneider@ucsd.edu). Robert Thomson is Professor, School of Social Sciences, Monash University, 3800 VIC, Australia (robert.thomson@monash.edu).
For their constructive feedback and suggestions on earlier versions of this article, we thank Emiel Awad, Austin Beacham, David Bearce, Ricky Clark, Christina Cottiero, Alex Debs, Bianca Freeman, Mike Goldfien, Lauren Konken, Claas Mertens, Sophie Meunier, Andrew Moravcsik, Elin Naurin, Cleo O’Brian-Udry, Tyler Pratt, Kim Scheppele, Rachel Schoner, Eric Thai, Didac Queralt, and the participants of seminars at Princeton University, Griffith University, and Yale University. The article also benefited from terrific comments from participants at IPES, EUSA, PEIO, and the UCSD IO Group. The qualitative analysis in this article was certified as exempt from UCSD IRB review. This research is supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project, “Internationalisation and democracy" (DP200100256) and the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation (Riksbankens Jubileumsfond) project “Mixed methods for analyzing political parties’ promises to voters during election campaigns" (grant number MXM19-1137:1).
1For more extensive discussions of promissory representation see Matthiess (2020); Naurin and Oscarsson (2017); Naurin, Soroka, and Markwat (2019); Stokes (2001).
American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 00, No. 0, March 2023, Pp. 1–15
© 2023, Midwest Political Science Association. DOI: 10.1111/ajps.12789
1


2 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
explain different levels of promise keeping.2 While this research has generated important insights into the impact of domestic institutions, it has not taken into account that democratic politics is increasingly shaped by countries’ integration into the global economy.3 We argue that international economic integration constrains parties’ capacity to fulfill their election pledges if they hold executive power after the elections. Governing parties in countries that are highly internationalized face greater uncertainty about economic business cycles, and they are bound by international agreements that may make some promises hard to keep. Economic internationalization also strengthens the power of domestic and foreign economic actors, who may lobby against the fulfillment of certain pledges that threaten their interests. Our large-n analysis of the fulfillment of thousands of election pledges made by prospective governing parties in 12 countries prior to the formation of 57 governments demonstrates a negative association between globalization and pledge fulfillment. The negative effect is robust to different model specifications, alternative operationalizations of globalization, and an instrumental variable approach. It also offers new evidence about the conditional nature of the relationship. Consistent with our argument, globalization presents less of an obstacle to the fulfillment of pledges made by parties of the right than pledges of center-left parties. Since the large-n analysis does not allow us to test the underlying theoretical mechanisms exhaustively, we present a case study of the U.K. Conservative Party’s now infamous 2010 pledge to cut net migration to the U.K. to under 100,000. This typical case illustrates the processes leading to a broken promise in a highly globalized context. The findings contribute to the emerging comparative literature on promissory democratic representation and are also relevant to the broader theoretical debate regarding the impact of globalization on the quality of democracy and the potential for democratic backsliding, a debate that is highly polarized.4 These broader debates address the possible implications of globaliza
2For example, Klingemann, Hofferbert, and Budge (1994); McDonald and Budge (2005); Naurin, Royed, and Thomson (2019).
3A small but influential and growing body of research examines the impact of globalization on other aspects of democratic performance, for example, Ezrow and Hellwig (2014); Hellwig (2015); Hellwig and Samuels (2007); Rodrik (2012). We define globalization as the extent to which the national economy is integrated into the international system in terms of significant flows of trade in goods and services, large inward and outward investment flows, national regulations that facilitate free moment, and extensive international commitments in the form of trade agreements.
4See, for example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2006); Dahl (1999); Keohane, Macedo, and Moravcsik (2009); Meyerrose (2020); Ro
tion for democracy. Our findings highlight that globalization affects key mechanisms of democratic representation, with important implications for the quality of democracy. Our study also relates to research on the impact of globalization on domestic economic and social governance, which centers on the effects of globalization on governments’ policy autonomy and ability to compensate the losers of globalization.5 Our findings indicate that even if governments want to respond to public demands for compensation, in globalized contexts they are constrained in fulfilling the very promises that would be most responsive to these demands. This insight may explain why scholars find support for the micro-foundations of the compensation hypothesis (Walter 2010), but more mixed evidence for the macrorelationship between globalization and welfare policies. The constraints that globalization places on promissory representation are particularly troubling considering the recent globalization backlash.6 These constraints on promise fulfillment also limit governments’ capacity to counter the backlash effectively through measures that would compensate citizens who are negatively affected by globalization; a solution to the backlash that has gained prominence in the literature (Goodman and Pepinsky 2021; Mansfield and Rudra 2021; Ruggie 1982).
Globalization and the Politics of Election Pledges
Election pledges are “statements committing a party to one specific action or outcome that can be clearly determined to have occurred or not” (Royed 1996, 79). They provide clear information about where parties stand on specific policy issues and are therefore distinct from general rhetoric and principles. Election pledges are also concrete manifestations of differences among parties in the principles they support. Two findings are particularly relevant in this respect. First, parties of all kinds make many pledges, and there are no marked differences in the frequency of pledge making between parties based on institutional context, incumbency status, or ideology
drik (1998; 2012); Rudra (2005). Milner and Mukherjee (2009) offer an excellent overview of the literature on the effects of globalization on democratization.
5For example, Adsera and Boix (2002); Dreher, Gaston, and Martens (2008); Garrett (1998); Iversen and Cusack (2000); Mosley (2000); Swank (2002);.
6Walter (2021) offers a succinct summary of the literature.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 3
(Naurin, Royed, and Thomson 2019, 44). Second, the types of pledges that parties make reflect their ideological differences. While the precise form and strength of the left–right dimension differ across countries and time periods, left-wing parties generally support larger government programs and higher spending and taxes, while right-wing parties support smaller government programs and lower spending and taxes (Klingemann et al. 2006). The idea of promissory representation looms large in the practice of democratic representation.7 The extent to which governing parties fulfill their election pledges serves as a benchmark against which voters assess whether their preferred policies, which partly guided them in their vote choice, were indeed implemented. Voters pay attention to pledge fulfillment and punish governments for failing to keep their promises (Matthiess 2020; Naurin and Oscarsson 2017; Naurin, Soroka, and Markwat 2019). Broken promises hurt parties’ reelection prospects and undermine public confidence in democracy (Stokes 2001). As Schedler (1998, 195) writes:
If after election day government officials do whatever they want, regardless of any prior campaign commitments, they ridicule the very notion of democracy as well. If electoral results do not produce any policy consequences, elections become mere devices to legitimate arbitrariness and contingency, blind mechanisms to replace at random one despotic ruler with another.
Pledges are politically constraining. Parties that hold executive power have strong incentives to fulfill the promises they made during campaigns or at least to explain why fulfillment is no longer desirable or appropriate. The presence of these incentives is confirmed by the evidence that governing parties generally attempt to and often succeed in fulfilling many of their election pledges (Naurin, Royed, and Thomson 2019). Globalization lowers the likelihood that parties fulfill their election pledges when they hold executive office after the elections through three key mechanisms. First, parties in highly internationalized contexts face greater uncertainty about economic business cycles when they formulate election pledges (Kayser 2005). Governments face pressures to pursue policies that respond to fluctuating global business cycles and maintain international competitiveness. Jahn (2006, 408) observes that with the onset of increased globalization, “international factors became a major driving factor for policy orientation and domestic factors became subordinated to
7While recognizing the prominence of promissory representation, liberal democratic theorists critique the idea that there is a normative reason to desire high levels of promise keeping at all times (Manin 1997).
them.” Global economic disruptions, such as economic or financial crises, can unexpectedly and profoundly affect countries that are deeply integrated into the international system. Consequently, policies that were considered to be appropriate during the election campaign may appear inappropriate or infeasible later on. Economic disruptions often lead to unexpected fiscal shortfalls, which impede the fulfillment of pledges to expand programs and/or cut taxes. One of the most famous broken promises in U.S. history—George H. W. Bush’s promise of “read my lips, no new taxes"—was made based on the (incorrect) assumption that the high growth rates of the 1980s would continue during his term in office; the unexpected economic recession in 1990 forced Bush to break this promise in response to a significant increase in the federal budget deficit. The second mechanism relates to the international legal commitments that governments make in order to reap the benefits of international economic integration. Many countries have signed preferential trade agreements and bilateral investment treaties, and they have formed or acceded to international organizations to cooperate on economic issues, such as free trade. These agreements often stipulate that governments pursue particular policies and maintain low or minimum levels of protection, and governments are generally committed to complying with these agreements. Such agreements impose constraints on pledge fulfillment, especially when they contain provisions for monitoring and enforcement. It is often not clear to the party officials and candidates who formulate election pledges whether particular domestic policies are consistent with international law until governments attempt to implement these policies. Governments have repeatedly been taken to international courts by other governments and private companies for domestic policies relating to health, the environment, and labor standards when these policies violate international trade or investment law (Foster 2021). Finally, globalization shapes the sets of actors who try to influence national governments and the preferences of those actors. These include national and international actors who gain from globalization. Many of these are market actors, such as national exportoriented firms that thrive on their ability to export their products and services to other countries. Other companies benefit from access to cheap and skilled overseas labor owing to increasing international migration. In addition, financial actors have strong interests to lobby because they benefit from particular policies that significantly impact their investments (Sattler 2013). These domestic actors pressure governments to implement policies that ensure their continued access to the benefits
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


4 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
of globalization, even if it means that governing parties break election promises. In addition, governments in internationalized contexts must pay more attention to the interests of international economic elites, such as multinational corporations and financial institutions, that pressure governments to pursue policies favoring long-term stability and market exchange. Sassen (1996, 54) argues that national governments are accountable to a “global, cross-border economic electorate” consisting of “inflation-obsessed bondholders,” rather than to citizens. Governing parties respond to these elites because market elites lobby governments directly and can threaten to relocate their economic activities if governments do not pursue economic policies that make their countries competitive with other markets. For example, the French Socialist Party won the 1981 election on promises of nationalization and redistribution but broke these promises, instead pursuing liberal economic policies that appealed more to international financiers than ordinary citizens (Hellwig 2015, 147). The influence of market actors limits governing parties’ ability to fulfill their election pledges to the extent that market actors’ interests diverge from the policy preferences of citizens to whom election pledges are primarily directed. There is strong evidence that the policy preferences of market actors and citizens differ significantly (Broz, Frieden, and Weymouth 2008; Hellwig 2015). Ezrow and Hellwig (2014) and Mosley (2003) find evidence of an ideological gap between citizens and economic elites when it comes to issues that can be placed on a left–right ideological continuum. Whereas citizens are more likely to favor a social model and public spending, albeit with variation across countries, most market actors have strong preferences for lower taxes, fewer regulations, and greater economic exchange over social policies and public spending. In sum, there are strong theoretical arguments to suppose that political parties that hold executive power after elections are less likely to fulfill their election pledges in countries and time periods in which governments are more exposed to globalization. The primary focus of the following analyses—both the quantitative comparative analysis and the in-depth case study—centers on the average negative effect of globalization on promise keeping as well as the mechanisms through which this effect occurs. However, our theoretical argument indicates that the globalization effect is weaker when the policy preferences of governing political parties and market actors converge. In the quantitative comparative analyses, we explore whether the globalization effect weakens when parties further to the right are in government and whether this is a con
sequence of right-wing parties making pledges that are aligned with market actors’ preferences.
Research Design
To examine the empirical implications of our theoretical argument, we use the Comparative Pledges Project (CPP) data set (Naurin, Royed, and Thomson 2019; Thomson et al. 2017), which includes information on over 20,000 election pledges made by parties in 12 countries (Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S.) prior to the formation of 57 governments. The time period ranges from the 1970s to the 2010s, with the data on some countries covering longer time periods than others.8 In the main part of the analyses, we focus on the fulfillment of 7,770 pledges made by parties that went on to hold executive power after the elections. Some of the analyses include more pledges, including those made by parties that did not hold executive power after the elections, to examine whether globalization affects the number and types of pledges that parties make. The data collection procedure involves human coding of party platforms, manifestos, or equivalent campaign materials to identify statements that qualify as election pledges. Researchers gathered evidence to assess fulfillment, categorizing pledges as unfulfilled, partially fulfilled, or fully fulfilled. A pledge is considered partially fulfilled if some action is taken in the direction of the promise that falls short of full fulfillment, such as reducing a tax rate from 25% to 23% when a cut to 20% was promised. The evidence gathered to assess fulfillment depends on the substance of what was promised, including changes to legislation, budget allocations, or certain socioeconomic outcomes. Following the practice in previous research, the analyses of pledge fulfillment focus on a dichotomous measure that distinguishes between pledges that were “unfulfilled” and pledges that were either “partially” or “fully” fulfilled. This approach is appropriate given that the possibility of a pledge being partially fulfilled arguably depends partly on the way in which the pledge itself was formulated. Governing parties vary significantly in the extent to which they fulfilled their election pledges. As Figure 1 shows, relatively high levels of pledge fulfillment are found in most single-party executives, including those in the U.K., Sweden, and Portugal. Parties that formed
8Appendix A (p. 2) summarizes the cases. Following previous analyses of this data set, the models we apply use frequency weights so that the countries are weighted equally.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 5
FIGURE 1 Fulfillment of Election Pledges, by Government Parties
USA
United Kingdom
The Netherlands
Ireland
Sweden
Spain
Germany
Italy
Portugal
Bulgaria
Canada
Austria
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Pledge Fulfillment (Percent)
Notes: Violin plots of the percentages of pledges made by parties across different election campaigns that were at least partially fulfilled. Shows only parties that went on to hold executive office after the elections.
single-party governments in the U.K. fulfilled 86% of their pledges at least partially. Lower levels of pledge fulfillment are found in coalition governments, such as those found in the Netherlands, Germany, and Austria. Dutch parties that entered governing coalitions partially or fully fulfilled 57% of their pledges. The data include cases where parties and governments were exposed to very different levels of globalization, which is our key explanatory variable. We use the authoritative KOF Economic Globalization Index, which is an annual weighted aggregation of information on de facto and de jure trade and financial globalization, including trade in goods and services, trade regulations, tariffs and agreements, financial direct investment, investment restrictions, and capital account openness (Dreher 2006). This index has been validated and widely used in the literature. Moreover, it is the most appropriate index to use given our theory’s focus on economic integration and the associated institutional constraints. The cases studied are all highly developed trading economies and, as such, are considerably exposed to the international economy. However, there are marked differences in the relative levels of exposure to economic globalization. In our main analyses, the cases have values ranging from 40 to 91 on the index’s 0 to 100 scale (mean = 73.63; s.d. = 11.69), covering contexts relatively insulated from globalization, such as the U.S. in the 1970s and 1980s, as well as highly exposed contexts, such as Ireland in the late 1990s and 2000s. We transform the KOF Index into z-scores to simplify the interpretation of the coefficients.
We also examine whether the negative effect of globalization on pledge fulfillment is less severe for rightwing parties, as the theory suggests. We test this implication with an interaction term between party ideology and globalization. To measure parties’ ideological positions, we rely on the widely used left–right positions from the Manifesto Project (Volkens et al. 2019), which are also derived from parties’ election manifestos or platforms. These measures of parties’ left–right positions are based on the Manifesto Project’s established thematic coding scheme, into which each sentence or quasi-sentence of the manifesto is allocated to a thematic category. The left–right score of each manifesto is based on the proportion of text it devotes to themes considered right-wing themes minus the proportion of text it devotes to themes considered left-wing themes.
Comparative Analysis
We estimate a logit model on the 7,770 pledges made by parties that went on to hold executive power after the elections at which they made these pledges. The exponentiated coefficients from the model depicted in Figure 2 summarize the effects of a range of explanatory variables that have been examined in previous studies of pledge fulfillment (Thomson et al. 2017). We describe the operationalization of the variables and present the descriptive statistics in Appendix B (pp. 3–5). The details of this model with numerical estimates are reported in Appendix C (p. 6). We also present models that analyze the effect of globalization on pledge fulfillment for different pledge types, party ideology, and type of market economies in Appendix D (pp. 7–8). In Appendix E (p. 9) we employ alternative measures of globalization, including trade globalization, financial globalization, and trade (as a percentage of GDP). Appendix F (pp. 10–12) presents specifications with additional control variables, country fixed effects, a multinomial estimation to exploit the full variation in our dependent variable, the results of an instrumental variable approach to deal with the potential endogenous nature of Globalization, models that include a time trend, and models that are limited to the most recent period. In Appendix G (pp. 13–14), we present results of different analyses to ensure that our results are not driven by economic downturns. This includes an interaction between growth and Globalization and variables to control for the changes in growth, the magnitude of negative growth, inflation, unemployment, and dummy variables to indicate whether governments experienced crises at
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


6 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
FIGURE 2 The Effects of Globalization on Pledge Fulfillment
Globalization Globalization (de jure) Globalization (de facto)
LMEs (reference) CMEs Mixed
Parliamentary (reference) Presidential Semipresidential Federal
Single Party Majority (reference) Single Party Minority Coalition Majority Coalition Minority Chief executive Ministry Left−Right position
Incumbent (reference) Opposition with experience Opposition without experience Average growth Government duration Agreement on pledge Preelection agreement
1970s (reference) 1980s 1990s 2000s
Varieties of Capitalism
Executive−legislative relations
Executive power−sharing
Incumbency
Decade
.25 .5 .75 1 1.5 2 3 4 5 6 .25 .5 .75 1 1.5 2 3 4 5 6
Globalization Types of Globalization
Odds Ratios Odds Ratios
Notes: The graph depicts odd ratios for each variable (dots) together with their 95% confidence intervals (lines). Coefficients (odds ratios) are from a logistic regression model (n = 7,770). Standard errors are clustered at the manifesto level.
different times of the legislative period. Appendix H (p. 15) provides evidence that the results hold when we exclude the U.S. and when we account for the number of previous governments and the number of years that a party served in government. One of the robustness tests aggregates the data to the manifesto level, which yields only 81 observations, and the analysis of this manifestolevel data also reveals Globalization’s significant negative effect on pledge fulfillment. This aggregate test has the advantage that it avoids making direct comparisons between qualitatively different pledges. However, it has the disadvantage that it excludes key explanatory variables at the level of individual pledges, including whether in coalition governments the party that made the pledge held the relevant ministerial portfolio. The main results are robust to all of these alternative specifications.9
9The negative effect of Globalization on pledge fulfillment is also evident in models that include fixed effects for countries. However,
Globalization has a strong and robust negative association with the likelihood of pledge fulfillment. The exponentiated coefficient, which can be interpreted as an odds ratio, associated with Globalization is below 1 and highly significant (exp(b) = 0.59; p = 0.00), which means that a one standard deviation increase in the level of Globalization is associated with a decrease of 41% in the odds that a pledge is fulfilled. Figure 3 illustrates the large size of the effect. At relatively low levels of Globalization, corresponding to one standard deviation below the average, the probability of pledge fulfillment is 0.69 (95% CI 0.64; 0.73). By contrast, at relatively high
models that do not include fixed country effects are most appropriate, and these are the ones we present here. Excluding country fixed effects is appropriate, first because an important amount of variation in Globalization exists across countries, and second because our models include the most theoretically relevant country characteristics in the form of political institutions that account for variation in pledge fulfillment.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 7
FIGURE 3 Predicted Probabilities of Pledge Fulfillment at Different Levels of Globalization
.2 .4 .6 .8 1
Probability of Pledge Fulfillment
0 .2 .4 .6 .8
Density
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 Globalization
Notes: The graph presents predicted probabilities of pledge fulfillment (solid line) with their 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines) holding other explanatory variables at their mean values. The gray bars represent the histogram for globalization.
levels of Globalization, corresponding to one standard deviation above the average, the probability of pledge fulfillment is 0.47 (95% CI 0.42; 0.53). This key finding on the negative effect of Globalization does not depend on the inclusion of the relatively internationalized cases with values around 1.5 standard deviations above the average. The coefficient associated with Globalization is almost identical when excluding these cases (it remains at exp(b) = 0.59; p = 0.00). The case study presented in the next section is the most appropriate way of illustrating the three mechanisms through which globalization affects promise breaking. Nonetheless, further quantitative analyses provide supportive findings in relation to two of the three mechanisms (international legal commitments and international market actors). The KOF Economic Globalization Index consists of de jure and de facto components, with the former focusing on rules and the latter focusing on actual flows. Crucially for our purposes, these measures are not so highly correlated that they raise concerns about multicollinearity (r = 0.33, n = 7,770). In a model with both de jure and de facto components, the coefficients associated with each of these measures is significant and negative, which is consistent with the argument that globalization constrains pledge fulfillment through both international commitments and the influence of economic actors (Figure 2). While both are significant and strong effects, the effect of the de facto globalization indicator, which is most closely associated with our market actors mechanism, is strongest. This may
suggest that globalization’s negative effect on promise keeping works mainly, though not exclusively, through the empowerment of market actors. We do not find significant quantitative evidence that globalization affects promise breaking through uncertainty.10 Nonetheless, we do not discount this mechanism, as the case study evidence presented below suggests it can be highly relevant. An interaction term between Globalization and Partisan Left–Right Ideology allows us to examine whether the effect of Globalization depends on the ideological positions of the parties that made the pledge. Figure 4 shows that for all left-wing parties and for right-wing parties with ideology scores up to 20, which means “to the right of the mean,” Globalization has a significant negative effect on pledge fulfillment. The coefficient associated with Globalization becomes insignificant for parties with Partisan Left–Right Ideology scores higher than 20. These are relatively right-wing, if not extreme right-wing parties, and account for a small but important proportion of our observations; a total of 762 of the 7,770 pledges were made by such parties. The parties concerned are the U.S.
FIGURE 4 Partisan Ideology and the Effects of Globalization on Pledge Fulfillment
−.2 −.15 −.1 −.05 0 .05
Marginal Effect of Globalization
0 .01 .02 .03 .04
Density
−40 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 Partisan Left−Right Ideology
Notes: Marginal effects of globalization on pledge fulfillment for different partisan left–right ideology (solid line). The dashed lines present 95% confidence intervals. The gray bars represent the histogram for partisan ideology.
10The non-finding regarding economic uncertainty is reported in Appendix C (p. 6). These analyses use estimates of economic uncertainty from the World Uncertainty Index developed by Ahir, Bloom, and Furceri (2022). According to our theory, globalization increases uncertainty, which in turn affects pledge (non)fulfillment. We estimate a model including economic uncertainty but excluding globalization. This non-finding in combination with the marked effect of uncertainty in the case study leads us to suspect that more refined measures and model specifications are required to detect this mechanism quantitatively.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


8 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
FIGURE 5 Pledge Type and the Effects of Globalization on Pledge Fulfillment
.2 .4 .6 .8 1
Probability of Pledge Fulfillment
0 .5 1 1.5
Density
−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 Globalization
Other Cut Expand
Notes: Predicted probabilities (dots) of pledge fulfillment with their 95% confidence for different levels of globalization across pledge types. The gray bars represent the histogram for globalization.
Republicans in 1984 and 1988, the U.K. Conservatives in 1983, 1987, and 1992, the German Christian Democrats in 2005, and the Conservative Party of Canada in 2011. The findings suggest that the fulfillment of these parties’ pledges is not significantly affected by their country’s exposure to international markets. This finding is consistent with the argument that right-wing parties support policies that are more closely aligned with pro-globalization economic actors (Schleiter et al. 2021; Ward, Ezrow, and Dorussen 2011). This might also explain why we find more support for the international commitments and market actors mechanisms compared to the uncertainty mechanism, although we do find substantial support for uncertainty in the case study below. To further examine this line of argument, we analyzed the effect of globalization conditional on the type of pledge. We examined 4,444 pledges made by parties in 48 manifestos from six countries (Bulgaria, Canada, Ireland, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S.), for which a detailed categorization of pledge type is available. Each of the pledges was categorized according to whether it involved cutting taxes, cutting government programs, raising taxes, expanding government programs, or an “other” category of promise. The “other” category consists mainly of pledges to change rules and regulations. Pledges to cut taxes, of which there are many, and to cut programs, of which there are few, are typical economically liberal pledges. We group these pledges together to examine whether the proportion of pledges that parties make to cut taxes or programs is related to Globalization. The effects of Globalization on the fulfillment of different types of pledges are depicted in Figure 5. Although governments appear more likely to fulfill expansionary
pledges, the difference across pledge types is only significant at the margins. Globalization has a significant negative effect on all types of pledges, which is consistent with our argument. The significant and negative impact of Globalization on the fulfillment of various types of pledges is noteworthy, because it indicates that parties are unlikely to make more modest pledges in globalized contexts knowing that their capacity to fulfill pledges in those contexts is reduced. One might have expected that international integration could lead to fewer pledges or to more modest pledges that are more easily fulfilled. This would mitigate any observable effect of globalization on pledge fulfillment. To the extent that this happens, the observable negative effects of globalization on pledge fulfillment are conservative estimates of the true size of the effect. Empirically, however, we find that levels of international economic integration have no effect on the number of pledges that parties make and only a small effect on the types of pledges that parties make.11 Parties’ leftright ideological positions are a more important predictor of pledge making. We examined the 178 manifestos from 11 countries on which we have comparable data on the frequency of pledges made by each party in each manifesto. We estimated a negative binomial model with the count of pledges in each manifesto as the dependent variable and Globalization as one of the explanatory variables. The coefficient associated with Globalization is not significant (p = 0.52), which is also the case for the other explanatory variables included in the model. These nonfindings accord with previous analysis of the frequency of pledge making, which concluded that parties make comparable numbers of pledges, be they left- or right-wing, incumbents or challengers, or in systems where singleparty governments or coalitions are the norm (Naurin, Royed, and Thomson 2019, 39–55). Globalization is weakly related to the types of pledges that parties make. However, the strength of this relationship is conditional and quite modest in comparison to the relationship between parties’ ideological positions and the types of pledges they make. We first estimated a general linear model with the proportion of “cut” pledges in each manifesto as the dependent variable and Globalization as one of the explanatory variables. The coefficient associated with Globalization is not significant (p = 0.77). By contrast, Partisan Left–Right Ideology has a strong and highly significant association with the proportion of cut pledges they make. Figure 6 depicts these relationships using predicted values. The expected proportion of pledges that are cut pledges is the same,
11Full results are presented in Appendix I (p. 16).
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 9
FIGURE 6 The Effects of Partisan Left–Right Ideology and Globalization on Pledges to Cut Taxes and Programs
Notes: The graphs depict predicted probabilities together with 95% confidence intervals for different levels of political ideology (a) and globalization (b).
around 0.10, regardless of the level of Globalization. By contrast, parties further to the right make far higher proportions of pledges that are cut pledges than parties to the left. Globalization is positively, albeit modestly, associated with the proportion of parties’ pledges that are expansionary. Again, the effect of parties’ ideological positions is far greater than international exposure. Pledges to expand government programs, of which there are many, and pledges to raise taxes, of which there are few, were grouped together to create a category of “expansionary” pledges. We estimated a general linear model with
the proportion of “expansionary” pledges in each manifesto as the dependent variable and Globalization as one of the explanatory variables. The coefficient associated with Globalization is positive and significant (p = 0.00). As countries are more exposed to international markets, parties tend to make relatively more expansionary pledges. While significant, this effect of Globalization is smaller than the effect of Partisan Left–Right Ideology, whereby parties further to the right make relatively fewer expansionary pledges than parties to the left. This adds further evidence to our argument that the globalization constraint may be less binding for parties on the right.
FIGURE 7 The Effects of Partisan Left–Right Ideology and Globalization on Pledges to Expand Taxes and Programs
Notes: The graphs depict predicted probabilities together with 95% confidence intervals for different levels of political ideology (a) and globalization (b).
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


10 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
The effects of Globalization and ideology are depicted as predicted values in Figure 7. These results indicate that to the extent that manifesto writers respond to the constraints on pledge fulfillment imposed by globalization, these considerations play a minor role compared to the need to formulate policy appeals that win votes and secure the support of key party factions and supporters.
The U.K. Conservative Party’s Migration Pledge
We complement the quantitative analysis with a qualitative analysis of the mechanisms that underlie the relationship between globalization and pledge breaking. To trace the underlying causal mechanisms of our theoretical argument, we examine why the Conservative Party was unable to fulfill one of its central election pledges of 2010, to reduce net migration to below 100,000, during the 2010–2015 governing period when the party held executive office. This is a typical case in the sense described by Gerring (2008), in that it is typical of the relationship between globalization and pledge fulfillment; the governing party could not fulfill a salient election promise in the context of deep integration into the global economy. In 2010, the U.K. ranked as the fifth most globalized country in the world, just below Belgium, Sweden, Switzerland, and the Netherlands. Although net migration fell somewhat after the 2010 election, the government failed to bring it even close to the promised benchmark, and numbers rose again after 2012. This failure is noteworthy given that immigration policy promises are more likely kept by governments when they are salient and public pressure to keep them is intense (Böhmelt and Ezrow 2022). Because the U.K. was highly exposed to globalization and the pledge was unfulfilled, we would expect to observe the theoretical mechanisms underlying our argument in operation. To trace the underlying causal mechanisms, we rely on a range of secondary sources (including academic studies and newspaper articles); primary archival materials (such as election manifestos, consultation reports, and government communications); and interviews with political, administrative, and economic elites who were involved in the debates. In selecting the interviewees, we strove to maintain a balance across political ideologies, views on immigration, and background in terms of public and private sectors. The interviewees included, among others, the former Minister for Immigration, Damian Green (a member of
the Conservative Party) and the former Secretary of the Department of Business, Innovation, and Skills, Sir Vince Cable (a member of the Liberal Democratic Party).12
The Genesis of the Migration Pledge
The Conservative Party formulated the pledge to cut net migration in response to public concerns regarding increasing levels of migration in a challenging economic context. Before the 2010 election, the Conservative Party, led by David Cameron, was the main opposition party challenging the incumbent Labour Party, led by Prime Minister Gordon Brown. At that time, the country was reeling from the global financial crisis, and unemployment had risen to over 2 million for the first time since the 1990s. These economic conditions fueled anti-immigration sentiments in large parts of the population who believed that the economic problems and immigration were intimately linked. A clear majority of British citizens became opposed to immigration. A survey by Ipsos MORI in 2011 found that 64% of respondents believed there were too many immigrants in Britain (Blinder and Richards 2020). Public opposition to immigration put pressure on political parties before the 2010 election. The right-wing U.K. Independence Party (UKIP) positioned itself as the party to tackle immigration (Ford and Goodwin 2014). They pledged to end “uncontrolled mass immigration” by imposing an immediate five-year freeze on immigration (Carey and Geddes 2010, 860). This allowed UKIP to gain public support and put pressure on both the Conservative and Labour Parties. Immigration featured prominently in the 2010 election campaign, including the three leaders’ debates (Carey and Geddes 2010). Both major parties responded to public opinion and the challenge posed by UKIP by proposing to control immigration. The Conservatives were losing supporters to UKIP at an alarming rate. UKIP won second place in the 2009 European Parliament elections, and its transformation into a multi-issue party strengthened its appeal at the national level (Ford and Goodwin 2014, 84). UKIP’s message resonated with many voters who generally voted for the Conservatives, and it gained most votes in Conservativeheld constituencies. With UKIP gaining ground on the Conservative Party and the majority of public opinion in favor of reducing migration, David Cameron committed the party to reducing immigration. On January 10, 2010,
12A full list of interviewees can be found in Appendix J (p. 17). Each interview lasted 30–60 minutes.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 11
just months ahead of the general election, he made the now-infamous promise in a BBC interview, stating that if he won the election, he would limit net immigration to “tens of thousands” each year. The pledge had been prepared carefully. It was developed by the then-Shadow Minister of Immigration Damian Green based on a pamphlet he had written on economic migration with David Davies, another prominent Conservative politician. It was agreed upon by a small group of party elites, including the shadow Home Office team and the Conservative Party’s leadership. The 2010 Conservative Party election manifesto made the 100,000 net migration target official party policy (Conservative Party 2010). According to our interviewees, the pledge was not merely aspirationalor as Cameron put it himself, “no ifs, no buts” (Travis 2015). Our interviewees who participated in the formulation of the pledge shared the view that there was a sincere belief within the party leadership that the target was achievable when it was formulated. According to many observers and our interviewees, the rationale behind Cameron’s move was to respond to public concerns about immigration and to neutralize migration as an issue during the campaign (Bale, Hampshire, and Partos 2011). And indeed, during the campaign, the Conservative Party won significant political ground on the basis of their immigration pledge, the only issue on which the party scored significantly better than Labour (Elliot 2010). According to a YouGov survey, at 25.2%, the Conservatives were far ahead of both Labour (6.3%) and the Liberal Democrats (1.8%) on respondents’ judgment of the best party to handle immigration. Immediately after announcing the promise in early 2010, Cameron’s personal favorability ratings increased substantially (Dahlgreen 2015).
The Road to Failure
The Conservative Party won the 2010 election and subsequently led a coalition government with the Liberal Democrats. Under the leadership of then-Home Secretary Theresa May, the U.K. Home Office introduced one of the harshest immigration policies in British history. The government implemented a cap on skilled labor migration from outside the European Union (EU), which was promised in the Conservative’s 2010 manifesto. It introduced a new minimum income threshold for people with spouses from overseas, which was arguably consistent with its 2010 manifesto statement to “limit [...] access only to those who will bring the most value to the British economy,” a statement that conveys intent, but does not specify the action that would be taken. The
government also cracked down on “bogus” colleges and “foreign criminals” (Trilling 2020). In addition, the hostile environment policy, as it was called, included administrative and legislative steps to make it as difficult as possible for noncitizens to stay in the U.K. (Hill 2017). Yet, net migration remained stubbornly above 100,000, and even increased to 336,000 just before the 2015 election (up from 246,000 in 2010) according to the U.K. Office of National Statistics. Despite failing to fulfill the promise, it was repeated by the Conservative Party during the 2015 election campaign. The same promise was again repeated at the 2017 election, after Theresa May took over the leadership of the party. Only in 2019 did the party replace the net-migration pledge with a promise to implement an Australian-style points-based immigration system. Our analysis indicates three main reasons why the Conservatives were unable to fulfill the pledge. One obvious (though not the most important) obstacle to fulfilling the pledge was the U.K.’s membership of the EU. The U.K. had agreed to freedom of movement across Europe as part of the European single market. To accede to the EU in 2007, Bulgaria and Romania had agreed to limited movement during a transition period, which came to an end in 2013, followed by substantial increases in migration from both countries to the U.K. The European single market therefore constrained the government’s ability to fulfill its promise. As Theresa May said after it became clear that the government had failed to keep its promise, it was “unlikely” the target of getting net migration below 100,000 would be met, because EU migration had “blown us off course” (BBC 2014). However, the effect of the EU should not be overstated. Migrants from EU member countries accounted for less than one-third of long-term migrants to the U.K. In 2010, of the 281,000 immigrants, 196,000 were from outside the EU (70%). Even if the U.K. had eliminated all immigration from the EU, they would not have achieved their target of 100,000. Rather than focusing on EU citizens, the government’s attempts focused on cutting immigration from non-EU countries, including the immigration of skilled individuals who were highly sought after by U.K. businesses and organizations in the private and public sectors. There was also some attempt to cut the numbers of overseas students, who bring economic benefits in part through university tuition fees as well as contribute to the U.K.’s intellectual community. The government’s inability to affect or even anticipate emigration was another important constraint on its capacity to fulfill the pledge, and one that was subject to considerable uncertainty. A decline in British emigration after 2010 contributed significantly to the failure to fulfill the pledge. The fall in emigration was partly the result of
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


12 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
the increased costs of living abroad due to a weak pound, with the government having little control over currency movements due to the U.K.’s integration in global financial markets (Owen and Travis 2010). In a consultation report from 2010, the Migration Advisory Committee, an independent government advisory committee, warned the government that uncertainties about emigration numbers as well as EU rules might limit the feasibility of achieving the net migration target (Migration Advisory Committee 2010). In addition, many Britons returned to the U.K. during this period from crisis-hit Spain and Dubai, which further contributed to increased net migration (Travis 2010). Furthermore, the pledge was opposed by a broad range of national and international actors from the private and public sectors. Following a call for responses on these issues, the Migration Advisory Committee received over 400 responses from domestic and international actors, including the Scottish and Irish governments, the Japanese embassy, various trade federations, banking associations, law firms, law associations, the health and social services sectors (including hospitals, medical services, and nursing homes), private companies, the British Chamber of Commerce, the oil industry, universities, research institutes, the Royal Bank of Canada, the Greater London Authority, the Department of Health, the Department of Education, the Department of Work and Pensions, and the Migration Policy Institute. The opposition expressed toward the cap was as forceful as it was unanimous. Of the responses quoted in the report, only one response from a member of the public argued in favor of the cap on migration. Private and public sector employers warned that the introduction of a cap would lead to major skill shortages. The lobbying efforts came from a variety of stakeholders, including politicians from all parties, business groups, law firms, car manufacturers, pharmaceutical companies, and the National Health Service (NHS). The NHS relied on recruiting skilled and relatively low paid care workers from abroad. Gerwyn Davies from the Chartered Institute of Personnel Development expressed his concerns with a stark warning to the government:
The reality for employers is that training workers to plug the U.K. skills gap is a lengthy task. [...] The abrupt introduction of a radical cap would therefore leave many employers with a bigger skills problem and tempt employers with global operations to offshore jobs, where they can find the skills (Owen and Travis 2010). Sectors with international operations raised concerns about the significant adverse economic effects of restricting immigration. In a joint response to the Migration Advisory Committee consultation, the Association
of Foreign Banks (AFB) and British Bankers’ Association (BBA) threatened that:
If the ability of migrants to enter the U.K. under Tier 2 is significantly reduced, AFB and BBA members will create jobs overseas, that otherwise would have been created in the U.K. As a result, the teams supporting those roles will also be located overseas (Migration Advisory Committee 2010, 105). Further pressure came from overseas. A major concern was that restrictive immigration measures would make it difficult to secure trade cooperation, and several interviewees noted the effect of the policies on relations with India. The policies threatened to derail negotiations between Britain and India to promote trade between the two countries in 2010. The U.K. government wanted the Indian government to allow British banks, legal and insurance firms, and small manufacturers to operate in India. In return, India asked for mutual recognition of qualifications so that its lawyers and bankers could operate in the U.K. The Indian government was concerned that the cap on immigration would make this difficult and was dismayed by what they called racially prejudiced policies toward Indians. The U.K. had much to lose as total bilateral trade between the U.K. and India was worth £11.5 billion, and U.K. exports to India totaled £4.7 billion in 2019 Waugh (2010). Our interviews confirmed that the pressure worked; after a high-level meeting between the British and Indian governments, the U.K. shelved planned restrictions on intracompany transfers, which were opposed by Indian firms. The pressure exerted by these actors was intense and multidimensional. It was expressed publicly (through the media, including through the notoriously vociferous British tabloid newspapers) as well as behind closed doors (through lobbying the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills; the Home Office; or the Prime Minister through the Business Advisory Group). Although the pressure did not convince the government to abandon the pledge altogether, the government did not pursue many of the measures it had originally intended to, and many compromises were made. For example, the Home Office agreed not to restrict intracompany transfers, which made up a significant share of immigration, and made significant concessions on foreign students and family policies. As one of the interviewee’s notes, “if there hadn’t been resistance, from lobby groups, from me and my colleagues, they [anti-immigration measures] would have gotten much worse.”13 In sum, the Conservative Party’s broken net migration pledge provides vivid illustrations of the theoretical
13Interview 1.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 13
mechanisms through which globalization can impede promise keeping. International integration constrained the British government because of its international commitments, especially its membership of the EU. Economic uncertainty associated with globalization also played a role, partly in relation to the unpredictability of both inward and outward migration flows. Finally, the case illustrates how market actors can lobby government successfully when their interests are threatened by the fulfillment of an election pledge. We find little support for alternative explanations of this broken promise, such as the role of coalition politics. Indeed, Sir Vince Cable, the senior Liberal Democrat cabinet member during the 2010–2015 government, described the Liberal Democrat’s influence on this issue to us as negligible.14 The case illustrates how the causal mechanisms associated with globalization play out in practice.
Conclusion
Globalization poses a formidable challenge to democratic representation at the national level. Governing parties in highly internationalized contexts fulfill significantly fewer of the pledges they made to voters before the elections that brought them to power. Promise keeping is central to promissory representation, which is the mainstay of mainstream democratic theory and popular conceptions of how democracy works. Until now, comparative research on election pledges has looked mainly inward, toward the domestic level, to explain differences in the likelihood of pledge fulfillment in different governments and time periods. But treating governments as independent units is no longer appropriate as modern states are deeply embedded in layers of international interdependence. This applies not only to research on election pledges but also to other aspects of democratic performance. Our findings indicate that although globalization has only a modest effect on pledge making, it has a large and negative effect on pledge fulfillment. The negative effect of globalization applies in a broad range of contexts and to a broad range of parties and pledges. It is also striking that it reduces the likelihood of fulfillment of a broad range of pledges, not only pledges that are considered economic pledges. Globalization is, however, especially constraining for center and center-left parties, the very parties that are under the most pressure from their core voters to compensate globalization’s losers.
14We discuss those alternative explanations in Appendix K (p. 18).
The consequences of promise breaking in the context of international constraints have yet to be examined. Failure to deliver on election pledges is associated with the widespread belief that politicians are untrustworthy promise breakers. Such lack of trust can be corrosive if it becomes synonymous with expectations of betrayal, rather than healthy vigilance on the part of citizens with respect to government performance. A key question is whether citizens hold governing parties to account for promise breaking if those parties are deeply constrained by globalization. Answering these questions may shed light on the causes of the globalization backlash and the rise of populist parties. Promise breaking in globalized contexts may at least contribute to the anti-globalization backlash and the rise of extreme parties, with important implications for promissory representation by mainstream parties. Our findings do not necessarily indicate that national representative democracy is impossible in the age of globalization. The broader debate on the impact of globalization on democracy includes claims other than promise making and keeping, and a comprehensive assessment requires that these be considered too. Proponents of the view that globalization can enhance democratic performance at the national level assert that globalization enables governments to pursue long-term welfare-enhancing policies for their citizens. While international integration may be costly in terms of promise keeping and policy responsiveness, the costs do not accrue equally to all parties. Future research should address the extent to which the constraints of globalization are contingent on other factors, such as economic conditions, the salience of pledges, and different policy areas. Furthermore, globalization may be beneficial in terms of responsibility, which is another key element of democratic representation. One of the major challenges in this field of research is to assess the trade-offs between these different aspects of democratic representation. This research agenda is all the more salient as political movements to limit globalization gather pace.
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Adsera, Alicia, and Carles Boix. 2002. “Trade, Democracy, and the Size of the Public Sector: The Political Underpinnings of Openness.” International Organization 56(2):229–62.
Ahir, Hites, Nicholas Bloom, and Davide Furceri. 2022. “The World Uncertainty Index.” NBER Working Paper No. (29763):.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


14 CHRISTINA J. SCHNEIDER AND ROBERT THOMSON
Bale, Tim, James Hampshire, and Rebecca Partos. 2011. “Having One’s Cake and Eating it Too: Cameron’s Conservatives and Immigration.” Political Quarterly 82(3):398–406.
BBC. 2014. “Cameron Accused of ‘Total Failure’ on Immigration.” November 24, 2014.
Blinder, Scott, and Lindsay Richards. 2020. “UK Public Opinion Toward Immigration: Over- all Attitudes and Level of Concern.” The Migration Observatory Briefing.
Böhmelt, Tobias, and Lawrence Ezrow. 2022. “How Party Platforms on Immigration Become Policy.” Journal of Poublic Policy 42(1):1–19.
Broz, J. Lawrence, Jeffry Frieden, and Stephen J. Weymouth. 2008. “Exchange-Rate Policy Attitudes: Direct Evidence from Survey Data.” IMF Staff Papers 55: 3.
Carey, Sean, and Andrew Geddes. 2010. “Less is More: Immigration and European Integra- tion at the 2010 General Election.” Parliamentary Affairs 63(4): 849–65.
Conservative Party. 2010. “The Conservative Party Manifesto.” Conservative Campaign Headquarters.
Dahl, Robert. 1999. “Can International Organizations be Democratic? A Sceptic’s View.” In Democracy’s Edges, eds. Ian Shapiro and Casiano Hacker-Cordon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dahl, Robert A. 1956. A Preface to Democratic Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dahlgreen, Will. 2015. “Ten Years On: David Cameron the Least Disliked Party Leader of a Generation.” YouGov: Politics and Current Affairs.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. “An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy.” The Journal of Political Economy 65(2): 135–50.
Dreher, Axel. 2006. “Does Globalization Affect Growth? Evidence from a new Index of Globalization.” Applied Economics 38(10):1091–110.
Dreher, Axel, Noel Gaston, and Pim Martens. 2008. Measuring Globalisation: Gauging its Consequences. New York: Springer.
Elliot, Francis. 2010. “Cameron Steps Back to Avoid Tensions with Party.” The Times February 27, 2010.
Ezrow, Lawrence, and Timothy Hellwig. 2014. “Responding to Voters or Responding to Markets? Political Parties and Public Opinion in an Era of Globalization.” International Studies Quarterly 58(4):816–27.
Ford, Robert, and Matthew Goodwin. 2014. Revolt on the Right. Explaining Support for the Radical Right in Britain. London: Routledge.
Foster, Caroline E. 2021. Global Regulatory Standards in Environmental and Health Disputes: Regulatory Coherence, Due Regard, and Due Diligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Garrett, Geoffrey. 1998. Partisan Politics in the Global Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gerring, John. 2008. “Case Selection for Case-Study Analysis: Qualitative and Quantitative Techniques.” In Oxford Handbook of Political Methodology, eds. Janet M. BoxSteffensmeier, Henry E. Brady and David Collier. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 645–84.
Goodman, Sara Wallace, and Tom Pepinsky. 2021. “The Exclusionary Foundations of Em-bedded Liberalism.” International Organization 75(2):411–39.
Hellwig, Timothy. 2015. Globalization and Mass Politics: Retaining the Room to Maneuver. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hellwig, Timothy, and David Samuels. 2007. “Voting in Open Economies: The Electoral Consequences of Globalization.” Comparative Political Studies 40:283–306.
Hill, Amelia. 2017. “Hostile Environment: The Hardline Home Office Policy Tearing Families Apart.” The Guardian November 28, 2017.
Iversen, Torben, and Thomas R. Cusack. 2000. “The Causes of Welfare State Expansion: Deindustrialization of Globalization?” World Politics 52(3):313–49.
Jahn, Detlef. 2006. “Globalization as ’Galton’s Problem’: The Missing Link in the Analysis of Diffusion Patterns in Welfare State Development.” International Organization 60(2):40131.
Kayser, Mark A. 2005. “Who Surfs, Who Manipulates? The Determinants of Opportunistic Election Timing and Electorally Motivated Economic Intervention.” American Political Science Review 99(1):17–27.
Keohane, Robert O., Stephen Macedo, and Andrew Moravcsik. 2009. “Democracy-Enhancing Multilateralism.” International Organization 63(1):1–31.
Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, Andrea Volkens, Judith Bara, Ian Budget, and Michael D. McDonald. 2006. Mapping Policy Preferences II: Estimates for Parties, Electors and Governments in Eastern Europe, European Union, and OECD 1990-2003. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Klingemann, Hans-Dieter, Richard I. Hofferbert, and Ian Budge. 1994. Parties, Policies and Democracy. Boulder: Westview Press.
Manin, Bernhard. 1997. The Principles of Representative Government. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mansbridge, Jane. 2003. “Rethinking Representation.” American Political Science Review 97(4):515–28.
Mansfield, Edward D., and Nita Rudra. 2021. “Embedded Liberalism in the Digital Era.” International Organization 75(2):558–85.
Matthiess, Theres. 2020. “Retrospective pledge voting: a comparative study of the electoral consequences of government parties’ pledge fulfilment.” European Journal of Political Research 59(4):774–96.
McDonald, Michael, and Ian Budge. 2005. Elections, Parties, Democracy: Conferring the Median Mandate. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meyerrose, Anna. 2020. “The Unintended Consequences of Democracy Promotion: In- ternational Organizations and Democratic Backsliding.” Comparative Political Studies 53(10):1547–81.
Migration Advisory Committee. 2010. “Limits on Migration. Limits on Tier 1 and Tier 2 for 2011/12 and Supporting Policies.” Technical report Migration Advisory Committee
Milner, Helen V., and Bumba Mukherjee. 2009. “Democratization and Economic Globalization.” Annual Review of Political Science 12: 163-81.
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


GLOBALIZATION AND PROMISSORY REPRESENTATION 15
Mosley, Layna. 2000. “Room to Move: International Financial Markets and National Welfare States.” International Organization 54(4):737–73.
Mosley, Layna. 2003. Global Capital and National Governments. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Naurin, Elin, and Henrik Ekengren Oscarsson. 2017. “When and Why are Voters Correct in their Evaluations of Specific Government Performance?” Political Studies 65:860–76.
Naurin, Elin, Stuart Soroka, and Niels Markwat. 2019. “Asymmetric Accountability: An Experimental Investigation of Biases in Evaluations of Governments’ Election Pledges.” Comparative Political Studies 52(13–14):2207–34.
Naurin, Elin, T.J. Royed, and Robert Thomson. 2019. Party Mandates and Democracy: Making, Breaking and Keeping Election Pledges in Twelve Countires. Michigan: Michigan University Press.
Owen, Paul and Alan Travis. 2010. “Vince Cable Warns Coalition Colleagues Over Immigration Cap.” The Guardian August 27, 2010.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?” Journal of Political Economy 106(5):997–1032.
Rodrik, Dani. 2012. The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Royed, Terry J. 1996. “Testing the Mandate Model in Britain and the United States: Evidence from the Reagan and Thatcher Eras.” British Journal of Political Science 26(1):4580.
Rudra, Nita. 2005. “Globalization and the Strengthening of Democracy in the Developing World.” American Journal of Political Science 49:704–30.
Ruggie, John Gerard. 1982. “International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberalism in the Postwar Economic Order.” International Organization 36(2):379415.
Sassen, Saskia. 1996. “Losing Control? Sovereignty in the Age of Globalization.” New York: Columbia University Press.
Sattler, Thomas. 2013. “Do Markets Punish Left Governments.” The Journal of Politics 75(2):343–56.
Saward, Michael. 1998. The Terms of Democracy. Cambridge: Polity.
Schedler, Andreas. 1998. “The Normative Force of Electoral Promises.” Journal of Theoretical Politics 10:191–214.
Schleiter, Petra, Tobias B ̈ohmelt, Lawrence Ezrow, and Roni Lehrer. 2021. “Social Democratic Party Exceptionalism and Transnational Policy Linkages.” World Politics 73(3):512–44.
Stokes, Susan C. 2001. Mandates and Democracy: Neoliberalism by Surprise in Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swank, Duane. 2002. Global Capital, Political Institutions, and Policy Change in Developed Welfare States. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Thomson, Robert, Terry Royed, Elin Naurin, Joaqu ́ın Artés, Rory Costello, Laurenz Ennser- Jedenastik, Mark Ferguson, et al. 2017. “The Fulfillment of Parties’ Election Pledges: A Comparative Study on the Impact of Power Sharing.” American Journal of Political Science 61(3):527–43.
Travis, Alan. 2010. “Cameron’s Empty Immigration Promise.” The Guardian January 11, 2010.
Travis, Alan. 2015. “Net Migration to UK Higher than When Coalition Took Office.” The Guardian February 26, 2015.
Trilling, Daniel. 2020. “10 Years On, David Cameron’s Toxic Net Migration Pledges Haunts the UK.” The Guardian January 14, 2020.
Volkens, Andrea, Werner Krause, Pola Lehmann, Theres Matthiess, Nicolas Merz, Sven Tegel, and Bernhard Wessels. 2019. “The Manifesto Data Collection.” Manifesto Project (MRG/CMP/MARPOR). Version 2019b. Berlin.
Walter, Stefanie. 2010. “Globalization and the Welfare State: Testing the Microfoundations of the Compensation Hypothesis.” International Studies Quarterly 54(2):403–26.
Walter, Stefanie. 2021. “The Backlash Against Globalization.” Annual Review of Political Science 24:421–42.
Ward, Hugh, Lawrence Ezrow, and Han Dorussen. 2011. “Globalization, Party Position and the Median Voter.” World Politics 63(3):509–47.
Waugh, Paul. 2010. “Cable Warns on Immigration as Cameron Flies Out to Woo India.” The Evening Standard July 27, 2010.
Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of the article.
Appendix A: Sample of Countries, Parties, and Elections Appendix B: Variables and Descriptive Statistics Appendix C: Pledge Fulllment (Full Results) Appendix D: Conditional Effects Appendix E: Alternative Measures of Globalization Appendix F: Alternative Specications Appendix G: Economic Downturns Appendix H: Other Robustness Tests Appendix I: Pledge Making Appendix J: List of Interviews Appendix K: Alternative Considerations
15405907, 0, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ajps.12789 by London School Of Economics And, Wiley Online Library on [27/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License