www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister
The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at e The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
}.
www.emeraldinsight.com/0144-3585.htm
The German historical schools in the history of economic thought
Peter R. Senn
Evanston, Illinois, USA
Abstract
Purpose -- The purpose of this article is to study how the German historical schools are treated in the histories of economic thought as the background for an exploration of some historiographical issues in the history of economic thought. Design/methodology/approach - The study describes the contributions of the members of the German historical schools from a variety of different viewpoints and attitudes toward the history of economic thought. Findings — One conclusion is that several of the things most of the economists of the German historical schools desired are now part of mainstream economics. These include an enlarged scope of economics, changes in the role of the state in economic life, attention to the relationships of law and economics and recognition of the importance of history. Another conclusion is that several historiographical and methodological problems important for the history of economic thought need further study.
Originality/value — The study helps to explain and understand some historiographical aspects of the history of economic thought. It examines practices, principles, theories, methodology and forms of presentation of scholarly historical research on one subject in the history of economic thought. Keywords Economic history, Economic doctrines Paper type Research paper
Introduction The ams of the study This is a study of how the German historical schools are treated in the histories of economic thought as the background for an exploration of some historiographical issues in the history of economic thought. Why might such a project be of interest? In the broadest terms, the present state of economics can only be understood by knowing how economists came to think as they do. The development of modern economic thought cannot be understood without an historical and sociological reading of its antecedents. The study of the contributions of the members of the German historical schools as they are represented in the histories of economic thought shines more light on the development of the economics of today. The study helps to explain and understand some historiographical aspects of the history of economic thought. It examines practices, principles, theories, methodology and forms of presentation of scholarly historical research on one subject in the history of economic thought. This study describes the contributions of the members of the German historical schools from a variety of different viewpoints and attitudes toward the history of
The author would like to thank Jiirgen Backhaus, Nicholas Balabkins, Merle Kingman, Martha Rubenstein and other conference participants that helped with useful critiques. The author is particularly obligated to Mary Stone Senn who was helpful in countless other ways. Thanks also to Anita Lauterstein who did much of the typing. Any errors belong to the author.
The German historical schools
185
Emerald
Journal of Economic Stucies Vol. 32 No. 3, 2005
pp. 185-255
& Emerald Group Publishing Limited O144-3585 DOT 10.1108/01-44358051061 1038
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


186
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
economic thought. It aids in perceiving and comprehending the nature and significance of their lasting contributions and how these are woven into modern economic thought. At the least, it helps to confirm or refute the old saying that the histories of economic thought tell more about their authors than they do about the history. The study of the contributions of the German historical schools as they are represented in the histories of economic thought also confronts every important issue about historiography in the history of economic thought. This study is based on reading everything written about the German historical schools in the major histories of economic thought. It applies what the historians of economic thought say about the German historical schools to some of these historiographical issues.
To what does the term “German historical schools” refer? The German historical schools are treated so differently in the histories of economic thought that no scholar could get an understanding of them from any one history. Although the term “German historical schools” is ambiguous, that does not mean it should be abandoned. Without exception, historians of economic thought assume that references to the German historical schools refer to a group of German scholars working in the middle to late 1800s and early 1900s. In this study, the term “German historical schools” is given a broad meaning, necessary to include the different ways the authors of the histories use it. It includes any definition the authors of the histories give it. In the search for understanding the influence of the German historical schools, the net must be cast wide. Every historian has the right to construct any definition. All that logic demands is that its use is consistent. For a definition to be useful in science, the definition should correspond in important ways to reality. For a definition to be useful in discourse, it should not be much different from conventional usage.
Who are the members of the German historical schools? There is no generally accepted consensus about either the number of German historical schools or their members in the histories of economic thought. The number of schools varies from one to four. Sometimes only one German historical school covers the subject. Sometimes there are two German historical schools, “early” or “older” and “younger”. Sometimes there are three German historical schools, “early” or “older”, “younger” and “youngest” or “newer”. In general, the German historical schools are described as follows: Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher (1817-1894) is usually credited with founding what has been labeled the “early” or “older” Historical School. Probably neither Roscher or Bruno Hildebrand (1812-1878) or Karl Knies (1821-1898), who are almost always included in the older school, thought of themselves as members of any “school.” Sometimes Friedrich List (1789-1846) is also included as a member, more often as a forerunner. Sometimes Albert Eberhard Friedrich Schéaffle (1831-1903) and Richard Theodore Ely (1854-1943) are included as members. Then came what has often been called the “younger” historical school led by Gustav von Schmoller (1838-1917) and includes, according to many authors, Lujo Brentano (Ludwig Joseph, 1844-1931). Often Karl Biicher (1847-1930) is included. Sometimes
Gustav Cohn (1840-1919), Johannes Conrad (1839-1915), Eberhard Gothein (1853-1923), Adolf Held (1844-1880), Friedrich Knapp (1842-1926), Georg Irwin Nasse (1829-1890),


Hans von Scheel (Friedrich Wilhelm Johann, 1839-1901), Gustav Friedrich von Schénberg (1839-1908) and Adolf Heinrich Gotthilf Wagner (1835-1917) are included. After that came what some have called the “youngest” or “newer” historical school, made up of Wemer Sombart (1863-1941), Arthur August Caspar Spiethoff (1873-1957), and Max Weber (1864-1920). Because the German historical schools are defined in so many different ways, other economists are sometimes included in them. Some of these are Richard Ehrenberg (1857-1921), Friedrich von Kleinwachter (1838-1927), Hermann Rosler (1834-1894), Gustav Ruhland (1860-1914), Ludwig Stephinger (b. 1868), Carl Brinkmann (1885-1954), Alfred Miiller-Armack (1901-1976), Hermann Aubin (1885-1969), Johann Plenge (1874-1963), Rudolph Eberstadt (1856-1922) and Wladyslaw Grabski (1874-1938). Beyond the oversimplified notion that Roscher, Hildebrand and Karl Knies belong to the “early” or “older” historical school, there is no consensus about all of the economists who are to be included in the “older” “younger” and “youngest” or “newer” historical schools. There is almost universal agreement that what has been called the “younger” historical school was led by Gustav Schmoller and the “youngest” or “newer” historical school included Sombart and Weber. Schmoller and his followers gained control of German economic chairs at a time when many Americans were studying economics in Germany. Many of these Americans became influential in the USA. For example, Ely and Edwin Robert Anderson Seligman (1861-1939) extended the influence of the historical schools into the USA and became early American Institutionalists. There is an extensive literature on English historical economics, practitioners of which had many ties to the German historical schools. For a competent introduction to their work see Koot (1987). Anyone at all familiar with the work of those who have been included as members of the various historical schools will recognize that they did not share a uniform outlook on methodology, economic policies, politics, or the way they did economics. This does not mean that they did not have much in common. They were all German. They mostly agreed that economic behavior, and thus economic generalizations, were contingent upon the historical, social and institutional context. They emphasized the relativity of laws and institutions. Almost all preferred and employed the inductive method of reasoning from concrete historical data. Most of them felt that the scope of economics, as then understood, was too narrow. Almost all thought that the state did and should playa large role. Most of them also shared a set of beliefs about how the components of the German society (workers, business and the state) of their day should be organized for the common good. Most of them had about the same forms of expression. The wide variety of ways of classifying German scholars who shared those viewpoints has led scholars like Betz (1988) and Pearson (1999, 2001) to ask such questions as, “How does the German historical school fit?” and “Was there really a German historical school of economics?” Questions like these can never be answered decisively. The reason is that classifying economic thought in terms of “schools” is dependent upon the definition of a “school”. Behind their questions les the fundamental issue of how the history of economic thought is to be organized.
The German historical schools
187
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES How ts the hastory of economic thought to be organized? 393 The study of the German historical schools in the histories of economic thought , highlights the fundamental historiographical issue of how the study of the history of economic thought is to be organized. All histories are, by their very nature, chronological. For the history of economic thought, there are two main methods of organizing the development and flow of ideas 188 in time, by topic and by “schools”. Neither method exists without some overlap with the other. Topical organizations typically stress the development of ideas and methods with less attention paid to the people who held them. Using “schools” as an organizing device allows more attention to be paid to people and their interactions. Because of its pedagogical utility it is very common. All classifications, by topic or by “schools,” in the history of economic thought are conditional. If it serves the purposes of the author better, any classification can be replaced by another. All classifications must be judged by their utility in several different uses: pedagogical; rhetorical; presentation of scholarship; understandability; and their ability to get the author’s idea across, to mention but a few.
What 1s a “school” in the history of economic thought? The difficulties of getting agreement about how to define a school in the history of economic thought are exemplified by the controversy as to whether there were German historical schools. Protagonists, Pearson (2001) and Caldwell (2001), agreed that “the identification of well-defined schools of thought in economics is often very difficult”. Pearson thinks that most historians of economic thought “would probably assent to a ready definition of a school as a group of thinkers so like-minded that they not only agree on the relevant questions, but tend also to arrive at the same answers” (Pearson, 1999). This is not necessarily so. ; Deciding on a definition of a “school” means choosinga set of characteristics that the members of the school are to share. There are no rules or general agreement about what these characteristics might be. They can be common viewpoints, practices, methods, work on common problems, collaboration, political outlook, systems of social thought and many other things. Some scholars have defined “schools” simply on the basis of the country or place of origin of the members. Several other characteristics have also been the basis for grouping: problem orientation; method or methodology; and views of the scope of economics. Still other definitions are based on theoretical structures, approaches to policy questions or how the members handle the investigation of the relationships |
between issues. | Because there is not, and probably can not be, any generally accepted definition of “school”, it is up to each historian of thought to make two decisions. The first is |
whether to use “schools” as a classification and organizing device. If the answer is yes, | then a decision must be made about the definition of “school” to be used. In defining a “school,” once the characteristics are chosen, a group of economists can be associated with them. Now one reason for the differences in who is to be included | becomes apparent. If the “school” is to be of any real interest to historians of economic thought, it must have more than one characteristic. But economists both possess and exhibit more than one characteristic in their work. Matching the characteristics of an economist with those of the “school” is unlikely to
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


result in a one-to-one correspondence of member characteristics with classification The German criteria. Thus it is that every definition can include different economists, depending on historical schools which characteristics are chosen for the match. What this points up is that any future discussion of “schools” in the history of economic thought requires careful attention to the definition of “school.” Joseph Alois Schumpeter (1883-1950) is one of the few historians of economic thought who has a conception that the “term school means a definite sociological phenomenon” 189 (Schumpeter, 1954). He does not spell his conception out clearly and it appears to be quite different from what most other historians accept. Discussions about which definition of a “school” to use must depend on what the author intends to do with the definition and how well the definition serves the purposes of the author. In the case of the German historical schools there is no doubt that, almost without exception, historians of economic thought have found them a useful way to classify a group of German scholars and their place in the development of economic thought. For example, only in Germany did historicism ever attain a leading position with a large, influential and relatively unified body of practitioners. Only in Germany in the late 1800s did there exist a group of scholars who centered their attention on common problems and who pursued a common method and worked in virtual collaboration. This was especially the case of the Verein ftir Socialpolitk (Association for Social and Economic Reform, sometimes Union for Social Politics), which published more than 188 monographs on social problems. The German historical schools can be understood in several very different ways. One of the most common approaches is to understand them as a group of economists who shared a methodology that stressed the influence of historical conditions and the role of the state. Another approach sees them as made up of a group of German economists who were concerned with social reform. Both approaches, as well as others, exist in the histories of economic thought. It is important to remember that the methodology did not depend on the beliefs about society and the beliefs about society did not depend on the methodology in any logical sense. This is evidenced by the fact that many economists included in a “school” shared one approach without the other. There is no compelling reason to choose one approach over the other. Sound logic is very desirable in the defining of schools.
Some caveats In this paper the term, “method,” refers to the procedures, rules and techniques historians of economic thought use to accomplish their ends. The term, “methodology,” refers to the study and theoretical analysis of a method or set of working methods. It can be thought of as an examination of why historians of economic thought accept what they do. One reason to write an article about books is that there is no single source that surveys the way historians of economic thought treat the German historical schools. Another reason is that much discussion of historiography and methodology in the history of economic thought is based on a very limited database that does not include the variety that actually exists in the histories of economic thought. Most such discussions pay inadequate attention to the diversity that is present and the problems this represents.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Different historians of economic thought have different viewpoints, approaches and
393 emphases. Every historian has a special viewpoint. Every historian must exclude some
> material. Both what is included and excluded about persons or subjects is selected on the basis of the criteria of the historian. As one result, any study of the histories of economic thought must rely heavily on the judgment of the author of the study because there are no generally agreed upon
190 measures of importance or influence. For example, simply counting index entries in a history or counting the number of times an author or school is referred to, while often indicative of the importance an author or indexer gives to a person or subject, can never be conclusive evidence of the importance the author gives to a person or subject. Today the kngua franca of the economics world is English. Although this was not always the case, it is now the most widely read and spoken language of economists. Most histories of economic thought are published in it. Important histories in other languages are translated into it. For these reasons, the search for material about the treatment of the German historical schools in the history of economic thought is focused on histories published in English. The search was not limited to English language resources however. A word is required about the selection of the histories. Sometimes their titles do not include anything to indicate that a book is about the history of economic thought. With these warnings in mind, it is still true that the best signs of the importance and influence of a school of thought on the development of economics are how the school is referred to in the histories of economic thought.
The histories of economic thought
One cannot, moreover, be said to possess a knowledge of any doctrine or to understand it until one knows something of its history, and of the pitfalls that lay in the path of those who first formulated it (Gide and Rist, 1948).
What economists do and how they do it summarizes all that has happened in the development of economics. If the thinking and practices of economists are not in writing they cannot be part of the history of economics. Historians of economic thought work from the written record to tell the story of how the present came into being. This story is never the same in the words of the different tellers. Histories of economic thought will inevitably differ on many dimensions, according to the intentions and skills of their authors. The evidence used by historians is always a matter of selection. This evidence always has several possible explanations for its origins and place in the history of | thought depending upon many things such as the time, place, intellectual milieu and theoretical framework of both the economist and the historian interpreting the
evidence. It is important to notice that the histories of economic thought become themselves part of the history of economic thought. The assessments of the historians become an important determinant of how economists understand their subject. The basis for the conclusions of this study is an examination of more than 35
histories of economic thought. The histories are by the following authors: Blaug (1997), Brue (1994), Catlin (1962), Cossa (1893), Dewe (1908), Ekelund and Hebert (1983), Ferguson (1950), Galbraith (1987a, b), Gide and Rist (1948), Gray (1931), Gruchy (1947),
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Haney (1949), Heimann (1945), Homan (1928), Hunt (1992), John Kells Ingram The German (1823-1907), Kuhn (1963), Landreth (1976), Landreth and Colander (1994), Morgan 1; :
(1990), Negishi (1989), Newman (1952), Nichans (1990), Mai (1975), Mitchell (1969), Nef 2!Storical schools
(1950), Oser and Blanchfield (1975), Pribram (1983), Rima (1970, 1978), Robbins (1998), Roll (1942), Routh (1975), Rubin (1929), Schumpeter (1954), Ben B. Seligman (d 1970), Spann (1930), Spiegel (1983), Taylor (1960), Whittaker (1940, 1960), and Zweig (1950). Five books of readings in the history of economic thought by the following authors 191 were also examined, Gherity (1965), Patterson (1932), Rima (1970), Spengler and Allen (1960) and Weintraub (1977). Because some members of the German historical schools had socialist inclinations Laidlers’s (1927, 1948) two books on the history of socialist thought were scrutinized. A short description and significant details about what each of these histories say about the German historical schools are given in Appendix 1, “short descriptions and significant details in the histones”. There are virtually no references to the individual histories in the main body of the paper because of space limitations. All of the statements about the histories are supported by the material in Appendix 1. There are dozens, if not hundreds of histories of economic thought in many languages. See, for example, the history by Cohn (1894) or the great bibliography by Howey (1982). Time and space limitations required the omission of some histories that discuss the German historical schools. Important among these is the work by Hutchison (1953), which I have consulted but have not annotated. Another is the Marxist work of Anikin (1975). The titles of some works of what are included as histories of economic thought do not indicate that they are histories. The histories selected for analysis can best be thought of as a sample of those most commonly referred to in studies of the history of economic thought.
The influence of the German historical schools
Economic writers are almost always influenced, though in varying degrees, by the special conditions, ideas, and institutions of the country and the period to which they belong, or to which they have by preference, tumed their attention. The effects of this influence are very great, although often unobserved or denied by those who feel them (Cossa, 1893).
The importance of the German historical schools in their time is manifested by the fact that they are written about in all but a very few of the major works in the history of economic thought. Such unanimity by those best qualified to judge about influences in the development of economic thought is powerful evidence for their influence during the peak of their power. What about their influence more than a century later? Has this band of German scholars left any traces in modern economic thought? What were their successes? What were their failures?
The failures of the German historical schools A substantial majority of the historians of economic thought who have discussed the subject have judged that many of the members of the German historical schools did not fully achieve the goals they set for themselves. Although that verdict is probably
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES sound, it is not the end of the story simply because the writings of the members of the 323 German historical schools should not be judged only by their own standards. , The judgment is misleading because it answers only one question, “How close did a “school,” or the members of it, get to the achievement of their own objectives?” It overlooks the possibility that the person or “school” could find their aims achieved by others in ways different from those they had envisioned. It is necessary to distinguish 192 between understanding the scientific work of the schools as it appeared to the scholars of the time and the development of economics as a science. The way all scientific, including economic, thought progresses is by criticism of ideas. The attacks of the German historical schools forced clarification of all the subjects they treated. Some of the most important of these criticisms were focused on the scope and method of economics, the place of nationalism, the economic roles of the state and the place of individualism in economics. Certainly, the treatment of these subjects by the members of the German historical schools was not the last word on them. It was in the later critiques and development that many of the aims of the German scholars would be achieved. An example of the process is the controversies over method. The critiques that followed have resulted in a general acceptance of the idea that the historical inductive method is complementary to the abstract deductive approach. One might almost characterize the fate of the German historical schools in terms of stages many of them favored. The first stage was the establishment and dominance of historicism in Germany, culminating with Schmoller (1900) and his approach. This process occurred from about the middle of the 1800s to the very early 1900s. The second stage was the decline of the schools while, at the same time, many of
their ideas were being criticized and spreading, roughly during the first half of the twentieth century. The third stage of their influence, the early twenty-first century, is described below. The fourth and inevitable stage will come when the ideas of the German historical schools will be treated by antiquarians and other specialists in ancient economic thought.
The present state of economics and the German historical schools Have the German historical schools made any contributions to the development of modern economic thought? If so, what have they been? One way of answering these questions is by a comparison of the present state of economics with what the economists of the German historical school desired.
Four undoubted changes There is no doubt that changes in least four important aspects of economic thought and practice desired by most of the members of the German historical schools are now part of modern economic thought. These are an enlarged scope of economics, changes in the role of the state in economic life, attention to the relationships of law and economics, and recognition of the importance of history. A central criticism most of the economists of the German historical schools made against the practice of economics in their time was that its scope was too limited. They argued for the inclusion of many more aspects of life. Certainly the scope of economics has expanded as can be demonstrated by a comparison of any text or history of the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


time with the EconLit subject descriptors of the American Economics Association The German (www.econlit.org/econlit/elhomsub.html). : : Throughout history the state has been recognized as having important roles in historical schools economic life. Almost all the economists of the German historical schools agreed that the state should play an important role. Their contribution was to insist that this role should be changed. They wanted the state to focus more on what is today called welfare and economic justice. 193 They wanted state action for all social ends that could not be adequately attained by voluntary individual effort, or whenever social aims could be reached only, or more effectively, through state action. Is there any question that all the major states and such super-states as the European Union now have welfare and economic justice as central elements of their economic policies? Many of the economists in the German historical schools put great stress on the role of law and the relationships of law to economics. This certainly makes them forerunners of the modern discipline of law and economics. An interesting consequence of the combination of broadening the scope of economics and paying attention to the role of law was that economics became a more inclusive and socially oriented study, something most members of the German historical schools also sought. Attention to the present consequences of the past was an important part of the program of many members of the German historical schools. They felt that economists needed to understand that social evolution changed environments and required new theories. Today, most economists agree. Many of the now popular econometric studies are built upon historical data or use historical data to develop their models. The historical approach required attention to economic history. The attempts of those scholars to determine the details of the past stimulated the study of economic history throughout the world. They also broadened the scope of economic history by including a wide variety of economic topics. Many histories of economic thought mention their monographic output, especially in economic history. We know that some of the aims of the German historical schools were accepted and some were not. There is no real understanding of the process and why some of the aims were accepted and some were not.
Other legacies In addition to the topics above, there are several other parts of modern economics in which strong traces of German influence can be found. Among these are the role of economists in policy making, the use of statistics, and methodology. Many economists of the German historical schools played an active role in influencing the economic policies of the state. Schmoller, for example, was invited to participate in the 1890 drafting of the German Civil Code. Today every major state and such super-states as the European Union give economists and economic theory important roles in the making of economic policy. Some historians claim that the German historical schools gave a new impetus to the application of economics to social reform. Most of the members of the schools were interested in social reform. Today most economists also share their belief that reform is preferable to worse upheavals brought on by sharpening class distinctions. There is a question, however, of the extent to which the German scholars were unique in this. Many early non-German economists were interested in social reform.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Perhaps this question needs to be thought of with reference to how involved in the 323 actual political world the economists were. ? Another of the achievements of the German historical schools was in the use of statistics, even though statistics then was more focused on data gathering. The sophisticated analytical techniques that we now call econometrics were almost a necessary development as economists realized they could not just look at data and see 194 what it meant. Some members of the schools were forerunners of the modern econometrics studies. Schmoller’s role in the development of dynamic economic analysis is often overlooked. It is worth noting that he was one of the first who tried to treat economic questions dynamically, to examine facts while they move and determine how they act and react on each other. Many historians of thought also indicate a different kind of influence. This kind of influence is indicated when, as is often the case, they contrast and compare the thinking of economists who are not members of the German historical schools with that of its members. This kind of influence is also shown when historians compare the views of the German historical schools to those of other schools. There is no question that the German historical schools also affected the development of the economics of some individuals. They were mostly German but also individuals from many other countries. There are testimonies of many different kinds that support this assertion. Members of the schools wrote about their debt to each other. Several historians of economic thought declared their obligations. Dedications of works to leaders of the school are often to be found. The work of the German historical schools inspired many people. Herbst’s (1965) fine study, The German Historical School in American Scholarship: A Study in the Transfer of Culture, is another example of a different kind of influence. We conclude this section on influence with Marshall’s (1961) well-known tribute.
But on the whole the most important work that has been on the continent in recent times is that of Germany (Marshall, 1961).
See also Appendix 2 “A simple econometric test.”
Comments about the treatment of the German historical schools in the histories of economic thought
Whoever embarks on the study of the history of economic thought is faced with the question of explaining why the meanings of commonly used terms vary so greatly between the different schools — why some concepts and problems which are of fundamental importance for certain schools are irrelevant or at least hardly significant for others (Pribram, 1983).
The treatment of the German historical schools in the histories of economic thought is a strong argument for the study of the systematics of the history of economic thought. It is axiomatic that the authors of histories of economic thought intend to contribute to an improved understanding of how economic thought developed. The classifications they use vary widely. Most histories of thought can be characterized as “a collection of critical summaries of past theories spiced with short biographies of major theorists” (Merton, 1967). Partly because they use different classification schemes, none of them can be accepted as a complete telling of the story.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


The histories of economic thought are not characterized by so rapid a cumulative The German growth in knowledge as economics itself. The process of the growth of knowledge in 4; : the history of economic thought differs from that of economics. Although new historical schools discoveries occur, knowledge in the history of economic thought increases mostly by correcting past mistakes and by reinterpretations. Progress in both fields, as in all of science, is measured by the development of scholarly consensus. A related issue concerns the conceptual basis for this kind of history. The question 195 of how the history of economic thought is to be organized was raised above. There can be no definitive answer, for which there are two main reasons. One reason is pragmatic. Scholars will write history however they wish. Another reason is that social and intellectual environments change with time. This requires periodic reviews of the past from the vantage point of the present. Problems of definition or clear elaboration of ideas loom large. An example is a common overstatement of this type, “German economics, then dominated by the historical school under the leadership of Gustav Schmoller, had no use for economic theory” (Niehans, 1990). Such statements ignore the fact that the historical method was backed by a theory. What Niehans should have said is that most members of the German historical schools had little or no use for some conventional or orthodox theory. Another, rather commonplace, observation about the history of economic thought is reinforced. Many challenges to mainstream economics, for example, monopolistic competition, ended up by being incorporated in it. If one had predicted that many of the challenges by the German historical schools would end up incorporated in mainstream economics, the prediction would have been correct for only some of their challenges, not all of them. An important question is whether the histories of thought have made progress in understanding the German historical schools. The answer depends upon the aims of the history and how progress is defined. If progress is defined as above, in terms of scholarly consensus, the answer depends on when the histories were written. The older classic histories, as for example, Ingram, Cossa (1893), Gide and Rist (1948), and Haney (1949) were all written before the first world war. They all agree on the importance and influence of the German historical schools in their time. There is however, little consensus about their long run influence, as the examples of the later histories of Schumpeter (1954) and Pribram (1983) illustrate. If progress is thought of as correcting earlier mistakes, there has been little progress. No serious factual errors about the German historical schools appear to have been made by the major historians of economic thought. Neither have there been any startling new discoveries of new material. If progress is thought of as broadening our understanding of economic phenomena, there has been progress. The interpretations of the later texts are sometimes more sophisticated and inclusive than the early ones. Lacking a general theory about what constitutes progress in the history of economic thought, one can only make statements about very specific definitions of progress. The matter is further complicated by the wide variety of assessments of the German historical schools and their members. The way the German historical schools are treated in the histories of economic thought provide strong evidence for the view “that systems of social thought usually grew out of the conditions and problems of the time and were regarded, in one way or
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


196
the other, as a solution of the social questions and crises of the era and culture of the writers” (Barnes, 1948). “Usually” is an important qualification because not all systems of social thought develop in this way. With but few exceptions, historians of economic thought have avoided the temptation of assuming that to know and understand the German historical schools it is necessary to know the personal lives of their members. The selection of the materials by historians of economic thought is determined by the aims of the person writing it. These aims can include establishing or defending a viewpoint, approach or school. This is one reason that a single general work rarely can give a full and balanced view of any subject. There are many theoretical gaps in our understanding of why historians of economic thought treat the same people and events so differently. The wide differences in conclusions shows that we need to know much more about the influences on the authors of the histories of economic thought that lead to such wide divergences.
More questions of methodology
Here, the very ideas of economic analysis, of intellectual effort, of science, are “quenched in smoke,” and the very rules or principles that are to guide the historian’s pen are open to doubt and what is worse, to misunderstanding (Schumpeter, 1954).
Many questions of methodology arise in the study of the German historical schools. Tracing the heritage of their ideas is a classic case that illustrates the difficulties of untangling direct and indirect influences. Most often, questions of indirect influences arise when economists try to make a case that difficult-to-define factors, such as social environment, ideology, philosophy or nationality, are important causes of some event. In tracing what influenced the development of an economist’s ideas, there are many persons, things and events that inevitably operate. One has to be especially careful about ideas that are generally accepted at the time. For example, almost every imtellectual of the time thought Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882) had found a good explanation for the evolution of plants and animals. Applying his approach to the development of society might have been expected. Ideas that are generally accepted can hardly be considered of great importance in determining the influence of one person on another since these ideas are part of the intellectual milieu. Students of the history of science have generally accepted the premise that complicated concepts, such as the economic role of the state or how the past affects the future involve ideas from many sources. What causes scholarly consensus has never been exactly determined. It is for this reason that conclusions about indirect influences must always remain speculative, even when they are useful and interesting. An example is the question, “would economics be the same today without the influence of the German historical schools?” All of the contributions of the members of the German historical schools had forerunners and advocates in other countries. Does this mean that the above changes in economics would have come about without the Germans? This is a case of a more general issue that comes up in questions about who or what caused changes in the development of economics.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


There is no way to find a definitive answer. History cannot be rewritten. All that can The German be done is to take the evidence we have and examine it. What it shows in this case is historical schools near certainty that the German effort, at the least, speeded up the processes for four undoubted changes, an increased scope of economics, the role of the state in economic life, attention to law and recognition of the importance of history. The decline in the study of the history of economic thought has been documented in more than one place. It is almost unheard of to include as one of the reasons for the 197 decline systemic mternal problems. Among these problems is little basic agreement about the subject matter or how it is to be treated. Is it not possible that attention to historiography and methodology might clarify some of the issues and thus bring about more scholarly consensus? Stigler (1976, p. 97) has written, “the primary task of scientific history is to become scientific: to subject hypotheses to objective tests which the hypotheses are capable of failing”. Although he was writing about biography, his stricture applies equally well to the interpretations of the historians of economic thought. By that standard, most are a long way from being scientific, although that does not lessen their importance. Another methodological question relates to how long it takes before a group of scholars is recognized as a “school.” This depends, in part, on the definition given to the term “school.” For the present, it seems that it is usually easier to find similarities and differences in retrospect and during formative periods. Related to this, as pointed out above, many scholars put together in “schools” would not agree that they belong in It. The gaps in our knowledge about the German historical schools are not so important as the fact that economic historians lack the methodology to remedy them.
Conclusions The two main tasks of a reassessment are to select and point up what is useful for the present and to get some sense of what has lasted and why. The study of the treatment of the German historical schools in the histories of economic thought demonstrates several things. It seems virtually impossible for historians of economic thought to say anything new about the schools or their members. The historians of economic thought, those best qualified to judge, leave no doubt about the influence of the German historical schools in their time. Although no one today would admit to being a member of any historical school, the schools left a lasting legacy in modern economic thought. A comparison of the present state of economics with what most members of the German historical schools desired shows that many of the reforms they wanted are in place. Methodologically there are special problems in associating the thought of the German historical schools with mainstream economics. The task is inherently difficult. It points up the fact that large theoretical gaps in our understanding of the history of economic thought remain. Until some of these gaps are repaired, we must remain content with the idea that what the history of economic thought ought to be is what it is in the hands of the most able historians.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


198
Writing the history of economic thought remains, and will probably continue to remain for a long time, a very individualistic activity. There are few rules; the main one is to shun the use of fraudulent data. What counts is clarity of exposition and the convincing organization of the data that makes up the past of economics.
References
Anikin, A. (1975), A Science in Its Youth (PreMarxian Political Economy), Progress Publishers, Moscow.
Barnes, HE. (Ed_) (1948), An Introduction to the History ofSoaology, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Betz, H.K. (1988), “How does the German historical school fit?”, History of Political Economy, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 409-30.
Blanqui, J-A. (1880), History ofPolitical Economy in Europe, Augustus M. Kelley Publishers, New York, NY, Translated from the fourth French edition by Emily J. Leonard; with a preface by David A. Wells, and an appendix and index by the translator.
Blaug, M. (1986a), Great Economists Before Keynes: An Introduction to the Lives and Works of One Hundred Great Economists of the Past, Humanities Press International, Atlantic Highlands, NJ.
Blaug, M. (Ed.) (1986b), Who’s Who in Economics: A Biographical Dictionary of Major Economists 1700-1986, 2nd ed., Wheatsheaf Books, Brighton. Blaug, M. (Ed.) (1990), The History OfEconomic Thought, Elgar Publishing, Aldershot.
Blaug, M. (1997), Economic Theory in Retrospect, 5th ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Brue, S_L. (1994), The Evolution of Economic Thought, 5th ed., The Dryden Press, Fort Worth, TX.
Caldwell, B. (2001), “There really was a German historical school of economics: a comment on Heath Pearson”, History of Poktical Economy, Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 649-54.
Catlin, W.B. (1962), The Progress of Economics: A History of Economic Thought, Bookman Associates, New York, NY.
Cohn, G. (1894), A History of Political Economy, American Academy of Political and Social Science, Philadelphia, PA, Translated by Dr Joseph Adna Hill, with an introductory note by Edmund J. James.
Cossa, L. (1893), Ax Introduction to the Study of Political Economy, MacMillan & Co., London, revised by the author and translated from Italian by Louis Dyer, M.A.
Dewe, J.A. (1908), History of Economics: Or, Economics as a Factor in the Making of History, Benziger Brothers, New York, NY.
Ekelund, R.B. Jr and Hebert, RF. (1983), A History of Economic Theory and Method, 2nd ed., McGrawHill Book Company, Inc., New York, NY.
Ferguson, J.M. (1950), Landmarks of Economic Thought, 2nd ed., Longmans Green and Co., New York, NY.
Galbraith, J.K. (1987a), A History ofEconomics: The Past as Present, Hamish Hamilton, London.
Galbraith, JK. (1987b), Economics in Perspective: A Critical History, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Gherity, J-A. (Ed.) (1965), Economic Thought: A Historical Anthology, Random House, New York, NY.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Gide, C. and Rist, C. (1948), A History ofEconomic Doctrines From the Time of the Physiocrats to The German the Present Day, George G. Harrap & Company, London, Authorized translation by 1 - : R. Richards, Second English edition, with additional matter from the latest French editions historical schools translated by Ernest F. Row.
Gray, A. (1931), The Development of Economic Doctrine: An Introductory Survey, Longmans, Green and Co., London.
Gruchy, A.G. (1947), Modern Economic Thought: The American Contribution, Prentice-Hall, 199 New York, NY.
Haney, L.H. (1949), History of Economic Thought: A Cnitical Account of the Origin and Development of the Economic Theories of the Leading Thinkers in the Leading Nations, Ath ed., The Macmillan Company, New York, NY.
Heimann, E. (1945), History ofEconomic Doctrines: An Introduction to Economic Theory, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Herbst, J. (1965), The German Historical School in American Scholarship:A Study in the Transfer of Culture, Ithaca, New York, NY.
Homan, P.T. (1928), Contemporary Economic Thought, Harper & Brothers, New York, NY.
Howey, RS. (1982), A Bibliography of General Histories of Economics, 1692-1975, The Regents Press of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.
Hunt, E.K. (1992), History of Economic Thought: A Critical Perspective, 2nd ed., HarperCollins Publishers Inc., New York, NY.
Hutchison, T.W. (1953), A Review: of Economic Doctrines 1870-1929, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Koot, G.M. (1987), Exglish Historical Economics, 1870 1926: The Rise of Economic History and Neomercantilism, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kuhn, WE. (1963), The Evolution ofEconomic Thought, South Western Publishing, Cincinnati, OH.
Laidler, H.W. (1927), A History of Socialist Thought, Thomas Y. Crowell, New York, NY.
Laidler, H.W. (1948), Social Economic Movements: An Historical and Comparative Survey of Socialism, Communism, Cooperation, Utopianism: and Other Systems of Reform and Reconstruction, Thomas Y. Crowell, New York, NY.
Landreth, H. (1976), History ofEconomic Theory: Scope, Method and Content, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Landreth, H. and Colander, D.C. (1994), History ofEconomic Thought, 3rd ed., Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Mai, L.H. (1975), Men and Ideas in Economics: A Dictionary of World Economists Past and Present, Littlefield, Adams & Co., Totowa, NJ. Marshall, A. (1961), Principles of Economics, 9th ed., Macmillan and Co., London.
Merton, R.K. (1967), “On the history and systematics of sociological theory”, Ox Theoretical Sociology: Five Essays, Old and New, The Free Press, New York, NY.
Mitchell, W-C. (1969), Types of Economic Theory: From Mercantilism to Institutionalism, Vol. I, Augustus M. Kelley Publishers, New York, NY, edited with an introduction by Joseph Dorfman.
Morgan, MS. (1990), The History OfEconometric Ideas, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Neff, F_A. (1950), Economic Doctrines, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, NY. Negishi, T. (1989), History of Economic Theory, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam. Newman, P.C. (1952), The Development of Economic Thought, Prentice-Hall, New York, NY.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Niehans, J. (1990), A History of Economic Theory: Classic Contributions, 1720-1980, Johns 393 Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Oser, J. and Blanchfield, W.C. (1975), The Evolution of Economic Thought, 3rd ed., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York, NY.
Patterson, S.H. (1932), Readings in The History ofEconomic Thought, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY
200 Pearson, H. (1999), “Was there really a German historical school of economics?”, History of
Poktical Economy, Vol. 31 No. 3, pp. 547-62.
Pearson, H. (2001), “Response to Bruce Caldwell”, History of Poktical Economy, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 655-61.
Pribram, K. (1983), A History of Economic Reasoning, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Rima, TH. (1970), Readings in the History ofEconomic Theory, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, NY.
Rima, LH. (1978), Development of Economic Analysis, Richard D. Irwin, Homewood, IL.
Robbins, L. (1998), A History of Economic Thought: The LSE Lectures, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, edited by S.G. Medema and WJ. Samuels.
Roll, E. (1942), A History of Economic Thought, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, New York, NY. Routh, G. (1975), The Ongin of Economic Ideas, The MacMillan Press, London.
Rubin, LL. (1929), A History ofEconomic Thought, Ink Links, London, translated and edited by Donald Filtzer, with an afterword by Catherine Colliot-Théléne.
Schmoller, G. (19001904), Grundriss derAllegemeine Volkswirtschaftlehere, Duncker & Humblot, Munich.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1954), History ofEconomic Analysis, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, edited from manuscript by Elizabeth Boody Schumpeter.
Senn, P.R. (1996a), “Sombart’s reception in the English speaking world”, in Bachaus, J. (Ed), Werner Sombart (1863-1941) Social Scientist, Metropolis Verlag, Marburg, pp. 147-286.
Senn, PR. (1996b), “Judgment in history: the case of Werner Sombart”, in Bachaus, J. (Ed), Werner Sombart (1863-1941) Social Scientist, Metropolis Verlag, Marburg, pp. 297-320.
Spann, O. (1930), Types ofEconomic Theory, George Allen & Unwin, London, translated by Eden and Cedar Paul from the Nineteenth German Edition.
Spengler, J.J. and Allen, W.R. (Eds) (1960), Essays in Economic Thought: Aristotle to Marshall, Rand McNally & Company, Chicago, IL.
Spiegel, H.W. (1983), The Growth ofEconomic Thought, 2nd Ed., Duke University Press, Durham.
Stigler, GJ. (1976), The Scientific Uses of Scientific Biography: With Special Reference to John Stuart Mill, The Economist as Preacher and Other Essays, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Taylor, O.H. (1960), A History ofEconomic Thought: Social Ideals and Economic Theories form Quesnay to Keynes, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, NY.
Weintraub, S. (Ed.) (1977), Modern Economic Thought, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, PA.
Whittaker, E. (1940), A History ofEconomic Ideas, Longmans, Green and Co., New York, NY.
Whittaker, E. (1960), Schools and Streams of Economic Thought, Rand McNally & Company,
Chicago, IL.
Zweig, F. (1950), Economic Ideas: A Study ofHistorical Perspectives, Prentice Hall, New York, NY.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Appendix 1. Short descriptions and significant details in the histories The German This appendix contains short descriptions, significant details and comments about what 38 1- : histories and five books of readings, in alphabetical order of the last name of the author, have to historical schools say about the German historical schools. The indexes to the histories of economic thought are notoriously unreliable. They are almost never exhaustive and sometimes contain errors of attribution. However, they do indicate the relative importance that the authors or indexers place on individuals and subjects. It is for this 201 reason that the comments about the histories start with their indexes. Note that when the number of entries in an index are given, some of the entries refer to multiple pages. The authors of the histories of economics are numbered. The books of readings are designated by the number of the history preceding them followed by the capital letter in the order in which they appear. The purpose is simply to tell them apart. Those who bother to read these comments and excerpts will notice the texts show no consistency in editorial form, e.g. “German historical school,” “German historical schools,” “German historical school,” etc. or even in nomenclature, e.g. “historism,” “historicism”. In my comments, I follow the capitalization and other editorial conventions of the text examined. 1. Blaug’s Economic Theory in Retrospect has six entries in the index, “historical school” “German.” The first entry (1997, 289) contains nothing specific about the German historical school. The same is true of the second entry (1997, 292). “Whenever there was an historicist bias — a pervasive bias in Germany and a widespread one in England — marginal utility economics was dismissed together with English classical political economy as excessively abstract and permeated with implausible assumptions about human behavior” (1997, 292). The third reference is Spiegel’s history as “a good textbook treatment of both the English and German Historical schools” (1997, 309). In the section, “Readers Guide to the Principles of Economics” by Marshall, Blaug mentions that it “provides a capsule history of economic thought, which is notable for its conciliatory comments on the German historical school” (1997, 380). In the “Readers Guide to the Lectures on Political Economy, Volume 1” by Wiksell, Blaug says that im the introduction, “Note in particular the incisive critical comments on the German historical school” (1997, 529). In his chapter on “Spatial Economics and the Classical Theory of Location” Blaug says, “Alfred Weber himself turned towarda totally different style of location, more in keeping with the historical and evolutionary preoccupations of eighteenth century economists and members of the German historical school in the nineteenth century” (1997, 608). The final reference says that Thorstein Bunde Veblen (1857-1929) refused to admit that the work of the German historical school constituted scientific economics (1997, 701). Blaug does not pay much attention to the German historical schools. Roscher is in the index. This is because Blaug divides attitudes toward intellectual history into “absolutism and relativism” (1.2). “The relativist regards every single theory put forward in the past as a more or less faithful reflection of contemporary conditions, each theory being in principle justified in its own context; the absolutist has eyes only for the strictly intellectual development of the subject, regarded as a steady progression from error to truth. Relativists cannot rank the theories of different periods in terms of better or worse; absolutists cannot help but do so” (1997, 2). One comment about Roscher is that he, Ingram and Cossa were authors of relativist texts (1997, 4). Blaug uses the same approach when he discusses the defense of mercantilism. “The stern condemnation visited upon mercantilist errors by classical theory went unchallenged for 100 years. The relativist interpretation of mercantilism had to wait upon the revival of protectionism in Europe and the rise of the German historical school. First Roscher, Schmoller and then their English disciples Cunningham and Ashley, rose to defend mercantilist policies as perfectly
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES rational .. .” (1997, 14). This is another small example of the failure of indexes. There is no entry 293 that refers to this reference to “The German historical school” in the index. ? Roscher is also mentioned as one of “a number of isolated contributions to location theory” (1997, 606). Blaug has no real discussion of the German historical schools. He does, as indicated above, comment on the ideas of some of the members of them. Blaug wrote more than one history of economic thought. One of his books is Great Economists 202 Before Keynes: An Introduction to the Lives and Works of 100 Great Economists of the Past. He does not include Brentano, Hildebrand or Knies in this group. Roscher is described as one of the principle founders of the German historical school along with Hildebrand and Knies. They “are frequently linked together as the ‘older’ historical school to distinguish them from Schmoller and Sombart, the ‘younger’ historical school of the following generation” (1986a, 207). “All three shared the belief that the clear exposition of the aims and methods of economic inquiry must take precedent over the development of substantive doctrines; that all economic truths are purely relative and valid only for a specific set of national and historical circumstances; that economics must therefore proceed via the history of economic thought by ruthlessly criticizing the ideas of the past; that economic development reveals definite stages of growth similar to the biological cycle of infancy, youth, manhood and old age; and that a variety of social policies are required to ameliorate the conditions of the working class and to stem the rising tide of socialism. Roscher was closer to the ideas of the English Classical economists than were Hildebrand and Knies, and he alone of the three carried out fundamental research in the history of economics” (1986a, 207). “Compared with what was promised, what Roscher actually delivered was very modest, amounting in fact to a critical restatement of the conventional economics of his time with a wealth of examples and illustrations of the so called ‘law’ of historical development, which somehow he never succeeded in stating explicitly. A studious disinclination to enter into anything smacking of normative economics kept him from spelling out the policy implications of his ideas” (1986a, 208). Schmoller is described as the leader of the younger historical school who “continued to believe in the merits of an historical approach to economic questions, but abandoned the aim of providing comprehensive laws of historical development, confining themselves to illustrative monographs on particular subjects. In addition, they gave much greater prominence to piecemeal social reform by public action than had the earlier historical economists.” Blaug concludes his comments on Schmoller “but whatever Schmoller’s intentions, the effect of his methodological pronouncements was to throttle the development of economic theory in Germany right up to the 1920s and 1930s” (1986a, 214). Blaug’s judgment on Sombart is, “putting all his books on capitalism together, he had clearly over-explained its origins; he had provided so many explanations of the emergence of capitalism as to make what was once an historical puzzle seem an inevitable event that would have happened anyway even if this or that element had been missing” (1986a, 237). He concludes his comments on Sombart “the Nazis must have had some difficulty with Sombart’s earlier views on the role of Jews in history, but nevertheless permitted him to retire gracefully from teaching in 1935 and even reprinted parts of A New Social Philosophy in 1937. Sombart died in the middle of World War II in 1941” (1986a, 238). Of Spiethoff, Blaug says that he “devoted his entire professional life to the study of a single subject, business cycles” (1986a, 239). These studies are described. Spiethoff also “tried to resolve the old battle between the orthodox view of the absolute truth of economic theories and the German historical school’s contention that theories are only valid for their own time and place” (1986a, 240). “On balance, however, the argument in these two papers amounts to little more than a defense of the traditional standpoint of German historical economists expressed in new language” (1986a, 240).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Of Max Weber, Blaug says that he was “also an economist and economic historian, equally The German famous for his methodological pronouncements on the use of ideal types and the possibility of a 1: : value-free social science as for his studies of the Protestant origins of capitalism” (1986a, 269). historical schools Blaug has a longer discussion than usual of Weber's work on the origins of capitalism and methodology. “Weber’s methodological belief in the possibility — note that the word — of value-free social science was a reaction against the use of academic chairs by Schmoller and the other founders of the Verein to preach particular social and political views” (1986a, 271). 203 “But Weber was in fact keen to promote a rational discussion of the norms of economic policy. His point, however, was to insist that such a discussion had to be clearly distinguished from a purely positive study of economic problems” (1986a, 271). Blaug concludes his discussion of Weber, “here, as elsewhere, later generations spent almost as much time disputing exactly what he meant as in arguing over whether he was correct” (1986a, 271). It is significant that five of the 100 most important economists according to Blaug were members of the German historical school. Blaug’s book Who’s Who in Economics: A Biographical Dictionary ofMajor Economists 1700 to 1896 selects 1,000 economists as the cutoff point between major and minor economists. The work includes all the conventionally accepted members of the German historical schools except Brentano. The entries are short including dates and birthplace, posts held, degrees, major publication and then a short comment on the statement of the principle contributions to economics. A sample is that for Sombart and his career. “Writer on capitalism whose viewpoints run so sharply from Marxism to ultraconservatism to national socialism that he is virtually impossible to categorize. His chief work Der Moderne Kapitalismum is eclectic and sometimes unreliable, but presents a historical analysis of capitalism which differs from the Marxian version in regarding modern capitalism as an improvement on early competitive capitalism” (1986b, 796). Blaug also published The History of Economic Thought. The title is somewhat misleading because it is really a book of readings. No member of any of the German historical schools is mentioned in the name index. I do not recall that any of the articles discuss any aspects of the German historical schools. 2. Brue is one of the few texts that devotes an entire chapter of about 18 pages to the “German historical school.” All of the references but one occur in that chapter. The one other reference states that “The influence of the German historical school on American institutionalism is quite visible” (388). About a paragraph discusses the paths of German influence. Chapter 11, “The German historical school” considers “The German historical school, which arose in the 1840s with the publications of Friedrich List and Wilhelm Roscher, and ended in 1917 when Gustav Schmoller died. By then economists in general had absorbed some of the ideas of the school and it ceased to exist as a distinct entity” (211). The chapter begins with a historical discussion of the school and immediately goes to list four principles “that were basic in the thinking of the German historical economists” (212). The first principle was that the historical school applied a dynamic evolutionary perspective in its study of society. It concentrated on cumulative development and growth.” The second principle was its emphasis on the positive role of government. “The historical school was nationalistic, whereas classical economics was individualistic and cosmopolitan.” The third point was that they used an inductive historical approach, and the last point was that they advocated conservative reform. Brue asks the question, “how was the historical schoo] valid, useful or correct in its time?” (214). His answer is that “the historical school was correct in its perspective that economists needed to familiarize themselves with changing history and changing environments, with economic and social evolution, in order to understand the present world. For this task inductive factual studies were required. New theories and new ideas had to be evoked to understand new
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


204
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
situations, and these new theories required careful testing through the use of empirical data” (214). Brue then asks, “what tenets of the historical school became lasting contributions?” His answer is that “The task of the German historical school was completed when economists of various persuasions agreed that historical empirical studies are required to explain the past, to test old theories, and to develop new ones. Today the historical inductive method has become generally accepted as complementary to the abstract deductive approach; changing times and methodological controversies have forced the two into an uneasy but tolerably placid marriage” (214). “Another lasting contribution of the school was its attack on Iaissez faire. This theme was a trend of the future. The members of the historical school recognized that unrestricted free enterprise does not necessarily produce the best possible results for society as a whole. And they were right in their belief that reform can be a substitute for worse upheavals brought on by sharpening class distinctions” (215). Asa final word, referring to the German economists’ “strident note of nationalism” Brue says, “In this respect, some of the ideas presented by the historical economists were detrimental to society’s progress” (215). The rest of the chapter is devoted to the discussion of the ideas of List, Roscher, Schmoller and Max Weber. Roscher gets about a page anda half (219-221), Schmoller gets about two and a half pages (221-224). Knies, Hildebrand, Brentano and Spaethoff are not in the index or mentioned as far as I could find. All told Brue has a good discussion. 3. Catlin is organized on the basis of “ideas or subject matter” instead of by men or schools of thought (Preface). The index has eight entries under the heading “German historical school,” some are duplicated. List, Roscher and Schmoller are mentioned in connection with “special attention to the stages of economic development” (23). Roscher and Schmoller are described as “surely partly responsible for the narrow and aggressive foreign policy of Germany at the time in which they wrote and in the succeeding period” (23). Later Catlin writes, “The leading exponents of the organic theory of the state have been none other than the forerunners and members of the German historical school and the founders of German nationalism ...” (132). Writing on the question of “what constitutes wealth?” Catlin writes, “as might be expected, the German historical school, which largely ran its course during the second half of the nineteenth Century, had a more inclusive and sometimes romantic view of what constitutes the wealth of a nation. Its history, its heritage of literature and art, its institutions, are different from those of other nations, and its economics must likewise differ” (176-177). Wniting in the section “The German historical school and the institutionalists” Catlin says, “The German historical school, both older and younger, as we have seen, had a penchant for merging the different social sciences and for a broader interpretation of human motives. Knies’s and Schmoller’s views on the subject are described (237). Schmoller’s writing is said to contain “an ethical or pedagogical overtone that suggests what should be, as much as what has been and what is” (238). Writing about money, credit and the business cycle, Catlin says, “the German historical school of the second half of the nineteenth century was naturally ‘historical’ here as in other matters, and the earher group including Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies tended especially toward a nationalistic and descriptive account of crises rather than toward any general theories” (583). He goes on to describe Knies's view that “the generalizations of economics are simply historical explanations and progressive manifestations of truth” (583). Writing about the role of government and Otto von Bismark’s (1815-1898) social insurance, Catlin says, “we are even somewhat in doubt about the intentions of the German historical school of the period, which generally approves such measures. They had, it is true, been emancipated from classical doctrines through a study of history, ethnography, ethics and kindred subjects,


but were disposed to glorify the state as a separate entity or organism. Gustav Schmoller saw in The German such legislation ‘a better and more peaceful social future, a lasting improvement in labor 1: : conditions, quite in harmony with the interests of the higher social classes and with existing historical schools political institutions” (743). There are many other entries referring to Germany. For some examples, the number of important American economists who went to Germany for graduate study is mentioned (24), as is the rise of trade and manufacturers (45-47-48), the German influence on English economics 205 (332) and the boycotting of Carl Menger’s (1840-1921) work in Germany “because of the ungracious attitude of Gustav Schmoller and the methodenstreit to which it gave rise” (361). There is no mention of Hildebrand or Brentano. Some of the contributions of Sombart and Weber are discussed. 4. Cossa, now more than 100 years old, reads like it was written yesterday. In the index, “Historical school of economics” has more than 18 references. The first two, those on pages 3 and 11 are very general. Very early, Cossa gives his view of the German historical school when he writes that “economic history is of invaluable service in rightly fixing the limited and purely relative character of certain economic laws, which, being descriptive and secondary, always vary with the social conditions upon which they depend. Bagehot in England, and the German historical school have achieved brilliant results in this field, but the Germans pursue the advantage too far when they proceed to deny the existence, or to disregard the importance of economic laws that are universal and constant” (24). Cossa amplifies this view in many places, as for example, when he writes of the school “which asserts that social economics is an historical science which should sketch in broadly the various phases of economic civilization, and find out the laws of its evolution. This amounts to nothing less than a complete change of scope and method. As has been said already, social economics is an abstract science of man’s concern with wealth as a social system. Its subject matter is neither historical nor statistical, for it does not deal with concrete and individual cases as such; it confines itself to what is typical and general, and disentangles from present and past phenomena what is essential and permanent, excluding everything accidental and variable” (51). Cossa has a long discussion of his views of the historical method, “history as an important factor in the method of political economy, but its importance has been persistently exaggerated since the middle of the century” (82). He goes on to say that “the celebrated Wilhelm Roscher opened the fray by formulating repeatedly the new programme” (83). Cossa is careful to give credit where he thinks it is due and says, “in 1848, Bruno Hildebrand took up the same idea, and improved upon it by his eloquent and forceful advocacy. Karl Knies went into greater detail, and based a more precise plea upon a remarkably sound historical study, ...” (83). In his discussion of Roscher’s predecessors he says, “so the school of Roscher once for all rejects absolute truths and ideal types in economics, declaring they have no bearing on sound government” (84). Roscher is said to recognize “only national economies, which he contrasts with cosmopolitan economics. Each people and each age has its own economics” (84). Cossa continues to summarize Roscher’s views and then has a lengthy section discussing reasons against them (84-85). Of “Schmoller, Ingram, and others of the strictest sect of the historical school” Cossa says, “it is palpable that they are dreaming of impossibilities, which, if attainable would be useless and that they are quaintly ignorant of what complexity in economic facts involves” (85-86). Cossa concludes, “in closing these critical hints let us remark that the services of the Historical school have been chiefly indirect ones” (87). He thinks “the history of economics has been brought into prominence for study without really making any change in its fundamental principles . ..” (87).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES The reference on page 94 is another of the passing ones in the context of why everybody 293 should learn about political economy. So far as I can tell there is no reference to the Historical ? school on 278 despite the reference to it in the index. Hildebrand is said to have discovered in Adam Miller (1779-1829) a starting point for “the later theories of List and his school” (300). Thomas Edward Cliffe Leslie (1827-1882) is said to have taken “a position unique in Great Britain, where he was for a long time a solitary and always a most enthusiastic adherent of views which Roscher and Knies defended in Germany”
Page 355 is simply another passing reference. The same is true of the reference in the index on page 395 which is mainly a discussion of Charles Gide as “unquestionably the most promising economist of his years in France.” His textbook “is the very best now published in French” (395). On page 410, Cossa begins a discussion of the historical school and its origin. After mentioning several people who held those “views which more or less foreshadowed those maintained by the German school,” he goes on to say that Friedrich List (1789-1846) was by far the most important. He then gives brief but fair biographies and discussions of Hildebrand, Knies and Roscher. He calls Roscher “one of the most illustrious economists of this century” (412). After Cossa comments on his disagreements with Roscher and his method (412-413) Cossa goes on to write “his substantial and undeniable claim to unqualified praise lies elsewhere; We have him to thank for life and leadership given in those of his works where the deepest and most exceptional erudition does not prevent him from being quite in touch with those theories of the classical school, which he not only understands but substantially accepts. Here he excels as a critic whose impartiality is always unruffied, as a stylist who is not only clear but studiously finished, as a teacher of economic doctrines equally at home in putting their logical points and in sketching their history. Moreover, of all Germans only our author has been able to write a treatise on economics well proportioned in all its parts and quite unencumbered by the usual impedimentia, consisting as a rule in tiresome and pointless digressions about philosophy and law, or technical legislation” (413). Then he refers to Roscher’s main textbooks, not interestingly, his history. He thinks that Roscher, “after justifying the historical method quite neglected to carry it out” (413-414). Cossa gives a criticism of Schmoller that is found in dozens of histories of economics. “One serious reproach cannot but be made against Schmoller, and that is based upon his denial of any possible use for the deductive method in economics as a science. He bids us patiently wait until we have completed the accumulation of historical-statistical materials dealing with the economic conditions of all places at all time; but not all of us can wait so long” (414). Cossa also mentions that German professors practically all belong either to the historical school or to Schmoller’s neo-historical school and their turn to political activity (418). Once again he says something that evidently was copied by many others. “The German school has gone off at a tangent. It has denied the existence of general laws, it has led young men out of the way of theoretical investigations, it has turned every one of them to the study of history or politics, and thus it stands plainly convicted of a narrowness of view which is not less flagrant than that of the French optimistic school, but only in the opposite extreme. This has been a scientific calamity, since, during the last 20 years, the progress in Germany of the pure science of economics has greatly slackened. These are not the days of Thien, and we have to blame Schmoller and his new school rather than Roscher and Knies, the original leaders. Roscher and Knies were not capable of the grotesque confusion between Bastiat and Ricardo, which has led later day Germans of the new school to see no difference between the typical English views and those of optimism and individualism” (419-420). The reference in the index to page 427 is simply a passing one. The reference on page 429 is about Menger and his war on “the too exclusive tendencies of the historical school. The reference to page 494 is again just a passing one with no specific mention of the historical school.”
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


The final reference is on page 504 and it refers to the fact that Vito Cusumano (1843-1908) The German studied in Paris and then went on to Berlin “where he became a warm adherent of German views 1: : and introduced them to Italians in his learned work ...” (504-505). historical schools 5. Dewe’s history is best described by its subtitle, “Economics as a factor in the making of history.” It is not a history of the development of economic thought. It is a kind of economic history. It is not well indexed. There are many more references to German history than the twenty-nine in the index. Dewe’s approach is to show how economic factors shaped German 207 history. 6. Ekelund and Hebert “treat a limited number of individuals in depth rather than portray sweeping intellectual movements and grand scenarios with huge casts of characters. Schools of thought as such are downplayed because individual thinkers are more vital and true to life” (vii). Of List they say, “in stretching the dynamic fabric of classical economic growth by representing economic development as a succession of historical stages, he provided a methodological rallying point for the economists of the German school. Thus, List may appropriately be considered the forerunner of that school” (210). The main discussion of the German historical schools occurs in a section “Historicism” of about six pages (217-223). “One form of methodological criticism did make significant inroads into economics” (217). That was historicism. “Among other issues, the historicists raised the question of whether economics could be studied apart from the political, historical, and social milieu, an issue that is still debated among certain social scientists” (217). Ekelund and Hebert think that the major methodological issues raised by the historicists regarding induction and deduction “were sometimes based on a misunderstanding of logical processes” (217). The German historical school is introduced as follows: “the German historical school is often divided into two groups of writers: ‘the older’ and less extreme school, and the ‘younger’ school whose views on method were more extreme and uncompromising. The older group of writers is traditionally represented by Wilhelm Roscher, its founder, Karl Knies and Bruno Hildebrand; the younger group is dominated by the tenacious Gustav Schmoller” (218). Roscher is said to contain ideas taken from Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831) on history. There is an extensive section on Roscher who is described “as a scholar of the first magnitude” (219). Ekelund and Hebert write, “the historical method attempts to combine organic, biological analysis and statistics of all kinds in order to discover the laws of the phenomenon at issue. These laws, at least in Roscher’s formulation were always relative [original italics] to an ever changing set of institutions. Unlike Schmoller and the more extreme historicists, Roscher did not wish to totally abandon Ricardian economics but rather to supplement [original italics] and complete it.” Then follows a long paragraph, one of the few in the histories, quoting Roscher himself (219). They conclude their discussion of Roscher as follows: “Thus Roscher took side excursions into the construction of price indexes and, with the history of prices, into economic institutions and topics including slavery, the church, money (paper and specie), luxury, profits, insurance, population, international trade, and protection. Many of these accounts still repay careful reading, but despite Roscher’s best efforts, not to mention his obviously considerable mental talent, he (and this also holds true for Knies and Hildebrand) was unable to establish any laws of historical development. He was, in short, unable to reorient the method of economics” (220). Then follows a section on Schmoller, “the notorious Gustav Schmoller, leader of the younger school” (220). Schmoller is said to have pushed Roscher’s historicism to extremes and “argued that all received economic analysis, mainly Ricardian, was not only useless but pernicious (since it led to social conclusions that were presumably not to Schmoller’s taste)” (220). “Schmoller seriously proposed that received theory be completely discarded, owing to the unrealism of assumptions, to the degree of theoretical abstraction, and to the neglect of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES interrelated and relevant facts. The resultant gap would ultimately be filled by historical laws of 393 development, laws that Schmoller attempted to discuss in numerous publications” (221). 7 In the section on methodenstriet they conclude that it was essentially pointless (221-222). Ekelund and Hebert conclude their discussion of historicism with “contemporary economic theory may yet have to pay dearly for neglecting the saner and less extreme messages of the historicist doctrine” (223). 208 Ina later discussion they say, “given the historicists’ antagonism to theoretical economics, it is surprising that any peak performances in economic theory emerged during the period, yet emerge they did. In particular von Thiinen, Gossen and Mangoldt anticipated the marginalist revolutions in economics in much the same way Cournot and Dupuit did in France” (278). “The German economist Menger showed greatest familiarity with mostly, but not exclusively, historicists. They included Herman, Hildebrand, Hufeland, Knies, Rau, Roscher, Schaffle and Storch” (281-282). Schmoller is mentioned in the section on Menger and the Methodenstriet (282). There are various other mentions of members of the Historical school, for example, Schmoller’s work on the Mercantile System And Its Historical Significance (New York Smith, 1931) (57) and another reference to the same work (77). Friedrich von Wieser (1851-1926) “studied economics at the University of Heidelburg (under Karl Knies), Jena and Leipzig” (288). Eugen von Boéhm-Bawerk (1851-1914) “worked under the German historian Karl Knies” (298). Roscher and other continentals are given credit for being “astute in acknowledging their antecedents and contemporaries” (324). 7. Ferguson devotes an entire chapter, XI, to the Historical School of Economics. All but one of the references to the members of the school are there. The exception is when Ferguson states that Bohm-Bawerk studied in Germany under Knies, Roscher and Hildebrand (168). Writing in 1950, Ferguson said, “if there ever was an historical school, it no longer exists. And if by the term ‘schoo? is meant a group of scholars who center their attention upon some common problems, pursue a common method and work in virtual collaboration it would seem fitting to confine the designation to certain Germans whose qualifications are more in line with this definition than the natives of any other country. It is entirely proper, therefore, to speak of the German Historical school” (143). Ferguson devotes a fair amount of attention to the English historical school and in this connection mentions that List was among the first who “endeavored to temper the rigor of the classical teachings” (144). Later he says that List was “long regarded merely as a forerunner of the German historical school, but now recognized as its earliest important representative” (147). Ferguson writes that it was in Germany that “the historical approach received the most thorough exploitation; with Germany alone may the phrase ‘the historical school’ be safely employed. The German historical school has the distinction of being the first to react systematically against the methods of the British orthodox economics” (146). After pointing out that many of the details of List’s stage theory have “long since been shown to be both inaccurate and vague,” Ferguson says, “yet he rendered invaluable services in behalf of the growing science of economics, and undoubtedly ranks among the most influential of German economists” (150). Ferguson concludes his appraisal of List as follows. “He was, in truth a rare combination of business leader and scholarly genius. Correctly appraising the real state of affairs in his day and age and looking upon protection as a strictly transitional phrase (a point too often forgotten by his detractors), he assisted considerably in placing the science of economics upon the path which it must follow, if it is ever to justify the hopes and devotion of those who thoughtfully study its intricacies” (150-151). Ferguson then turns to what he calls the German “triumvirate,” Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies. Of Roscher he says he stated, “though haltingly, the fundamental principles of the school” (151). Of Hildebrand he says, “his chief contribution was probably the establishment in 1863 of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


the Yearbook for Economics and Statistics, one of the most respected of German periodicals and The German one that still maintains its existence” (151). Knies was said to be the ablest of the triumvirate and 1.- : is mentioned as a teacher ofJohn Bates Clark (1847-1938) and E.R.A. Seligman (152). He starts his historical schools summary by saying that the three men were so very different in their work that “it is no easy task to summarize their criticism of classical economics” (152). Ferguson makes the following points. They: tried to trace the historical course of economic life; held there are no laws of economic science which hold true for all times; stressed inductive as 209 opposed to deductive logic; moved away from individualism and cosmopolitanism of the classicists toward a spirit of nationalism; and explored the connections of economics with kindred fields such as geography and jurisprudence and philosophy (152). Of the younger school he says that the essential features of historical method are found much more fully in the writing of the students of the triumvirate than in the foundations laid by them. Schmoller was said to be the leader of the group and his Outline of General Economic Theory is praised with regrets that it is not available in English (153). Ferguson associates more people with the younger school than most historians. Among them are Knapp, Biicher, “revered teacher of the present author”, Wagner, Nasse, von Schonberg, von Scheel, Held, Brentano, Cohn and Conrad (154). In his summary Ferguson says that “the chief service of the Historical school, undoubtedly, was to counteract the over abstract tendencies of the classicists” (155). He felt that they “did clarify the evolution of the major stages of economic organization.” They reawakened interest in nationalism and pointed out the folly of an exaggerated individualism” (155). “In short they established beyond all question the relativity of economic theory. Although the historical school is now defunct, the historical method is firmly entrenched as an invaluable tool in economics, and its fruits are found nowadays in the researches more especially of those economists who perhaps may be described as institutionalists and statisticians” (155). 8. Galbraith, for the only instance in the history of economic thought, published two identical histories, with different names, in 1987. There is no reference in the index for the German historical schools. There are 19 references, some duplicated, some to multiple pages, under the caption “German economic thought.” All are strongly conditioned by Galbraith’s approach. “I pass over the great German writers on economic history in them last century who had little effect on its course, although here I should confess that I also suffer from a lack of motivating interest” (footnote 1, 3). His “is a history o of economics, and not merely of economists and their thought” (3). Finally, Galbraith believes that “economic ideas are always and intimately a product of their own time an place, they cannot be seen apart from the world they interpret” (1). There is no discussion of the German historical schools. References to some members of the German historical schools are scattered throughout. An example is that the single references to Roscher, Hildebrand, Knies and Herman Schumacher (1868-1952) are in a footnote referring to Americans who studied in Germany “where they sought out the great German historical scholars” (footnote 8, 165). Schumacher is not included a member of the German historical schools in any other work. There are two references to Schmoller. In the first, he is characterized as “the German historian-economist” (36) the second is that on page 165 above. Sombart is refered to in a footnote as “the German historian-economist, a diligent but not completely reliable scholar intuitively and perhaps even openly anti-Semitic” (footnote 2, 22). 8A. Gherity, like most books of readings, has no index. He does have a chapter on the historical school. He begins it, “although there were economists in almost every part of the world who used the historical approach, it was only in Germany that historicism ever achieved the strength or unity necessary to justify the use of the term ‘school’ in describing it” (246). Gherity has a page of discussion on Roscher, and a paragraph on Knapp. “Knapp was among the most distinguished members of the German Historical school and made valuable
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES contributions to the study of economic statistics as well as to economic history” (248). He also has 293 a short section on James Bonar (1852-1941). The reason is that Gherity reprints Bonar’s review of 7 Knapp’s theory of money. Gherity reprints William James Ashley’s (Sir, 1860-1927) introduction to and translation of the Preface and selections from Roscher’s Grundriss zu Vorlesungen tiber die Staatswirtschaft, nach geschichthcher Methoden (Outline of Lectures on Political Economy, Following the 210 Historical Method) (248-254). 9. Gide and Rist have an extensive discussion of the German historical schools with nineteen index entries, some of them duplicated. The first entry asks the question, “was not political economy placed in a vulnerable position for the attacks of Sismondi, of List, of the Historical school and of the Christian Socialists by this very work of Say?” (126). The next entry that refers to the historical school is “Friedrich List has a way of his own with history; and the earliest ambition of the Historical school was to transform political economy into a kind of philosophy of history” (233). Writing about John Stuart Mill’s (1806-1873) successors, they say, “Mill’s influence was universal, though, properly speaking, he had no disciples. This was, no doubt, partly because writers like Toynbee, who would naturally have become disciples, were already enrolled in the services of the Historical school” (378). An extensive discussion of 28 pages occurs in Book IV: “The Dissenters,” chapter one is “the historical school and the conflict of methods.” After an introduction which explains the gap between theory and reality when the principles of economics were applied to “countries where the economic conditions were entirely different from those existing in England or France,” they say that a “radical suggestion was to get rid of all abstract theory altogether and to confine the science to a simple description of economic phenomena. This was the method of procedure that was attempted first, and it is the one followed by the historical school” (384). They then discuss the origin and development of the historical school, “the honor of founding the school undoubtedly belongs to Wilhelm Roscher, a Géttingen professor” (385). “What Roscher proposed to do was to try to complete the current theory by adding a study of contemporary facts and opinions, and, as a matter of fact, ... Roscher was merely content to punctuate his exposition of the classical doctrines with many erudite excursus in the domain of economic facts and ideas” (386). They quote Knies as saying that “Roscher’s work simply means a completion of historiography rather than a correction of political economy” (footnote 2, 386). They also quote Schmoller as thinking “that Roscher’s work might justly be regarded as an attempt to connect the teaching of political economy with the ‘Cameralist’ tradition of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Germany” (386). Gide and Rist then discuss Hildebrand’s “much more fundamental opposition to the Classical school” (387). They criticize Hildebrand’s view of the laws of national development because “he did not seem to realize that a denial of that kind involved the undoing of all economic science and the complete overthrow of those ‘laws of development’ which he believed were henceforth to be the basis of the science” (387). Unlike most histories, Gide and Rist point out the differences in the views of the three people who are usually grouped together in the older Historical school. Speaking of Knies, they write, “but there is as much divergence between his views and those of his predecessors as there is between Rocher’s and Hildebrand’s” (388). Knies is said to think “that political economy is simply a history of ideas concerning the economic development of a nation at different periods of its growth” (388). His real reputation is said to rest upon his works about money and credit in which “there is scarcely a trace of the historical spirit” (388). “The three founders of the science devoted a great deal of time to a criticism of the Classical method, but failed to agree as to the aim and scope of the science and left to others the tasks of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


applying their principles” (388). “This task was attempted by the newer historical school, which The German sprang up around Schmoller toward the end of 1870” (388). : : The new school possessed two distinctive characteristics. The first was that “The useless historical schools controversy concerning economic laws which Hildebrand and Knies have raised is abandoned” (388-389). The second was that the newer historical school “not content merely with advocating use of the Historical method hasten to put the theory into practice” (389). Writing about the historical monographs that were produced, Gide and Rist say, “the names 211 of Schmoller, Brentano, Held, Biicher, and Sombart are known to every student of economic history. Marshall, the greatest of modern theorists has on more than one occasion paid them a glowing tribute” (390). They then go on to discuss the spread of the movement to England where “the influence of the school becomes quite plain after 1870” (390). “In France the success of the movement has not been quite so pronounced, although the need for it was as keenly felt there. Although it did not result in the founding of a French school of economic historians, the new current of ideas has influenced French economic thought in a thousand ways” (391). Some of these ways are listed. The next section discusses the critical ideas of the historical school. “The Historians held that the greatest sin committed by Smith and his followers was the inordinate stress which they laid upon the universality of their doctrines.” They maintained that economic laws “so far from being categorically imperative, should be regarded always as being subject to change in both theory and practice” (393). Knies especially emphasized “that economic laws are at once provisional and conditional” (394). They criticize Knies as being “hopelessly wrong in thinking that this relativity is enough to separate the laws of economics from the laws of other sciences.” Despite these criticisms “modern economists have come to the conclusion that the criticisms of the historical school are sufficiently well-founded to justify them in demanding greater precision so as to avoid those mistakes in the future. Dr Marshall for one, adopts Mill’s expression, and defines an economic law as ‘a statement of economic tendencies” (395-396). They think that that conception “ts the universally adopted doctrine today” (396). Gide and Rist discuss the charges of the historical school that are “leveled against the narrowness and insufficiency of the psychology” on which their laws are based (396). They especially attack the view “that personal interest is a sole motive and that there are many others” (396). But they criticize the school for extreme views about this because they point out that Mill, among others, had drawn attention to these ideas much earlier. Gide and Rist then discuss “the charge of abusing the employment of abstraction and deduction, and greater stress is laid upon this count than upon either of the other two. Instead of deduction the new school would substitute induction based upon observation (398). Gide and Rist also criticize this attack of the historical school because it “confuses two things, mainly the particular use which the Classical writers have made of the abstract deductive method, and the method itself” (899). “Happily the controversy as to the merits of the rival methods, which was first raised by the historical school, has no very great interest at the present moment. Most eminent economists consider that both are equally necessary” (400). Biicher, “an author to whom the historical school is indebted for some of its most valuable contributions” is quoted (401). Gide and Rist have a long section on the positive ideas of the historical school (401-409). They begin this section “what made the criticism of the historians so penetrating was the fact that they held an entirely different view conceming the scope and aim of economics.” They say that “the study of economic phenomena may be approached from two opposite standpoints, which we may designate the mechanical and the organic” (401). They put the earlier economists mainly in the mechanical group. They explain, at some length, that the concept is too limited. On the other hand, the founders of the historical school felt “if we want to understand all the different aspects of this life we must make a study of its economic activity, not as it were i#7 vacuuo but in connection with the medium through which it finds expression, and which alone can help us to understand its true nature” (403).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES The historians maintain that the early economists “have kept the science within too narrow 393 limits.” They felt “there is room for another study more closely akin to biology, namely, a ? detailed description and an historical explanation of the constitution of the economic life of each nation. Such is the positive contribution of the school in the study of political economy, and it fairly represents the attitude of most modern economists toward history” (404). Gide and Rist note that “the earlier historians claimed a higher mission still for the historical 212 study of political economy. It must not only afford an explanation of concrete economic reality, but it must also formulate the laws of economic development” (405). They go on to say, however, that that idea was held by only a few of them and even they did not agree on how it should be done (405). They havea long section on the striking similarities between the ideas of the historical school and those of Auguste Comte (1798-1857) (406-407). According to Gide and Rist, “the historical school is mistaken if it imagines that history alone can afford an explanation of the present or will ever enable us to discover those special laws which determine the evolution of nations.” However, the historical school “has a perfect right to demanda place [for history PRS] beside economic science,” and it is “undoubtedly destined to occupy a position still more prominent in the study of economic institutions, in statistical investigation and above all in economic history” (408). The historical school has “succeeded in infusing new life into the study of economics and stimulating new interest in political economy by bringing it again into touch with contemporary life. They have thrown new light upon the past and collected a wonderful amount of first class material” (409). 10. Gray’s fine little text is written to “serve as a useful stepping stone to the more comprehensive works of Haney and of Gide and Rist” (7). He is obviously familiar with the writings of many of the members of the German historical schools. It is one of the subjects he had to neglect. “Even the German historical school has gone without causing me much misgivings: somehow the old controversy with regard to ‘methods’ seems less important today than a generation ago, and, with this decline in significance, the leading figures in that controversy seem less insistently to require notice” (6-7). There is no mention of the historical school in the index and, as far as I could tell, this is the only mention of it in his text. He does not neglect some of the members of the German historical schools. Roscher is mentioned three times, always in connection with his comments on someone else. “It is a wise observation of Roscher’s that in Rome it was the most practical men who concerned themselves most with economic matters; and their most influential thought on economic questions, being in effect the economics of the Civil Service and the Law Courts, was never formally propounded” 33). Writing about Nicholas Oresme (Bishop of Lisieux, 1320-1382) on money, he says while it is “scarcely deserving the wild praise bestowed upon it by Roscher as a theory of money which is still perfectly valid today, [it] is nevertheless a sufficiently remarkable performance” (61-62). Writing about Johann Heinrich von Thiinen (1783-1850) Gray says that “Roscher hails him as one of the earliest to view wages as something more than the price of a commodity, labour” (246). The same practice of mentioning members of the historical school in the context of other topics is true of Schmoller. “In the somewhat hackneyed phrase of Schmoller, Mercantilism is merely ‘state-making’ . ..“ (69). His work on Mercantilism is also mentioned (373).
Weber is mentioned in connection with his work on Protestantism and the spirit of Capitalism (72-73). Gray refers to the German historical schools indirectly when he says that the “German idealist school” brings the charge of materialism against Adam Smith (1723-1790) (138). In the same context he mentions that Hildebrand, List, Miller, and in our own day, Spann represent a well defined line of criticism (152).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


11. Gruchy has 6 index entries under the heading “Historical economists.” Because Gruchy The German emphasizes the American contribution to modern economic thought most of these references are 1,: in the context of the German influences on American economists. historical schools Of John Rogers Commons (1862-1945) he says, “In his scientific approach he has more in common with the Historical school of Gustav Schmoller and Carl Biicher. The historical economist stressed fact gathering rather than deductive analysis, and substituted an evolutionary theory of economic stages for the static theoretical system of the classical 213 economists. The two dominant characteristics of economic analysis of the historical school were its historicity and its relativity. Economic science was to be nurtured by historical rather than by logical analysis; and, in addition, economic principles were always conceived to be relative to particular historical epochs. Thus, there was little of the universal or logically formal about the economic speculations of the historical school” (156). Commons is careful to point out that he seeks to avoid the errors of both the formalistic economics of the classical and neo-classical economists and the descriptive economics of the historical economists. He seeks a union of the two types of analysis that will not overemphasize either the logicality or the historicity of economic behavior (233). Gruchy makesa critical pomt that most historians of economic thought have missed in their discussion of the German historical schools. Writing about Mitchell he says, “the historical method, whether in the hands of a Schmoller or a Veblen, had not proven to be as fruitful as some social thinkers had hoped, because, without refined statistical techniques, it was very difficult to extract much significance from accumulations of historical data” (265). He goes on to explain that the historical school never seriously threatened economic orthodoxy “for the simple reason that it was unable to utilize effectively the vast supply of historical data which it had laboriously accumulated” (265-266). Writing about the social economics of John Maurice Clark (1884-1963) and the influence that Charles Horton Cooley (1864-1929) had on him, Gruchy says that Cooley “was equally critical of the historical school of economists which, he felt, had been much too empirical in its studies to provide the theoretical basis of a more realistic economics” (347). Gruchy says that John Maurice Clark sought “a continuous stream of development which shows no signs of drying up” in the USA. “First came the period of orientation between 1860 and 1883 in which the classical economics of John Stuart Mill and the teachings of the German historical school were combined to prepare the ground for the marginal economics which flowered at the end of the last century” (394). The last time the German historical school is discussed is in connection with Rexford Guy Tugwell (1891-1979). Simon Nelson Patton (1852-1922) was one of Tugwell’s teachers who influenced Tugwell greatly. Patton had gone to Germany for advanced graduate study in economics “and had received from the German historical economists an outlook on economic matters which was very different from the viewpoint of the English classical economists”. He found that “a new standpoint from which to view social affairs was introduced by the German economists. They saw that society, and not the individual, was the center of economic activity; and that productive power depends more largely upon the organization of society than upon the material development. They began with an investigation of man in society, and not with nature.” It was this over-all, collective view borrowed from the German historical economists that became the point of departure of Patton’s dynamic economics and that was later passed on to Tugwell (408-409). 12. Haney’s classic has 19 entries to “historical school” in the index of subjects in addition to entries for every one of the usual members of the German historical schools in the index of names. Early on, there is a discussion of the revolt of the historical school against the abstract deductive method. “The historical school, as will be seen more in detail, denied that economic doctrines, especially if looking toward applications as industrial policies, are good for all times
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


and all places. Human nature itself, they urged, is not unchangeable. The assumption of 393 deductive economists that men are guided in their economic activities by self-interest, they ’ refused to adopt as a premise until it had been established inductively by observation of the phenomena of actual life and the manifestations of human motives. Also, they insisted that such conclusions as that free trade and division of labor are advantageous or that wages and interest tend to become equalized among different industries, are questionable, and can be established 214 only by the collection of many particular cases drawn from different places and times” (23). Haney has an interesting aside aboutJean-Charles-Leonard Simonde de Sismondi (1773-1842). “No evidence has been found that the German Historical school acknowledges a debt to Sismondi, yet it is probable that he was well known to the leaders of the school ... and some small degree of influence seems not unlikely” (400). There are passing references to the German historical school in his discussion of Leslie. Leslie is called “The successor of Richard Jones” (529) and it is said, “he knew the German historical school through the works of Roscher and Knies” (530). Haney also states that Ingram “was perfectly familiar with the German Historical school” (533). Haney has an extensive chapter of 14 pages on the German historical schools (537-551). After an introduction, he discusses the general nature and main branches of the historical school. “It is essential to an understanding of the historical movement in Germany, to distinguish between the older group which originated that movement, and the younger group which carried the tendency further, even going to extremes” (539). Of the older group he says, “its member were attacking and tearing down the faulty abstract-deductive methods which they found predominant, and, while they formulated a method of their own, and their spirit of free investigation had most valuable positive results, still the negative aspect of their work was very large. They did not deny the existence of laws in economics, but they attacked absolutism and abstract deduction from ideal posiulants [original italics]. The younger group sought to develop and apply the historical method further, and in so doing they took a positive stand the older group would not have sanctioned... .. They differ from the older group in that they went so far as to deny the existence of non-empirical laws in economics” (539). Haney’s definition of the German historical schools is broad but omits any reference to their interests in the role of the state. When therefore the historical school is referred to in a general way, we should mean a very broad movement embracing all those economists who emphasize the relativity of laws and institutions, the inductive method of reasoning from concrete historical data, and the interrelations among human motives and among the social sciences (539-540). He then discusses Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies. He mentions Knies’ criticism of Roscher “for the unusual and unscientific way in which he uses the term ‘historical method’ and for believing that a comparison of historical conditions which are merely similar, not identical, will lead to the establishment of laws of cause and effect” (543-544). Haney wonders “if, after all, there is much difference between the methods of the older members of the Historical school and those of the men they criticize; and no little misunderstanding has arisen on this very point” (544). He concludes, “this group will be remembered as standing for a new spirit and a fresh point of view. It cannot be maintained that their effect was merely negative, for in America and England and Italy and France the stimulus of their thought was a virtual emancipation, and produced profound results. Moreover, the significance of their part in leading up to the more positive historical thought which followed, is to be remembered” (545). He then goes on to describe the younger historical school and begins with Schmoller. He has a paragraph on Biicher. Then he does something very few historians of economic thought do. He discusses Schdffle, “although he perhaps belongs in the older group, [he] may also be mentioned
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


as an important recent economist who had affinities with the school” (647). He mentions his The German concept of society as an organic system. : : Haney thinks “it seems fair to say that the movement initiated by the German historical historical schools schools had clearly ceased to exist as a distinct factor by the time of the first world war” (549). In his “Summary and critical estimates” Haney writes, “directly, it led to results which were largely negative. Indirectly, however, as has already been emphasized, the thought of the school was one of the great liberating and stimulating forces of the nineteenth century, bringing 215 positive results in the economic theory of all the advanced nations” (549). His conclusion is: “the service of the historical school has been to counteract an undoubtedly over-abstract tendency. The concrete realities of time and place had been stressed. In applying a principle of least sacrifice, some economists have forgotten what one people or time considers a gain, another may look upon with indifference or regard as a loss. So it is also with the ‘at any given stage of the industrial arts’ qualification of the ‘law’ of diminishing returns”. “The school has broadened the conception of human motives by emphasizing the interaction of non-economic and economic motives. The interrelation existing among the several social sciences has accordingly been kept in mind. It has clearly shown the fallacy of extreme individualism and laissez faire”. “Finally, the followers of the historical school are to be thanked for valuable studies in economic history, — studies from which data have been obtained for verifying and correcting the theory of the classicists. In connection with the two preceding paragraphs, it may be added that the historical school has been a force tending to broaden the scope of economics” (551). In his discussion of Veblen and institutionalism he compares and contrast the views of the Historical school with those of the institutionalists of the 1914-1946 period (722-723). Haney has an extensive chapter on economic thought in Germany and Austria from 1870 to the second world war (Chapter XL, 813ff). In that chapter he compares the views of some members of the historical school with other developments in Germany. For example, “Schmoller, while strongly subjective, did not accept marginal utility as a determinant of market value, believing that cost theories afford a simpler solution” (817). As elsewhere, he puts people into the historical school that many authors do not. For example, he says this school included not only Sombart but also “F. Klemwachter, and G. Ruhland, but also such writers as R. Eberstadt, Grabski, J. Plenge, and Stephinger” (819). In his discussion of the general characteristics of German economics he says, “it has stood for much nationalism as opposed to individualism and cosmopolitanism. A careful analysis of the functions of the state is a service for which we must thank German thinkers” (830). Later on he says, “a broad analysis of economic motives is characteristic of German economic thought. National, moral, and ethical factors have been more allowed for than in English economics”. “The German tendency to distinguish between ‘price’ and ‘value’ represents an important difference for the lack of which English-speaking economists have suffered. This no doubt facilitates an understanding of the difference between subjective and objective values, and it suggests the difference between ‘value economics’ and ‘price economics” (830). “The German economist tends to take the biological or organic point of view regarding evolution of institutions, thus avoiding the particular form of absolutism so common in English and French economics” (830-831). In his discussion of economics in Italy from 1870 to the second world war Haney mentions Cossa and that Cossa studied in Germany under Roscher, “yet, on the whole he is a follower of the doctrines of the Classical school, and, while very sympathetic with historical studies, he severely criticizes the methods of the younger historical school” (834). In his discussion of economics in France from 1870 to the second world war Haney mentions that there was very little German influence in France up to the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. One
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES result of the war was an increase in curiosity concerning German thought (851). He mentions that 393 Gide studied under Roscher. ? Haney does not forget that there was a historical school in England. This is discussed in the chapter on economics in England from 1870 to 1936 and elsewhere. In the section on economics in the US from 1870 to 1946, Haney says Ely may “on the whole, be classed as one of the older Historical school” (894). Ely’s thought is also said to show the 216 influence of Wagner. 13. Heinmann devotes a short chapter, VII, of 7 pages to historiciscm and institutionalism. He begins his discussion of the Historical school by saying that it “never achieved a quite clear formulation of its doctrine. The one thing that can be said of this school with certainty is that it represents a reaction against classical theory” (177). For him the founders of the “so-called” older historical school, Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies, though engaging in a spirit of discussion of these methodological principles remained on a plane of theory in their own scholarly work (178). This echoes Cossa. He goes on to say, “it was only the younger historical school that turned its back on economic theory and launched those monumental studies in economic history which opened new horizons of knowledge and understanding and need no methodological justification. Schmoller, Brentano, Georg Friedrich Knapp, and Karl Buecher are the leading historians of the older generation, and even they were surpassed by Max Weber and Wermer Sombart in the younger generation” (178). Heinmann is one of the very few who explains just how the ideas of the Historical school blocked theoretical studies. He uses the example of Knapp’s The State Theory of Money. He quotes Knapp’s declaration in the first sentence of the book that, “money is a creature of the legal order.” Heinmann says this blocked any theoretical studies by putting forth “the illusion that the government had the power to control money ...” (180). He goes on to say, “as a matter of fact, the historical school seriously erred in denying the existence of what it called mechanical laws of economic life and insisting that man is motivated by ethical and other impulses different from what he conceives to be his own interest” (180). He goes on in this vein. Heinmann does admit, “there were other members of the historical school who did not disdain economic theory” (180). He uses Spiethoff and his fully developed business cycle theory as an example. Heinmann says that the dispute between Schmoller and Menger “gradually came to an end for lack of a real problem when it was recognized that the two points of view complement each other” (178). The final reference, on page 214, simply says that Karl Gustav Cassel’s (1866-1945) theory of the business cycle has a distinctly historicist approach. Several important individual members of the various historical schools are also discussed, most often not in connection with their affiliation to any school. Heinemann intended to write, “a history of ideas rather than of authors” (V). 14. Homan has are five entries in the index under “historical school.” Most of the entries are in connection with the views of Veblen and Marshall. “Nor can Veblen find anything much more favorable to say of the historical or the Marxian schools of thought. The early historical economists, as represented by Roscher, he considers to have proceeded on a tacit assumption of Hegalian metaphysics, regarding history as a self-realizing life process, active, self-determining, unfolding by inner necessity. The search for the laws of this spiritual unfolding on its economic side resulted in nothing better than the view that culture moves in cycles, together with a few rather vague or obvious generalizations about cultural sequences. The latter branch, as represented by Wagner, is not occupied with theoretical work, taking over such doctrins as it needs from classical economics. For the other branch, as represented by Schmoller, Veblen entertains a considerable respect, particularly as regards his examination of the origins of economic institutions. He feels, however, that Schmoller fails to give any adequate scientific
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


treatment of more recent economic phenomena and of the cultural influences which have shaped The German them” (125). : . In his discussion of Marshall, Homan writes, “he was much impressed by the complexity of historical schools actual economic life and felt that economic science must furnish a competent tool for dealing with concrete facts and problems. The theories of the German historical economists interested him, and the writings of the socialists found him a sympathetic reader. But his mind refused to accept the dogma of either, and he applied his most earnest efforts to studying, understanding, and 217 interpreting the economic life of his time” (203-204). Later he writes, “in all Marshall’s work, the influence of the historical economist is evident in the analysis of the institutions and customs that constitute the living body of the economic system. As they leave his hand, economic theories are applicable only to the particular stage of development at whicha civilization finds itself. They are valid only insofar as they are based upon premises that represent the actual situation. Economic laws are thus not of universal validity, but are applicable only to the behavior of human beings as it is shaped by the particular social environment in which they live” (264-265). Most of the economists of the German historical schools would agree with this approach. The final chapter is entitled, “The Present Impasse” (437-468) and is based on the observation “that those economists who concern themselves with general theory hold widely divergent ideas of the purpose, scope, and method of economics” (439). The last reference to the historical school comes when he is describing what he calls a “new attitude” by which he really means the growth of institutionalism. In certam aspects, the new attitude took forms that caused it to be described as a recrudescence of the influence of the historical school. Something more than that, however, appears to have been contained in it. What appears to have happened was an infiltration of ideas from other fields of knowledge (444). Homan thinks that the economists who share this new attitude call “for no orthodoxy” and “the dissenting economist can hardly be regarded as forming a ‘school’”’(445). “The unity lies mainly on the negative side, in a common critical attitude to economic analysis of the traditional sort. On the constructive side they are a race of freelances, with a rather common feeling for historical research and interpretation, quantitative analysis, realistic description, and only such abstract theory as is necessary to the analytical treatment of specific problems” (445). For them, “St is the scientific spirit of the investigator, not the accumulated body of truth, that achieves the position of importance” (445). 15. Hunt writes in the radical tradition, see the section “Comments on the Social Perspective Underlying the Present Book” (633-ff). There is not a word in the book about the German historical schools nor is there anything about the contributions made by any of the members of those schools. 16. Ingram’s classic history has an introduction by Ely. Ely emphasizes the point that “Dr Ingram was first of all a follower of Auguste Comte, but as an economist he was most in sympathy with the German historical school, Roscher, Knies, Schmoller and others associated with them in Germany and elsewhere” (vii). His introduction is a sober but glowing tribute. The one index entry is to the “historical school,” a long chapter, VI. The chapter begins with a discussion of Comte’s approach and critique. In it Ingram claims that Comte began a new movement in economic science of which the appearance of the German Historical school was the second manifestation. He traces the origin of the school to Roscher and has a long quotation from Roscher giving Roscher’s views of the essence of the historical method (196). This is followed by almost a page long discussion of the work of Hildebrand and Knies. After this Ingram makes “two points which seem to be open to criticism and the position taken by some German economists of the historical school” (199). One of these, and he singles out Knies, is that “he considers the error of overlooking varieties of local circumstances and
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES nationality to be quite as serious as that of neglecting differences in the stage of historical 393 development. But this is certainly not so” (199). ? The second criticism is that “some members of the school appear, in their anxiety to assert the relativity of the science, to fall into the error of denying economic laws altogether; they are at least unwilling to speak of ‘natural law’ in relation to the economic world” (200). Ingram then discusses Roscher and lists many of his writings. He concludes this section, “but 218 it cannot be alleged that he has done much toward the transformation of political economy, which his earliest labors seem to announce; and Cossa appears to be right in saying that his dogmatic work has not affected any substantial modification of the principles of Hermann and Rau” (201). His list of the followers of the historical method is interesting. It includes Brentano, Held, Nasse, Schmoller, Hermann Résler (1834-1894), Schaffle, von Scheel, Schénberg and Wagner (201). The leading ideas which have been most strongly insisted upon by the German historical school are the necessity of accenting the moral element in economic study, the close relation which necessarily exists between economics and jurisprudence (201, 202), and “a different conception of the functions of the state from that entertained by the school of Smith” (203). Ingram elaborates, the “German historical school recognizes the state as not merely an institution for the maintenance of order, but as the organ of the nation for all ends which cannot be adequately effected by voluntary individual effort. Whenever social aims can be attained only or most advantageously through its action, that action is justified” (203). After a discussion of the debates around the role of the state and the political activities of many members of the German historical school, Ingram claims that the result of the investigations of the German historical school have resulted in the fact that “it has come to light that the one thing needful is not merely a reform of political economy but its fusion in a complete science of society. This is the view long since insisted upon by Auguste Comte; and its justice is daily becoming more apparent” (206). In line with Cossa’s critique when he discusses the issue of abstract economics he says, “but the error of these economics lies, not in the use, but in the abuse of abstraction” (207). Throughout his discussion he refers to specific works of the German historical school and says that without doubt they have “given to that country at the present time the primacy in economic studies. German influence has been felt in the modification of opinions in other countries — most strongly, perhaps, in Italy and least so in France. In England it has been steadily making way, though retarded by the insular indifference to the currents of foreign thought which has eminently marked our dominant school” (209-210). He then turns to a discussion of the influence of the German historical school in Italy with much attention to Cossa, of whom he says, “whilst refusing his adhesion to this school on the grounds that it reduces political economy to a mere narrative of facts, — an observation which, we must be permitted to say, betrays an entire misconception of its true principles, — [he] admits that it has been most useful in several ways, and especially as having given the signal for a salutary, though as he thinks, an excessive, reaction against the doctrinaire exaggerations of the older theorists” (212). Ingram does not think that the historical school has made so strong an impression in France as it has in Italy. OfJerome Adolphe Blanqui’s (1798-1854) great history he says that it “is not, indeed, entitled to a very high rank, but it was serviceable as a first general draft” (213). He then gives more than two pages of references to French works. This is followed by a 14 page discussion on the historical school in England in which he comments on many of the major members of that school and those who follow some of the precepts of the historical method (216-229). He follows the same procedure of commenting on works by Americans that begins, “for a long time, as we have already observed, little was done by America in the field of economics” (230). But the comments end on an optimistic note, “there is every reason to believe with Leslie
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


that America will take an active part both in bringing to light the economic problems of the The German future and in working out their solutions” (232). : : There is an addendum on recent developments with a section on Germany by William Amasa historical schools Scott (1862-1944) in which he says, “the influence of the historical school is still dominant in Germany” (256). This section is notable because of the extensive discussion it contains of Schmoller’s views (262-264). 17. Kuhn has only one index entry, “historical school.” However, a subentry says one should 219 also see Hildebrand, Knies, List, Roscher, Schmoller, Sombart, Toynbee and Weber. The main entry refers to a discussion of historicism that occupies but three pages (417-419). It begins with a discussion of List as “perhaps the most important among the intellectual antecedents” of the historical school (417). According to Kuhn, “historicism proposed in fact not a new theory, but rather a certain attitude toward, or outlook on, economic research” (417). Because the writers “tend to be loquacious” and historical monographs do not “yield their kernels of truth very elegantly,” “the reader, if not the author himself may be hard put to identify just what constitutes im a particular case a scientific advance or innovation” (417). “For these and other reasons it would have been disturbing, if not incongruous, if we had interspersed in previous chapters reflections on the contributions of the Historical school to the growth of economic thought” (417). Kuhn admits that some of the earlier parts of his history “might have absorbed to their benefit more generous doses of the quality of thinking for which the historical school fought its battles and suffered abuse. On the other hand, its members proved often strangely unsympathetic to anything that faintly smacked of the abstract, deductive quality of Ricardian or, for that matter, Jevonian propositions. If we add to this fact that members of the historical school considered the state as an agent to promote social improvement and economic growth, while members of the classical and neoclassical schools were basically noninterventionist, we need not be surprised that between them scientific intercourse tended to be acrimonious” (417). Brief comments about Roscher, Knies and Hildebrand follow. Roscher was said to have embraced views that differed only little from those of English liberals, did not condemn theory just because it was arrived at deductively, and did not rely much on the state as an agent of economic welfare. Positively, he undertook without bias an awe inspiring amount of detailed historical research (418). Knies is described as “a great skeptic and profound thinker” who proclaimed “the impossibility of framing universally valid policies, but nevertheless revealed himself as an able theorist who did little to inculcate economic historicism” (418). Hildebrand’s chief contribution “may well have been his establishment in 1863 of the Yearbooks for Economics and Statistics.” He “expressed hostility to the concept of natural law and emphasized the character of economics as a cultural science” (418). Schmoller is characterized as a leader of “a second generation of protagonists of the Historical
school” (418). His controversy with Menger is mentioned as is “his fervent belief in social reform”
(418-419).
Bucher is said to be a second line defender of the historical method and is given as an example of one who was “more skillful in blending induction and deduction” (419). “In the next generation we find two men whose scholarly idiosyncrasies, coupled with rare brilliance secure them a permanent place in the annals of historical research...” (419). The reference is to Sombart and Weber. Sombart’s Modern Capitalism is mentioned as is Weber’s The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Toynbee is said to have seen “at an early time that the historical (inductive) and the deductive methods complement each other and that emphasis on one or the other is largely determined by the nature of a given scientific problem” (419).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Kuhn also has a section “Biographical notes” which contains short, less than one paragraph,
393 biographical notes of 18 figures in the history of thought. These include List, Roscher, Knies, ? Hildebrand, Schmoller, Bucher, Sombart, Weber and Toynbee (436-438). 17B. Laidler’s 1948 book, Social-Economic Movements: An Historical and Comparative Survey of Sociahsm, Communism, Cooperation, Utopianism; and Other Systems of Reform and Reconstruction has many duplications of his 1927 History of Socialist Thought. The earlier book 220 will be discussed first.
The 1927 History has no mention of Hildebrand, Knies, List, Spiethoff or Weber in the index. Most of the discussions occur in Chapter XXXI, “Miscellaneous socialisms” (641) in the last section of the chapter “Socialism of the chair and state socialism.” In discussing the origin of the Socialism of the Chair movement Laidler says, “Precursors of this school were Karl Johann Rodbertus (1805-75) and the Frenchman Charles Brook DuPont-White (1807-78). The scientific leader of this school and its most advanced member was Adolph Wagner, the Berlin professor. Gustav Schmoller, Brentano, Adolph Held, Schaffle and other scholars in German universities were likewise members. In 1871, Herr Hoffenheim in the National Zeitung dubbed a number of those professors Katheder Sozialisten or socialists of the chair. This term was accepted by Professor Schmoller in his opening address at a gathering at Eiesenach in 1872 which led to a considerable movement in Germany and the formation of the Union for Social Politics. Schmoller is then quoted, the last part of which is that the state “should concern itself, in an altogether new spirit with his [the laborer PRS] instruction and training, and should see that labor is not conducted under conditions which must have for their inevitable effect the degradation of the laborer” (669-670). Laidler’s evaluation is, “negatively, then, the German professorial socialists vigorously attacked the empty abstractions of the Manchester school of economics, declaring that this school had no appreciation of the higher duties of the state in the protection of the working class or of the ethical side of economic life. At the same time, they frowned upon the incipient social movement as being directed against the existing state and held that, if the just demands of the workers were satisfied by the state, the hold of the social democrats on the working class would be loosened” (670). Laidler then discusses the professorial socialists and the state. For them the state was a moral person “arising out of the essential characteristics with which God had endowed humanity. State obligations, they held, are sacrosanct . .. Humanity progresses, and ever must progress through church and state. The state, in fact, according to Schmoller is the grandest moral institution for the education and development of the human race. In practical politics the Wagner-Schmoller school abjured violent or sudden change, and looked forward to a slow evolution toward improved labor conditions” (670). Laidler goes on to discuss Wagner’s law of government which, essentially, was that it would become ever larger. He then gives Ely’s comments that if carried out, Wagner’s law would “establish a socialist state” (671). Schmoller and Wagner were said to have great influence on Bismarck because “the socialists of the chair were no mere esoteric philosophers. They were vitally concerned with the problems of the Germany of their day and they exerted a considerable influence on the outstanding statesman of Europe — Bismarck” (671). Then follows a long section on state socialism because “the social legislation of Bismarck has been often referred to as state socialism. The term state socialist has had, however, during the last few decades many connotations” (671). In the last chapter, “General summary,” “the school of state socialism and of socialism of the chair of which Schmoller, Wagner, Bismarck and others were representatives” is mentioned as another of the schools of socialism (681).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


It is interesting that Laidler quotes Roscher’s history (27) and Sombart’s works (135, 137), to The German support his arguments. Sombart is also mentioned as a critic along with Eduard Bernstein 1: 2
(1850-1932) of certain phases of the Marxian philosophy (321). historical schools
In Laidler’s later, 1948 book, the section “Socialism of the chair: state socialism” is only slightly rewritten with the main changes being the subheadings. The quotation in the general summary is identical as are the citations to Roscher and Sombart. The index of the 1948 book still lacks any references to Hildebrand, Knies, List, Spiethoff or Weber. 221 18. Landreth alone was the author of the first edition (1976). It was followed by two other editions by Landreth and Colander (third edition 1994). They are not significantly different in their treatment of the historical schools. There are two references in the index. The first is simply to a passing comment in the introduction characterizing the economists of the historical school as “heterodox” (1976, 4). The second set of references is in the context of a section “methodological controversy”. Two subsections are “The older historical school” (1976, 273-274) and “The younger historical school” (1976, 274-276). Somewhat unusual is the extensive treatment of List as a member of the older school. Landreth describes the historical method of the writers of the older school as “a belief that the chief task of economics was to discover the laws governing the stages of economic growth and development (274). He gives them credit for the collection of “large quantities of historical and statistical information to support their analyses of economic development” (274). The discussion of the younger school briefly describes some of Schmoller’s views but emphasizes his controversy with Menger. In line with Landreth’s accepting views of controversy, he thinks “that this controversy did help economists to recognize that theory and history, deduction and induction, abstract model building and statistical data gathering are not mutually exclusive within their discipline” (275). The third edition by Landreth and Colander is much better indexed. It has been reorganized and includes two references to the influence the historical school had on Marshall (286, 290). The discussion of the older and younger historical schools is essentially the same. 19. Morgan’s index has five entries, “Historical school” and five entries “German economists,” of which two overlap. The first reference is “to the detailed empiricism of historical economics” (1). It is in the context of a discussion of econometrics which “reveal the relationships of economic theory ... strikingly different from those of the nineteenth-century economics” (1). The next reference is “of course, the desire for a scientific economics as opposed to a theological or historical economics was not shared by all nineteenth-century economists. Arguments about the validity of using mathematics and statistics in economics both predate and postdate the development of econometrics” (Footnote 2, 2). The next reference is “late nineteenth-century economists of the historical and institutionalist schools tended to welcome the growing wealth of statistical facts without necessarily adopting statistical explanations. In Germany the historical school of political economists formed the nucleus of a wider intellectual circle which warmly embraced statistical thinking. This circle provided intimate links between statistical thinkers such as Lexis and Engel and historical economists such as Schmoller” (5). She then discusses how this empirical statistical strand entered the American insitutionalist school in the late nineteenth century because many of its members had been trained in Germany with economists of the historical school. In her introduction to business cycles Morgan says, “full blown empiricism, such as that of the German historical school, suffered from the inability to synthesize its masses of evidence into coherent theories” (16). Discussing Mitchell’s view of business cycles she says, “these long term developments he claimed were gradual and continuous (unlike the earlier stage theories of development held by
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES some nineteenth-century German economists), and were associated with institutional or 293 organizational change in the economy” (47). ? Discussing the work of Ernst Wagemann (1884-1956) and of the Berlin Institute of Statistical Analysis he headed, she says, “unfortunately, the nineteenth-century methodenstreit between the theoretical deductive and the empirical inductive approaches was still sufficiently alive in Germany to stifle synthetic work (particularly quantitative and econometric developments) in
Further discussing Wagemann, Morgan says that he “made the interesting suggestion that approaches to statistical business cycle study could be characterized nationally: German economists view the economy from the point of view of a doctor dealing with a human patient, while the Americans saw the economy as ‘a powerful piece of machinery” (66). 20. Negishi’s work is poorly indexed with no references to individuals who were in the various schools. It does have two references under “historical school” although there are more. His discussion begins by contrasting English classical economics with the German historical school that “emphasized the importance of the concrete and inductive method and of the descriptive work on historical details, under the influence of the romantic movement of historicism” (16). He conventionally includes Roscher, Knies and Hildebrand as representatives of the older school with List a precursor. The younger school is dominated by Schmoller (16). Negishi considers that Weber’s work “may be considered as self-criticism of the German historical school in its final stages” (17). He includes Schumpeter’s six points of view which resulted from the “detailed historical research of the historical school” (17). He discusses the German’s passion for social reform and says that “institutionalism is the American version of the historical school” (19). All of the comments except one occur in the first chapter “A bird’s-eye view of the history of economics.” The last mention is in chapter 8 “Menger and the Austrian school.” Negishi states that, because of the influence of Schmoller and his followers, “Menger’s work was neglected simply because it was useless from the point of view of the historical school which insists that political economy is a historical science and not a theoretical one” (280). 21. Newman has five entries in the index, “German historical school.” Two of them cover the same group of pages. There is an entire chapter, XIX, “The German historical school” (183-208). The chapter begins with a discussion of economics in Germany in the early nineteenth century and emphasizes the effect of German bureaucracy on economics, “in a country run largely by a bureaucracy as much concerned with the regulation of economic life as with public defense, economic questions had to be discussed from the administrative viewpoint” (183). He mentions that German jurisprudence was “radically different from Bentham’s way of building up a code of laws” (185). Newman stresses the approach of the German “historical economists who planned to gradually accumulate factual data about how economic processes actually had run in the past.” Then “they planned to draw up a new set of generalizations which would have the enormous superiority over the generalizations of the classical economists in that they were valid in the sense of actually summarizing what human beings do” (186). This kind of program “would give them conclusions drawn from life itself and therefore applicable to life because they would have the validity of bemg derived from factual study. Thus they would be a far safer guide to economic policy” (186). This is followed by about a page of discussion on “the old historical school” and the main writings of Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies. He then discusses the younger school in the context of the Methodenstreit. After describing Schmoller’s program in some detail, Newman has the longest summary of the Grundriss [Outline ofGeneralEconomic Theory] in any of the histories. It is about two-pages in length (190-192) and is fair and balanced. Newman then critiques Schmoller’s method. Of the Grundriss he writes that it “does not treat any of its subjects in a really detailed fashion. His work has an encyclopedic character lacking in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


depth of treatment” (192). He writes that Schmoller was “a rather severe critic of a good many The German institutions which came into conflict with his ideals of promoting the greatness of Germany by historical school means of the imperial government” (193). He goes on to point out that critics of the book found Istorical SCNOOIS flaws in details “even on the historical side” (193). People also found problems with his economic theory. Newman says that “so long as Schmoller was dealing with the distant past he could be objective; but in dealing with current developments in Germany he saw through spectacles 223 colored by his very strong predilections in favor of a powerful military state regulated through a rather undemocratic government and following a policy of maintaining the vitality of the nation at the highest possible point” (194). Newman concludes his critique “however, if one believes that the inductive method is an indispensable complement to the deductive, he has reason to be grateful for Schmoller’s challenge to the Austrian school. And there were other writers, a little later on, who used his method to good effect in institutional studies” (195). Werner Sombart is given extensive treatment as a later representative of the school (195-203). Although Newman appreciates Sombart’s Der moderne Kapitalismus, he is properly critical of Sombart’s work, The Jews and Modern Capitalism. Newman begins his discussion of Weber in a very curious way. “Our next writer is for some reason seldom given a place in the average history of economic theory, perhaps because he is usually considered a sociologist” (203). In fact the majority of histories of economic thought do mention Weber. After this he has a sound treatment of Weber’s work (203-206). In a very unusual departure from most texts Newman devotes a page to “another offshoot of the German historical school” Richard Ehrenberg (1857-1921). This is because Ehrenberg developed what he called “the exact historical method” (206). Newman concludes the chapter with an appraisal of the German historical school. “The historicist’s main criticism of neoclassical economics was as follows: all human culture is divided into many societies, all different to a greater or lesser degree, and all undergoing constant change and development. Furthermore, all the various cultural aspects of each society are organically interconnected. Therefore any cultural expression of the society, such as its economy, is relative to time and place. Hence abstract economic laws in economics are both invalid and useless. “Their outlook may be stated as follows. Economists must concentrate on historical research. They must examine critically to what extent economic phenomena are governed by natural law, and they must regard economics as an ethico-psychological discipline”. “Further, to Schmoller at least, economics must have social reform as its goals” (207). Newman points out that the historical school gained a few adherents in England and in the Latin countries, and “engaged in a rather fruitless conflict over method with the so called Austrian school” (207-208). Newman’s final judgment is, “their contributions, however, were very great. By using economics as a tool for social reform, they took the professor out of the ivory tower and gave him the task of convincing statesmen of the wisdom of their theories. They also envisaged the study of economics as a dynamic one — the observation of the changes in economic societies through time. This was a welcome change from the arid rationalizations of some of their contemporaries. What they lacked, of course, was adequate statistics on which to base their conclusions, and it was not until much later that their spiritual cousins, the American institutionalists were able to utilize such materials” (208). There are passing references to the historical school in connection with von Wieser (225), Ely is described “as a student of the German historical school” (363), Commons’ work on the documentary history of American industrial society and the history of labor in the USA is said to be “in the tradition of the German historical school, which stressed fact gathering and also favored liberal middle class reform. But Commons went beyond them; he insisted that historical facts be grouped and fused through intelligent speculations to check on theory” (367).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES 22. Niehans has six references to the historical school in the index. The first explains that the 393 academic establishment in Germany was “dominated by the historical school” which “impeded ? the adoption of marginalism” (162). The second states that von Thiinen’s “use of vast masses of facts” endeared him to the adherents of the historical school (174). Nexy he refers to Menger’s views about marginal utility, “as a matter of fact, he was not too far away from the historical school” (222). In a further discussion of Menger, Niehans states that “German economics, then 224 dominated by the historical school under the leadership of Gustav Schmoller, had no use for economic theory (223). He has a sensitive and useful appreciation of Menger’s contributions. The fourth index reference states that Béhm-Bawerk studied political economy with “the leaders of the so-called older historical school, Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies” (225-226). The fifth index reference states that the intellectual style of von Wieser “was in fact, closer to the German historical achool and the ‘socialists of the chair’ than to say, Walras or Wicksell” (232). Niehans also mentions that von Wieser’s earliest known work was a paper he gave in the seminar of “Knies, one of the pillars of the historical school” (232). The final reference is that “Marshall's emphasis on historical evolution puts him close to the historical school” (239). In summary, Niehans does not have a solid discussion of the German historical school. All of the references are in connection with other people and subjects. 23. Mai’s book, strictly speaking, is not a history. The seven hundred most outstanding figures in the development of economic thought and policy are arranged alphabetically, in the form of brief biographical profiles. It is a splendid source and includes all of the main figures in the German historical schools. Some of the secondary figures, such as Réssler, Scheel, and Schénberg are not included. Brief sketches of the lives of the people are included as well as mention of their major works and contributions. Their place in the history of thought is often mentioned, such as that Sombart was “influenced by the historical school” and Schdffle was affiliated with the historical school. Held is not mcluded as a member, while both Nasse and Wagner were mentioned as co-founders of the Verein fiir Sozialpolitik (Association for Social Policy). Mai’s judgments are always prudent and sound. Mai also includes appendix 2, “An Outline of Period and Schools in Economic Thought.” In it he lists the names of the 700 economists according to their viewpoints and trends in time. In the section on the historical school (262) he lists the forerunners of the school, surprisingly not List, but he does include Frangois Xavier Joseph Droz (1773-1850), the French economist and historian. In addition to the members of the British Historical school he has a list of its other followers. 2A. Mitchell's massive two volume history has but one reference to a 64 page chapter on the German historical school. It is Chapter XIX in Volume 2. Interestingly it is entitled, “The German historical school: Gustav von Schmoller.” It begins, “the discussion will turn to another trend in the direction of making the field of inquiry much larger than that which was occupied by the classical economists” (Vol. 2, 523). He says he will first take up the historical school as represented by Gustav von Schmoller. It must be remembered that Mitchell's history was put together from stenographic notes and mimeographed lectures. Mitchell is among the few who cautions that “it is not to be understood that the classical masters had no interest in the historical development of economics” (Vol. 2, 524). With respect to Adam Smith, however, this interest in historical development “was not the part which most impressed his successors, nor did it shape larger issues of his theory” (Vol. 2, 524). He goes on to discuss the historical sides of the works of Robert Thomas Malthus (1766-1834), the Reverend Richard Jones (1790-1855) and Sismondi. In an important footnote, Mitchell points out “the 1830s, a decade after Ricardo’s death witnessed the rise of serious systematical statistical inquiry” (Vol. 2, 527, Note 4). He goes on to cite much evidence for this.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


After discussing this Mitchell says, “but just about the time that the English were convincing The German themselves that the best method of developing economics had been found and that progress had 1,: : been accomplished in applying them in obtaining reliable, scientifically valid results, the historical schools criticism of those methods, which had begun tentatively in Germany a generation before, reached a peak. There had begun to develop a program for making a different type of economics, a type that would rest on carefully established knowledge of existing conditions. This was the work primarily of Germans but it had forerunners as previously noted among the classical economists 225 of Great Britain, and at the time the great historical school was getting underway it had close sympathizers in France, Great Britain and the United States” (Vol. 2, 529-530). “The English school of classical economics, to repeat, was for a considerable time, dominant in Germany and the United States” (Vol. 2, 530). Kar] Heinrich Rau’s (1792-1870) textbook which first appeared in 1826 “dominated instruction in economics in German universities for almost 50 years” (Vol. 2, 531). Rau was John Stuart Mill’s correspondent and his text was used for training public servants. Rau also was critical of historical studies “on the ground they did not show how to improve the present” (Vol. 2, 531). Other German books using classical ideas by von Thiinen and Friedrich Benedikt Wilhelm von Hermann (1795-1868) are mentioned (Vol. 2, 531-532). Mitchell points out that in Germany, in contrast to England, the universities were the center of intellectual life. He has an extensive discussion of how the German universities trained men for the service of the state. “The Germans seem to have taken perhaps 20 years or so to realize that the imported English doctrine was not the kind of explanation they wanted for the economic life of Germany” (Vol. 2, 534). He mentions List and his ideas on the unification of Germany and the need for protection as pushing the recognition that Germany was different (Vol. 2, 534-535). Mitchell’s discussion of cameralwissenschaft (the science of public administration) “has a logical character quite different from that given, particularly by Ricardo, to political economy. It is not set up to be a science like Ricardo’s; that is, it does not try to draw general conclusions on the basis of broad and simple assumptions. It is far more practical in character; it goes into enormous detail in telling what ought to be done” (Vol. 2, 536). “Thus it was possible in one and the same place to teach cameralwissenschaft and classical political economy” (Vol. 2, 536). When it came to solving economic problems based on Ricardo’s thinking the German's found themselves in difficulties. The Germans also contrasted “the comfortable organization of life in Germany with the harsh impersonal organization which was characteristic of Great Britain, and to feel in particular that in German life there existed a great institution of the utmost human significance which was left out of the account given by the British economists, except insofar as they had to deal with matters of taxation; namely, the state” (Vol. 2, 537). “Ideas about what came to be called the relativity of economic doctrine as against the extreme form of British individualism were favored by the fact that the German world of scholarship was thoroughly impregnated with a type of philosophy radically different from the Benthamite type, which most of the British economists accepted explicitly or implicitly” (Vol. 2, 537-538). And this was, according to Mitchell, Hegelianism and the type of jurisprudence recognized by Friedrich Karl von Savigny (1779-1861) (Vol. 2, 538). Mitchell goes on to discuss five reasons why classical theory was undermined in Germany. The first is that the institutional situation which is “tacitly supposed in the work of Ricardo and his contemporaries was different in Germany from what it was in England” (Vol. 2, 539). The second reason is that “the whole spirit of cameralwissenschaft was opposed necessarily, because of the difference in the institutional spirit to the spirit of classical economics” (Vol. 2, 539). The third reason was because of “the rise of the nationalistic ideal in Germany, particularly as it was represented by List” (Vol. 2, 539). The fourth reason was that the German school of jurisprudence in Germany was “beginning to adopt an historical viewpoint getting away from the reasoning on all sorts of abstract bases” (Vol. 2, 539).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES The final reason was that “the whole philosophical background of Englishmen of that 393 generation of utilitarians particularly was almost totally at variance with the philosophical > background of the corresponding generation of German scholars” (Vol. 2, 540). “In short, the rise of the German historical school is to be traced primarily to the efforts on the part of able, intellectually vigorous, Germans to use the British doctrines constructively, and to the resulting discovery that the account of human behavior which had been built up by British 226 ao did not apply very successfully as an account of economic behavior in Germany” (Vol. 2, 541). “Consequently, in the 1840s and 50s there was the beginning of formal criticism of the classical doctrines, and in the 70s and 80s there is the gradual rise of a constructive school of workers who describe themselves as ‘historical economists.’ Their program called for an exhaustive systematic investigation of the development of economic institutions, not only in their own country but elsewhere for as long a period as the necessary materials could be had. They planned the gradual accumulation of data running far back into the past and coming up to the present. When the necessary factual data had been assembled, they would then draw a new set of generalizations which would have enormous superiority over the generalizations of the classical economists, in that they would be valid in the sense of summarizing what human beings actually do” (Vol. 2, 541). Mitchell writes, “in the middle of the nineteenth century there appeared in Germany, as noted before, vigorous critics of the English political economy who, in later time, came to be accepted as representatives of the early historical school. Accounts of their work are in all the histories of political economy and there is little need to do more than barely to recall their names and to note the comparatively modest changes in economic theory which they suggested at first. The outstanding figures were Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies” (Vol. 2, 544-545). The leading books of each are briefly described. Knies’s book die Politische Okonomie von Standpunkt dergeschitlichen Methode (Political Economy from the Standpoint of the Historical Method) is called by Mitchell “The first comprehensive treatise on methodology (Vol. 2, 548). Mitchell summarizes his discussions of the books, “the three early books of Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies have a curious definite character. They are almost wholly critical insofar as their aim and outcome is concerned. They call for a certain line of new policy but they do not show how that policy is to be followed. In general, they develop their notions by pointing out the shortcomings of classical economics” (Vol. 2, 548). He goes on to explain in some detail their views about the relativity of economic doctrine and their opposition to the idea that economic doctrine can be true in the same sense that physical laws are valid. He also stresses that they emphasize the necessity of historical study for the understanding of any kind of social activity. He then turns to “the dominating figure, almost from the beginning,” Schmoller (Vol. 2, 549). Mitchell discusses Schmoller’s controversies with Heinrich von Treitschke (1834-1896) and Menger (Vol. 2, 550-551). Mitchell explains why Schmoller “gradually found it impossible to maintain the attitude that there can be no economics that claims to be a science until after the lapse of several generations” (Vol. 2, 554). Mitchell then discusses the two volumes of Schmoller’s major work as a type of economic theory. The work is Grundriss der allgeminem Volkswirthschaftslehre [Outline of General Economic Theory} (Vol. 2, 554). Schmoller, in his introduction deals with something that has always interested Mitchell very much, “a recognition that one of the things which an economist ought to give conscious attention to in his work is the treatment of the general character of human nature.” The book is described in some detail. Each topic in the book is examined by Schmoller, according to Mitchell, from four viewpoints. The first is so far as possible “to examine the historical evolution of an economic institution, and this means in practice any condition which he finds it necessary to touch upon”
(Vol. 2, 558).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


The second viewpoint is that Schmoller “likes to give a statistical picture of how matters The German stand with respect to the topic under discussion in recent times” (Vol. 2, 558). The third approach 1,-: = is that Schmoller “regards it as part of his duty to give what would ordinarily be considered a historical schools theoretical analysis of the problem in hand.” Lastly, “he is seldom content to leave a subject without telling what ought to be done about the matter in question” (Vol. 2, 558). Mitchell describes Schmoller’s social ideas, “Schmoller was somewhat conservative in his social ideas” but “his feelings were very warm. It was not a passive conservatism; it was 227 primarily that of an ardent German patriot who believed most sincerely that the prosperity of the German empire was in the interest of mankind, that the empire had a great historical mission properly to be regarded as belonging within the field of economics” (Vol. 2, 559). Mitchell goes on to explain that Schmoller “was an ardent defender of that whole series of pioneering laws on social insurance” (Vol. 2, 560). He goes on to agree with Ashley’s view that Schmoller’s work was “an Olympian survey” (Vol. 2, 561). He then tells how Schmoller’s work was criticized. According to Mitchell, the greatest weakness of Schmoller’s book is that he throws together the materials “without cementing them” (Vol. 2, 563). Then follows a long section of questions and answers on various subjects and people (563-590). An example: question — “have any points been taken over by British economists from Schmoller?” Answer — “not to any great extent” (Vol. 2, 567). There are several questions and answers about Veblen and Schmoller. In response to another question by a student, one of Mitchell’s judgments is that “No one, however, has made as vigorous an attempt as Schmoller to combine the light that is shed upon economic problems by history and statistics and the evolution of politics as well as by theory in the narrower sense” (Vol. 2, 568). In answer to a student’s question “is there much economic theory in Schmoller?” (Vol. 2, 572). Mitchell denies that the German historical school has made no contribution to economic theory “if by theory is meant a larger understanding of economic behaviour at the present time” (Vol. 2, 572). About the understanding of economic life, Mitchell says, “no one interested in economic affairs can read Schmoller without getting strong impressions that his comprehension of the modern situation has been rendered wider and more secure” (Vol. 2, 573). Schmoller’s Volkuirtschaftslehre “is one of the great books on economics at the end of the nineteenth century which sums up in a most effective fashion an enormous amount of detailed work and has considerable substantive value.... It is a treatise of beginnings, but as such enormously worthwhile and stimulating” (Vol. 2, 574). Mitchell later returns to a discussion of the text and various topics such as that of price and value. He thinks that the errors of detail “are matters of subordinate significance” (Vol. 2, 585). “The important defect is that Schmoller has not succeeded in blending what he brings together into anything like a synthetic whole” (Vol. 2, 585). “Schmoller was the first person who has tried to bring all the resources of the historical, descriptive and theoretical methods together” (Vol. 2, 585). He contrasts Marx and Schmoller. “Marx was a superb theoretical intellect. Schmoller is a very industrious scholar, and the two things do not by any means lead to similar results” (Vol. 2, 587). There is a four-page editorial recapitulation of the discussion (Vol. 2, 590-593). Schmoller’s book has two great defects. Schmoller “allows his interest in economic policy to interfere with his analysis of economic interrelations when dealing with present conditions.” Mitchell would not object to his interest in policy were it not for this interference. The second main defect is that Schmoller “does not succeed in welding together his discussions of economic history, economic theory, economic description and economic policy” (Vol. 2, 593). But against these defects there are many merits. Mitchell’s conclusion is “historico-statistical investigations are necessary parts of the social sciences in general and certainly of economics. They supplement one another. Quantitative analysis, however, is difficult in part for lack of data.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Insofar historical investigation is necessarily imperfect. We shall never be able to make the social 393 sciences on this side what we shall wish they might be. On the other hand, statistical analysis of 7 recent past will doubtless expand greatly and be one of the most important elements contributing toward understanding of current institutional changes” (Vol. 2, 595). Mitchell goes on to explain “the collapse of the German historical school is to be taken, I think, [1938] not as an indication that history is of no value in trying to understand modern economic 228 life, but as evidence that the history needed for that purpose must be worked out more
thoroughly than Schmoller” did (Vol. 2, 595). Mitchell further concludes, “in any event, one general advantage of historical studies is that they help to emancipate us from the schematic and superficial view of human nature that the early classical economists embodied in their homo oeconomicus” (Vol. 2, 596). Mitchell goes on to say, “to repeat, we recognize that historical, statistical and theoretical studies all contribute toward the understanding of economic phenomena, and also that the final justification of economics lies in the contribution it may make to wise public policy” (Vol. 2, 596). 25. Neff has three entries under the caption “German historical school.” They include chapter 25, “The German historical school,” with the names of Roscher, Hildebrand, Knies and Schmoller as a subtitle. The chapter begins, “a reaction against classical economics developed in Germany asa result of emphasis there upon realistic research in the social sciences” (355). After an introduction which mentions Hegelian philosophy and von Savigny there is about a third of a page devoted to a biographical sketch of Roscher. This is followed by a discussion of Roscher’s emphasis upon realistic studies and his theses, which were:
* Political economy is a science that can be explained only in relation to other social sciences.
* Since people are more than a mass of existing individuals, economic investigations cannot be confined to observation of current economic relations.
* As many people as possible should be compared for the purpose of deriving laws from the mass of phenomena. Similarities between old and new civilizations are especially significant.
* The historical method will be slow to acclaim or to condemn economic institutions, for few have been entirely good or completely bad for all peoples (357).
This is followed by a biographical sketch of Hildebrand anda discussion stressing his rejection of cosmopolitan economic theory (358). Then comes a biographical sketch of Knies who is said to be the most determined critic of the classical school. “Relativity and economic theory is stressed; cosmopolitanism and perpetualism are rejected. In fact, Knies goes so far as to deny the existence of economic laws” (359). In his introduction to the younger members of the school Neff says, “although each of the three founders criticize the classical method, they failed to agree as to the aim and scope of the science. The attempt to accomplish this was left to a new group which also took up the task of applying widely the principles of the historical method” (359). Schmoller has a biographical sketch (360) and is given credit as the author “of the most outstanding treatise of the historical school, Outline of General Economic Theory (1900-1904). It contains a huge mass of information ona large variety of topics. In it psychology is introduced to explain motives, and climate and geological structure are recognized as placing limitations. Schmoller set in motion an intensified movement of historical research. As essential techniques of science he recognized the necessity of ‘(1) correct observation, (2) good definition and classification, and (3) the finding of typical forms and causal explanations” (360). He concludes his chapter on the German historical school as follows: “realism was
Schmoller’s keynote. Nationalism was set against individualism, non-economic motives were
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


brought into focus, and relativity of economic theory established. The historical method made a The German lasting contribution to the science of economics, but the tenets of the historical school have been 1,- : superceded as knowledge of the science has progressed” (361). historical schools The historical school is mentioned again in connection with Menger’s criticism of the historical method (397-ff). The final chapter of Neff’s book is “In summary,” (473 ff). It has a section about a page long on the German historical school. “Roscher, Hildebrand, and Knies pioneered in stressing the need for 229 infusion of the historical spirit into economic investigation. They believed that political economy should use the actualities of life as phenomena for study instead of mental abstractions. The economic theorists who contributed to the venture during the three decades following 1843 are known as the older historical school.” “Whereas the older historical school was mainly concerned with theoretical questions, the younger school turned to the history of economics and prepared a multitude of descriptive monographs. The outstanding leader of the younger school was Gustav Schmoller.” “Contrary to the practice of the older school, which drew lessons from universal history without sufficient inquiry into the details of its economic phases and made but slight use of deduction, Schmoller used the combination of induction from historical and_ statistical observation with deduction from the known properties of human nature. Psychological factors according to Schmoller explained motives, while natural and social environment present conditions to be considered in the solutions of an economic problem“ (500-501). The last mention of the German historical schools is “John Bates Clark, noted American economist, while a student at Heidelberg University came under the influence of the German historical school, which held society to be an organism. This concept, lodged in his mind while a student, became fixed in the general body of his economic theory” (503). 26. Oser and Blanchfield have 14 references under the heading “German historical school: and American institutionalism” in their index. All but one of these references occur within chapter 11, “The German historical school” (198-219). After two pages on the social background of the school they turn to the four principles “that were basic in the thinking of the German historical school” (200). The first of these was that “the historical school applied an evolutionary approach to its study of society” (200-201). “The social organism is born, develops and grows, and finally decays and dies.” “This relativistic approach was especially useful in attacking classical economics as being suitable for England but not for Germany” (201). The second principle was that “the historical school was nationalistic, whereas classical economics was individualistic and cosmopolitan. If the social organism is the center of study, if it is the force for dynamic movement, then society and the state rather than the individual occupy the center of the stage.” Later he says in discussing the second point, “the historical school gave great prominence to the need for state intervention in economic affairs and emphasized that the community has interests of its own that are quite distinct from those of the individual” (201). The third principle is that “the economists of the historical school emphasized the importance of studying the economy historically, as part of an integrated whole. Because economic and other social phenomena are interdependent, political economy cannot be treated adequately except in combination with other branches of social science. The historical school criticized the abstract, deductive, static, unrealistic, unhistorical quality of classical and marginalist methodology” (201). They close their discussion of the third principle, “some of the historical economists became opposed to theorizing altogether, denying that there are any valid economic laws, with one exception: They believed that patterns of development are discernable in history and can be generalized into ‘laws of development” (201). The fourth principle is “the historical economists were reformers, although conservative. Political economy, they said, has important ethical tasks.... The demands of justice and morality must be satisfied” (201).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES After discussing the groups the German historical school served or sought to serve Oser and 393 Blanchfield raise the question, “how is the German historical school valid, useful or correct in its 7 time?” (202). They claim, “the evolutionary approach to society and to economic thought provided a necessary antidote to the static thinking of the classical and marginalist schools” (202). The lasting contribution of the German historical school was the realization that “new theories and new ideas must be evoked if we are to understand new situations” (202-203). 230 They also state, “through its nationalism and glorification of the state, this school promoted German unification and economic growth. The historical economists were the leaders in the attack on laissez faire. This theme was a trend of the future. They were astute enough to know that unrestricted free enterprise does not necessarily produce the best possible results for society as a whole. And they were right in their belief that reform can be a substitute for worse upheavals, which might occur if the class struggle is allowed to develop and sharpen” (203). Oser and Blanchfield then pose the question, “how did the German historical school outlive its usefulness?” They answer the question as follows, “the task of the German historical school was completed when economists of various persuasions agreed that historical empirical studies are required to explain the present, to test old theories and to develop new ones” (203). “Today the historical inductive method has become generally accepted as complementary to the abstract deductive approach; changing times and methodological controversies have forced the two into an uneasy but tolerably placid marriage” (204). They point out that the usefulness of the German historical school was diminished by virtue of its success in promoting the economic growth and power of Germany. Germany no longer needs protection and paternalism as it once did. The authors think that the very success of the German historical school’s policies made their analysis unnecessary and useless (204). Because of their nationalism, however, “their ideas seem to lead logically to the holocaust of World War I” (204). “They offered little hope and few dreams of good will to which people could
cling” (204).
This is followed by long discussions of List (204-208), Roscher (208-210) and Schmoller (210-213). Roscher’s ideas on the role of the state and on historical method are quoted at length (208-209). Schmoller’s views on historical research and the role of ethical value judgments are also given attention with two long quotations (211-212). Weber and Sombart are discussed next. Weber was said to consider himself an intellectual descendant of Schmoller (213). This is followed by a rather long section on Sombart (215-219), not all of which is completely accurate. “By 1933 Sombart had becomea full fledged supporter of the Nazi philosophy” (216). “As a devotee of Hitler, he of course glorified the role of the state” (217). “Sombart, like other members of the German historical school, neglected value and distribution theory in favor of history” (218). Oser and Blanchfield conclude the chapter with “according to Wesley C. Mitchell, Sombart’s chief weakness as a scientific inquirer was that he did not restudy and enrich his perceptions as he gathered and assimilated his data. His greatest strength, however, was that his encyclopedic studies and the frequently provocative conclusions he drew from them stimulated further research” (218). The section on Sombart is marred by Oser and Blanchfied’s emphasis on his role for the Nazis. Later research has shown that things were not quite so simple. On the question of Sombart’s relationship with the Nazis (see Senn, 1996a, b). The final reference to the German historical schools occurs in their discussion of American institutionalism where it is said that “the influence of the German historical school on American institutionalism is quite visible .... We should note, however, that despite certain similarities in methodology between the German historical school and American institutionalism, the latter was not nationalistic and it was more liberal and democratic in its outlook” (362). 26C. Patterson has no index. He does have a section, VI, on the British Historical school in which he reprints selections from Ingram, Leslie, Walter Bagehot (1826-1877) and Toynbee. He
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


reprints a long selection from List’s National System of Political Economy (381-413). In the The German introduction no mention is made that List was a forerunner of the German historical school. : : The material by Ingram does not mention the German historical schools as such. It refers to historical schools them as follows: “the largest and most combined manifestation of the revolt has been in Germany, all of whose ablest economic writers are in opposition to the methods and doctrines of the school of Ricardo. Roscher, Knies, Hildebrand, Nasse, Brentano, Held, Schmoller, Schaffle, Schonberg, Samter, and others have taken up this attitude” (486). 231 Bagehot’s discussion of methods includes the following: “I have been careful not to use in this discussion of methods the phrase which is oftenest used, zz. the Historical method, because there is an excessive ambiguity in it. Sometimes it seems that what I have called the Enumerative, or ‘all-case’ method; sometimes the ‘single-case’ method; a most confusing double meaning, for by the mixture of the two, the mind is prevented from seeing the defects of either. And sometimes it has other meanings, with which, as I shall show I have no quarrel, but rather much sympathy. Rightly conceived the historical method is no rival to the abstract method rightly conceived. But I shall be able to explain this better and less tediously at the end of these papers than I can at the beginning” (518). The reprint from Toynbee (1852-1883) also discusses the historical method. “The historical method pursues a different line of investigation. It examines the actual causes of economic development and considers the influence of institutions, such as the medieval guilds, our present landlaws, or the political constitution of any given country in determining the distribution of wealth. Without the aid of the historical method it would be impossible, for instance, to understand why one-half of the land in the United Kingdom is owned by 2,512 persons” (532). Toynbee goes on to say that the historical method “investigates the stages of economic development in any given country, but it compares them with those which have been obtained in other countries and times, and seeks by such comparison to discover laws of universal application” (532). Later Toynbee writes, “the historical method is also of value because it makes us see where economic laws and precepts are relative. The old economists were wont to speak as if these laws and precepts were universal. Free trade, for instance, is a sound policy no doubt, for England, and for all nations at a certain stage of development; but it is open to anyone to say that free trade is only good under certain conditions” (533). There is nothing specifically on the German historical schools even though Toynbee’s thoughts echo those of many members of them. 27. Pribram has one index entry, “historical ethical school,” and a sub entry under that, “methodological issues.” He has, however, other entries on historicism. He begins his discussion in chapter 14, “The German historical schools” under the general rubric of “Organismic Economics; Part IV.” The chapter begins with a long discussion of German “idealistic” philosophies stressing the ideas of Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814), Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775-1854), Hegel and Miiller (209-212). Pribram then has a section on the emergence of historicism. “The teachings of the idealistic philosophers, as applied to the analysis of the course of social events, provided the background for the development of the methodological principles of the so-called historical school, which exercised a dominant influence on the thinking of a generation of German jurists and were endorsed by several generations of German economists. In accordance with these principles each nation constituted an ‘organic whole’ whose existence and development was determined by laws and objectives of its own.” “It was a small step from this logical foundation of ‘historism’ to the proposition that the diversification of national spirits was a means chosen by nature for achieving full development of the human race” (212).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Pribram’s discussion of historicism is among the most extensive in the literature of economic 323 thought. “German jurists led by Friederich K. von Savigny (1779-1861), Gustav F. Hugo 7 (1769-1844) and Karl F. von Eichorn (1781-1854) were the first scholars to apply the methods of historism to some fundamental problems of their science” (213). He concludes with “their historical interpretation of existing social and economic laws and customs provided strong support for all conservative movements in the field of social and political organization” (213). 232 Continuing the discussion, Pribram writes, “Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886), an outstanding representative of historism, developed the ‘idiographic method’ according to which every historical event was to be analyzed as to its particular features, especially its national aspects. The search for general laws or regularities underlying political or social relationships or developments was practically excluded by that method.” “Around the middle of the century some leading economists undertook to apply the main principles of historism to the analysis of economic phenomena” (213). This is followed by a discussion of their rejection of the Ricardian doctrine. “They expected that comparative analysis of the results of such studies would enable them to discover certain general social or economic regularities, trends, or ‘laws’” (213). List is mentioned as a precursor to the historical school and his views are discussed. Then comes a discussion of the views and works of Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies. Pribram then turns to the program of what he calls the “historico ethical school.” “The name ‘historico ethical’ school, chosen by the proponents of the program to denote their movement, indicated their intention to combine the historical approach to the study of economic phenomena with the pursuit of economic and social policies based on definite moral principles. Any cosmopolitic tendencies were incompatible with these principles” (216). Schmoller is recognized as the leader of the school who formulated both the “economicopolitical” and scientific program of the school. “The greatest nations, epics, or men, said Schmoller, are not those who merely increase production but those who succeed in propagating moral ideas” (216). Outstanding members of the school were Held, Schonberg, Nasse, and Scheel. Pribram describes some of Schmoller’s views. “Schmoller emphasized above all the need for a ‘realistic’ approach to economic problems as distinct from the predominantly idealistic attitude of the preceding generation of German scholars” (216). “The will, said Schmoller, remains always the regent and dominates the intellect” (217). Schmoller is said to have “followed the suggestion of Herbert Spencer (1820-1903) that the ethics of the various societies showed a linear progress from more homogeneous to more heterogeneous forms. Belief in the hereditary transmission of acquired facilities was an article of faith for Schmoller. From the findings of the English biologist Sir Francis Galton (1822-1911), he derived the conviction that the psychophysical differentiation of ethnically homogeneous nations was due to the development of occupational characteristics through the influence of specific activities exercised over centuries by certain groups of the population.... In his teaching Schmoller emphasized the proposition that in the course of history the natural play of evolutionary forces was, time and again, kept in bounds through social institutions which were continuously improved and rendered more ethical” (217). Spiethoff is mentioned as one of Schmoller’s most faithful disciples and his views are given. Schmoller is also said to have attempted “to provide a sociological background for his economic analysis” (218). Pribram says Schmoller’s treatment of the value problem in his textbook “was rudimentary and hardly connected with his discussion of pricing processes, which he approached primarily from an ethicopolitical angle in his attempt to achieve ‘appropriate approximation to reality in the full stream of complex historical processes’. Even some of his most faithful disciples admitted that procedures of that kind were not fit to cope with theoretical problems” (218).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Pribram states, “many members of the historical school, including Knies and Schindler, The German
regarded wars as inevitable cultural factors, deeply rooted in human nature” (218). s e
in his concluding comments, Pribram says “Schmoller is frequently described as one of the 4Storical schools
‘Socialists of the chair,’ but other prominent members of this group such as Adolf Wagner, Wilhelm Lexus, G. Cohn and Lugo Brentano, did not share the methodological views of the historical school. In addition, religious convictions frequently provided strong incentives for movements in favor of radical social reforms. Socialist doctrines and proposals were studied with 233 great care and extensively discussed. But the incompatibility of centralized social production with free choice of occupation and consumers’ sovereignty was generally ignored, or at least minimized” (219). Pribram then turns to methodological issues. “The methodological problems involved in the application of organismic reasoning to economic analysis were brought out in sharp relief” (219). Of Schmoller’s role in the Methodenstreit, Pribram says, “the more Scholler endeavored to clarify his methodological position, the more it became apparent that he failed to realize the fundamental logical issues involved in the controversy. He tried to reduce these issues to a conflict between the inductive and deductive method, and to settle this conflict eventually by a compromise which implied that both methods were as indispensable for economic research as the right and left legs were for walking. That statement was quoted time and again by Schmoller’s disciples, but it provided no pertinent answer to the problems raised by Menger” (220). The methodological belief cherished by Schmoller was incompatible with the methods adopted by the Ricardians and their followers. “Practically general agreement was reached on the view that the doctrines of the English economists were not applicable outside the country of their origin. The validity of the methods used by Ricardo and his followers continued to be the object of skeptical observation; practically all members of the historical school endorsed the belief that all social and economic doctrines were strictly determined by specific cultural and social conditions” (222). Pribram claims that “the intuitive method was applied by many adherents of historicism to the elaboration of sequences of ‘stages’ in the development of ‘national economics.’ Many authors claim for their schemes some sort of general validity, but they failed, as a rule to support them by consistent theoretical considerations. The evolutionary process said to produce the successions of stages was never clearly defined” (222). He concludes his discussion of stages with, “eventually after about a century of discussion, it was still an open question whether the distinguishing of stages in economic development was intended to serve purposes of theoretical analysis or was only a device for facilitating the description of changes in economic institutions” (220). He points out that the school produceda vast literature “dealing with the specific aspects of various phases of history, of characteristic economic institutions, industries, and trade, and of the changes in the structure of various economics” (222). Pribram concludes his discussion of the school with, “quite remarkable efforts were also spent on the analysis of past economic doctrines and economic and social philosophies. The ideas and theorems of almost all fairly prominent economists of the past were made the object of careful studies. But the theoretical aspects of the various documents frequently received rather superficial treatment as compared with the sociological and political features. Although many researches of this type were highly useful for a deepening of sociological and historical knowledge, they could not compensate for the neglect of theoretical economic analysis strictly speaking” (223). He concludes the chapter with a brief discussion of the English historical school. The next Chapter, 15, is “Versions of the organismic approach” which is said to have led to conflicting trends because, “the deficiencies in the methodological foundations of the historical approach to economics led to a search for some philosophical approach which could be expected
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES to establish a link between the study of economic problems and the study of other social 393 phenomena in their historical settings” (224). ? Unlike most economic histories, Pribram mentions that “quite an impressive series of comprehensive textbooks on political economy were produced during the last two decades before the first world war by German economists who remained outside the historical school. Works by Adolf Wagner, Johannes Conrad, Wilhelm Lexis and Heinrich Dietzel bore witness to the 234 scholarship of their authors and their extensive knowledge of economic conditions” (230). He also mentions the textbook by Eugen Philippovic (1858-1917). Notice that both Wagner and Conrad are often included as members of the German historical schools. In his discussion of the Marxian doctrine, Pribram states that “important elements of Hegelian philosophy were used by members of the German historical school in support of their views that the study of economic phenomena could not be isolated from the study of social institutions and political events; that economic history, like general history was the outcome of evolutionary intellectual processes and that successive stages could be distinguished in the course of these processes; and that in each stage a specific ‘spirit of the time’ pressed its stamp on economic behavior, economic relationships, economic techniques and social institutions. But the concept of evolution that was used by the members of the German historical school was, as a rule, not of the dialectic type; rather, it was arrived at by loosely defined intuitional procedures” (246-247). Pribram devotes chapter 24 to “The decline of the historical school.” Early on he writes, German teachers “who had been educated in the methodological principles adopted by Gustav Schmoller’s school” are said to have “prepared the soil, for the most part unwittingly for the subsequent acceptance of the National Socialist creed” (372). Much of the first part of this chapter is devoted to a discussion of debates over a wide variety of questions about such things as price theory, value theory, monetary views, Marxism and business cycles. For example, “it is easy to understand why the overwhelming majority of German economists did not care about developing a consistent business cycle theory. They regarded every cycle and every crisis as an individual historical phenomenon caused by a variety of circumstances, and attached little importance to the problems involved in explaining the typical course of cyclical movements and their periodicity. This conception of business cycles was emphasized by many members of the historical school, such as Karl G. von Brinkmann, A. Miiller-Armack, and H. Aubin” (375). None of these are usually included as members of the historical school. “Pribram’s discussion of the methodological problems of historicism begins after the war, the German economists of organic persuasion who resumed the discussion of their unresolved methodological problems felt, more intensively than ever before, the need to give safe, logical foundations to their conception of the national economy and to their belief in the existence of ‘historical laws’ adjusted to the nature and objectives of the national economy” (379). Among the methodological approaches discussed are Othmar Spann’s organismic theories, Sombart’s work and Speithoffs work. The difficulties of planning along organismic lines and the various approaches taken are also covered (379-381). The final chapter in Part VIL, “Organismic economics” is “Totalitarian economics,” chapter 25. It concludes, “The struggle against the relativism of the historical school was resumed with renewed vigor after the collapse of the National-Socialist regime. The ‘neoliberalistic’ movement led by Eucken and his group found a center in the so-called Ordo circle and was strengthened by the return to Europe of a number of economists who had spent the war years abroad. Their ideas were supported by the powers who occupied the western zones of Germany and who were opposed to the intensified industrial cartelization and the concentration of financial capital that had taken place under the totalitarian order” (391). In his preface, Pribram says that even as a student he “was struck by the fundamental difference between the approach to economic research adopted by the German historical school
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


and the principles of economic analysis applied by my Austrian teachers. The adherents of the The German historical school rejected the use of highly abstract notions as a starting point of deductive 1 - : reasoning; they were looking for specific historical laws which in their view were instrumental in historical schools determining the economic and social development of the various nations” (xvii). He goes on to say “the conception of economy adopted by the historical school appeared to be reflected in the economic policy pursued by the German national socialist government” (xviii). 28. Rima’s history has only two index entries “historical school” that include just three pages, 235 although there are more references. She has no entries for Brentano, Hildebrand, List or Sombart in her index of names. An unusual feature is “Index to glossary of terms and concepts.” This index includes an entry on “institutionalism” and “economic interpretation of history.” The index of names does include Knies, Roscher, Schmoller, Weber and Speithoff. The discussion of the German historical schools is brief. After stating that Malthus, Ricardo and John Stuart Mill were essentially unhistorical in their outlook and took it for granted that the behavior they observed among their contemporaries was inherent in human nature and that their conclusions concerning them were valid for all eternity. This is the essence of the criticisms which the German historical school directed against classicism. “The historical school took the position that the laws of the classical school were neither absolute nor perpetually valid either in terms of economic theory or as a basis for policy. They argued that economic laws, if they can be discovered at all, must necessarily be relative to time and place. Because economic laws operate within the framework of constantly changing environments, they argued that it is necessary to replace the classical method of deduction by induction in order to discover the nature of these environments. Induction would, they felt, also shed new light on the motives of human conduct, which, in their view, the classicists interpreted all too simply as being only the product of self-interest. The study of political economy should proceed by collecting a mass of historical data from which generalizations will eventually be drawn. Precisely what the nature of these generalizations will be cannot be determined in advance, for the necessary data must first be assembled.” “German scholars such as Wilhelm Roscher of the older historical school, Karl Knies and Gustav Schmoller, who carried on his tradition of fistorismus, took the position that the historical method is the only way of studying political economy and that nothing of importance can be learned by using the deductive method. They embarked on an ambitious program of study which resulted in the accumulation of a remarkable volume of historical detail. But their contribution is primarily of a descriptive character. Their charge that theoretical economics neglects relevant facts undoubtedly made deductive economists more selective regarding their premises and more cautious in putting forward their generalizations. But the historical school contributed little to the body of economic analysis” (176-177). She then goes on to a discussion of the Methodenstrett. Rima points out that the analytical tradition of neoclassicism did not go unchallenged by the institutionalists and the “younger members of the German historical school who carried on lustorismus. The tradition of the historical method, which had already clashed with orthodox economics during the Methodenstreit of the late 19th century, was imported to America under the influence of large numbers of young scholars who studied at German universities” (309). Rima states that from the point of view of the members of the historical school and the institutionalsts, “the philosophical and psychological premises from which economic laws are derived and the use of the deductive method for establishing them” were related issues (314). Schmoller is characterized as the undisputed leader of the younger historical school who “left an impressive legacy of historical research which he hoped would provide the groundwork for the identification of economic laws that would be truly universal.” “Schmoller’s emphasis on the appropriateness of induction, via the study of history, was complemented, albeit from a different point of view, by Thorstein Veblen (1857-1929), who urged economists to study human behavior in an institutional setting” (14).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES The last mention of anything about the German historical schools is a comparison of modern 393 dissenters with earlier dissenters such as Marx, Veblen and Roscher (470). ? Rima’s book of readings has no index. I do not recall any mention of the German historical school in it. 29. Robbins’ history has three entries under the caption “historical school.” It is verbose, discursive and very personal, as for example, “List has exercised in the policy of various nations 236 an iad I would say only surpassed by Adam Smith in his time and Karl Marx in our time” (240).
Robbins wants to define the position in the perspective of the history of economic analysis of two groups of critics of the Smithian system. The first is economic nationalists. “The second school which I wish to draw your attention to is, so to speak, the historical school, which, in its way, in Germany at any rate, was tremendously the by-product of the change between the eighteenth and the nineteenth century outlook with which I began this section of the lecture.” “The historical school, in a way, can be regarded, in its German manifestations at any rate, as a byproduct of academic nationalism. And it manifested itself in various ways and gave rise, especially in law and in history, to notable intellectual achievements. Whether you regret the tendency of which they were a part, as I do, or whether you regard them as inevitable, as many people do, or whether you regard them as positively an embellishment of human history, you must admit that the intellectual influence was notable” (242). He goes on to say the influence was notable in history, and jurisprudence and “what was one of the very great achievements of the nineteenth century — in philology” (242). He then goes into an extensive discussion of Jones because “a great deal of what was in the Historical school of economics — and not all of it was bad — is to be found in the work” ofJones (243). Roll also has a long discussion of Jones. Robbins then writes about two stages in the development of the historical school. The leader of the first or early historical school was Roscher. Roscher “was, in my opinion, a good economist for his time.” Roscher is also “to be treated with the same respect as one would treat Jones” (244). Knies is said to have written “extremely well on money and banking and the history of money and banking” (244). Robbins is glad he read Knies and Roscher because of the famous essay by Max Weber, who “was the most powerful sociological mind of the period” (244). Of the later historical school he warns us that “although I have a friendly feeling for Roscher and Knies and treat them with respect, if not always with agreement, I am apt to be much less sympathetic to the later historical school which was dominated by the famous Schmoller” (245). In an earlier discussion of Schmoller’s views on mercantilism he wrote that the “famous, or infamous von Schmoller ... was nothing if not authoritative” (47). Later, “he’s not one of my favorites” (48). Of Schmoller and his school Robbins says that his “point of view, from my position, is not so acceptable” (249). Robbins thinks that “the attack on the assumptions of classical political economy was misplaced” (249). “So far as the general attack on method was concerned, I am bound to say that I think it was rested on a complete misconception” (250). They “got the logic of scientific discovery wrong. Their emphasis on a priority of induction was surely misplaced” (250). Robbins thinks that “Schmoller and Schmoller’s department and its followers produced interesting historical studies, but they produced no significant theory, no significant laws of development which would stand up to logical and historical analysis” (250). Robbins also thinks that “it is really safe to say that by 1914 the main body of faculties of economics in Germany were not producing anything which is of historical interest” (250). He then goes on to write about the English historical school.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


When the German historical school appears again it is a discussion of Marshall. “Also, when The German you are thinking about his origins you must remember that Marshall, although he didn’t agree 1,: 7 with them completely, was mm some sense ferrified of the German historical school. All sorts of historical schools dull places in the Principles are qualifications put in lest he should be attacked by members of the German historical school {original italics]” (306). 30. Roll has four references, “historical school,” in the index. The first is “indeed, the earliest attempts at a systematic treatment of the history of economic doctrine were made by adherents 237 of the historical and socialist schools which developed in Germany after the middle of the nineteenth century” (1). About ten pages are devoted to a section “The historical school” (31-340). The main discussion includes a reasonable representation of the views of Roscher, Hildebrand, and Knies. Of the younger historical school he says that Schmoller “really set in motion an active movement of economic historical research. It is interesting to note that, in the hands of Schmoller and his followers, the original aim of the historical school was beginning to disappear. They no longer denied the existence of laws of society” (335). Roll’s general conclusion is “the historical school left as legacy an enhanced desire for a knowledge of concrete reality in all its individual manifestations through time, and this was productive of very valuable work. But it was after all a desire which enlightened theorists have always understood and appreciated” (339). He also gives a conventional discussion of the Methodenstreit (336, 339). The section concludes with a brief discussion of the English historical school whose “only positive achievement was to stimulate research in economic history” (339). The impact English historical school on the French was “mainly an increase of historical research, and it found a related trend in the growth of sociological studies which nearly always emphasize the historical point of view” (340). Then follows an extensive treatment of Jones (340-347). 31. Guy Routh. The historical schools do not exist for Routh. The only reference to any of the people usually included in those schools is a brief derogatory reference to Weber (footnote on page 30). 32. Rubin wasa scholar from the Soviet Union. His history is an example of Marxist dogma that went through two editions. When the dogma changed, Rubin was killed. There are no references to the historical schools or anyone connected with them. The only reference to any one remotely connected with the historical schools is a passing reference to Wagner who was said to have influenced “bourgeois economists” (208). 33. Schumpeter has 19 entries under the heading “Historical School of Economics” in the index. I suspect there are more that are not indexed. The first reference states that the historical school objected to natural-law jurisprudence and economics because it was supposed to be divorced from historical reality (111). The second occurs when Schumpeter discusses the accusation made by the German exponents of Sozialpolitik [social policy] who accused the English classical economists of cold indifference to the fate of labor. “The first thing to be said about this is that the indictment reveals a lack of historical sense that is particularly strange in critics associated with the German historical school: the man who disapproved of a ten-hour bill in 1847 might easily be a new dealer in modern America without our having any right to impugn his consistency. But we can go further” (402). Schumpeter then explains that most of the classical economists supported factory legislation and the poor law amendment. He explains that this tallied well with their general scheme of economic and political thought, their scheme of Natural Liberty, their views on population and wages. “It tallied still better with their almost ludicrous confidence and the ability of individuals to act with energy and rationality, to look after themselves responsibly, to find work, and to save for old age and rainy days. This of course is Benthamite sociology, hence bad sociology. On this point the critics were right, however wrong they were in imputing to the ‘classic’ a defective
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES social conscience” (402). This discussion occurs in the section about socio-political backgrounds
? The next discussion of the historical school occurs in his discussion of Comte, whose plan “was to observe historical and ethnological facts and to build his science of society from such generalizations as these facts would suggest. This is, of course, a very familiar program that was, then and later, espoused by numerous writers, especially by historical economists” (417). 238 He comments that although it was perfectly natural for historical economists to adopt this plan “it was not at all natural for Comte to do so” (417). “The historian, and hence the historical economist distrusts any theory that tries to ‘isolate’ the economic element in social life. Theory is for him indeed speculative and unrealistic. It is even something still worse; it is speculative construction that borrows its methods from the physical sciences. Only the real phenomenon in all its historical facets — with the economic, ethical, legal, and cultural facets all simultaneously considered — is for him the true object of social research whose methods must therefore differ toto celo from any used by the physicist” (417). Schumpeter points out that Comte wanted to use the methods of the physicist and that when Comte “accused ‘classic’ economists of unscientific speculation, he meant exactly the opposite of what the economists of the historical school were to mean” (417). In his discussion of the intellectual scenery from 1790 to 1870 Schumpeter writes “the influence of the historical school jurisprudence is particularly evident in the case of Roscher, who took arguments from the jurists and attached importance to what he considered to be a close parallelism between the situations in the legal and economic fields. In other cases, that of R. Jones, for instance (see below, ch. 6) no such influence can be proved” (note 8, page 423). The next footnote discusses von Savigny and his position of leadership in the German legal world of his day. “This leadership meant the victory, for the time being, of the historical school” (footnote 9, 423). There is a passing reference to Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies as members of “what has been termed the older historical school” (504). In describing List, Schumpeter says that List “was an heir to eighteenth century thought. He was an offshoot of romanticism. He was a forerunner of the historical school of economics. There is not more in all of this than that everyone is heir to everything that went before him and the forerunner of everything that comes after him” (505). In his “review of the troops” from 1790 to 1870, Schumpeter writes “reasons will be offered, as we go along, for believing that it is in the interest of a realistic picture of developments in our field to confine the concept, Historical School of Economics, to the age and to the group of Gustav von Schmoller (see below, part V, Ch. 4). This implies that it is not good practice to speak of an older historical school, a term that has been introduced, chiefly for use in the polemic against Schmoller’s ‘historism,’ to denote a group of writers who, while appreciating the importance of historical research, displayed no hostility toward ‘theory.’ I maintain that such a position does not constitute a distinctive characteristic and that the economists who are usually mentioned in this connection do not, in any useful sense, form a group, let alone a school. But first we must notice these economists themselves; Hildebrand, Knies and Roscher. The first, a man of restless activity and considerable influence, comes nearest to having been a historical economist in the later and genuine acceptance of the term. Knies, one of the most significant figures of German economics, will be mentioned in our survey of the next period to which his main work belongs” (507-508). Schumpter continues, “Roscher, who taught at the University of Leipzig for 46 years, added to the influence which this implies, the influence of many works that never fell below a highly respectable level: honest scholarship and sound common sense is written all over them, and the sympathetic understanding that his gentle and highly cultivated mind extended to all types of scientific effort helped to make them perhaps more useful to many generations of the students than would have been more original productions” (508).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Further describing Roscher and his works, Schumpeter writes, “there were those to whom he The German looked like an obstacle to advance. On the whole, however, there is hardly another economist of 1: z that period who enjoyed so nearly universal respect inside and outside of Germany. With historical schools complimentary intention, writers who found it difficult to credit him with original results have tried to find something original in his method or approach. This is how he got into the position of being considered either one of the ‘founders’ of a historical school in general or a leader of the so-called ‘older’ historical school. He invited this by speaking frequently of his historical method 239 or standpoint. But we shall see later that there is not much in this and that he should be classified, so far as his analytic apparatus is concerned, as a very meritorious follower of English ‘classics,’ though a follower who happened to have a particularly strong taste for historical illustration” (508). Schumpeter concludes, “I think the discussion above blocks out all the salient features of the scenery that it is necessary to keep in mind for our purpose” (508). In the section “General economics: a cross section” from 1790 to 1870 Schumpeter discusses John Stuart Mill’s method of isolating economic phenomena or motives or of abstracting from non-economic ones. He points out that “Men like Roscher, who had mastered J.S. Mill did not raise any such objection” (538 footnote 10). He adds in the same footnote, “the majority of later German critics, however — those of the genuine historical school — cannot have had much first hand knowledge of Mill or of the ‘classics’ in general, for it is hard to believe that if they did they could have misunderstood Millian methodology as completely as they did: they argued rather against a wrong picture of it that had become fixed by the time they wrote. And, considering their absorption in a research program of their own, this is not so difficult to understand” (footnote 10, 538). In the same footnote he goes on to criticize Ingram’s understanding of Mill on the ground “that both his knowledge of economics and his interest in it did not go beyond general ‘philosophies’ that were inspired by generous enthusiasm for the great slogans of his day but never came to grips with real problems” (footnote 10, 538). Chapter 3 of Part IV “From 1870 to 1914 (And Later)” is entitled “Some developments in neighboring fields.” “As regards historiography, the great event, from our standpoint, was the close alliance with economics implied in the program of the historical school of economics” (781-782). The alliance is of economics with history. Schumpeter has a section on the Verein fiir sozialpolitik. Schumpeter comments on the fact that “The German economists’ zeal for reform” produced “188 ‘volumes’ most of which actually consisted of several volumes . . . to which we are indebted for an invaluable extension of our factual knowledge” (803). The next few pages report on other works such as that by Arthur Speithoff. At the conclusion of that section, Schumpeter discusses the frequent charge that the historical school left people who hardly knew what economic theory meant. “Many foreign observers laid all the blame for this state of things at the door of the historical school. But the historical school, though cultivating another purely scientific interest, still cultivated a scientific interest; it should not be held responsible for that substitution of convictions for performance [original italics]’ (804). Schumpeter has a long section “Historism” (807-824) in Chapter 4, “Sozialpolitik and the historical method” in Part IV “From 1870 to 1914 (and later).” He begins his discussion of historism as follows. “Tt is one of the major aims of this book to destroy the myth that there ever has been a time when economists as a body scorned research into historical or contemporaneous fact or when economics as a whole was purely speculative or lacked its factual complement. What, then, is the distinctive characteristic of the group that called itself the historical school and how was it possible for its members to look upon its program as a new departure? Evidently, it would not do to include everyone who recognized that economic history is an important source of economic truth. Nor can we draw the line around all those who displayed an extensive command of historical facts or a sense of the historical flux of policies and of the historical relativity of propositions; for this would still include List and Marx and Marshall. Not even the actual
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES performance of historical work is enough; there would be no point in a definition that includes
? “These considerations, however, point directly to what we are looking for. The basic and distinctive article of the historical school’s methodological faith was that the organon of scientific economics should mainly — at first it was held that it should exclusively — consist in the results of, and in generalizations from, historical monographs. So far as the scientific part of his vocation 240 is concerned, the economist should first of all master historical technique. By means of this technique, which was all the scientific equipment he needed, he should dive into the ocean of economic history in order to investigate particular patterns or processes in all their live details, local and temporal, the flavor of which he should learn to relish. And the only kind of general knowledge that is attainable in the social sciences would then slowly grow out of this work. This was the original core of what became known as the historical method in economics. The resulting attitude in program is what economists of a different persuasion meant by historism” (807-808). Schumpeter goes on to admit that his definition of the historical school tends to obliterate the frontier between the historical economist and the economic historian. He defends it on the grounds that, “for the methodological creed of the historical school may be summed up precisely in the proposition that the economist, considered as a research worker, should be primarily an economic historian” (808).
“As thus defined, the historical school cannot be said to have ever been dominant in any country. But in German economics it was, during the last two or three decades of the nineteenth century, by far the most important factor of a purely scientific nature” (808). He gives that as the reason he is going to go on to discuss the performance of the German historical school (808). His discussion of the older historical school begins “in deference to established tradition” he notices three writers, Hildebrand, Roscher and Knies “who are usually mentioned together under the heading of the older historical school. As a matter of fact, however, they did not form a school in our sense — the reader should remember that in this book the term school means a definite sociological phenomenon and hence cannot be used at will for any group of writers we may choose to select — and their relation to economic history was neither uniform nor very different from that of a host of other economists of all ages” (808). Schumpeter is not guilty, as are many writers on the history of economic thought, of failing to point out that he really means “historical school” in an entirely different sense from that of the German historical schools as that term is used by economists. In the literature of the social sciences, the term “historical school” often refers to the group of German historians who revolutionized our thinking about history. He explains in a footnote, “it will be seen that this meaning of historical school outlined above has nothing to do with other meanings of the same term, such as the sum total of the historian’s techniques or genetic method of presentation” (footnote 1, 808). Of Roscher he says that “Roscher was the incarnation of professorial learning, mainly of a philosophical-historical nature, and must indeed be mentioned both on account of his scholarly labors in the field of the history of economic thought and as a leading figure on the stage of academic economics. On that stage he conscientiously retailed, in ponderous tomes and in lifeless lectures, the orthodox ~ mainly English — doctrine of his time, simply illustrated by historical fact. However, this does not make a historical economist in the term’s distinctive sense. Nor does talk about ‘historical laws’ or approval of Mangolt’s epigram that economics is ‘the philosophy of economic history’ — especially if, for the rest, one theorizes exactly as do other people. Knies was the most eminent of the three. But his main performance was in the field of money and credit, where he made his mark as a theorist. His only connection with the historical school consists ina programmatic book, in which he stressed the historical relativity not only of policies but also of doctrines and which owes to commendation, by genuinely historical economists, a prominence it does not quite deserve” (809). He then discusses the Methodenstreit.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


“Since there cannot be any serious question either about the basic importance of historical The German research in a science that deals with a historical process or about the necessity of developing a set 1: $ of analytic tools by which to handle the material, the controversy, like all such controversies, historical schools might well seem to us to have been wholly pointless” (814). He goes on to say that “The first thing to be observed about all controversies between scientific parties is the large amount of mutual misunderstanding that enters into them” and that methodological clashes are often clashes of temperaments and of intellectual bents. “This was so in our case” (815). 241 Very important is the third point he makes in his discussion of the Methodenstreit. He defines “schools.” “We must never forget that genuine schools are sociological realities — living beings. They have their structures — relations between leaders and followers — their flags, their battle cries, their moods, their all-too-human interests. Their antagonisms come within the general sociology of group antagonisms and of party warfare. Victory and conquest, defeat and loss of ground, are in themselves values for such schools and part of their very existence. They will try to appropriate labels that are considered honorific — in our case both parties laid claims to such epithets as ‘empiric,’ ‘realistic, ‘modern,’ ‘exact’ — and to affix derogatory labels ‘speculative, ‘futile,’ ‘subordinate, to the work of the enemy. These labels mean little or nothing in themselves, but they acquire a life of their own and in turn keep controversy alive. All this gives scope to personal vanities, interests and propensities to fight that may, as they do in national and international politics, count for more than any real issues — in fact, to the point of obliterating the real issues (815). The main members of the “youngest” historical school were Speithoff, Sombart and Max Weber. They carried on the work of the Schmoller school and “had experienced the influence of his message in their formative years; and, though they differed from him and from one another in aims, methods of research, and performance, remained faithful to the fundamental principles he had been foremost in asserting. We might almost speak of ‘youngest’ historical school” (815-816). After he discusses Sombart and Weber Schumpeter says “so far we have been dealing with a specifically German phenomenon that grew out of specifically German roots and displayed typically German strengths and weaknesses. Of course, some of the factors that account for the rise of the German historical school were ubiquitous” (819). He adds that in every country there were other factors that favored parallel movements. “Finally, the work of the German school was far too important to remain without influence on the course of things in other countries” (819). The last mention of historism occurs when Schumpeter is discussing equilibrium analysis and the opposition to it. “And, finally, there was something else. Then as always, the majority of economists were absorbed in the task of investigating the facts and practical problems of the various departments of public policy. This majority, which was reinforced by the historical and institutional groups, had little use for ‘theory’ and did not welcome a new type of it. They never accepted it as an instrument of research but looked upon ‘marginalism’ as a speculative philosophy or as a new sectarian ‘ism’ which it was precisely their business to eliminate by what they considered truly scientific and realistic research. Hence they passed, in methodological and programmatic pronouncements, all sorts of sweeping judgments upon it. On the surface, the result was bedlam, especially in Germany and in the United States — a multitude of discordant voices, all of which seemed to testify to the presence of an impasse. The reader must try to understand, on the one hand, how very natural this was, and, on the other hand, that it did not mean what it seems to mean. Below the phrase-troubled surface, there was no impasse” (954). Schumpeter has reasonably extensive discussions of what he views as the scientific contributions of practically all the men who are regarded as members of any of the German historical schools.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES 34. Ben B. Seligman has no references in his index to the German historical schools. There is 393 one reference to “historical economics” and two to “historical economists.” The single reference to 7 “historical economics” is somewhat misleading because he begins his history “in the 1870s with the revolt of the German historical writers against the seeming rigidity of the classical writers” (ix). Chapter 1, to which the reference refers, is entitled “Protest from the Historicists.” It contains 242 sub-sections on the most important members of the “younger” German historical school, Schmoller, Sombart, Weber, Brentano, Biicher, Wagner, Knapp and Speithoff as well as some non-Germans. He mentions Muller and List as forerunners. Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies are early representatives of the school who “ stressed the need to inquire into the growth and development of economic institutions” (7). Schmoller is acknowledged as “one of Germany’s great economists” (8). The Methodenstreit was “arid.” On the one hand, Schmoller’s Grundriss “remains in many ways a fascinating monument to the art of fact-grubbing” (80). On the other hand his emphasis on a broad perspective was a healthy one (12). Like Schmoller, Ben B. Seligman mixes judgments with his descriptions. Sombart’s work illustrates “the extremes to which the historical method could be pushed” (14). His break with Marxism “was evidently motivated by some measure of self-interest,” promotion in the university (14). Although “his work was often overburdened with exaggerations, it did exert some influence, at least by stimulating a not inconsiderable amount of research into economic history” (15). Sombart “had a lively uncontrolled imagination“ (16). This is followed by a critique of his work in the Jews which concludes, Although he may not have been a party member, Sombart was a thoroughgoing Nazi. The mythology of his last work, married to the power of the Third Reich, bore fruit in the crematoria of Treblinka and Maidenek. “His earlier works in economic history and the sociology of capitalism may have contained some elements of truth, although it would not be difficult to demonstrate that these had come from Marx. But when they were raised from the level of social philosophy and analysis to a general unifying principle, a vicious mythology was called forth, capable of generating the unbelievable mischief and destruction that totalitarians are capable of achieving” (21). Weber was “a good deal more liberal than Schmoller or Sombart” and “an important source of many ideas which highlighted obscure regions in social science” (21). His “approach to historical problems was a good deal more careful than Sombart’s” (24). After describing Weber's views about capitalism, Ben B. Seligman concludes, “the capitalist spirit was a much more complicated affair than Weber was willing to concede” (31). The section on Brentano, Biicher, Wagner and Knapp briefly describes their main ideas and has less critical comment than the earlier sections (31-34). : It is noteworthy for one of the most extensive discussions of Spiethoff, “the last of the great figures in the historical tradition” (34). Spiethoff's work on business cycles is emphasized. It concludes, “there seems to be just a touch of romantic nonsense in this panegyric to economic bloodletting, but in the light of the tradition in which Spiethoff worked, it is completely understandable.” The two references to “historical economists.” are in the context of their relationship to the development of the Austrian school and the Methodenstreit. 35. Spann has one index entry “historical schools.” The index is poorly done, with many entries in German. The single entry is to chapter 11, “The historical school, social reform, the theory of marginal utility,” a long and curious chapter (241-275). His history is also notable for discussing, sometimes at length, sometimes briefly, some of the contributions of all of the members of the historical schools.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


Chapter 11 begins with a discussion of the rise of the historical schools and the disputes about The German method. Spann points out that the historical school of jurisprudence rejected the idea of 1; : rationalistic and abstract natural night, “and took actual positive law, as historically recorded, for historical schools its topic of study. In economics, too, there came a kindred endeavor to substitute historical induction for the purely abstract and arbitrary constructions of the classical theory” (241). Roscher, Knies and Hildebrand were “under the stimulus of the historical school of jurisprudence” and “attempted to return to the evolutionary laws of economics, to the historical 243 actualities of economic life” (241-242). They were the founders of the “older historical school” and were influenced by Miller, Franz von Baader (1765-1841), and List. Of the “younger historical school”, Spann says it “aimed at an even more objectively historical and statistically realistic method of research, and had, further, a predominantly sociological trend” (242). Schmoller, Brentano, Knapp, Schonberg, Bucher, Held, Gothein and Weber were said to be members of this “younger historical school”. He describes the two schools as follows. “The older historical school was mainly concerned with theoretical questions, as contrasted with the trend of the younger school. It aimed at effecting some sort of synthesis between the regulative tendencies of mercantilism and the principle of laissezfaire. The investigations of the younger school, on the other hand, related more and more to the history of economics and took the form of descriptive monographs. This went so far that among the last generation of German economists interest in the traditional theories of political economy seemed to have evaporated. At the same time, the study of philosophical fundamentals was neglected. This lack of an adequate attention to economic theory was largely responsible for the defenselessness of academic political economy in face of so amateurish a doctrine as Marxism. In like manner, the younger historical school had only a feeble resistance to put up against the new theories emanating from Austria, and it is now ina state of utter decay. But it did good and lasting service in one respect; it initiated a vigorous and wisely planned social reform movement. Unfortunately, however, the universalist and sociological factors of that movement remained in great measure unconscious, and were therefore not cultivated as they should have been. If the historical school is today ceasing to exist, this is due, not so much to the want of strong personalities among its members, to their lack of philosophical training and of an all around knowledge of economic theory, to their narrow-minded devotion to ‘hard fact’ — as to the essential weakness of their position” (242-243). Discussing the problem of methods, Spann wrote that the historical school regarded “economics as inseparably interconnected with the other provinces of society, and therefore not subject to laws peculiar to itself, but participating in the historically conditioned structure and development of society as a whole — which, for the very reason that they are historically conditioned, are individual, and therefore not in strict conformity with law” (244). Spann says the historical school “is concerned only with concrete historical realities” and will endeavor to understand the present as an outcome of the past. Necessarily it will renounce any attempt to comprehend economics in term of theory. Those who adopt it will consider that, strictly speaking, there can be no laws of value, price and wages. Whatever regulative principles of this kind it is possible to observe will merge into evolutionary trends or other uniform successions. According to the younger historical school, “the question of method was a question of the relative extent to which induction and deduction were used. This way of looking at the matter is erroneous, for any method must use a fair amount of both” (245). Spann concludes his discussion of the problem of method as follows. “If therefore the problem of method is ultimately one of an individualistic versus a universalist explanation, the key to its solution is to be found in sociology. A sociological attitude, a sociological method must be substituted for a purely abstract or purely historical method — in respect of their historical outlook, the two historical schools of economics embody the powerful and healthy reaction against the atomistic aridity of the individualism of the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES Manchester school. But the economists of the younger historical school neglected conceptual 393 thought so grievously that economics in contemporary Germany has sunk to a deplorably low ? ebb” (246-247). The next part of the chapter (247-255) on the historical school is devoted to the social reform movement which begins, “the movement for social reform is the grandchild of the romantic school and the child of the younger historical school” (247). Most of the rest of the chapter, which 2AA is extensive (255-275), has nothing to say about the historical school being devoted to marginal utility and mathematics. 36. Spiegel has a chapter, 18, on “The Hegelian variant of historical economics.” There is one entry, of 22 pages, “German historical school.” There are index entries on Brentano, Hildebrand, Knies, List, Roscher, Schmoller, Sombart, Spiethoff and Weber. Spiegel begins his chapter on the Hegelian variant of historical economics with the comment that there is only a tenuous relationship between the English historical economists and the German historical school, “which, at its time was more influential than the English ..., had a more lasting impact, and was grounded in a different philosophy. Although German historical economics had little influence on the later development of economic thought as it unfolded during the second half of the twentieth century, it was, however, part and symptom of wider intellectual tendencies which have cast their shadow over the history of mankind. Most of German historical economists exalted the nation and the work of the government, and this attitude is again grounded in these wider circumstances” (411). He then goes on to discuss Germany and the enlightenment and Germany’s rise to nationhood. This is the background for the rise of “historicism” “the specifically German reaction to the enlightenment, which refused to wring general rules from reason and instead insisted on observing the unique and its endless historical variation. German historicism has many scholarly achievements to its credit, so much so that during the closing decades of the nineteenth century the German universities enjoyed an unparalleled prestige and attracted students from all over the world. It was, however, a movement not without dangers, both to the Germans themselves and to all mankind. Historicism offered no principles to guide and restrain action. It was hostile both to the secularized natural law tradition of which Adam Smith’s work was a belated offspring and to utilitarianism. Its spread coincided with the time of weakening religious influence, and what was left supported rather than checked the trend toward the secular idolatry of the nation and of the state, German Lutheranism having for a long time exalted the unquestioning obedience of the faithful to government authority. Thus, in the end, historicism could degenerate into an idolatry of naked power. There was not only an absence of general principles but a disdain for them, a cynical contempt for anyone who would appeal to the rules of humanity” (413). Speigel then goes on to discuss historical jurisprudence and states, “historical economics was but one of the many manifestations of German historicism” (413). He stresses the point “that the restraining influence of the natural law idea vanished completely from German jurisprudence, even more so than did economic theory from economics” (414). More than a page is devoted to Hegelian philosophy. “The German variant of historical economics might be designated as Hegelian” (414). Among its characteristics were: “Hegel’s moral positivism equates might with right and power with morality” (414). “His view of liberty as submission to the authority of the state foreshadows a development of social thought and of political programs stressing social control and public policy” (415). Spiegel then discusses Edmund Burke (1729-1797). His “words may be designated as a manifestation of romanticism, a multifaceted movement that rose in opposition to the enlightenment” (416). Spiegel’s emphasis is on its influence in England because romanticism “had no counterpart in the German countries of the continent, where police and the censor would have stifled them.” He is speaking of such publications as The Edinburgh Review and The Westminster Review.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


However, “Burke found an eloquent disciple on the continent” in Adam Miiller (1779-1829), an The German exponent of ‘economic romanticism” (416). “Miller may be classified as an early critic of 1: qi capitalism, which he considered a threat to the viability of the absolute state” (417). historical schools A short paragraph is devoted to Fichte who was said to have extolled self-sufficiency in the context of a corporate state with a controlled economy and autarchy. “Ideas such as these were to resound in Germany for 150 years.” He then turns to List who was “with Miuiller, the principle forerunner of the historical 2A5 economists” (417). In discussing List’s theory of stages, Spiegel comments, “Stage theories are harmless when they are mere classifications, standing between description and analysis and indicating possible courses of economic development. They invite misuse when what they depict is declared to be a necessary historical sequence. When developed in this form, they tempt the student of history to treat his material in such a manner as to make it conform to the previously established theory” (418). Spiegel points out that List was a liberal in politics and “aimed at a synthesis of nationalism and liberalism, and this was also true of the three founders of the German historical school, two of whom, like List, had been victims of political persecution early in life. However, as time went on German historical economics did not escape the general political tendencies that made themselves felt in Germany. Liberalism was driven into a defensive position and in the end all but vanished from the scene, whereas nationalism came to suffuse all phases of life, especially after liberalism’s great foe, Bismarck, had achieved with ‘blood and iron’ the unification of Germany under Prussian leadership, a success that stifled and confused whatever remained of the opposition of liberal patriots” (419). Spiegel then discusses the older historical economists, Roscher, Hildebrand and Knies who “initiated a tradition in German economics which was to last almost 100 years, but their figures have become dim and their individual contributions indistinct” (419). All three have more than one page devoted to them. Of Roscher, Spiegel says, “in its core the message of the historical economist stressed the programmatic-methodological element, which from then on was destined to become a distinct and ubiquitous feature of German economic thought” (420). Spiegel points out that “the historical economists’ program was more easily stated than executed. It aimed at the reconstruction of an economics that was ‘based on the historical method” (421). But “judged in the light of these goals, what Roscher actually delivered was extremely modest” (421). Spiegel says, “there were, however, tensions between the three, with Knies becoming estranged from his teacher Hildebrand, who he judged intellectually dependent on Roscher; with Hildebrand failing to mention Roscher in his book; and with Roscher and Hildebrand criticizing each other’s views” (421). Spiegel states that Hildebrand’s basic position was similar to Roscher’s, “and his aim was the establishment of laws of economic development” (422). But Hilebrand “never clearly stated the methodological principles that would guide such an historical approach to economics, and he nowhere came close to producing a body of doctrine that could have superceded that of the classics and accomplished what in his opinion the classics were unable to do, that is, secure the intellectual defeat of the socialists” (422). Knies, however, “was equipped with greater analytical gifts than the other two wniters. But the wealth of thoughts assembled in his otherwise poorly written book prevented it from becoming an immediate success” (423). Knies, like Hildebrand, believed in linear progress and “considered it faulty to ground an absolute economics in the self-seeking pursuit of private interest” (423). “Knies believed classical economics entirely unequipped to overcome the rising tide of socialism” (423). Although Knies produced a methodological and political criticism of economic theory, “he failed to construct a new economics” which differed from that of the classics and of the socialists,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES and “that could have taken the place of conventional economics.” Spiegel writes about Knies’s 393 great works about economic value and about money and credit, “the influence of the historical 7 method espoused in his early work had almost disappeared” (423). Spiegel hasa section on the results of the three founders. “It must be admitted that they were not successful in their search for laws of economic development” (424). “Nor were the historical economists more successful in establishing an historical method for the study of economics” 2AG (424). Because the idea of the invisible hand of competition lost its sway, “no efforts were made to restrain monopolistic combinations, and the cartel movement was allowed to spread” (424). “Because there were few who understood the theory of comparative advantage” German economists failed to oppose Bismarck when he switched the economic policy of Germany from free trade to protectionism. “Thus economic policies of interventionism or non-interventionism came to be decided on an inadequate, ad hoc basis, there being no firm principles to adhere to in the face of an all pervasive relativism” (423). With respect to social policy “the three historical economists pleaded for a ‘social policy’ of ameliorating the position of the laboring class” (425). Bismarck’s social insurance program, which set a pattern “eventually emulated throughout the world” was quite in line with the thought of the historical economists, “who did much to promote it, it seems, however, that the insurance program itself did not have its origin in a suggestion from academic circles but in the ideas of Karl Marlo, an obscure socialist writer” (425). The reference is to Karl Georg Winkelblech (1810-1865) who published under the name Marlo. He was a professor at the Universities of Marburg and Kassel. This is one of the few places Spiegel is wrong; Marlo was not obscure. Spiegel then turns to a discussion of Schmoller, characterized as the leader of the next generation of German historical economists, usually designated as the younger school. “Under Schmoller historical economics became far more hostile to economic theory than it had been before. The younger school did not merely reject the alleged absolutism of theory but theory altogether. Economics then became identified with economic history, and all theorizing was relegated to the uncertain future when studies of economic history would be available in such abundance that general conclusions could be drawn from them” (425). The type of studies that Schmoller and his disciples carried on were “oriented toward political history and especially the history of public administration” (426). Spiegel also mentions Schmoller’s school and its role in the Verein fiir Sozialpolitik and how the American Economic Association was modeled after it. In discussing the socialists of the chair Spiegel begins, “with their active but unprincipled interventionism Schmoller and his followers found themselves exposed to attacks from various quarters” (426). He was attacked both from the left and from the right. The Methodenstreit is briefly discussed. (427) Spiegel stresses that “actually the historical approach did not yield settled truths at all, and what the German economists lacked were established principles from which to derive guidance” (427). In discussing Bismarck’s move toward protectionism “Schmoller in effect made science abdicate when he declared, after sketching the history of commercial policy at home and abroad, that Bismarck had probably again done the right thing, as he always had” (427). Spiegel points out that German economists had no effective advice to stem the inflation after world war one or when attempts were made to fend off the great depression in Germany. Spiegel does point out that “on his deathbed Schmoller came to repent the decline of economic theory in Germany, deploring that his followers were no longer familiar with what under his leadership they had so aggressively fought against” (427). Spiegel then has a section on the statistician Ernst Engel (1821-1896) and Brentano, mentioning Brentano’s pioneer history of English trade unions (427-428). The following section is on Spiethoff and Sombart (428-429). Spiethoff, one of Schmoller’s students, went beyond him and
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


became internationally famous for his contributions to business cycle theory. Sombart’s work on The German capitalism was also discussed. : : Spiegel has a long section (429-431) on Weber “who is close to the Schmoller group” (430). historical schools “Weber’s most profound effect on twentieth-century social thought resulted from another of his methodological preconceptions, namely his insistence on the strict observation of Hume’s distinction between what is and what ought to be” (431). “Weber was a strong German nationalist” (431). The chapter concludes with a section on the historical economists whose influence was not restricted to their homeland (431-433). When it spread abroad as in the US, “it was often domesticated by the moderating forces of different traditions and environments which took the sting out of the nationalism, the idolatry of the state, the political polarization, and the illiberalism which attended the growth of historical economics on its native soil” (431-432). The section on influence is mainly devoted to its influence in the US and Spiegel mentions that not all the American economists who were trained in Germany became exponents of historical economics, for example, John Bates Clark who was a student of Knies. The section ends with the comment that Knies “may well have been among the intellectual ancestors of the modern theory of value, just as were his contemporaries at Oxford and Dublin” (433). Spiegel mentions later on that criticism of conventional economic thought “helps to undermine existing structures, but does not build new ones” (665). 36D. Spengler and Allen’s book of readings is one of the most carefully indexed of any such book in the history of economic thought. It has both an index of names and of subjects. Its main virtue lies in its completeness. There are 20 entries “historical school” in the index. With the exception of Brentano they have entries in the name index for all the major members of the German historical schools. Part 5 of the collection is “the historical school and institutionalism.” There are no reprints of readings by members of the historical school. Most of the references to the historical school and its members occur in the almost 15 page long introduction to the readings. In the introduction, List is mentioned as one of the critics of orthodox economics. The historical school is the subject of one of three sets of criticisms by authors opposed to the classical or neo-classical system of economics. The other two sets refer to Marx’s ideas and the American institutionalists (485). The first reading is by Henryk Grossman (1881-1950), “The Evolutionist Revolt against Classical Economics.” The introduction discusses it as follows, “the opinions of members of the historical school are dealt with only cursorily in the selection from Grossman’s essay, in which it is argued that Hegel was not responsible for the ‘historicizing’ of economics. Credit for this accomplishment, Grossman believes, belongs primarily to Condorcet (1743-1794), who supposed that every nation tended to progress similarly, though at different times and rates; and to Saint-Simon (1760-1825), who emphasized the growing importance of science and administration and the rising industrial class, who described the course of social progress in terms of a series of progressive and retrogressive periods, and who helped to inspire the view that economies moved through a more or less ordered sequence of developmental stages” (486). The “Introduction”, by Spengler and Allen, next discusses the antecedents of the historical school and the shift in the focus of attention, especially in Germany, after the French Revolution and as a result of the enlightenment. “The object of this attention became man, now conceived of as a being who varied in space and time, and who, as a member of his nation or folk or other community, underwent cultural evolution” (487). Spengler and Allen distinguish between different types of historical approaches. “The method of inquiry which eighteenth-century social scientists had found adequate was no longer deemed sufficient, therefore, and as good as was to be had; nor was the pursuit of self interest still considered to be the unique key to man’s behavior. Use must be made of historical principles and preconceptions.”
247
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES “The impact of this new historical and sociological emphasis was felt by economical writers 393 in Germany earlier and in much greater measure than elsewhere. For here historical methods ? were early employed in many disciplines. Nationalist aspirations were strong and growing. Moreover for a number of reasons, the economics of Smith and Say (in which natural and conjectural rather than philosophical or purely empirical history played a part) did not become so ascendant in Germany as in England and France. Among these reasons may be included the 248 persistence of cameralistic influence and a concern with detailed policy, Germany's partial intellectual isolation, the presence of feudal interests and of a romantic ‘economic’ literature favorable thereto (e.g. Adam Miiller’s works), and a variety of economic problems which had been at least partially solved in England.” “There came into being three essentially historical types of approach, each in some measure hostile to that of the classical economist. First emphasis might be placed on the accumulation of factual data, upon the disclosure of the diversity and variegatedness of man’s behavior, and upon showing his economic tendencies to be not universal in character but quite sensitive to differences in his cultural situation. Second, concern might be manifested primarily in the discovery of tendencies or laws of economic development, or of the stages through which an economy must evolve, together with the susceptibility of economic evolution to acceleration through conscious, collectivistic intervention. Third, it might be taken for granted that an economy would progress in accordance with the principles of dialectical materialism and hence more or less independently of conscious human intervention; this approach reflects even more than does the second, the influence of Hegel. Each of the first two approaches was employed by members of the historical school, especially in Germany. The third approach was givena classic form by Marx and Engels” (487-488). Spengler and Allen point out that the approach of the proponents of the historical method resulted in work that took on a unique form in the different countries where authors followed it. They mention Roscher, Knies and Hildebrand as “usually described as the founders of the German historical school, although Friedrich List (1789-1846), publicist and disciple of the romanticist Adam Muller is sometimes grouped with them” (488). They mention the leading later representatives of the school as including Schmoller, its major spokesman and Knapp and Biicher. As representatives of a still later and final period, they mention Sombart and Weber (488). Spengler and Allen put the views of the German historical economists into three categories, “their criticism of the classical school, their positive themes, and their conception of economic policy and the role of the state” (488). They point out that no one member of the school subscribed entirely to the summary above or to all the principles endorsed by any other member. Nor was there ever as much homogeneity of opinion as was to be found in the classical school or the physiocrats. The reason “is attributable in part to the fact that the historical economists never highly conceptualized their views, preferring to formulate their opinions in quite empirical or in loosely defined terms” (488). Among the criticisms the historical school made, one was that Ricardo’s method was unacceptable because it was considered deductive and based “upon the premise that man’s institutions and behavioral tendencies were essentially invariant” (489). Spengler and Allen write, “among the positive themes of the historical economists we may include their notions of economic development; their supposition that economic behavior and economic thought are cultural in character and hence time- and space-bound, with the result that the economic component of a societal system may not be looked upon as being so autonomous as the classical and the Austrian economists implied; and their inference, treated below, that since political considerations are of primary importance, the economic role of the state is necessarily great” (489). Spengler and Allen mention the theories of stages of List, Hildebrand, Biicher and Schmoller as being different (489). They point out that the historical economists “defined their stages in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


social and economic terms.” This reflected their view that “economic activities cannot be The German completely sequestered, analytically or empirically, from non-economic activities” (489). : : The views of the historical economists on the role of the state were that the state was more historical schools than just a political instrument designed to preserve law and order but rather “it approximated a community or social organism that helped to define the ends of nations and individuals and assisted them in realizing these ends” (490). Spengler and Allen point out that it is not easy to pinpoint the effects produced by the 249 writings of the historical economists “since some of the effects in question are attributable in part also to changes in the climate of opinion and to the response made by other social scientists to changing circumstances” (491). Among their positive contributions was that the emphasis of the economists upon empirical inquiry “whether to discover coexisting facts or to infer causal relationships and trends, focused attention on various concrete factors and changes which had been insufficiently taken into account before” (491). Another of the positive accomplishments of the German historical school was making “more clear and concrete not only the great importance of the economic role of the state but also the need for economic policy to be formulated only after careful inquiry and in the light of relevant historical, stitutional, and other factual circumstances. Their concern with the nature of social and cultural science helped give currency and shape to analysis of methodological and related issues” (491). Spengler and Allen conclude their list of positive contributions, “this list suggests both the nature of the contributions made by the historical economists and the fact that they lay far more
stress in the areas of economic application and of sociology than in that of economic theory”
(491).
Spengler and Allen then turn to the negative contributions, one of the worst of which “was their endorsement of protectionism even in countries such as Britain and their failure to appreciate the extent to which international commerce could and did serve to free countries of the impact of comparative economic disadvantage” (491). Even worse “was the great slowing down of progress in economic theory in Germany” (491). This was the result of “their failure to conceptualize historical economics significantly and make sufficient use of abstract models, ideal types, etc.” (492). They point out that by the tum of the century the methodological conflicts had been composed. “Economists were becoming alert to the complementary roles of theory, statistical and historical inquiry, and the use of mathematical and nonmathematical models, as well as to the restrictions to which economic generalizations become subject when they are given empirical content” (492). Spengler and Allen state that the views of the German historical economists exercised considerable influence in other countries, although it was overrated in England. American economists influenced by the Germans are given as John Bates Clark, Edmund Janes James (1855-1925), Ely, Henry Carter Adams (1851-1921) and E.R.A. Seligman. They made “discriminating use of German historist practice” and greatly modified American economics and made it more empirical, more problem oriented, more statistical and less narrow in scope” (493). They then go on to discuss Marxism (493-495). After that they have a section on the American institutionalists. It begins “some but not all of the American institutionalists subscribed to a critique of neoclassical and marginalist economics that resemble the historical and Marxian critiques in emphasizing the evolutionary character of economic society and its elements and their interrelations (495). Veblen is said to have followed that approach but not Commons. They have a long discussion of Veblen, who was said to be “highly critical of the historical school in general and quite critical even of Schmoller’s work. The historical school had produced history, not economics; it was innocent of the theory requisite to translate its accumulation of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES data and narrative into ‘a consistent body of knowledge.’ It lacked what every evolutionary 393 science must have, ‘a theory of a process of an unfolding sequence” (496). ? In their section “comparison” of the approaches treated in the introduction Spengler and Allen point out that “the historical economists, together with Marx and Veblen, had a quite different conception of the scope of economics than did the classical economists and their marginalist and neoclassical successors” (498). 250 They point out that the historical economists “were interested primarily in the process of change and in the effects of change in factors treated as constant by the economists whom they criticized; they were not greatly interested in such matters as allocative mechanisms. It is not possible to assess their performance nicely in terms of the standards of those they criticize; it must be assessed in terms of their accomplishments, given their objectives. These accomplishments were not outstanding in most instances, above all on the part of Veblen’s institutionalist followers. It is possible to infer, however, that this weakness of performance was highly correlated with the neglect of theoretical considerations, concern with which makes present-day recourse to interdisciplinary approaches so much more effective than were the approaches dealt with in part five” (498-499). In Grossman’s article he says, when writing about Jones, “but, unlike the discredited school of Roscher, who substituted for theoretical laws an unthinking, chronological accumulation of unanalyzed descriptive material, Jones considered it his function to test and correct the prevalent theories against actual historical developments and to formulate concrete experience into new theoretical viewpoints and categories” (507). Homan’s article “The institutional school” has several references to the German historical schools. It begins “the form assumed by the descent from orthodox economics has differed from country to country and from period to period” (525). Homan says, “The German historical school of necessity was deeply concerned with the changing structure of economic institutions and the progressive adaptation of life and thought to such change” (525). “The so-called genetic method, the explanation in terms of accumulative causation, may perhaps be regarded as a distinctive institutionalist method, although it has also been championed by such representatives of the German historical school as Karl Biicher” (628). 37. Taylor’s history has no entry in the index for the German historical schools and none for most of the members of them, Brentano, Hildebrand, Knies, List, Roscher, Schmoller, Sombart, Spiethoff or Weber. About half of Taylor’s history of economic thought is devoted to the “history of philosophical and over-all social, ethical and political thought” (ix).
Taylor has a fairly detailed discussion of his views of what brought about the Nazi movement (406-411) but nothing at all about the German historical schools. The same is true of his other discussions of Germany such as his discussion of the German Social Democratic Party in the late nineteenth Century and the revisionist movement that was led by Bernstein (423). 37E. Sidney Weintraub’s large book of readings has no entry for Brentano, Hildebrand or Knies in the index of authors. There is no index of subjects. All of the entries for economists of the German historical schools occur in Rima’s article “Neoclassicism and descent: 1890-1930.” One section “Austrian and German contributions” contains all of the entries to the members of the German historical schools (12-13). She says that, in contrast to the Austrian school, “The historicists innately reflected the Romantic Spirit which had nurtured German nationalism and idealism” (12). “Historicism, however, was the dominant intellectual force in the German universities, and it was widely respected in Europe and America. But it could not halt the ultimate evolution of theoretical systems of thought, even in Germany, and the Methodenstreit subsided. Continental thought strands during the period were therefore complex, for they reflected the continuing conflict between alternative conceptual ideas” (12-13). “Gustav Schmoller was the undisputed leader of historicimus among those who yearned backwards to the work of Miller and List and, in part Roscher. Schmoller’s Outhne (Grundriss, 1900) was the grand monument of ‘the younger historical school.’ Its two volumes treat a range of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


subjects historically, statistically and in a sense, analytically. Arthur Speithoff, once Schmoller’s The German assistant, distinguished the ‘pure’ theory of Ricardo, Johann von Thinen, and Carl Menger and 1 - : ‘observational’ (anschauliche) theory of Schmoller and Weber. Likewise, there is a conjectural historical schools type of historical theory in the embracing themes of Werner Sombart and Max Weber to explain the rise of capitalism. “In his business cycle study Spiethoff drew on both the factual materials of the historical school and the statistical compilations of Clement Juglar to investigate general ‘overproduction’ 251 and to dismiss Say’s law as ‘less a theory of explaining crisis than a theory seeking to prove their impossibility, and complete disregard of all the facts” (13). Rima then goes on to a discussion of several Austrian economists. 38. Whittaker, like a few other historians of economic thought, wrote two such histories. The first he called A History of Economic Ideas, published in 1940. In 1960 he wrote Schools and Streams of Economic Thought which was both “a complement and a successor” to his 1940 history (Preface, vii). His 1940 book, organized along topical lines, will be discussed first. Because of the topical organization, e.g. value, rent etc., many of the references to the German historical schools and its members are brief and scattered. There are four references to “historical school” in the index. The index entry adds, “see also Bucher, List, Roscher, Schmoller.” Whittaker also refers to Brentano, Hildebrand, and Weber. There are no index references to Knies, Sombart, or Speithoff. Early on, Whittaker himself shows some influence of the German historical schools, “certain economists, notably members of the German historical school and the American insitutionalists, have taken the view that society can be understood only as a whole, from which follows the conclusion that it must be studied as a whole. Without going so far as to adopt this attitude, it is apparent that students of economics should have some acquaintance with thought in allied fields, such as ethics, political science, and psychology (1940, vii). He states this because “some sections of the book go beyond what are often regarded as the limits of economics” (1940, vii). After describmg Hermann Heinrich Gossen’s (1810-1858) anticipations of marginalism, Whittaker says that his work “was published in Germany when the historical school was dominant in that country and, although he himself had high expectations of its results, it was received with such little favor that its author ordered the destruction of the remainder of the edition a short time before his death” (1940, 445). Describing the work of Menger, Walras and Jevons he says “after 1870, however, they rapidly assumed a dominant position in Western Europe, at least outside Germany, where the Historical School retained its powerful position” (1940, 445). Describing Hume’s work on interest Whittaker says, “in its emphasis on habit and national character, it gave a foretaste of the ideas of the German historical school and the American institutionalists” (1940, 538). Discussing John Stuart Mill’s ideas about distribution, Whittaker says, “Mill’s book on the subject might have come from a member of the historical school” (1940, 728). In his discussion of the scope and method of economics, Whittaker begins with a section on “The historical viewpoint before the rise of the German historical school” (730). He closes his discussion, “but it was left to the German historical school, the sociologists led by the Frenchman Auguste Comte (1798-1857), and a few scattered critics in England to reassert the viewpoint of Montesquieu” (1940, 732). Whittaker introduces the section on “The German school and the instituionalists” with a discussion of the British school that “this outlook had little influence in Germany” (1940, 732). He refers to Hegel’s influence and “the school of legal writers” which included von Hugo, von Savigny and Eichhorn, all of whom were said to have followed Montesquieu in relating legal ideas to their general social environment and emphasizing the concept of evolution. “It was this legal group that furnished the economist, Wilhelm Roscher (1817-1894), and his followers with much of their inspiration.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES “The Germans delivered a triple challenge to British economics. They attacked its narrow 393 and individualistic scope, seeking to substitute for Senior’s specialized science of individual ? wealth a broader study that would bring out the interrelations of the various aspects of the social whole. Secondly, they criticized the static nature of the classical postulates and the ‘laws’ that were based on these assumptions. Thirdly, they objected to the abstract method of the classical economist and endeavored to replace it by more realistic methods of approach [Original italics]” 252 (1940, 733). List “can be regarded as an early exponent of the historical outlook” and his views are discussed (1940, 733). Roscher “may be looked upon as the leader of the German school, at least in its early period” (1940, 734). He makes his points about Roscher’s views by quoting him (1940, 734). After making the point attributed to Roscher that there has to be a close connection between the law, politics and the social condition, Whittaker says “Comte stated the same principle” (1940, 735). And this is followed by almost a page of quotations from Comte. In a section “The evolutionary concept and the existence of laws of social development” Whittaker writes, “another important feature of the writings of the members of the historical school was the emphasis placed on the concept of social evolution. The idea was older than the school, having been found in the works of Montesquieu and Hegel as well as in those of German legal writers” (1940, 737). After mentioning that List and Jones advanced the idea that economic actions and standards were related to the social environment he says “Roscher made the same point” and gives a quotation from Roscher (1940, 737).
He goes on to point out that the “historical and institutional writers have differed in the way in which they regarded evolution”. While discussing this topic Whittaker says, “During the latter part of the nineteenth century the general attitude of the German Historical economists was that the world was heading for some form of socialism and, from the Eisenach Conference of 1872 onwards, many of them engaged in promoting the socialist movement. The institutionalists, however, have rejected this position. Unlike Hegel, Marx, List and Biicher they have refused to regard social evolution as a simple progress along a road that investigation might reveal, if, indeed it had not been so already” (1940, 738). The section on “economic method” begins “thinking as they did, it was only to be expected that members of the historical school would reject the classical method of abstract argument from given assumptions in favor of realistic study of forms and alterations of social institutions.” And then follows an extensive quote from Roscher to make the point (1940, 738). Whittaker gives the members of both the English and German historical schools the credit of having “done a great deal to unearth the facts of economic history. Stimulated by their example and along the path marked out by these students, an uncounted band of workers have added enormously to knowledge of the past of society. Others have collected data on existing institutions. Hildebrand, especially, among the outstanding members of the German school, made extensive use of statistical methods” (1940, 739). In the section “assessment” in the chapter on the scope and method of economics Whittaker says, “in the first place it must be conceded that society is complex and that more than economic factors are concerned in its nature and development” (1940, 740). Because of the need for policy “it need be no matter for surprise, therefore, that historical economists and institutionalists — who give a wide scope to their study and claim confidence to give advice — have been popular in government circles.” Whittaker ends the paragraph “yet in truth it must be asked frequently whether all the work that is being done would be needed if there were somewhat less urge to rush into investigation anda little more willingness to think beforehand”. “Against the historical and institutional writers, it must be pointed out that the range of social knowledge is so great nowadays that no man can hope to master it in any detail” (1940, 740).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


However, “the argument of the historical school and of Comte, that society can be understood The German only as a whole, seems to contain a good deal of truth, and this belief helps to explain the nature 1,-: :
of the present volume.” historical schools
“On the subject of method, it can be said that the historical criticism has had the effect of stimulating the use of realistic data, so that many economists of recent years can be classified as eclectics, remaining free from formal allegiance and using whatever methods appear appropriate to the problem in hand” (1940, 741). 253 Whittaker thinks that the difference between the classical and the historical viewpoints on the subject of methods “is not so marked in reality as may first appear” (1940, 741). This is primarily because “Practical investigators are driven back on abstract theorizing” (1940, 742). In his “Summary of chapter” (743 ff.) Whittaker explains, “the major shifts of emphasis in economic discussion are largely explained by alterations in men’s views respecting ultimate objectives” (1940, 743). “The Germans gave their economics a scope less individualistic and more national than was the case with the British school but, even in those countries where the ideas of the latter have predominated, recent years have witnessed a trend in the direction of social or national economics.” “A sharp difference of opmion has appeared in regard to the subject matter of economics. Where the British classical economists endeavored to study wealth-seeking alone, apart from other angles of life, some other writers have refused to admit the possibility of thus disentangling one facet of life from the whole. Men’s motives and actions are too intimately connected with each other to be understood independently, they have said. The German historical school, the general body of sociologists and the American institutionalists have adopted this attitude” (1940, 743). Whittaker concludes the summary section as follows: “while the classical economists built their science by logical reasoning from stated assumptions, the historical school and the institutionalists have employed the realistic method of study, examining historical data and investigating statistics. Obviously, such material represents the process of social life as a whole and it is not always possible to identify the specifically economic ingredient. So the realistic inquirer often falls back on abstract reasoning. On the other hand, the growth of quantitative data makes it possible for Classical assumptions to be reinforced by historical or statistical information, and the dividing line between the two schools becomes less clearly cut” (1940, 744). Whittaker’s 1960 book has 11 entries in the index under “Historical school of economics.” The main discussion occurs in chapter 9, “Romanticism and historical economics” (191-216). His 1940 book was “destructive of ‘school’ and ‘system” (1960, vii). This one is organized to study “economic writings by author, school, and period” (1960, vii). The first reference occurs when Whittaker mentions that Montesquieu, James Denham Steuart (Sir, 1712-1780) and Hume anticipated “the Hegelian view of human society and the historical criticism of classical economics” (1960, 81). The section on the historical school begins, “what commonly is called the German historical school of economics dominated economic thought in Germany from 1843” (1960, 205). Roscher, Hildebrand, Knies, Schmoller, Biicher and Sombart “may be classified with this group” (1960, 206). The historical school of law founded by von Hugo and Savigny is mentioned. The section “Economic ideas and methods” begins “Roscher and his successors saw economics as part of a broader study of an integrated and evolving society. They taught that economic organization and theory must be related to time and place, that is to say, to the environment. This is what Savigny and his followers were saying about law. Roscher believed that classical economics was not of universal application” (1960, 206). Roscher’s views about the necessity of studying the history of various societies and of human society as a whole, and that such study had to be inductive are discussed (1960, 206-207). “Only as the historical school developed were these ideas fully expressed; it was Schmoller, more than earlier members of the group, who grounded it firmly in historical research” (1960, 207).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


JES The stage theories of List, Hildebrand and Bucher are mentioned. “List can be regarded as a 393 forerunner of the historical school rather than as a member of it” (1960, 207). , After mentioning Menger’s work on method and the controversies it aroused, “it came to be conceded by economists generally that, although the criticisms of classical economics which had been offered by members of the historical school had at times been extreme, they nevertheless contained much truth” (1960, 208). 254 Whittaker concludes the section on economic ideas and methods with, “more than formerly, it came to be admitted that what were called economic laws often were little more than generalizations applicable to particular circumstances. When they were generalizations arrived at on the basis of past behavior, they could be employed in forecasting only so far as environmental conditions remained unaltered” (1960, 208). This is followed by a section “British writers with a historical viewpoint.”
In the chapter “Socialism before Marx” and the section on Saint-Simon, “Saint-Simon anticipated Marx and the German historical school of economists in regarding society as an evolving phenomenon” (1960, 225). In his discussion of Marxism and socialism after Marx, Whittaker says that Marx “went further than most members of the historical school in accepting the idea that it was the task of economics not merely to explain the past and present, but to discover the key to the future. More, perhaps, than any other economist of the first rank, he visualized economics as a science of society as a whole; he was able to do this because of the importance which he attached to economic factors as social determinants” (1960, 238). In chapter 12, “Modern economics in the classical tradition; (1) the resurgence of the 1870s,” Whittaker writes, “Thorold Rogers, who was teaching economics at Oxford and London, held views which classified him with the German historicists rather than with Senior and Mill” (1960, 261). In his review of neoclassical economics, after listing the limitations of neoclassical economics, Whittaker writes “these limitations of neoclassical economics were largely responsible for the rise of institutionalism in the United States and for the continued influence of historicism in Europe” (1960, 312). While discussing Veblen’s predecessors and successors, Whittaker states “Veblen made virtually no use of statistics. His historical writings were sketchy and appeared to have been based largely on secondary sources. What Veblen had to say was not altogether new. The revolt of the German historical school against the extremes of British Classical economics partly paralleled Veblen’s own attack on the neoclassical school. When Veblen did his writing, however, economics in America was often taught as a rather extreme form of neoclassicism, and Veblen and his school have done much to change this” (1960, 319). When he discusses recent writers in the historical tradition in a short section on economic history, Whittaker says, “Contemporary with the appearance of the institutional economics of Veblen and his followers in the United States, historicism of the German variety continued its development” (1960, 320). In his discussion of recent historicists, Whittaker begins “more directly in the tradition of the German historical school, and classifiable with the earlier work of members of that group, are the studies of Max Weber and Werner Sombart” (1960, 320). Later, “Schumpeter received inspiration from both the classical and historical schools” (1960, 321). In his discussion of state economic planning Whittaker says, “some of the later members of the German Historical school of economists gave so much support to socialism that they got the name ‘socialists of the chair’ (meaning the academic chair or professorship)” (1960, 385). There is no entry on Brentano in the index. He is the only main member of the German historical schools that has no entry. 39. Zweig has no entries to the historical schools in the index. But there are at least two references to them. Early on he says, “the chief interest of the present-day economist is turned to
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


the institutionalist and historical school...” (3). In his discussion of Marshall he says, “the The German substance of his work was affected by Spencer and the ethico-historical studies of the German 1 - :
historical school” 9-10). historical schools
Zwieg has a discussion of the question “are the greatest minds attracted to the study of economics?” In his answer, he includes many members of the historical schools. “Roscher, Schmoller, Wagner, Brentano, Knies, Biicher, Max Weber were primarily historians and sociologists. Frederick List was a man of affairs, journalist, and politician” (17). In his list of great 255 books in economics, he includes “Frederick List’s, Roscher’s and Schmoller’s works” (39). Among other mentions of members of the historical schools is one that says that Richard Cobden (1804-1865) “was a forerunner of Max Weber and Werner Sombart” (35). There is also a reference to Weber’s “ideal type” (19).
Appendix 2. A simple economic test Just for fun, let us use a modern econometric technique, something the members of the German historical schools had no knowledge of and would have rejected if they did, to test an hypothesis about their influence. The process of testing a null hypothesis requires starting with the assumption that two variables are not associated. Then an attempt is made to demonstrate or deny (confirm or disconfirm) the truth of this assumption with empirical findings showing an actual link. Consider the null hypothesis: the German historical schools left no legacy, they had no influence on modern economic thought. The null hypothesis is that jz; — fz = 0 where 2; is some measure of the influence of the German historical schools at their peak, say the 1890s. Let 422 be some measure of the traces of their work to be found in modern economic thought. Thus, the null hypothesis concerns the parameters ~ 2 and the null hypothesis is that the sum of the parameters equals zero and no traces of their thought are to be found in modern economic thought.
Ho : my, — p2 =0 ce)
Without getting extravagantly mathematical, the data for y; is that all the historians of economic thought who discuss the German historical schools agree that it had great influence in its day. It can be argued that historians would not write about a subject thought to be of no importance. A full answer would require an examination of all the histories of thought to see if any significant number claim the German historical schools had no influence in their day. Since no first- or even second-rate history claims this, one could reasonably suspect any such verdicts of being outliers capable of rejection. The data for jzz given in the section above “The influence of the German historical schools,” is substantially in favor of many traces of their influence in modern economic thought. The null hypothesis that the German historical schools left no legacy and had no influence on modern economic thought can be rejected.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.