Nil DALMM
since 1453


RINEHART BOOKS IN EUROPEAN HISTORY
Eugene N. Anderson
M odern E urope in W orld Perspective: 19J4 to the Present
Eugene N . A nderson
E uropean Issues in the T w entieth Century
Richard M. Brace
The Making of the M odern World: From the Renaissance to the Present
Wallace E. Caldwell The Ancient World
Stewart C. Easton
The Heritage of the Past: From the Earliest Times to 1500
Stewart C. Easton
The Heritage of the Past: From the Earliest Times to 1715
Loren C. M acKinney The Medieval World
L. S. Stavrianos
The Balkans since 1453


Th«m m
since 1453
L. S. Stavrianos
Professor of History, Northwestern University
N EW YORK
Rinehart & Company, Inc.


Copyright © 1958 by L. S. Stavrianos A ll Rights Reserved Printed in the United States o f A m erica l ibrary of Congress Catalog Card N um ber: 58-7242


Preface
p
J . e r h a p s t h is bo o k should be preceded by an apology rather than a preface— an apology for presum ption in undertaking singlehanded a history of the Balkan Peninsula. This task, under ideal circum stances, should be assumed by an international team of scholars. And even such a team could not hope to produce anything approaching a definitive work without a good many years of cooperative research and deliberation on the num erous basic problem s in Balkan history that still rem ain unresolved. I began this study almost a decade ago with the hope that the inevi table shortcomings of the final product might be balanced by certain positive features. M ore specifically, two objectives have been kept in mind through out the preparation of this volume. One was to synthesize and to make more generally available the great amount of monographic and periodical literature that has appeared since the period following W orld W ar I, when the currently available general Balkan histories were written. The nature and extent of this literature is indicated in the bibliography, w here an attem pt also has been made to point out the most pressing needs and the most promising research areas in contem porary Balkan historiography. The other objective has been to make manifest the broader signifi cance of Balkan history by emphasizing the interrelationship of Balkan, gen eral European, and world history. During the past century, particularly, Bal kan developments are explainable to a significant degree in terms of the im pact of the dynamic, industrial W estern society upon the static, agrarian Balkan society. The instability and turbulence of Balkan politics in the mod ern period become meaningful when interpreted as a local manifestation of the world-wide problem of the adjustm ent of backward areas to the W estern in dustrial civilization that has enveloped the globe. Early in the preparation of this study certain basic questions of defi nition and delimitation had to be decided. One concerned geography— how far north do the Balkans extend? The decision here— arbitrary of necessitywas to exclude Hungary and include Rum ania. A nother question was whether the approach to Balkan history during the Ottom an period should be prim a rily local or imperial. T he latter had certain im portant advantages, particularly


vi Preface
pedagogically. The O ttom an period of Balkan history has been viewed tradi tionally from C onstantinople, and this treatm ent undoubtedly is m ore adapt able to the familiar patterns of general European history. On the other hand, a B alkan approach to the O ttom an period is desirable precisely because it has been hitherto neglected. But this in turn immediately raises the problem of current Balkan historiography for the O ttom an period. Yugoslav historians, who have devoted far more attention to the prenational era than any of their Balkan colleagues, are still debating elementary questions of interpretation and even of fact. A t the risk of falling between two stools, an attem pt has been made to com bine the im perial and local approaches. O ttom an im perial history is sur veyed in Parts II and III, though the analysis is deliberately “slanted” toward the Balkans. F o r example, the conquests of Selim I in Syria and Egypt are of basic significance for the general history of the O ttom an Em pire; yet they are only briefly summarized here because they did not directly affect the Balkans. F o r the sam e reason m uch m ore em phasis is placed on Suleim an’s cam paigns in Central Europe, where Balkan frontiers were involved, than on his equally im portant expeditions into Persia and the western M editerranean. At the same time, Parts II and III include chapters devoted to Balkan institutions and trends during the Ottom an period, and also the “national” chapters in Part IV include background surveys of pre-nineteenth century developments and conditions. The nineteenth century also posed a problem of delimitation. Should this study concern itself with the various crises and wars arising from the in trusion of the great powers into the vacuum created by Ottom an decline? For exam ple, both the N ear E astern crises of the 1830’s and the C rim ean W ar did not originate in the Balkans and the m ilitary operations were not waged in that area. This would appear sufficient reason for concluding that these episodes have no place in a B alkan history. Y et the events of 1875-1878 obviously m ust be considered, and if they are to be considered m eaningfully it is clearly necessary to trace the diplomatic threads back to the earlier crises. Thus the decision again was in favor of broader coverage, so that the so-called Eastern Q uestion is here exam ined com prehensively to the L ausanne T reaty of 1923. In fact, the Q uestion is traced through to the post-W orld W ar II period, for the maneuverings, declarations, and doctrines of Churchill and Stalin and Roosevelt and Trum an are but the contem porary manifestation of the age-old Q uestion that in the past involved Greeks, Persians, Rom ans, Slavs, and Turks.
It gives me pleasure to take this opportunity to acknowledge the friendly and unstinted help of the following scholars who read and criticized portions of the manuscript: Professor Sinasi Altundag of the University of Ankara, Professor George Arnakis of the University of Texas, Professor С. E. Black of Princeton University, Professor Michael B. Petrovich of the Univer sity of W isconsin, Professor Carl Roebuck of Northwestern University, Pro lessor Jo/,о Tom asevich ol Sim Francisco State C ollege, and Dr. Peter T o p


Preface vii
ping, Director of the Gennadius Library of the Am erican School of Classical Studies in Athens. O ther scholars, including Professor Sydney N. Fisher of The Ohio State University, Professor Charles Jelavich of the University of California at Berkeley, Professor William L. Langer of H arvard University, Dr. Philip E. Mosely of the Council on Foreign Relations, Professor Henry L. R oberts of C olum bia University, and Professor W ayne S. V ucinich of Stan ford University, responded generously to the innum erable questions that arose in the course of preparing the manuscript. I am indebted also to the following authors who kindly allowed me to read their works while still in m anuscript form : Dr. John C. Cam pbell of the Council on Foreign Relations ( French In fluence and the Rise of Roumanian Nationalism) , Dr. George Coutsoum aris ( Possibilities of Economic Developm ent in G reek A griculture), Professor Roderic Davison of T he G eorge W ashington U niversity ( Reform in the O tto man Empire 1 8 5 6 -1 8 7 6 ), Professor Adam antios Pepellasis of the University of California at Davis (Socio-Cultural Barriers to the Economic Development of Greece), Professor Howard A. Reed of W allingford, Pennsylvania ( The Destruction of the Janissaries by M ahm ud II in June, 1 8 2 6 ), D r. E rnest E. R am saur, Jr. (The Young Turk Revolution, An Inquiry into the Origins of the Turkish Revolution of 1908, published iri 1957 by the Princeton U niver sity Press as The Young Turks: Prelude to the Revolution of 1 9 0 8 ), Professor Henry L. Roberts of Columbia University ( Rumania: Political Problems of an Agrarian State, published in 1951 by the Yale University Press), Professor T raian Stoianovich of R utgers U niversity ( L ’économ ie balkanique aux X V IIe et X V IIIe siècles), Professor Lewis V. Thom as of Princeton University ( O tto man Awareness of Europe, 1650 to 1800), and Professor Jozo Tomasevich ( Peasants, Politics and Economic Change in Yugoslavia, published in 1955 by the Stanford U niversity P ress). W hile this w ork was in the press, D r. George C. Soulis, Librarian of D um barton Oaks and mem ber of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, H arvard University, kindly informed me of a num ber of studies that had escaped my attention. These have been added to the bibliog raphy section, with the notation in each case that they have not been consulted in the preparation of the manuscript. Mr. Justin Kestenbaum , formerly H earst Fellow in Am erican History at Northw estern University and presently a mem ber of the history departm ent at W right Junior College, photographed the illustrative materials with expertness and care. The directors and staff members of the libraries in which I have worked have been m ost helpful and courteous. I am grateful to them all, and particularly to those of the National Library of Greece, the Gennadius Li brary in Athens, the Library of Congress, the New York Public Library, and the libraries of H arvard University, Princeton University, Columbia Univer sity, Stanford University, the University of California at Berkeley, and the University of Chicago. The staff of Deering Library at Northwestern Univer sity responded unfailingly to repeated requests throughout the preparation of the manuscript. I should also like to extend my thanks to the John Simon Guggen


viii Preface
heim M emorial Foundation for a fellowship that enabled me to devote without interruption the year 1951-1952 to this study, and also to the Committee on Research of the G raduate School of Northwestern University for generous and successive grants-in-aid which facilitated the preparation of this book. Finally it gives me the greatest personal pleasure to express my appre ciation and gratitude to my colleague, Professor Gray C. Boyce. I am indebted to him not only for his helpful comments concerning portions of the m anu script that he read, but above all for his selfless and perceptive consideration in sm oothing the way during the preparation of this study. T he m easure of my indebtedness will be best appreciated by my colleagues who also are associated with Professor Boyce in his department. L. S. S. Evanston, Illinois


Contents
Preface v
Photographs xvii
Maps xix
Note on Spelling and Place Names , xxi
PART I. INTRODUCTION
1. The Land and the People 1
Location · Terrain · Rivers and Routes · Climate and Re sources · People · Balkan and Western Ethnography · Non geographic Forces
2. Historical Background 15
Greek Period · Macedon Dominates the Balkans · Rome Unites the Balkans · Rome to Byzantium · Coming of the Slavs · Medieval Balkan Empires · Eve of the Turkish Con quest · Byzantium in Retrospect
PA R T II. AGE O FO T T O M A N A SCEN D A N CY : TO 1566
3. Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 33
Pre-Ottoman Turks · Osman: Founder of the Ottoman Em pire · Bases of Ottoman Power · Orkhan Prepares for Con quest · State of Christendom · Crossing to Europe · Murad Defeats the South Slavs · Bayezid the Thunderbolt · Nicopolis Crusade · Timur the Lame
ix


x Contents
4. Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481 50
Ottoman Recovery · Murad II · Varna Crusade · Moham med’s Preparations · Fall of Constantinople · Aftermath · Mohammed Subjugates the Balkans · War with Venice
5. Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 68
Bayezid II · Selim I and the Trade Routes · Suleiman the Magnificent · Ottoman Empire and Christian Europe · Vic tory at Mohacs · Defeat at Vienna · Truce on the Dan ube · Persian and Mediterranean Expeditions
6. Ottoman Institutions 81
Lands and Peoples · Sultan and Slaves · Recruiting and Training of Slaves · Armed Forces and Administration · The Moslem Institution · The Divan · Status of Non-Moslems · Ottoman Culture · The Osmanli and the Turk
7. Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 96
Migrations of Peoples · Administration · Autonomous Re gions · Patriarchate · Balkan Christianity · Folk Culture · Ec clesiastical Culture · “Pax Ottomanica”
PA R T III. AGE O F O TT O M A N d e c l i n e : 1566-1815
8. Decline of the Ottoman Empire 117
Degeneration of the Dynasty · Corruption of the Administra tion · Disintegration of the Armed Forces · Ruling Oli garchy · Economic Subservience to the West · Ottoman and Western Military Developments · Ottoman and Western Political Evolution · Western Science and Ottoman “Eyes of Oxen” · Plague Epidemics · Ottoman Decline in Retro spect
9. Balkan Peninsula during Ottoman Decline 137
Territorial Changes · Timar to Chiflik · Growth of Com merce and Industry · Political Developments · Passing of the Theocratic Age · Role of the Orthodox Church
10. Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1 5 6 6-1699 154
Selim II: 1566-1574 · Rule of the Sultanas · War on the Danube · Murad IV: 1623-1640 · Decline Continues: 16401656 · Kiuprili Vizirs: 1656-1676 · Russia and the Ukraine ·


Siege of Vienna: 1683 · War of the Holy League: 16831699 · Treaty of Karlowitz: 1699
11. Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 178
Defeat of Peter the Great · Reconquest of the Pelopon nesus · War with Austria (Passarowitz Treaty: 1718) · War with Austria and Russia (Belgrade Treaty: 1739) · Three Decades of Peace: 1739-1768 · Catherine’s First Turkish War: 1768-1774 · Catherine’s Second Turkish W ar: 17871792 · Treaty of Sistova: 1791 · Treaty of Jassy: 1792 · Jassy and the Balkans
12. The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792—1815 198
French Rule in the Ionian Islands · Napoleon Invades Egypt: Balkan Repercussions · Selim Joins Napoleon: Balkan Reper cussions · French in Dalmatia · Tilsit, Bucharest, Vienna · Balkan Aftermath
Contents xi
PART IV. AGE OF NATIONALISM : 1815-1878
13. Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815-1878 215
Continued Ottoman Decline · Revolutionary Balkan Nation alism · Intervention by the Great Powers
14. The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 230
South Slavs under Foreign Rule (Slovenia, Croatia, Voivodina, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia) · Belgrade Pashalik under Turkish Rule · Intellectual Awakening · Roots of Revolt · Course of the Revolt: 1804-1813 · Winning of Autonomy: 1813-1830 · Serbia under Milosh · Alexander Karageorge: 1842-1858 · The Obrenoviches to 1878 · Eco nomic Development to 1878 · Hapsburg Slavs to 1878
15. Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 269
Greek Imperial World · Greek Peasant World · Economic Revival · National Awakening · Eve of Revolt · Revolu tion and Stalemate: 1821-1824 · Foreign Intervention to Navarino: 1825-1827 · Navarino to Independence · Polit ical Developments to 1878 · Economic Developments to 1878
16. Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 300
Mahmud and the Janissaries · Near Eastern Crisis: 18311833 · N ear Eastern Crisis: 1839-1841 · Reshid and the Reform Movement: 1839-1852


xii Contents
17. Crimean War: 1853-1856 319
Strategic and Commercial Background · Diplomatic Prelimi naries · Holy Places Dispute · Steps to W ar · War · Treaty of Paris · Balkan and European Repercussions
18. Making of Rumania to 1878 339
Historical Background · Peasant Problem · Rise of Nation alism · Winning of Unity: 1856-1859 · Economic Develop ments to 1878 · Political Developments to 1878 · Transyl vania, Bukovina, and Bessarabia to 1878
19. Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 364
Turkish Rule · Greek Prelates · Regenerative Forces · Cul tural Awakening · Bulgarian Exarchate · Revolutionary Move ment
20. Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire: 1 8 5 6 -1 8 7 7 381
Nature of Reform Problem and of Balkan Politics · Failure of Reform in the Balkans · Revolution and Reaction in the Empire
21. Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 393
European Background: Three Emperors’ League · Balkan Background: First Balkan Alliance System · Revolt in Bosnia and Herzegovina · Failure of Mediation · War in the Balkans · Constantinople Conference · Russo-Turkish War · Treaty of San Stefano · Treaty of Berlin
PART V. AGE OF IM PERIALISM AND CAPITALISM :
1878-1914
22. Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1878-1914 413
The New Imperialism · The New Capitalism
23. Making of Bulgaria: 1 8 7 8-1914 425
Dynamics of Bulgarian Politics · Russia Fails in Bulgaria: 1878-1885 · Unification of Bulgaria: 1885-1886 · Abdica tion of Alexander: 1886 · Ferdinand and Stambulov: 18871894 · Bulgaria under Ferdinand: 1894-1914 · Economic Development to 1914


Contents xiii
24. Serbia and the South Slavs: 1 8 78-1914 448
Austria’s Tunis · The Last Obrenovich · Revolution and Revival · Economic Development · Hapsburg Slavs
25. Greece: 1878-1914 467
Pursuit of Irredentism · Crisis at Home · Recovery under Venizelos · Economic Developments
26. Rumania: 1878-1914 483
Aftermath of 1878: The 1883 Secret Alliance · Political Evo lution · The Peasant Revolt · Economic Development · Ir redentism and Foreign Policy
27. Albanian Awakening to 1914 496
Albania under the Turks · Albanian League · National Awak ening · Struggle for Autonomy · William of Wied
28. Diplomatic Developments:1878-1914 513
Aftermath of the Berlin Congress · Macedonian Problem · Macedonia, the Balkan States, and the Great Powers · Young Turk Revolt · Bosnian Crisis'· Balkan League · First Bal kan War · Second Balkan War · On the Eve
PA R T VI. AGE O F W A R A ND CRISIS! 1 9 1 4 ---
29. Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 545
The Murder · The Conspiracy · War · Serbia’s Triumph · Dardanelles and Gallipoli · Bulgaria’s Intervention · Occu pation of Serbia · Rumanian Intervention · Greek Interven tion · Allied Victory
30. Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 571
The Old Order Passes · Saint Germain Treaty · Trianon Treaty · Neuilly Treaty · Sèvres Treaty · Turkish Revival · Greek Crisis · Greco-Turkish War · Lausanne Treaty · The New Balkans
31. The Dynamics of Balkan Politics:1918-1939 593
Economic Trends (Land Distribution, Population Pressure, Low Productivity, External Pressures, Role of Governments, Failure of Industrialization, German Domination, Conclu


xiv Contents
sion) · Social and Cultural Trends (Variations, Food and Housing, Health, Emigration, Education, State Administra tion) · Political Trends (Pattern, Agrarianism, Dictatorships, Communism)
32. Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 617
Seeds of Disunity: Centralism versus Federalism · Land Re form · Triumph of Centralism: 1921 Constitution · Political Pattern · Political Deadlock: 1921-1928 · Alexander’s Dic tatorship: 1929-1934 · Regency: 1934-1941 · Eve of War · Economic Development · Social and Cultural Development
33. Bulgaria: 1 9 1 8-1939 645
Stambuliski’s Regime: 1918-1923 · 1923 Coup · Reaction: 1923-1934 · Military and Royal Dictatorship: 1934-1939 · Economic Development · Social and Cultural Development
34. Greece: 1918-1939 661
Republic Established: 1923-1928 · Venizelist Rule: 19281933 · Fall of the Republic: 1933-1935 · Monarchy to Dic tatorship: 1935-1936 · Metaxas Dictatorship: 1936-1941 · Economic Development · Social and Cultural Development
35. Rumania: 1918—1939 689
Land Reform: 1918-1921 · Liberal Rule: 1922-1928 · Peas ant Rule: 1928-1930 · Carol’s Triumph: 1930-1938 · Royal Dictatorship: 1938-1940 · Economic Development · Social and Cultural Development
36. Albania: 1918-1939 709
Occupation: 1914—1918 · Independence Regained: 19181920 · Problems of Independence · Political Instability: 1920-1924 · President Zog: 1925-1928 · King Zog: 19281939 · Italian Occupation · Economic Development · Social and Cultural Development
37. Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 732
French Alliance System: 1920-1927 · Italian Alliance Sys tem: 1926-1930 · Balkan Conferences: 1930-1933 · Balkan Entente: 1934 · Balkan Entente Undermined: 1934-1937 · German Ascendancy: 1938-1939 · Balkan Entente De


Contents xv
stroyed: 1939-1940 · Hitler’s Fateful Decision: July 31, 1940 · Italian-Greek W ar: 1940-1941 · Operations Marita and Barbarossa: December, 1940 · Hitler Intervenes: April 6, 1941 · Swastika over the Balkans
38. Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 761
Pattern of Occupation and Resistance · Satellite Rumania · Satellite Bulgaria · Occupied Yugoslavia (Partition, First Re sistance, Tito’s Partisans, Mihailovich’s Chetniks, Tito’s Tri umph,Partisan Administration) · Occupied Greece (Occu pation and Partition, National Liberation Front [EAM], Nationalist Bands, Resistance Struggle, EAM Administra tion) · Occupied Albania · The New Spirit
39. Hidden War, Cold War, and Peace Settlem ent in 1947 801
British Agents and Balkan Guerrillas · “The Brute Issues” · Anglo-Russian Division of the Balkans: Summer, 1944 · Red Army in Rumania and Bulgaria: Fall 1944 · British Diplom acy in Yugoslavia and Greece: Fall, 1940 · Division of the Balkans Confirmed: October, 1944 · Crisis in Greece: November-December, 1944 · Battle of Athens: December, 1944—January, 1945 · Yalta · Yalta Violated · Peace Settle ment
Epilogue 839
Notes 847
Bibliography 873
Index 947


Photographs
following page 298
OTTO M A N PERIOD
M urad IV
Mohammed II
A Janissary
A Spahi
Travnik, Bosnia
A Divan meeting
NATIONAL PERIOD
Title page of the first Bulgarian book
Rules of the “Black H and,” or “Union or D eath,” Serbian secret society
Karageorge Petrovich
Rhigas Pheraios
Athanasios Diakos
Charles I of Rumania
Ferdinand I of Bulgaria
M ustafa Kemal Ataturk
Paul I of Greece
W ORLD W AR II
Germ an poster offering reward for capture of Tito
Stevan Filipovic calling for resistance
Tito and Pijade in Lepoglava Prison
Ares Velouchiotes ■
General Stephanos Saraphis
xvii


xviii
POST-W ORLD WAR II
Poster advising Greek children to drink American milk
Poverty of postwar Greek population
Stalin Dam, Bulgaria
Valley of Roses, Bulgaria
ART AND ARCHITECTURE
The Castle of Europe on the Bosphorus
Mykonos Island, Greece
Mosque, Constantza, Rumania
Street with mosque, Novi Bazar, Bosnia
Rumanian peasant house
G reek fisherm en’s houses
Bulgarian peasant
Cretan peasant
Albanian peasant woman spinning
Shepherd in southern Serbia
Bulgarian w om an’s folk costum e
Rum anian Easter eggs
Byzantine mosaics, Hagia Sophia
Renaissance mosaics, St. Clem ent Basilica
St. Catherine painted on glass
Cathedral of Zadar
Basilica of St. C lem ent
Suleymaniye Mosque, Istanbul
Hilton Hotel, Istanbul
Photographs
following page 650
I


Maps
Relief Map of the Balkan Peninsula
front endpaper
Peoples of the Balkan Peninsula before W orld W ar II
front endpaper
Religions of the Balkan Peninsula before World W ar II 10
Bulgarian, Greek, and Serbian Medieval Empires 25
Balkans after 1204 30
Ottoman Conquests to 1480 42
Siege of Constantinople 57
Ottoman Conquests: 1481-1683 68
Ottom an Territorial Losses in the Balkans: 1683-1815 176
O ttom an T erritorial Losses in the Balkans: 1815 -1 8 7 8 216
O ttom an T erritorial Losses in the B alkans: 1 8 7 8 -1913 514
Territorial Growth of Yugoslavia 617
Territorial Growth of Bulgaria 645
Territorial Growth of Greece 662
Territorial Growth of Rumania 689
Balkans after W orld W ar I
back endpaper
Balkans after W orld W ar II
back endpaper
xix


Note on Spelling and Place Haines
» N th e spellin g o f n a m es I have sou g h t to re n d er the originals as nearly as possible as they are actually pronounced. I have, there fore, eschewed the conventions of m odern transliteration systems which, how ever logical in themselves, give to the nonspecialist an entirely false im pression of the sounds they are intended to convey. For this reason I have preferred to render Enver Hoxha as Enver Hoja, and Nikola Pasic as Nikola Pashich. Likewise I have followed common usage rather than consistency in choosing between the original or Anglicized forms of personal names. Nikola Pashich, for example, has appeared frequently enough to be preferable to N icholas Pashich, w hereas King G eorge obviously is m ore appropriate than the original Georgios. In short, I have tried to follow common-sense pro cedures in the hope of being helpful to the reader. Closely related to the problem of spelling is that of the choice of place names. Zagreb obviously should be referred to as Zagreb rather than as Agram, its G erm an name. Y et the term “Agram T rial” will be found on sev eral occasions in the text. T he reason is th at the use of the term “Zagreb T rial” in place of the “Agram T rial” of 1909, appeared to be as incongruous as the use of the term “Fall of Istanbul” would be for the “Fall of Constanti nople” in 1453. The lack of uniformity may prove grating for some readers, but it should not be difficult to deduce from the text and the maps that Agram is Zagreb, th at C onstantinople is Istanbul, and that likewise A drianople, Oskub, and Dedeagach are known today as Edirne, Skoplje, and Alexandroupolis, respectively.
xxi


Part I. Introduction
1. T h e L a n d a n d th e P e o p le
t r a v e l e r m aking his way through the Balkan lands is impressed above all by the countless signs of a long and varied past. H e may unexpectedly pass by an old Rom an bath or walk along a Roman road. He may stop to admire the medieval frescoes in a Byzantine church or the graceful minarets of a Moslem mosque. On the D alam atian coast he might drive along roads built by Napoleon Bonaparte. If he passes through Split or Spalato (the dual nam e reflects the tow n’s Slavic-Italian heritag e), he will see the rem ains of E m p ero r D iocletian’s palace, still form ing the center of the town, with alleyways and streets cut through the palace rooms between slen der columns of vaulted arches. In Greece he can see the classical temples of Athens, the Frankish castles of the Peloponnesus and the crumbling Vene tian fortifications of Corfu and Crete. Everywhere in the Balkans the past jostles the present— a present symbolized by m odern office buildings in the capital cities and by hundreds of thousands of peasant huts in the countryside.
LOCATION
This variety in historical background is explained in large part by the intermediate location of the Balkan Peninsula. Jutting southward into the eastern M editerranean, it constitutes an integral part of Europe. Y et at the same time it faces Asia across the narrow Aegean Sea, and its southern capes stretch down toward the coast of Africa. This location at the crossroads of three continents gains added significance because of the peninsula’s unusual accessibility. In this it differs from its two sister peninsulas in the M editer ranean. The Pyrenees effectively separate the Iberian Peninsula from the rest of Europe, and the Alps likewise shut off the Italian Peninsula. In contrast, the D anube R iver is not a b arrier b u t rath er a link betw een the B alkans and C entral Europe. It is a broad highway over which Slavs and G oths and H uns 1


2 Introduction
and Bulgars have crossed southward through the centuries into the Balkan lands. Likewise to the west a mere fifty miles separate the heel of the Italian boot from the coast of Albania. In the south the island of Crete serves as a natural steppingstone between Greece and Egypt. A nd to the east, the islandstudded Aegean has been easily crossed in both directions by colonists and invaders on countless occasions since the days of Troy. This central location of the peninsula explains why it has been tradi tionally a bridge or a battleground of empires and cultures. The ancient Greeks who developed the first great center of civilization in the peninsula owed much to their proximity to the Nile and Tigris-Euphrates valleys. W hen the R om an Em pire was divided in a .d . 395, the line of dem arcation between E ast and W est cut across the Balkans. This line corresponded closely to that which divided the Catholic world from the O rthodox when the Christian church split in the medieval period. Likewise when the conquering Turks were finally stopped at Vienna in the sixteenth century the frontier between the Cross and the Crescent again followed the old furrow. W ith the rise in modern times of the Russian land empire and the British sea empire, the peninsula was again a zone of conflict throughout the nineteenth century. And today, with the division of the world following W orld W ar II, the Balkans once more are a battleground between East and West. Thus the location of the peninsula has in large part determ ined its history from the earliest times to the present.
TERRAIN
Alm ost as im portant as the location is the com plex terrain. An air plane traveler may view in close succession fertile valleys, barren limestone wastes, level steppes, inaccessible m ountain forests, Norwegian-like fiords, and hundreds of islands, large and small, set in the blue Aegean and Adriatic seas. T he prevailing im pression, however, will be of the overwhelming pre dom inance of m ountains. In fact, the nam e “ B alkan” is derived from the Turkish word for mountain. Unlike the Italian Peninsula with its relatively simple arrangement of the Alps in the north and the Apennines running the length of the boot, the B alkan Peninsula is crisscrossed with m ountain ranges running in all di rections. If we disregard the complexities of geologic origins and local terrain, the main features of Balkan topography stand out clearly and simply. In the far north the C arpathian M ountains swing around in a great curve, with the Danube River breaking through at the Iron Gate, a narrow gorge at the western apex of the curve. Geographers usually consider the Danube as the northern limit of the Balkan Peninsula. From the physi ographic viewpoint this is understandable, but for the historian it is unsatis factory because it excludes the trans-D anubian Rum anian lands whose de velopment has been part and parcel of general Balkan history. Accordingly we will consider the dividing line between the peninsula and the rest of


The Land and the People 3
Europe to run the length of the Sava River to its junction with the Danube at Belgrade, then down the Danube from Belgrade to the Iron Gate, and finally around the Carpathians to the Russian frontier to the northeast. This line should not be taken too literally. Geography and politics rarely are in accord in the Balkans, and today we find that Yugoslavia at one point pro trudes northward above the Danube, and that Rumania extends far beyond the Carpathians to include the whole province of Transylvania. For most of the course of Balkan history, however, the line delineated above will be found to be the most meaningful. Considering next the mountains south of the Danube, we encounter first the Balkan range, which runs east and west to the south of the Danube and which is really the southw ard extension of the C arpathians. This range reaches a maximum height of nearly eight thousand feet in the center, but in its eastern section it gradually decreases in height until it levels down to low hills at the shore of the Black Sea. It is im portant to note th at the B alkan range offers no serious obstacle to penetration from the north. The invader may skirt the range at its eastern end by pushing down the Black Sea coast. O r he may advance further to the west through any one of several passes, in cluding the Shipka, the Isker, and the Baba Konak, all of which are relatively easy to cross. South of the B alkan range lie the Rhodope M ountains. The two chains meet in the region of Sofia in the ,heart of the peninsula. From that point the Rhodope M ountains run in a southeasterly direction, gradually de creasing in altitude until they become low foothills when they reach the Aegean. Between the B alkan and R hodope ranges is the broad valley of the M aritsa (E v ro s) River. This is one of the m ost considerable tracts of low land in the peninsula, and it continues as an undulating plain beyond the M aritsa to Istanbul. A similar, though interrupted and narrower, belt of plain is to be found betw een the R hodope and the Aegan. In the western part of the peninsula the mountain chains run parallel to the coast line. In the long stretch from Trieste to the southern tip of Greece they are divided into three well-defined sections. The northernm ost, known as the Dinaric Alps, extends the length of the Adriatic coast of Yugo slavia in a southeasterly direction. This is followed by the A lbanian M oun tains which run almost due north-south from the m outh of the D rin to Valona. A t the latter point the mountains resume a southeasterly course and cross into Greece, where they are known as the Pindus M ountains. These extend the length of Greece and finally swing around to a west to east di rection, when they emerge from the Aegean to form the island of Crete. The northern half of these western m ountains is of lim estone form a tion with very thin surface soil and frequent patches of exposed bare rock. Running w ater is usually absent, as m ost of the streams, after a short dis tance, sink through the porous limestone into underground cavities and emerge later as full-grown rivers at the sea margin or even as springs bub bling up on the sea floor. Consequently this region is extrem ely difficult to


4 Introduction
cross because of the almost complete lack of continuous river valleys to serve as natural routes. These ranges not only form a barrier between the sea and the interior but also offer little sustenance for hum an habitation because of their poor soil and m eager resources. Thus this w estern m ountain area is noted for its poverty and isolation. The rugged and complex topography of most of the peninsula has profoundly influenced its political development. It has prevented unification and encouraged isolation and particularism. A comparison of Italian and Balkan history will illustrate this point. There were Greeks in antiquity in south Italy and Sicily as well as in the Balkans, and beyond were the b ar barians— Latins in the one case, Thraco-Illyrians in the other. W hy did the Latins succeed in forming a state and an empire while the Thraco-lllyrians failed? Why also did the Greeks fail to produce a unified state? One im por tant factor was the far greater geographic diversity of the Balkans, which tended to the formation of local units rather than a unified state or empire. N ow here in the peninsula is there to be found a natural center around which a great state might crystallize. Thus B alkan unity in the past has not risen from within but has been forced from without by foreign conquerors, first the Rom ans and then the Turks.
RIVERS AND ROUTES
The mountainous character of the peninsula enhances the importance of its rivers as natural routes of penetration. Of all the Balkan rivers the D anube is by far the m ost outstanding, both in length and in historical sig nificance. Rising in southern Germ any, it runs through A ustria, Czechoslo vakia, and H ungary before reaching the peninsula. Then it flows quietly through the north Yugoslav plains until it reaches the Carpathians, where it narrows suddenly to a quarter of its previous width and rushes through the famous Iron Gate with towering granite walls rising twenty-five hundred feet on either side. Beyond, it resumes its leisurely course eastw ard, with the broad Rum anian plains on the left and the rolling Bulgarian hills to the right. Sud denly and perversely it shifts to the north, thereby ending its function as a natural frontier between R um ania and Bulgaria and so giving rise to endless disputes and periodic wars between the two countries. Finally, about one hundred miles to the north it shifts once more eastward, finally reaching the Black Sea.
This magnificent river, the longest in E urope with the exception of the Volga, is navigable for m ost of its course. T hus from prehistoric times it has served as a natural highway, beckoning invaders and settlers and m er chants, and linking the peninsula with Central Europe to the west and with the Russian steppes to the east. Several tributaries flow from the interior of the peninsula into the Danube. From the northwest the Sava River runs due east until it joins the D anube where Belgrade is located. A bout tw enty miles further down the D anube the M orava River flows in, making its way northw ard from the cen


The Land and the People 5
ter of the peninsula. Still farther to the east a num ber of short Bulgarian rivers empty their waters into the Danube, the most im portant being the Isker, which connects Sofia with the D anubian lowlands. C onsidering next the rivers th at flow south to the Aegean, the chief ones in order from east to west are the M aritsa, the Strum a (S trym on), and the V ardar (A x io s). The M aritsa for most of its course runs between the Balkan and Rhodope ranges in a southeasterly direction as though it were to end in the B lack Sea. T hen it turns suddenly due south at A drianople and flows into the Aegean, and in doing so it fairly draws Bulgaria down to the coastal region. This twist of the M aritsa, like that of the Danube, has had lasting political repercussions. It has encouraged the inland Bulgarians to eye the ports of Kavalla and Alexandroupolis (D edeagach) and thus has brought them into conllict with the maritime Greeks determ ined to maintain their grip on the coast. A t the other end of the north Aegean coast the V ardar River and the great port near its m outh, Saloniki, form the natural outlet for the M acedonian hinterland. H ere again there is conllict, in this case further com plicated by the fact th at Serbians as well as Bulgarians seek to reach the sea through the usual fringe of Greek settlement along the coast. On the western coast of the peninsula the rivers are infrequent and unim portant. Since the ranges there run parallel to the coast, the rivers are usually short and find their way to the sea only after many twists and falls. Thus, despite the length of the coast, the only rivers worth noting are the N cretva (N a ren ta ) half way up the A driatic, the Drin and the Shkum bi in north and central Albania respectively, and the Acheloos in Greece. None of these approach the central or eastern Balkan rivers in their influence on the history of the peninsula. With the exception of the Danube, most of the Balkan rivers are of little value for navigation, for they shrink to shallow streams during the hot summers and their mouths are blocked by silt carried down from the uplands. Since prehistoric times, however, the river valleys have served as natural routes for penetration into the interior. As noted above, the Danube has been the traditional route traversed by peoples moving westward from Asia. The great open road leads all the way from M ongolia and the Gobi Desert, through Chinese and Russian Turkestan, around the northern end of the Caspian Sea, and along the north coast of the Black Sea to the Danube Val ley, and then either south to the Balkans or further up the valley to Central Europe. For those who during the course of the centuries have turned south ward, a num ber of routes have pointed the way to the warm water and blue skies of the Aegean. A t the northwestern tip of the peninsula, the Peartree Pass opens a passage southward to the ports of Trieste and Fiume on the Adriatic Sea. In the center of the peninsula the M orava River offers passage southeast to Constantinople and also directly south to Saloniki. Starting at Belgrade, one may journey up the M orava to the city of Nish, cross the m ountains to Sofia, follow the M aritsa Valley to Edirne (A drianople), and


6 Introduction
then strike across the Thracian plateau to Istanbul (Constantinople). This route, originally one of the most famous of the Rom an roads in the Balkans, is now followed by the internationally known O rient Express. A lm ost as im p o rta n t in B alkan history is the north-south route, which follows the C o n stantinople road from Belgrade to Nish, where it strikes southward across the watershed to the V ardar Valley and down that valley to the port of Saloniki. In the eastern part of the peninsula one can follow the Black Sea coast from the mouth of the Danube southward to Constantinople, thus avoiding the B alkan an d R hodope ranges. Finally there is the all-w ater route passing Constantinople from the Black Sea through the Bosphorus, the Sea of M arm ora, and the Dardanelles to the Aegean. These routes have always figured prominently in Balkan history be cause the mountain barriers of the peninsula constitute the great natural ob stacle separating the land powers of Central and Eastern Europe from the M ed iterranean Sea. It is not surprising, therefore, th at Trieste, Saloniki, and Constantinople, the termini of the overland Balkan routes, traditionally have been contested by the maritime powers seeking to retain control of the M edi terranean and by the land powers attem pting to expand to the sea. Thus in the nineteenth century the Italians eyed Austrian-held Trieste while the British were always ready to block an A ustrian move toward Saloniki or a Russian move to Constantinople. Likewise during the “Cold W ar” that fol lowed W orld W ar II, the W estern powers consistently sought to keep Russia out of the M editerranean by bolstering the Italians in Trieste, the Greeks in Saloniki, and the Turks in Constantinople.
CLIM ATE AND RESOURCES
Next to location and terrain, the factor which has most deeply influ enced hum an life on the peninsula is the clim ate, mainly through its effect on natural vegetation and cultivated crops. T he whole peninsula is situated within the Tem perate Zone, but the climate varies sharply, with differences in altitude and in proximity to the M editerranean. Disregarding local variations, two main types of climate prevail, the M editerranean and the Continental. Included within the area of the M editer ranean climate are the southern part of Greece and two narrow coastal strips along the Aegean to Constantinople and along the Adriatic to Trieste. The remaining interior, which constitutes by far the larger proportion of the peninsula, is subject to the C ontinental clim ate. T he distinguishing characteristic of the M editerranean climate is the long dry summer, with one sunny day regularly following another. This ap peals to the tourist, though the tem perature at midday soars high and the local peoples take refuge in their siesta. In the late afternoon cool breezes blow off the sea, the tem perature drops, and life begins to stir once more. Hence the late dinner hour and the prolonged night life typical of the M edi terranean world. In the autumn the first rains fall and the parched earth suddenly turns


The Land and the People 7
green. This is the tim e for sowing, and the harvesting m ust be com pleted before sum mer, when the drought once m ore sets in. The constant fear of the farm er is that the autum n rains may com e late or that the drought may start prem aturely in the spring. This explains why the traditional M editerranean products are olives, grapes, figs, and citrus fruits rather th an grain cereals, which require more regular rainfall. Likewise the lack of forests and grassy pastures means that the goat and the sheep in the M editerranean areas take the place of the cow and the pig in the central Balkans. It is quite natural, therefore, th a t the tourist will be treated to roast suckling pig and plum brandy in Belgrade, and to skewered lamb and wine in Athens. The Continental climate differs from the M editerranean in two prin cipal respccts: the rainfall is distributed m ore evenly through the year and the winters are much colder and more prolonged. It follows that the vege tation of the interior is correspondingly different from th at of the coastal areas. In contrast to the rocky and denuded mountains of the south, the central highlands are covered with forests, both deciduous and evergreen. Likewise the valleys are sufficiently well watered to grow wheat, rye, oats, corn, Hax, and o th er products typical of the whole of C entral E urope. F u r ther north the broad Danubian plains of northern Yugoslavia and particularly of Rumania are reminiscent of the fertile Ukraine or of the American Mid west. Corn, oats, and especially wheat are grown in such quantities that this region traditionally has been the breadbasket of W estern Europe, though in recent decades it has suffered severely from overseas competition. The central and coastal areas differ markedly not only in their climate and vegetation b u t also in their m ineral resources. Greece on the whole is poorly endowed in this respect, though she does possess considerable quan tities of bauxite, nickel, chromite, and some lignite. Furtherm ore, recent in vestigations indicate that a thorough geologic survey might reveal far richer resources than hitherto suspected. In the northern Balkan countries the m ineral o u tp u t is m uch m ore varied and valuable. T his is especially true of Yugoslavia, which produces copper, lead, zinc, bauxite, iron, chrome, anti m ony, gold, silver, and lignite, and is generally considered to possess m any rich deposits still unexplored. Likewise R um ania is notew orthy for her oil fields, by far the largest of the C ontinent west of the Caucasus. A t this point it should be noted that the economy of the peninsula and the living standards of its peoples have been affected to a surprisingly slight degree by this m ineral wealth. T he reason is th at m any of these re sources have been exploited by foreign capital, with much of the profit and m ost of the raw m aterial exported abroad. As an exam ple, bauxite is found in Greece close to the hydroelectric power necessary to transform it into aluminum. Nevertheless, the bauxite up to the present tim e is shipped to W estern Europe for refining while Greece continues to use her scanty for eign exchange to im port the finished product and the large rural surplus population continues to be tragically underemployed. This situation has prevailed in the past throughout the peninsula,


8 Introduction
thereby explaining the predom inantly rural complexion of its population. On the eve of W orld W ar 11 three out of every four people in the B alkans were dependent upon agriculture or forestry for their livelihood. Even in Greece, with its abundant ports and unique opportunities for trade, two thirds of the people live in the countryside. This dependence upon agriculture has pro duced dire results because the am ount of land is lim ited and the birth rate in the peninsula is one of the highest in E urope. This com bination of circum stances has led to a constantly increasing rural overpopulation which the puny industrial system has thus far been unable to absorb. As will be noted in the concluding chapters, this is one of the m ost urgent and basic problem s confronting Balkan governments and peoples today.
PEOPLE
This leads us to consideration of the several ethnic groups inhabit ing the peninsula at present. W ho are these Balkan peoples, where did they come from, and where do they live? A glance at an ethnographic m ap of the peninsula shows th at B alkan ethnography is as com plex as B alkan terrain. Closer examination reveals a pattern of four principal races and several scattered minorities. The most num erous of the four races are the South Slavs, who have settled in a great belt across the central Balkans from the A driatic to the Black seas. These Slavs are divided into four subgroups: the Slovenes at the head of the A driatic, the C roatians further to the southeast, the Serbians in the central Balkans around the M orava River, and the Bulgarians in the re maining territory to the Black Sea. The other three races are the Rumanians to the north of the Slavs, and the Greeks and the Albanians to the south. T he circum stances in which these races appear in the Balkans will be considered in detail in the following two chapters. Suffice it to note here that in classical times the ancient Greeks inhabited the southern part of the penin sula as their descendants do today, and that to the northwest and the north east were two barbarian peoples, the Illyrians and the Thracians, respectively. The Illyrians originally inhabited most of present-day Yugoslavia but later were forced southward by the Slav invaders. Thus today the descendants of these Illyrians, known as the Albanians, occupy only a small mountainous area along the southern Adriatic coast. The Thracians fared even worse at the hands of the Slavs. They were so effectively dispersed or absorbed that only a few survivors rem ain today. These are known as the Vlachs, a wild and largely nomadic group of shepherds and cattle breeders who are to be found scattered in m ountainous areas throughout the peninsula. Their total num ber at the beginning of this century has been estim ated at 140,000. Since then they have steadily dwindled because of assimilation with their sedentary neighbors. The people to be considered next in chronological order, the R um a nians, are the descendants of the early Dacians, who were subjected to R om an rule a .d . 107 to 274. During this period they were Romanized to a


The Land and the People 9
considerable degree, interm arrying with their conquerors and adopting their language. Hence the origin of the term “R um anian” and the basically Latin character of the modern R um anian language. Nationalistic Rum anians have considered themselves with pride as a Latin island in a sea of Slavic b ar barians. In actual fact the Rom an strain has been greatly diluted through centuries of successive invasions, and Slavic and Asiatic elements are prom i nent both in the present-day Rum anian people and in their language. The most radical change in the racial composition of the peninsula occurred in the sixth and seventh centuries with the invasions of Slavic tribes originating in the low-lying areas north of the Carpathians. By sheer weight of numbers they pushed back or assimilated the Illyrians and Thracians, and at times even menaced the East Rom an or Byzantine Em pire with its capital at Constantinople. As noted earlier, these newcomers gradually settled down in the central Balkans and developed as separate Slovenian, C roatian, and Serbian peoples. Tow ard the end of the seventh century some of these Slavs were conquered in turn by the Bulgarians, an Asiatic people related to the earlier Huns. T he Bulgarians, how ever, were few in num ber and soon were so completely assimilated by their subjects that only their name persists to the present. The modern Bulgarians, therefore, are considered one of the South Slavic subgroups, and are, in fact, completely Slavic in language, gen eral culture, and physical appearance. In this m anner the peninsula acquired its basic ethnic pattern over one thousand years ago. Since then several minority groups have appeared in varying circumstances. The Turkish dom ination of the Balkans from the fif teenth to the early twentieth centuries led to a scattering of isolated Turkish ethnic islands. With the recession of their empire, most of these Turks re turned to their homeland, so that insignificant remnants are left in the penin sula today. T he only exception is to be found in the area im m ediately to the west of C onstantinople. This area, know n as E astern or T urkish T hrace, is the only p art of the peninsula rem aining to the T urks, and its population of about half a million, or one million if Istanbul is included, is alm ost entirely Turkish. Turkish rule in the Balkans had a more perm anent effect in the reli gious field. Although the T urks did not attem pt forcibly to convert their Christian subjects, some nevertheless accepted Islam in order to escape cer tain disabilities to which all non-M oslem s were subject. Consequently sizable M oslem minorities are to be found in the Balkans today. O ne and a half m illion are in Yugoslavia, most of them in Bosnia. A nother 720,000 are in Albania, where they constitute the m ajority of the total population of slightly over 1,000,000. Bulgaria has 100,000 so-called Pomaks who are Bulgarian speaking Moslems whose Slavic ancestors were converted in the seventeenth century. Balkan ethnography was further complicated by the practice of the Turkish and A ustrian governments of deliberately planting colonies along their frontiers as a defense against the enemy. The Hapsburgs, for example,


10 Introduction
settled Germans along the Danube, so that prior to W orld W ar II Rumania had a German minority of about 750,000 and Yugoslavia had about 500,000. Similarly, the Turks settled Moslem T atars in the D obruja to guard the route to Constantinople, and over 170,000 are still to be found there. Jews have also played an im portant role in the economic life of the peninsula, particularly during the Turkish period. Before W orld W ar II about 1,000,000 were living in Rum ania, where they had migrated from Russia and Poland in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Approximately another 170,000 were scattered in Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Greece, most of these being descendants of sixteenth-century refugees from Spain and Portugal, who were given asylum by the Turks. A nother small minority are the gypsies, numbering approximately


The Land and the People 11
500,000. Some of them are nomadic, but the majority inhabit quarters on the outskirts of towns and villages and eke out a miserable livelihood as smiths, peddlers, musicians, porters, and scavengers. Finally it should be noted that the two world wars served to simplify this ethnic interm ixture somewhat, though at appalling cost to the hapless minorities that were uprooted or in some cases exterminated. Following W orld W ar I, Greece, Turkey, and Bulgaria agreed to exchange their respec tive minorities, and a total of 400,000 Turks, 250,000 Bulgarians, and 1,300,000 Greeks were repatriated. During the Germ an occupation of the Balkans in W orld W ar II a large proportion of the Jews were shipped to the extermination camps of Germany and Poland. Following the war many of the surviving Jews sought refuge in the new state of Israel. Paradoxically enough, the other Balkan minority that was greatly reduced as a result of W orld W ar II was the German. Some of the Yugoslav and Rumanian G er m ans enlisted in the Wehrmacht and few of them returned. O thers fled with the retreating Germ an armies in the closing months of the war. M any of those who rem ained behind were forcibly transported to Russia. T hus H itler’s attem pt to win “breathing space” in Eastern Europe for the G erm an people led rather to the decimation of centuries-old Germ an colonies in the Balkans. It is apparent from this survey th at A lbania, G reece, and Bulgaria are ethnically homogeneous countries, particularly as a result of the exchange of m inorities after W orld W ar I. A lbania has a small G reek minority in the south, and Greece has an equally small Slav enclave on her northern frontier, but these are insignificant exceptions, even though diplomatically trouble some. Bulgaria also has a small M oslem m inority, but this is disappearing as a result of emigration to Turkey precipitated by repressive measures adopted by the Bulgarian government in 1950. In contrast, Rumania and Yugoslavia inherited large minority groups in the provinces they acquired from the H apsburg Empire. According to the 1948 census, Yugoslavia has a total population of 15,751,935, of which 14,000,000 are South Slavs. The principal minority elements are 400,000 H un garians, an equal number of Albanians, 180,000 Rumanians, and 100,000 Italians. T he Yugoslav population also is divided in its religious affiliations. The O rthodox Christians (mostly Serbs) constitute 50 per cent, the Roman Catholics (C roatians, Slovenes, and Italian s) 3 3 V& per cent, the M oslems 11 per cent, and the Protestants, Jews and Greek Catholics the remaining 5% per cent. Rumania, according to the 1948 census, has a total population of 15,872,624, in contrast to alm ost 20,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 in 1939. T he decrease is due mainly to the loss of Bessarabia and Bukovina to the Soviet Union and to the drastic reduction in the num ber of Jews and Germans. The principal m inor ities now are the 1,499,851 Hungarians (1,387,719 in 1930), the 343,913 Germ ans (720,000 in 1930) and the 138,795 Jews (1,000,000 in 1930). The m inority peoples at present constitute 13 per cent of the total population, in contrast to approximately 25 per cent before W orld W ar II. The Rum a


12 Introduction
nians, like the Yugoslavs, are also divided in their religious affiliations, al though the p roportion of R om an Catholics is m uch less than in Y ugoslavia with its C atholic C roatians and Slovenes. A ccording to 1946 estim ates, 81 p er cent of the R um anian population is G reek O rthodox, 9 per cent G reek Catholic, 7 per cent Roman Catholic, and 3 per cent Jews, Protestants and M oslem s.
BALKAN AND W ESTERN ETHNOGRAPHY
A relevant question is why four m ajor racial strains and several m inor ones have persisted in an area not quite the size of Texas. T he geographic factors analyzed earlier provide a partial explanation. The location and the accessibility of the peninsula have led to frequent and prolonged invasions from the outside. The struggle against these invasions undoubtedly has hin dered the process of racial assimilation which has been the characteristic de velopm ent in W estern E urope. T he com plex terrain is also an im portant fac tor. If the peninsula had been a plateau instead of a highly m ountainous and diversified region it is probable that the various races would have am alga m ated to a considerable degree. A common Balkan ethnic strain might have evolved, which certainly would have varied in com position from one locality to another, just as the Genoese differ markedly from the N eapolitans, yet would have constituted a unit in place of the present separate peoples. Differences in historical background and in cultural tradition also have contributed to ethnic separatism. The Balkan races do not have the bond of a common Roman cultural tradition as do Western Europeans. When the C hristian church split in the eleventh century into its E astern and W estern branches, the Slovenes and the Croatians were left in the realm of the Pope of Rom e while the G reeks, Serbians, Bulgarians, and Rum anians fell to the Patriarch of Constantinople. When the Turks later conquered most of the peninsula this cultural cleavage was deepened. During most of four centuries the Croatians and the Slovenes lived under Hapsburg rule while the other Balkan peoples lived under that of the sultan. Such basic and lasting separa tions in government, religion, and general culture inevitably have left deep marks. To the present day a cultural dividing line runs across the peninsula, with Catholic Christianity, the Latin alphabet, and a W estern cultural orien tation on the one side, and Orthodox Christianity, the Greek alphabet, and a Byzantine cultural pattern on the other. The internal dissension in Y ugo slavia in the period between the two world wars bears witness to the lasting significance of this cleavage. These factors help to explain the fundam ental difference between the ethnic evolution of W estern E urope and the Balkans. W estern E urope is in habited today by large, homogeneous national groups such as the French, the Spaniards, the Germans, and the British. It does not follow, however, that there are fewer racial strains in the W est than in the East. If we look behind the façade of national unity we find Iberian, Ligurian, Frankish, N orm an, and Gallic strains in the French; Slavic, Celtic, Baltic, and Teutonic strains in the


The Land and the People 13
Germans; and Celtic, Anglo-Saxon, Scandinavian, and Norm an strains in the B ritish. In other w ords, the difference betw een E ast and W est is not in the num ber of com ponent strains but rather in the particular circumstances which made possible the unification of several strains into a national unit in the one case, and which prevented such a unification in the other. T hus the unique feature of B alkan ethnic evolution is th at virtually all the races that have actually settled there in the past, as distinguished from those that have simply marched through, have been able to preserve their identity to the present. The significance of this may be illustrated by imagining a Balkan type of ethnic developm ent in England. H ad that occurred we would meet, in a journey through England today, Britons speaking Welsh, Romans speaking Latin, Angles and Saxons speaking their Germanic dialects, Scandinavians speaking Danish, and Normans speaking Old French. Further more, religious diversity would match the ethnic. Some of these peoples would be Roman Catholic, others Anglican, and still others N onconform ists of various types. In an English setting such a situation seems fantastic. And yet this preservation of ethnic groups through the centuries is precisely w hat has h ap pened in the Balkans. T his is one of the unique and fundam ental factors th at has inlluenced the historical development of the peninsula to the present.
NONGEOGRAPHIC FORCES
T he influence of geography upon history having been noted it should be em phasized now th at geography is only one of several factors. O therwise we run the risk of geographic determinism, which can be as misleading as economic determinism. Certainly various nongeographic forces have made their influence felt strongly from the outset. This will becom e apparent as we trace the course of Balkan history in the following chapters. However, the m ost im portant of these factors will be m entioned here, to be kept in mind as guideposts. First it should be noted that the past— even the very distant pastand the present are side by side in the Balkans. Centuries chronologically remote from each other are really contem porary. Governments and peoples, particularly intellectuals, have based their attitudes and actions on what happened, or what they believe to have happened, centuries ago. The reason is th at during the alm ost five centuries of Turkish rule the Balkan peoples had no history. Tim e stood still for them. Consequently when they won their independence in the nineteenth century their point of reference was to the preTurkish period— to the medieval ages or beyond. Thus the Rumanians have looked back with pride to their Latin origin in Rom an times, the Greeks to the classical period and to the great Byzantine Empire, the Serbians and the Bulgarians to their respective medieval empires controlling a large part of the peninsula, and the Albanians to their Illyrian background and to their fifteenth-century hero, George Skanderbeg.


14 Introduction
This obsession with the past has its ludicrous aspects. A lexander the G reat is claimed by the G reeks as a M acedonian G reek. H e is also claim ed by the A lbanians, who issued coins bearing his image. A nd he is claim ed by the Bulgarians, who exhorted their armies in W orld W ar I “to revive the fame of the great Bulgarian, Alexander the G reat.” M ore serious have been the political repercussions of this living in the past. Peaceful inter-Balkan relations were scarcely likely in the face of simultaneous attempts to revive the medieval Greek, Bulgarian, and Serbian empires. Thus historical tradi tion has been an im portant factor, and usually a disturbing factor, in Balkan affairs in the modern period. Equally significant has been the influence of the great powers. At times this influence has been unconscious, as when French Revolutionary ideology, Romanticism, Pan-Slavism, socialism, and communism seeped into the peninsula from the outside to affect its destinies decisively. A t other times the great powers have intervened purposefully to enthrone Balkan kings, to determine Balkan frontiers, and to cajole or force Balkan governments into alliance systems or even into war. W hether deliberate or not, the influence of foreign powers runs like a red thread through Balkan history from the days of the Crusades to the days of the Cominform and the Trum an Doctrine. T he final factor to be kept in m ind is the changing econom ic relation ship between the Balkans and the West. In the ancient and medieval periods the Balkan area was an im portant center of industry and commerce while W estern Europe was a relatively primitive agrarian region. W ith the Turkish conquest and the Commercial and Industrial Revolutions this situation was reversed. The O ttom an Em pire and the succession Balkan states became in the modern period virtual economic appendages of the West. They have served as a source of raw materials for W estern factories and as markets for Western capital and manufactured goods. Thus the Balkan economy became passive and predominantly agrarian. This economy has been unable to meet adequately the needs of the rapidly growing Balkan population. The result has been a profound economic and social dislocation which in turn has af fected political institutions. T hus B alkan history in the m odern period is explainable in large part in term s of the im pact of the dynamic, industrial W estern society upon the static, agrarian Balkan society. In this sense the B alkan problem is merely a local m anifestation of the w orld-wide problem of the adjustment of backward areas to the W estern industrial civilization that has enveloped the globe.


2. H i s t o r i c a l B a c k g r o u n d
T
A h e B a l k a n s t a t e s are newcom ers in the family of E uropean nations. F o u r of the five states m ade their appearance in the course of the nineteenth century, while the fifth did ,not m aterialize until the begin ning of the twentieth. It does not follow, however, that the Balkan peoples lack a sense of historical consciousness. Precisely the opposite is the case. For over four centuries the Balkan peoples were under the domination of the Turks. These centuries became a blank in their histories, so that when they were once more free they naturally looked back to their respective periods of imperial power and glory: the Bulgarians to their Tsar Simeon, the “A uto crat of the Greeks,” the Serbians to their great Dushan, conqueror of most of the peninsula, and the Greeks to their Byzantine emperor, Basil the BulgarSlayer, or further back still, to the glories of their classical age. These tradi tions are alive and real, and are taken quite seriously, particularly in support ing territorial claims. F or a W estern parallel to m odern Balkan territorial aspirations based on such historical precedents, one must imagine a British statesm an citing the empire of Edward III as justification for claiming half of modern France. Such have been the force and the persistence of historical tradition in the Balkan Peninsula.
GREEK PERIOD
The first great civilization of the Balkan Peninsula— and of the W est ern world— developed on the shores and islands of the Aegean Sea. This was the part of the peninsula that was closest to the fertile, sheltered valleys of the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates, where the earliest civilizations of mankind were born. This was also the part of the peninsula that has felt from time immemorial the stimulating influence of the M editerranean Sea. In few regions of the world does the sea hold such attractions for man. First there is the M editerranean itself, with its clear skies, light sum m er winds, and lew strong currents. Nowhere else arc waters so safe and climatic


16 Introduction
conditions so favorable for primitive vessels propelled by oars or sails. Then there is the deeply indented coast of southern G reece, w ith its uninterrupted succession of channels, gulfs, and harbors; and in the distance, one island following another to the coast of Asia Minor. The m ariner can scud along, from point to point, from island to island, never losing sight of land, never feeling lost between the sea and the sky. A nd finally there is the rugged m ainland, almost entirely lacking in spacious plains, and divided by a jumble of m ountain chains into a series of valleys hemmed in on all sides save that facing the sea. The people penned up in these valleys, or on the islands, were literally driven to the sea: to trade if they had a surplus of wine or oil; to colonize if their lands could not support them. This natural environm ent helps to explain the distinguishing charac teristics of the earliest Balkan civilization, that of the Greeks, with its m ari time trade and colonization that were novelties in human history up to that tim e; its sovereign and self-governing communities that contrasted so m ark edly to the absolutist m onarchies of the O rient; its lack of political unity and susceptibility to foreign invasion; and its contacts with overseas cultures from which it borrowed freely but never imitated slavishly. The first great center of G reek culture nourished on the island of Crete from 3400 B.C. to 1100 B.C., a period of over two thousand years. C rete is situated some sixty miles from the Balkan Peninsula, four hundred miles from Egypt, and a little over one hundred miles from Asia Minor. This central location m ade the island the natural interm ediary in the transm ission and transm utation of the Egyptian and M esopotam ian cultures to the Balkan m ainland. The precise nature and extent of Cretan influence upon the Balkans have not been determ ined. It is not know n, for exam ple, w hether the C retans actually em igrated and founded settlem ents on the m ainland. T here is no question, however, about the influence of C retan culture upon the mainland inhabitants. These were the Achaeans, the vanguard of a roundheaded Alpine people known as the Hellenes, who m igrated in successive waves from Cen tral Europe into the Balkans. The comparatively backward Achaeans quickly adopted the main features of Cretan culture and developed a center of their own at M ycenae, in the northeastern part of the Peloponnesus. M ycenaean culture gradually spread from the coastal areas to the interior of Greece. The M ycenaeans eventually became sufficiently strong to turn against their tutors. A bout 1400 B.C. they assaulted and overran Crete. Then they conducted a com bination of piracy, trade, and colonization in the Aegean and M editerranean, and on to Syria and A sia M inor. A bout 1200 B.C. they launched their famous expedition against Troy, memories of which have been preserved for posterity in the Iliad and Odyssey of Homer. Meanwhile, the pressure of the barbarian Thracians and Illyrians in the north had forced the Dorians into the southern Balkans. The Dorians were of the same Hellenic race as the Achaeans and spoke a dialect of the same language. A bout 1100 b .c. their slow infiltration turned into an invasion.


Historical Background 17
Although barbarians in comparison to the M yeenaeans, the Dorians were in vincible with their iron weapons. Central Greece, the Peloponnesus, Crete, and the Aegean isles fell to the conquerors. W hereas the Achaeans had adopted and preserved the Aegean civilization of Crete, although in a coarser form, the Dorians destroyed all that rem ained of it. The A egean world passed into a “D ark Age” from which gradually emerged the civilization of classical Greece. H om er’s epics reveal the prim itive agricultural and pastoral society of the early Hellenes. This H om eric Age, as it is com m only called, began to give way in the ninth century under the im pact of new forces. H om eric Greece was tribal, aristocratic, agricultural, and confined to the Aegean Basin. By the end of the sixth century all this had changed. The tribe had given way to the city-state; other social classes had risen to equality with the nobility; industry and commerce had come to play a considerable role; and G reek colonies were to be found scattered on all the M editerranean shores. With these changes the way was cleared for the Classical Age begin ning in the fifth century. T he G reeks now m ade their unique and well-known contributions to W estern civilization. Although handicapped by their incura ble particularism and by the poverty of their technology, they succeeded nevertheless in em ancipating the hum an mind from the supernaturalism and intolerance which had characterized ancient Oriental civilization. Following the lead of philosophers rather than of priests or prophets, they created a new art, ethics, and literature, and established criteria of behavior based on secu larism and humanism. Historically viewed, their contributions unveiled a new world for Western man. O ur concern, however, is with the progress of m an in the B alkan Peninsula rather than with the evolution of W estern civilization. Considered from this viewpoint, the significance of classical Greece can easily be ex aggerated. W hereas the Roman Em pire was continental in character, the Greek world was maritime and coastal. It was confined to the southern tip of the Balkan Peninsula and to a thin coastal strip along the Aegean, A dri atic, and Black seas. The city-states remained city-states. They did not at tem pt territorial expansion, and their influence did not penetrate deep into the hinterland. We will, therefore, now consider the non-Hellenic peoples of the interior who, sharing none of the stimulating experiences of the Greeks on the M editerranean shores, were separated from them by a wide gulf.
MACEDON DOMINATES THE BALKANS
Two non-Hellenic peoples lived in the Balkans at this time, the Il lyrians and the Thracians. The Illyrians, who occupied most of present-day Yugoslavia, were the least affected by Greek culture, partly because of the uniniviting nature of the Illyrian coast with its lack of harbors, and partly because of the strength and ferocity of the Illyrian tribes. W hereas the T hra cians tolerated Greek colonics and taxed them after their establishment, the


18 Introduction
Illyrians excluded them from their shores altogether until a late period. Thus the few Greek colonies were never able to extend their influence far into the interior. They established metallurgic, pottery, and glass works on the D alm a tian coast, and traded these products, together with various m anufactured goods from the homeland, for the raw materials of the Illyrian tribes. De spite this commerce Illyria remained a comparatively self-contained and con servative region, with its tribes living in a state of interm ittent w arfare with their neighbors and with one another. The Thracians occupied the territory bounded roughly by the M oravaV ardar Valley in the east and the Rhodope Range in the south. Like the Illyrians, their culture was quite different from that of the Greeks, and they constituted a distinct race, although of the same Indo-European stock. The Greeks were unable to understand their language and accordingly dubbed it barbarian. The Greeks were impressed by the light complexion and red hair of the Thracians. A typical observation was, “The Ethiopians are black and snub-nosed; the Thracians light-haired and grey-eyed.” The interior of Thrace, like the interior of Illyria, held little attraction for the M editerranean Greeks. Instead, as early as the late seventh century B.C., the lonians began to fringe the Black Sea with their colonies. One of them, Byzantium, was destined to be for centuries the capital of the Byzantine and O ttom an empires. The Greeks also made their way up the Danube and founded colonies along its banks. Only ten miles east of Belgrade, on the right bank of the river, archaeologists have unearthed rich classical findings— the remains of the Greek colony Vincha. Thus, the Greeks influenced the peoples of the Balkan hinterland by commercial operations from the Dalmatian coast on the east, the Black Sea coast on the west, and the Danube Valley in the north. They also exerted influence directly from the south, through the medium of the semi-Hellenized Macedonians. The Macedonians were located between the Thracians and the Greeks, inhabiting the fertile plains drained by the V ardar and Struma rivers. From antiquity to the present the question has been debated as to whether these early Macedonians were Greeks or barbarians. The M acedonian rulers claimed to be the descendants of Heracles and therefore genuine Greeks, a claim which the orators of the Athenian assembly scoffed at and rejected. The debate has continued to the present day, enlivened by the conflicting claims of modern Balkan states to the M acedonian lands. Recent philological and archaeological research indicates that the ancient M acedonians were in fact Greeks, whose civilization had not kept up with that of the tribes which had settled further to the south. Their language closely resembled the classical Greek from which it differed no more than one English dialect from another. Various non-Greek peoples apparently had come under the rule of the M ace donian nobles and kings, but these latter definitely were Greeks in language and outlook, and invited Greek men of learning to their courts. A t the beginning o f the fourth century B.C. the M acedonian state was primitive and loosely organized, still retaining the tribal m onarchy of Homeric


Historical Background 19
times and a peasant type of culture. All this was changed during the reigns of Philip II (3 9 5 -3 3 6 B .C .) and of his son, A lexander the G reat (3 3 6 -3 2 3 B .C .). Philip overran the divided G reek city-states while Alexander went on to conquer a fabulous empire— Asia M inor, Phoenecia, Syria, Egypt, M eso potam ia, Persia, and the Punjab. He was grappling with the problem of or ganizing an effective adm inistration for his enorm ous domains when he died at Babylon in 323 at the age of thirty-three. A lexander’s untim ely death ended w hat small chance there was of unifying this vast empire. For a generation and a half his successors fought for the spoils. The G reco-M acedonian world disintegrated and presently re turned very much to the political shape it had had before Alexander, though under different rulers and a different civilization. By 275 b .c. three m on archies were well established; the Seleucids ruled much of what had been the Persian empire in Asia; the Ptolemies, Egypt, and the Antigonids, M acedonia, including Greece. These monarchies ruled the Near East during the so-called Hellenistic period between the death of Alexander and the Rom an conquest. Continual wars during the third and second centuries so weakened the Hel lenistic m onarchs that when the Rom an legions appeared in the eastern M ed iterranean they had little difficulty in taking final possession of A lexander’s legacy. For the Balkan Peninsula the M acedonian or Hellenistic Age was one of profound changes in all fields. Politically it was characterized by the atrophy of the city-state and a trend toward larger political units. For a brief period Philip and Alexander united a considerable portion of the peninsula under their rule. Philip not only subjugated the Greek city-states but also defeated the Illyrian tribes and annexed part of their country. Likewise, Alex ander marched northward to the Balkan M ountains and on to the Danube in order to subjugate the unruly Thracian tribes. The Hellenistic period also witnessed the rem arkable diffusion of Greek culture eastward with the conquests of Alexander and the creation of G reek cities throughout the Asiatic domains. In the Balkans, G reek culture penetrated to a greater degree than heretofore, though in this respect also the peninsula was far from being united. The Thracians were only slightly in fluenced and the Illyrians alm ost not at all. The M acedonians, however, be came thoroughly Hellenized in the third century. They dropped their native dialect for A ttic Greek and their native pantheon for the gods of Olympus. Despite their mixture of blood, the M acedonians were now one people and their country was an integral part of the Greek world. In the economic field the G reek part of the peninsula lost its prim acy during these years. W ith the tremendous expansion eastward, the main com mercial centers shifted to the points where the land routes of the Orient met the sea routes of the M editerranean, as at Alexandria in Egypt, A ntioch in Syria and Ephesus in Asia M inor. M ost of the old G reek cities declined, al though Corinth, with its favorable geographic position, continued to secure its share of trade. Furtherm ore, thousands of Greeks em igrated to the eastern


20 Introduction
areas that were now controlled by M acedonian rulers, and found there en ticing opportunities as m erchants, soldiers, adm inistrators, and fiscal agents. Indeed, the exodus to the newly opened lands was so great that parts of Greece and M acedonia were depopulated. The general economic decline and the social struggles of the homeland were thereby sharpened, with the result that by the time Greece fell to the Rom ans its vital energies had been ex hausted. A part from the cultural prestige that still adhered to cities like Athens, Greece declined to the status of a comparatively insignificant Roman province.
ROME UNITES THE BALKANS
The Romans conquered the Balkans during the third and second centuries b .c . First they subjugated the A driatic Coast, then they defeated the rulers of M acedon, and finally they destroyed the Achaean League of G reek states. Having overrun the peninsula the Rom ans proceeded to construct a netw ork of paved highways sim ilar to those th at they built in G aul, Britain, Spain, and other parts of their empire. These magnificent roads, raised con siderably above the level of the ground, and with a deep ditch on each side, were in themselves eminently defensible and enabled troops to be massed at any threatened point with security and dispatch. In this manner the Romans built the Via Egnatia from the A driatic coast to Saloniki, providing direct entry from Italy to the heart of the Balkans. O ther roads crisscrosscd the peninsula in all directions, following natural routes used by prim itive men in earliest times and by railway engineers today. Along these roads the R o mans erected forts and planted colonies which were merely fortified outposts on a larger scale. A num ber of modern Balkan cities trace their origins back to these Rom an colonies, including Edirne (A drianople), Nikopol (Nicopolis), Sofia (Sardica), Nish (N aissus), and Belgrade (Singidunum ). In the realm of politics the Romans consistenly applied the policy of divide and rule. They partitioned natural regions and isolated individual sec tions. They weakened leagues and combinations which might have proved dangerous to their authority. They ended the A chaean League, for example, though later they perm itted its revival for restricted purposes. Finally they encouraged the propertied classes whose interests were bound up with R om an supremacy. The material results of Rom an rule varied greatly. Greece suffered a steady economic decline due to the ravages of R om an civil wars fought on her soil and to the diversion of trade following the establishm ent of direct com munications between Italy and the Levant. The most lucrative enterprise left to the Greeks was pasturage in large domains, but this enriched almost ex clusively the wealthier citizens and widened the breach between the classes. Certain new industries were developed to meet the needs of Rom an luxury. G reek marble, textiles, and table delicacies were in great demand. Yet the only cities that really flourished were the Italian communities planted at C orinth and Patrae, and the old city of Athens.


Historical Background 21
Commerce languished in general, and such wealth as rem ained was amassed in the hands of a few great landowners and capitalists. The middle class declined and the great bulk of the people earned a precarious living supplem ented by frequent doles and largesses. Thus Greece sank to the level of an obscure and neglected province. In the following centuries G reek his tory dwindled to a mere record of barbarian invasions, which, in addition to occasional plagues and earthquakes, seem to have been the only events worthy of record by contem porary chroniclers. The Illyrian lands, in contrast, rose from their form er obscurity and backwardness and flourished under the rule of Rome. A prosperous textile industry was established, vine cultivation became widespread, and mining and lumbering proved profitable in Bosnia. The commercial cities along the coast grew wealthy, and Latin civilization spread to the interior. Illyricum became one of the best recruiting grounds for the Roman legions. In troubled times, more than one Illyrian soldier fought his way up from the ranks to the imperial purple. Claudius, Aurelian, and Diocletian are the best known of the emperors who started out as sons of Illyrian peasants. The influence of Rome upon the culture of the Balkans likewise varied. In the Greek part of the peninsula there was no question of Rom anization; rather, as a Latin poet put it, “Captive Greece led captive her rude conqueror.” The Romans were scornful of Greek political aptitude but at the same time were very conscious of the greatness of Greek civilization. W ithin a comparatively short time their upper classes, at least, acquired a veneer of Greek culture. More Greek was learned in Rome than Latin in Greece. Cul turally speaking, G reece rem ained G reek. It is true th at in time the G reeks became so accustomed to their subject political status that they called them selves “Rom aioi” or Romans, and continued to do so in m odern times; yet in language and culture they remained Greeks. Rome made a greater impression on the backward peoples of the Bal kan hinterland, though even here there was no outright Romanization. Where the Rom an went he took with him Latin as the language of government, but he also took with him Greek as the language of culture. It was a GrecoR om an culture th at was diffused through the Balkans in the Rom an period, with G reek influence predom inant in the northeast and Latin influence in the northwest. The Illyrian lands were the most thoroughly Latinized, though the native dialect persisted in the inaccessible valleys of the southwest. It also survived the later Slavic invasions and is spoken today by the people of Albania, though with a heavy overlay of Latin, Greek, Slavic, and Turkish words. The Thracians, in contrast, failed to preserve their cultural identity, their Vlach descendants today speaking a Latin language akin to the m odern Rumanian north of the Danube. The Rom ans drew their northern frontier in the Balkans along the Danube, with the exception of a brief period when they extended their rule across the river to include the kingdom of Dacia. The inhabitants of Dacia were a Thracian people who had attained a modest degree of civilization


22 Introduction
before the Rom an conquest. They engaged mostly in agriculture and cattle breeding, but also worked gold and silver mines in Transylvania and carried on a considerable foreign trade. The Dacians incurred the w rath of the Romans with their continual raids into Moesia, the province immediately to the south of the Danube. E m peror Trajan conducted a num ber of victorious campaigns against the Daci ans, pursuing them far into the Carpathian M ountains, and ended by incor porating their kingdom into the empire ( a .d . 107). In the following years the Rom ans built highways and forts in the new province of D acia, and imported colonists to cultivate the land and work the mines. For over a century and a half, from a .d . 107 to 275, Dacia remained a province of the empire and became so thoroughly Romanized that today the descendants of the Roman colonists and native Dacians call themselves Rum anians and speak a Ro mance language. Nevertheless, the R om an hold over D acia was never very firm. The province across the Danube proved a vulnerable outpost, and the successors of T rajan looked upon it as a strategic liability. Em peror H adrian ( a .d . 117138) seriously considered its abandonm ent and was deterred only because of the plight of the numerous Rom an settlers. A century later the Goths crossed the Carpathians and drove the Rom ans out of most of Dacia, leaving them only a few fortified positions. Finally E m peror A urelian ( a .d . 275) withdrew his troops altogether from the exposed province and evacuated many of the Roman settlers to Moesia. Thus Dacia, the last won, was also the first lost of the Rom an provinces in the Balkans.
ROM E TO BYZANTIUM
The retreat from Dacia was but one of the many manifestations of the widespread disintegration within the R om an world in the third century. The disintegration was more marked in the western provinces than in the eastern. The East, with its multitude of well-established cities and their nu merous artisans and merchants, was better able to withstand the dry rot that was undermining the imperial edifice. The difference was recognized by Em peror Constantine when he moved (326) his seat of government to the old Greek colony Byzantium, on the European side of the Straits. To emphasize the significance of the shift, he renam ed the city New Rome, but from the outset it was popularly called the city of Constantine, or Constantinople. The transfer of the capital to Constantinople increased the impor tance of the Balkan Peninsula. It now took the place of Italy as the leading province of the empire, in the deluge of barbarian invasions that swept over the empire in the fifth century, the frontier of the Balkans held m ore firmly than those of the western provinces. Some of the tribes did succeed in break ing through the Danube defenses. The W est Goths under Alaric conducted destructive raids from which hardly a section of the peninsula was spared, but about a .d . 400 they moved westward and descended upon Italy. Ten years


Historical Background 23
later occurred the memorable sack of Rome at the hands of Alaric. In sub sequent decades other Germ an tribes— Franks, Vandals, East Goths, Angles, and Saxons— overwhelmed all the western provinces. Finally ( a .d . 476) the barbarian chief Odoacer forced the boy-ruler, Romulus Augustulus, to retire, ending the shadowy remains of imperial rule in the West. The deposition of Romulus Augustulus did not m ark the end of the Rom an Em pire. It was, rather, the beginning of the end. For one more cen tury the tradition of imperial unity persisted, inspiring the Eastern emperors to gallant but foredoomed efforts to restore a past that was beyond restora tion. This was the case especially with Justinian (5 2 7 -5 6 5 ), who won Africa from the Vandals, Italy from the Ostrogoths, and a part of Spain from the Visigoths. But in the century following his death the western provinces were irrevocably lost, the Slavs poured across the Danube to begin their process of crystallization into individual Balkan nations, and the A rab tribesm en, fired by the faith of Mohammed, burst across northern Africa and up the Levant to the borders of A sia M inor. T he flimsy foundations of Ju stin ian ’s im perial structure were demolished. Accordingly we may consider the first half of the seventh century as the period in which the Eastern Rom an Em pire became distinctively Byzantine.
COM ING OF THE SLAVS
The all-im portant development in the Balkan Peninsula during this transition period was the influx of the Slavic peoples. They began to move southw ard from C entral E urope into the D anube Valley in significant num bers in the fourth century after Christ. The process was a gradual drift and infiltration rather than a sudden invasion. By the sixth century the Slavs firmly occupied the Danube Basin and began to cross into the Balkans. At the same time other peoples were appearing intermittently upon the scene, including the Mongolian Huns and Avars, who swept into the Balkans from the steppes of Asia. But they were m arauders rather than settlers, and did not pause long enough to obtain a perm anent foothold. The agriculturally minded Slavs, in contrast, sank roots into the Balkan soil and took possession of lands which remain theirs to the present. By the early seventh century, when Em peror Heraclius finally was able to dispose of the Persian danger and turn to the Balkans, he found the Slavs occupying and cultivating wide areas laid waste by war. M aking a virtue of necessity, he assigned to them definite districts, in return for which they acknowledged his suzerainty and agreed to pay annual tribute. This arrange ment did not bring complete order and peace to the Balkans. Some tribes occasionally refused to pay tribute, others spread beyond their stipulated ter ritory, and still others were forced to move once m ore by fresh migrations from across the D anube. Y et the seventh century is significant as the period when the Slavic newcomers changed gradually from invaders into settlers. By the end of the century they were in possession of the A driatic Coast and its


24 Introduction
hinterland, and large areas of the central Balkans between the Aegean and the Danube. These Slav migrations reduced the num ber of the older Balkan races and crowded them into smaller areas. Part of the Illyrians were assimilated and part were forced southward into present-day Albania. The Greeks held their own in the southern part of the peninsula and rapidly assimilated the Slavic tribes that had settled in their midst. The Latinized Thracians and Dacians of the central Balkans and trans-D anubian lands were dispersed by the Slavs and forced to find refuge in isolated m ountain areas. For centuries no mention of them occurs in the meager contem porary records. Then grad ually they reappeared as the scattered nomadic Vlachs south of the Danube and the much more numerous Rumanians north of the Danube. In this m an ner the Balkan Peninsula developed in the early medieval period its present ethnic pattern. W ith the passing of a few centuries, the Balkan Slavs, widely scat tered and loosely organized as they were, developed along different lines and crystallized into four m ajor groups: the Slovenes at the head of the Adriatic, the Croatians between the D rava River and the A driatic, the Serbs in the central Balkans between the A driatic and the Danube, and the Slavs in the remaining territory to the Black Sea, who shortly were to adopt the name of their Bulgarian conquerors. The latter two groups organized great though short-lived medieval kingdoms which borrowed their culture from Byzantium. In contrast, the Slovenes and Croatians, because of their position in the western part of the peninsula, became subjects of the Holy Roman Empire and were inlluenced by Rom e rather than C onstantinople in their cultural de velopm ent.
M EDIEVAL BALKAN EM PIRES
These Slavic newcomers organized a num ber of powerful empires in the Balkans during the medieval period. The first of these was the creation of the Bulgarians, a people who were not Slavs, but rather Finno-Tatars related to the Huns. Like their A siatic predecessors in the Balkans, they had no taste for agricultural pursuits. They preferred to leave these to their Slavic subjects, whom they were able to subdue by virtue of their superior organiza tion under military leaders or khans. The Bulgarians, it should be noted, never equaled the Slavs in numbers. W ithin a com paratively short tim e the Bulgarian m inority was assim ilated and became Slavic in everything but name. Today the Bulgarians are considered a Slavic people, and are in fact Slavic in appearance, in language, and in customs. The Bulgarians first crossed the Danube into the D obruja in the sec ond half of the seventh century. Later, under the leadership of their great Khan Krum (8 0 8 -8 1 4 ), they were able to advance southward, destroy a num ber of Byzantine armies, and, on one occasion, even besiege Constanti nople itself. A nother great Bulgarian leader, K han Boris, accepted C hristian ity from Constantinople rather than from Rom e in return for Byzantine rec


25


26 Introduction
ognition of the Bulgarian conquests. Boris obtained a national church with its own bishops and archbishops, the only limitation being that an honorary recognition was to be accorded to the patriarch as the supreme head of the Orthodox Church. Having removed the threat of Byzantine domination, Boris felt free to encourage the work of the Greek missionaries. In the following years they provided the Bulgarians with an alphabet, translated the Scriptures into their language, and prepared a Slavonic liturgy. Henceforth Slavonic rather than Greek was the official language of the Bulgarian church. Thus were laid the cultural foundations of the Orthodox Slavs of the Balkans. About the same time the Serbian tribes were also converted to O rtho doxy. Further to the west the Latin church prevailed in C roatia and Slovenia. F o r a period Byzantine m issionaries held their ground in C roatia, but the com bined influence of the Franks and the old Rom an cities of Dalm atia finally prevailed. Byzantine influence petered out in the western Balkans, and the Croatians and the Slovenes in the future followed in the wake of their C ath olic neighbors, Italy, Hungary, and Germany. The medieval Bulgarian state reached its high point during the reign of B oris’s second son, Sim eon ( 8 9 3 - 9 2 7 ) . His years of education in C on stantinople imbued him with a deep respect for Greek culture and he encour aged its diffusion among his backw ard subjects. Greek books were translated into Slavonic, the arts were patronized, and palaces and churches were built. At Preslav, Simeon sat on his throne, girt with purple, arrayed in pearlembroidered robes and surrounded by a dazzling suite of nobles. This munifi cence and culture exerted influence far beyond the borders of Bulgaria, in deed, Preslav served as a funnel through which Byzantine culture poured into Serbia, Rumania, and Russia, dominating the civilizations of these countries for centuries. Sim eon’s accom plishm ents on the battlefield were equally impressive, though in the long run disastrous. He had it in his power to unite the South Slavs under his rule and to form a great Balkan Slavic empire. Instead he fell victim to the dream of Constantinople. He assumed the proud title “T sar of the Bulgars and A utocrat of the Romans [G reeks],” and squandered his sol diery to make this dream a reality. He conquered Nish and Belgrade, and overran M acedonia, A lbania, and Thrace, but the walls of Constantinople and the wiles of Byzantine diplomacy cheated him of his prize. W hen he died he was master of the northern Balkans, including the Serbian lands, but his country was exhausted and his em pire was soon to crumble. Before the end of the century it was overrun by M agyars, Pechenegs, Russians, and finally the Byzantines, who made Bulgaria their province. It was on this occasion that a redoubtable Byzantine emperor, known to history as Basil the BulgarSlayer, annihilated a Bulgarian army and blinded fourteen thousand captives. Byzantium was now dom inant over the O rthodox Slavs of the Bal kans. But her dom ination had come too late. The Slavs of Bulgaria and Serbia no longer were barbarians susceptible to assimilation or expulsion. They now


Historical Background 27
were peasants, tilling the soil, professing Christianity, and cherishing m em o ries of which the names of Boris and Simeon were the flaming symbols. They would therefore submit to Greek dom ination only so long as Constantinople remained the inviolable capital with power adequate to control the peninsula. By the late twelfth century this was no longer the case. The attacks of the Seljuk Turks, the commercial competition of the Italians, the disturbances of the Crusaders, and, to crown it all, the ineptitude of the Angelus dynasty, combined to bring Byzantium to' an obvious state of decay. In these circum stances the Serbians were able to found an imposing Balkan empire and the Bulgarians to revive their past glory. The Serbians were the Slavic people who, in the period of the m igra tions, settled in the central Balkans. In the early ninth century they formed an incipient state that soon passed under the control of the Bulgarians. About the same time the Serbians adopted the Byzantine form of Christianity. This helped to develop a sense of kinship among the scattered tribes and, by the eleventh century, they were consolidated into two rudim entary states, Zeta along the A driatic and Rashka in the interior. It was the latter state that was the nucleus of future Serbian greatness. In the second half of the twelfth century Stephen Nemanja, head or the G reat Zhupan of Rashka, united the Serbian people for the first time. In a series of successful wars with Byzantium and Bulgaria he conquered the whole of Zeta and extended the frontier of Rashka to the M orava Valley, thus establishing the territorial basis of the future Serbian kingdom. His son and successor, Stephen Nemanja II (1 1 9 6 -1 2 2 8 ), was a prudent diplomat and warrior who realized the dream of Serbian independence without striking a blow. Hitherto the Serbian rulers had been at least nominally the vassals of the em peror and bore the title of G reat Zhupans rather than kings. This relationship ended with the fall of C onstantinople to the C rusaders in 1204. Stephen prom ptly exploited the opportunity and played off the pope against the patriarch. From the one he obtained the title of king and from the other a Serbian archbishopric that made the Serbian church autonomous. The head of the new church was the king’s bro th er, a legendary figure who was to be revered by future generations as the holy and m iracle-working St. Sava. W ith a free state and church the Serbian people were now well launched on the road to nationhood. In the meantime the Bulgarians also had profited from the decline of Byzantium to regain their independence. Several brief uprisings had failed in the eleventh century, but in 1185 the brothers Peter and John Asen success fully raised the flag of revolt. The occasion was the im position of a new and burdensome tax, designed, it was rum ored, to provide for the wedding fes tivities of the em peror himself. W ith the help of the Cumans beyond the Danube and of the Vlachs, who were now reappearing after four centuries of refuge in their m ountain fastnesses, the Asen brothers repulsed the feeble efforts of the em peror to reassert his authority. Their successor, Kaloyan ( 1 197-1207), made Bulgaria a formidable rival of Byzantium. In fact, the


28 Introduction
blows he dealt the tottering empire helped to make it fall a ready prey to the Crusaders. F o r a period in the thirteenth century, during the reign of K aloyan’s successor, John Asen II (1 2 1 8 -1 2 4 1 ), Bulgaria was the leading power in the Balkans. Like the rulers of the first Bulgarian state, John Asen II cher ished hopes of imperial grandeur. He assumed the coveted title “Tsar and A uto crat of all Bulgarians and G reeks,” and extended his dom ain to include northern Albania, M acedonia, and W estern Thrace. But he was no more suc cessful than his predecessors in capturing the imperial city, and his kingdom disintegrated soon after his death. His weak and inexperienced successors were unable to maintain his conquests, and the declining kingdom reached its nad ir with its defeat by the Serbs in 1330. Thus Bulgaria becam e vassal to Serbia, which now emerged, for a brief period before the Turkish tidal wave, as the major power of the Balkans. A year after the defeat of the Bulgars, Stephen D ushan the Mighty, the greatest of the Serbian medieval rulers, ascended the throne. As a mili tary strategist and lawgiver, Stephen Dushan has been com pared to Napoleon. H e is rem em bered not only for his conquests but also for his fam ous code issued in 1349. This is of interest for us because of the picture it gives of the medieval Serbian civilization. The reign of Dushan also witnessed a modest development of Serbian culture. C hurch architecture flourished. A t first crudely Byzantine, it was gradually modified by W estern influences, and by D ushan’s time had devel oped its own characteristics. M onasteries becam e centers of learning. Serbian literature, inspired by G reek models, made its appearance and reflected a feeling of national unity. This was particularly true of the great popular epics that were now beginning to be sung and that were exclusively and peculiarly Serbian, owing nothing to Byzantium. Neither the political nor the cultural institutions of medieval Serbia had an opportunity to develop to the full. The foreign enemies were too many and D ushan’s am bition was too great. Like so m any South Slavic rulers, he envisioned himself on the imperial throne in Constantinople, and his vision proved his people’s undoing. His conquests were quite impressive. H e strength ened his hold on Bulgaria, overran Albania, M acedonia, Thessaly, and Epirus, and proclaimed himself “T sar of the Serbs and A utocrat of the Greeks.” To ensure his success against Constantinople he sought the aid of the Turks, the Italians, and the pope. In 1355 he marched on Constantinople with every hope of success, but on the march he died. W ith him died his empire, leaving behind only a memory that was to inspire Serbian patriotism for centuries. His empire broke into fragments because it was too diverse. There were Bulgarians, Italo-Dalmatians, Vlachs, Albanians, and Greeks as well as Serbs. Some were O rthodox Christians, others C atholic, and not a few were Bogom il heretics. D ushan’s em pire lacked both the time and the cultural tradition needed to fuse, or at least to weld together, these disparate elements.


Historical Background 29
The collapse of the Serbian empire created a political vacuum in the Balkans, a vacuum that was filled not by a resurgent Byzantium as had hap pened so often in the past, but rather by the all-conquering Turks, who over ran the whole peninsula— even the hitherto invincible Constantinople— and held it in their grip for alm ost half a millenium . Before turning our attention to the new m asters of the Balkans we will pause briefly to view Byzantium in its decline, for this decline and the inability to stage one m ore recovery, rather than their strength at arms, explain the dazzling successes of the Turks.
EVE OF THE TURKISH CONQUEST
In 1019 Basil the Bulgar-Slayer had captured the last Bulgarian for tress and stood victorious on the Danube. This marked a high point in the fortunes of Byzantium. But within fifty years after the death of Basil, the N orm ans had overrun the im perial possessions in Italy and the Seljuk T urks had perm anently occupied Asia Minor. The latter loss was the more serious, perm anently im pairing B yzantium ’s strength. A natolia in the past had been the great reservoir of manpower for the imperial armies. It had provided Basil the troops with which he had destroyed the Bulgarian empire. Now, with the Turks ruling the area from the Sea of M arm ora to the Euphrates, Asia Minor had become instead a dagger pointed at the heart of the empire. Byzantium was undermined also by a steady economic decline. The loss of the rich Asiatic provinces had deprived the empire of a principal source of tax revenue. Equally serious was the tightening strangle hold of the Italian merchant adventurers upon the commerce of the empire. The refusal of Byzantine capitalists to invest in risky m aritim e ventures left the Italians in alm ost com plete control of overseas trade. This foothold in B yzantium ’s economy was extended to ultimately fatal proportions when the Normans attacked Durazzo, the Byzantine fortress on the Adriatic. The attack was re pulsed, but only with the help of the V enetian fleet. A nd the price of this help was a treaty (1 0 8 2 ) granting V enetian m erchants a q u arter in C on stantinople and complete freedom from tolls or duties throughout the empire. Later emperors tried to withdraw or reduce these privileges but the Byzan tine navy was no match for that of Venice and the grip was maintained. Thus Byzantium was deprived of the duties which contributed so greatly to her revenues, and a hatred was engendered between Greeks and Latins which contributed in no small measure to the final catastrophe. Such was the situation in the em pire when it was faced by the on slaught of the Fourth Crusade. Although organized originally to attack the infidel in Egypt, the Crusade was directed instead against Constantinople on the insistence of the Venetians and the blandishments of the Byzantine pre tender. The latter was placed upon the throne with little difficulty, only to be unseated a few months later by a popular anti-Latin uprising. There followed the second siege of Constantinople, the capture of the capital on A pril 13, 1204, and the three days’ looting of this wealthiest of Christian cities.


30 Introduction
The victorious Latins now set up their feudal states on the imperial ruins. They established a Latin empire at Constantinople, a Latin kingdom at Saloniki, and several L atin states in G reece, of which the m ost im portant were the duchy of Athens and the principality of M orea in the Peloponnesus. The commercially minded Venetians rounded out their empire by occupying a whole quarter of Constantinople and annexing numerous islands and ports strategically located on their route to the Levant. This Latin occupation represents a brief and comparatively unim por tant interlude in the history of the peninsula. The new states were doom ed from the outset. They received little support from the fanatically Orthodox population, particularly in Constantinople. Furtherm ore, they controlled only the fringes of the peninsula and were surrounded on all sides by enemies. They faced not only the still form idable Bulgarian and Serbian kingdoms in the northern Balkans, but also several Greek succession states. Of these the most im portant were the empire at Trebizond on the southern shore of the Black Sea, the despotat of Epirus on the Adriatic, and the empire across the Straits at Nicaea where a member of the deposed dynasty, Theodore Lascaris, had himself crowned by the Patriarch as “Em peror of the Greeks.” Under these circumstances the only question was to which one of these states the Latins ultimately would succumb. The answer was given when the able emperors of Nicaea conquered much of Asia M inor and Eastern Thrace, and became by far the most pow erful of the G reek rulers. By skillful diplomacy and force of arms they re duced the L atin em pire until only the capital rem ained. Finally in 1261 the


Historical Background 31
Latin emperor, together with the Latin Patriarch and the Venetian settlers, fled from Constantinople w ithout resistance. The Nicaean em peror, M ichael Palaeologus, made a solemn formal entry into the city, and, amidst popular acclamation, took up his residence in the imperial palace. The outlook for the restored Byzantine Empire was scarcely more promising than that of its Latin predecessor, despite the ability and diplomatic trium phs of Michael. In Asia it faced the form idable T urks, and in E urope it was surrounded by Latins in Greece, the despotat of Epirus in the West, and the Serbians and Bulgarians in the north. Thus Michael was left with the pitiful rem nant of an empire. Confined to a few islands in the Aegean, to the northwestern corner of Asia Minor, and to the insignificant portion of the Balkans between Saloniki and Constantinople, his realm reminds one of postVersailles Austria. Both states were like shrunken bodies with enormous heads— Constantinople in the one case and Vienna in the other. To these external dangers were added internal difficulties. Econom i cally the empire was bankrupt. The Italians continued to drain its lifeblood. In the mid-fourteenth century the Genoese quarter in Constantinople was col lecting 200,000 solidi annually in custom s revenues while the im perial gov ernm ent collected only 30,000. The em perors were reduced to debasing their currency and pawning their crown jewels with Venetian bankers. W hen they increased taxes to meet state expenses, the rich frequently escaped by judi cious bribing, while the poor, already .in desperate straits, rose in revolt against the aristocracy of birth and of wealth. The large cities were torn by bloody social strife. In fact, for seven years (13 4 2 -1 3 4 9 ) Saloniki was vir tually an independent republic ruled by revolutionary leaders known as the Zealots. Particularly deplorable was the rapid growth of large estates which absorbed the holdings of the soldiery-peasantry. A nother basic factor in Byzantine decline was the religious issue. Hoping to obtain W estern aid against the ever-increasing Turkish menace, the emperors decided on an agreement with the Papacy. In 1439 Em peror John V III attended the church council of Florence, where he solemnly ac cepted the supremacy of the pope and the union of the two churches. The concession was in vain. The W est gave insignificant aid while the terms of the agreement caused bitter controversy in Constantinople. The Byzantine clergy and the devout masses fiercely rejected any compromise with the hated Latins as a betrayal of Orthodoxy. Even on the eve of the Turkish conquest, for many the pope rather than the Turk was the real enemy. The first minister of the empire was only expressing popular sentiment when he declared that he would rather behold in Constantinople the turban of M ohammed than the tiara of the pope or the hat of a cardinal. Thus with diminished territory, laboring under financial exhaustion and military weakness, rent by social and religious strife, and battered by Serbs, Bulgars, Latins, and Turks, the Byzantine em pire sank slowly into hopeless impotence before the oncoming Turks.


32 Introduction
BYZANTIUM IN RETROSPECT
On coming to the end of the Byzantine era we may look back and consider its significance for Balkan history. This may be illustrated by com paring the peninsula over which Justinian ruled in the sixth century with that which the Turks conquered in the fifteenth. W hen this is done the change that stands out m ost obviously is in the ethnic com position of the Balkans. In Ju stin ian ’s day the G reeks, Illyrians, and T hraco-D acians of antiquity still held their ground in the peninsula. By the fifteenth century the Slavs were in firm possession of a broad belt from the Adriatic to the Black seas. The dis possessed Illyrians were concentrated in present-day Albania and the scat tered Thraco-Dacians were reappearing as the nomadic Vlachs of the central highlands and as the Rum anians of the newly emerging trans-D anubian states, Moldavia and W allachia. This ethnic distribution that took place in the By zantine period has persisted with slight changes to the present. The modern culture of the Balkans also had evolved by the fifteenth century through a process of Byzantinization and Christianization. For the South Slavs, and the Albanians and Rum anians for that m atter, Byzantium was what Rome had been for the Germans— the great educator, the great initiator, the source both of religion and of civilization. Her missionaries spread the gospel among the barbarians, and with it they brought Byzantine legal ideas, literature, art, trade, and everything else that constitutes a dis tinctive civilization. During the future centuries of Turkish rule Balkan Christianity contributed to the preservation of Balkan nationality. For the church became the center of national life and the ecclesiastical organization was entrusted by the Turkish overlord with some of the functions of civil governm ent. Finally, the Byzantine period witnessed the development of the im perial idea in the Balkans, in contrast to the city-state particularism of an tiquity. W hereas in the W est feudal decentralization, loosely organized m on archies, and im perial illusions prevailed, in the E ast there cam e an extrem e development of absolute m onarchy and of highly centralized imperial bu reaucracy. All authority was in and from the em peror. T he patriarch, in con trast to the pope, lived in the shadow of the imperial palace. Thus the m e dieval political institutions of the W est laid the basis for the national state system, while those of the East preserved the imperial tradition of Rom e and of the Orient, and passed them on to the new Turkish m aster of the Balkans.


To 1560
I'arl, II. I p ill (Ifliiiiiiin Ascendancy
3 . C o m in g o f th e O tto m a n T u rk s: to 1 4 0 2
T
J . h e e f f e c t o f t h e t u r k s on the development of the Balkans and of the N ear East may be com pared, generally speaking, with that of the Germans on the development of W estern Europe. In the fourth and fifth centuries a .d . successive waves of G erm an barbarians gradually over whelmed the W estern Rom an Empire and prepared the ground for that fusion of Germanic, Roman, and Christian elements known as W estern civilization. Likewise from the eighth century onward; Turkish tribesmen streamed out of their ccntral Asian homeland into the N ear East, overwhelmed the Islamic and Byzantine empires, and eventually founded the O ttom an Em pire, with its blending of several N ear Eastern cultures upon an Islamic base: In this chapter we shall analyze the factors explaining the success of the Turks, and trace their career of conquests until the beginning of the fifteenth century, when they had gained a firm grip on the Balkan Peninsula.
PRE-OTTOM AN TURKS
M uch less is known of the origins of the O ttom an E m pire than of the M erovingian and Carolingian kingdoms in the West. The early Turks were too busy with the sword to have time for the pen. Not until the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when their empire had been fought for and won, did Turkish chroniclers concern themselves with their early history. By that time fable had taken the place of fact. Of necessity the chroniclers accepted and recorded a mythology of their origins analogous to the Romulus myth of the R om ans and the sun-goddess myth of the Japanese. Only in the past few decades have serious attempts been made to lift the colorful veil of legend, but in the absence of reliable records much still remains obscure. We hear of the T urks first from Chinese sources. They were then the inhabitants, strong and predatory, of the A ltai plains in Siberia and M ongolia. By the sixth century a .d . they had established a vast khanate stretching across
33


34 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
the continent of Asia as far west as the Sea of Azov. Like most nomadic empires this khanate collapsed almost as soon as it was created, and the various Turkish tribes divided into a western and an eastern branch. The western group, located in Turkestan, was subdued in the eighth century by the Moslem Arabs advancing from the south, and in the following two cen turies the Turks adopted the Islamic faith of their conquerors. The condition of the Islamic world at this point was similar to that of the Rom an world when the G erm an tribes were pressing on its borders. The great empire conquered by the crusading A rab disciples of M ohammed in the century following his death (6 3 2 ) had become a hollow shell. Spain and North Africa had seceded from the empire and virulent sectarianism had disrupted the monolithic faith of the Prophet. Faced with this crisis the caliphs of Baghdad turned to the Moslem Turks for support, just as the Rom an emperors under similar circumstances had turned to the Germans. As early as the eighth century the Turks had begun to infiltrate the Islamic Em pire. Employed first as mercenaries, they soon became the pre dom inant element in the armies of the caliph. In the tenth century, Mongol pressure in the rear forced more Turkish tribes to move into the empire. It was these newcomers who captured Baghdad in 1055, thereby founding the brilliant though short-lived Seljuk Empire. These Seljuk Turks reanim ated the moribund Islamic world. They united once more the vast territory from the shores of the M editerranean to the borders of India. They successfully repulsed the attacks of the Crusaders in the Holy Land. Above all, they broke the traditional frontier of Asia M inor along the Taurus M ountains— the frontier that had sheltered Rome and Byzantium for fourteen hundred years. They accomplished this when they defeated the Byzantine army in the fateful battle of M anzikert in 1071. This victory proved a turning point in the history of Asia Minor. Large numbers of Turkish settlers migrated northward in the wake of their victori ous soldiers, and the native A natolian population gradually lost its thin veneer of Greek culture. Between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries the larger part of Anatolia was transform ed from a Greek and Christian to a Turkish and Moslem region, and it remains so to the present day. It should be noted that this Turkification of Asia M inor m eant that the Turks who later conquered the Balkan Peninsula were far from purely Turkish in ethnic composition. M any were of Greek origin and probably some were Armenians. In the meantime the Seljuk Em pire had disintegrated into a patch work of independent principalities or sultanates, one of these comprising the newly conquered Asia M inor area. This was known as the sultanate of Rum, by virtue of its form er Rom an ownership, and also as the sultanate of Konya, after the nam e of its capital Iconium (G reek) or Konya (T urkish). Thanks to the capture of Constantinople by the Latins in 1204, the Seljuk sultans of Konya were able to add to their domains the ports of Adalia on the M edi terranean and Sinope on the Black Sea. This opened their kingdom to a profitable trade with the Italian city-republics. The resulting riches made


Com ing of the Ottom an Turks: to 1402 35
possible the development of a brilliant court at Konya, the extraordinarily high culture of which has been revealed by recent excavations. No sooner did the sultanate of Rum reach its peak than it declined precipitously. The main reason seems to have been the practice of granting hereditary fiefs in return for military services. This led to the developm ent of independent or semi-independent states, especially when the central govern m ent was weak. This occurred all too frequently, for the T urks had no tradi tion of strong autocratic government com parable to that of the Byzantines. The disintegration of the Rum sultanate was completed when the great Mongol conqueror, Genghis Khan, burst into Asia M inor, routed the Seljuk forces in 1243, and temporarily occupied the capital. The great khan did not stop to establish his personal rule. He contented himself with levying tribute and he allowed the Seljuk sultans to rem ain tributary rulers. But the sultans henceforth lacked even the feeble authority they formerly had possessed. The disorder was heightened by new bands of Turkish immigrants forced westward by the Mongol invaders. Thus Asia M inor in the late thir teenth and early fourteenth centuries sank into a state of near anarchy, with most of the country controlled by virtually independent local chieftains or emirs. One of these was a certain Osman, m emorable in history as the founder of the Osmanli or O ttom an Empire, destined to carry the banner of Islam to the walls of Vienna and to dom inate the entire N ear East to the twentieth century.
OSM AN: FOUNDER OF THE OTTOMAN EM PIRE
Legend has it th at O sm an’s father, E rtoghrul, led a small com pany of four hundred and forty-four horsemen with their families across the m oun tains of Armenia to the Anatolian plateau. There he came unexpectedly upon a battle in which one side was sorely pressed. He rallied his followers to the aid of the losers and won the battle with an impetuous charge. The warrior that he had saved from defeat proved to be none other than the Seljuk sultan himself, who gratefully rewarded Ertoghrul with a grant of land along the Byzantine frontier. T he story savors of m yth but it is not w ithout interest in that it demonstrates how the nomadic Turkish tribes were establishing them selves at this time throughout A sia M inor. We can well believe that the Seljuk sultan welcomed Ertoghrul and the other Turkish chieftains as allies to resist the pressure of the Byzantines in the west and the Mongols in the east. E rto g h ru l’s fief was located on the extrem e northw estern fringe of the Seljuk territory, less than fifty miles from the Sea of M arm ora and not a hundred miles from Constantinople itself. H ere E rtoghrul was to be a W arden of the M arches, to hold his territory for the sultan and to extend it for himself if he could. H ardly had he settled dow n w hen the sultan’s au thority dwindled to the point where the newcomers were virtually on their own. E rto g h ru i’s son, O sm an, is reputed to have declared his independence


36 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
in 1299, but this could have been nothing more than formal affirmation of patent fact. In the same year Osm an took up his residence at Yenishehir, or New City, located halfway between the prosperous Byzantine cities of Brusa and Nicaea. From this strategic base Osm an set out upon his career of con quest. Before following his path we need to consider how a small group of comparatively primitive Turkish tribesmen were able not only to capture large walled cities but also to consolidate their domains and organize them into a base for still further expansion.
BASES OF OTTOM AN POW ER
The source of Ottom an power still remains obscure in many respects. But one cardinal point stands out clearly. The popular conception of O tto man power originating in an overwhelming invasion of Asia M inor by hordes of central Asiatic Turks who swept on into the Balkans as single-minded apostles of Islam— all this may be discarded with assurance. The story of E rtoghrul leading his four hundred and forty-four horsem en obviously is related m ore to the sacred num ber four than to actual fact. B ut it does ex press the popular belief that his orginal followers were a mere handful. This is quite significant. G reat Asiatic conquerors like Attila and Genghis Khan won their vast empires at the head of large nomadic armies, but Osman and his successors started with virtually nothing. A nd yet they accomplished m uch more. T he O sm anli E m pire endured to our own times, in contrast to the other Asiatic empires that almost invariably disappeared with their founders. We need to explain, therefore, not the simple and common occur rence of an overwhelming Asiatic invasion, but rather the complex com bina tion of factors that made possible the emergence of a lasting new state out of the rem nants of the decaying Seljuk and Byzantine empires. A n im portant factor was religion. Osman and his successors owed much of their strength to the steady stream of ghazis, or warriors of the faith, who poured in from all parts of A natolia to do battle against the enemies of Islam . O sm an’s position near the Byzantine capital attracted an exceptionally large number of these warriors. W hereas the other emirs had consolidated their holdings and stabilized their borders at an early date, Osm an was forced to fight much longer and harder to overcome the Byzantine strongholds that he faced. This attracted to him a continuous supply of ghazis, so that al though he ruled a domain smaller than those of other emirs, he possessed a disproportionately large striking force. The ghazi hosts not only made possi ble the early successes against the Byzantine cities in Asia M inor, but also virtually forced O sm an’s successors to conquests further afield. T he everincreasing numbers of Islamic warriors who were attracted to the expanding Osmanli frontier state had to be kept occupied in some manner. The obvious solution lay across the Straits, where infidel Balkan kingdoms, feeble and divided, prom ised rich spoils for the ghazis and new glory for the faith. Another im portant factor explaining the expansion of the Osmanlis


Coming o] the O ttom an Turks: to 1402 37
was the unprecedented weakness of the Byzantine defenses in the face of the ghazi onslaught. The imperial outposts in Asia M inor traditionally had been m anned by special frontier troops known as akritai. These rough and ready guards originally had defended the empire with great courage and energy, but in later years they had become wealthy and lax. W hen the Byzantine emperors returned to Constantinople in 1261 they virtually wiped out the akritai by means of taxation and conscription. The latter prom ptly revolted, and, although they were suppressed, the defense system remained completely disorganized. Henceforth the Byzantine emperors could muster at the most an army of only ten to twelve thousand men, of which a large part was un reliable. In addition to these military considerations there were im portant economic factors behind the Osmanli triumph. The late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries were years of economic and social disintegration in the Byzantine provinces. Most of the land was held by monasteries and absentee landowners. The destitute peasants were driven to acts of lawlessness, raiding the large estates for foodstuffs and sometimes even appropriating land by forceful means. When the Turks appeared, many of these Christian peasants accepted and even hailed them as deliverers from their unbearable lot. And contem porary evidence indicates that the peasants’ lot did improve. Anarchy and terror in the countryside gave way to peace and security. In the place of the form er absentee landowners was a new class of small farmers who nat urally identified their well-being with Turkish rule. The economic appeal of the Turks probably was heightened by their Akhi brotherhood. This consisted of corporations of craftsmen, devoted to Islam and to the idea of chivalry, and practicing a com m unal life reminiscent of Christian monasticism. Their golden rule was “put the other man above thyself.” The famous A rab traveler, Ibn Battuta, experienced the hospitality of these Akhis when he journeyed through Asia M inor in 1333. “Nowhere in the w orld,” he reported, “ will you find men so eager to welcome travellers, so prom pt to serve food and to satisfy the wants of others. . . . A stranger coming to them is made to feel as though he were meeting the dearest of his own folk.” Contem porary Christians must have been impressed by the contrast between this benevolent brotherhood and the institutions and practices within Byzantium. The fact that the Akhi and all the other T urks were M oslems did not influence the Christian Greeks as much as might be expected. In contrast to the nineteenth century, when conflicting nationalist awakenings aroused religious fanaticism in Moslems and Christians alike, the distinctions between the rival religions at this time were blurred to a surprising degree. The Moslem Bektashi order, for example, put little store by doctrinal differ ences and cercmonial practices, and aimed at the reconciliation of Christian ity and Islam. Likewise, not a few shrines in Asia M inor were frequented
* Numbered notes begin on page 847.


38 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
indiscriminately by both Christians and Moslems. It may be assumed, then, that many Christians in this period found not only that apostasy was expe dient but also that it required only a slight adjustm ent of their beliefs and practices. Finally, T urkish expansion was aided by the fact th at O sm an’s p rin cipality was situated astride the main routes from Constantinople to central A natolia. As a result, the Osmanli lands had more intimate contact with the Moslem interior than did the other Anatolian emirates. This in turn ensured a steady supply of ulema or M oslem doctors in law who interpreted the Koran and who assumed the vital role of organizing the administration of the new territories that were being conquered. This ensured order and stabil ity and thereby contributed to the strength and perm anence of the rising state. In the light of these various factors the success of the Osmanlis against mighty Byzantium becomes comprehensible. First they captured Brusa in 1326, when Osm an lay on his death bed. Then his son and successor, O rkhan, won the two remaining large Byzantine cities in Asia M inor, Nicaea and Nicomedia, in 1331 and 1337, respectively. None of these cities was taken by assault or by battle beneath its walls. R ather, they were abandoned to their fate by the feeble em perors in Constantinople. The Turks were per m itted to settle in the surrounding countryside and to cut off the trade upon which the prosperity of the cities depended. Years went by with no effective relief from Constantinople. In the end the Greek townspeople chose submission as the sole alternative to economic ruin.
ORKHAN PREPARES FOR CONQUEST
Having broken the power of Byzantium in Asia M inor, O rkhan penetrated to the coast, opposite which rose the majestic imperial capital. Before attempting to span the narrow chasm of the Straits, Orkhan paused to consolidate his gains. Being now the ruler of a greatly expanded domain, he dropped the title of emir to assume the more ambitious one of “Sultan of the O ttom ans.” * In accordance with this new sense of sovereignty he coined money in his own name to take the place of the Byzantine and Seljuk cur rency hitherto used. His most im portant measures had to do with his army. The Osmanli forces heretofore had consisted of volunteer horsemen who served for the duration of a campaign and then returned to their villages. W ith a rapidly expanding territory and with ambitions for further conquests, a perm anent and well-disciplined force was needed. This was achieved by organizing a cavalry militia associated with land tenure. The land was divided into fiefs, the smaller ones known as timars and the larger as ziamets. The holders of these fiefs (tim ariots and ziam s) were obliged to serve in the event of war,
* The word “Ottoman” is derived from the Turkish name “Osman,” which comes “Othman” in Arabic. Hence the adjectives “Osmanli” in Turkish, “Othmani” in Arabic, and “Ottoman” in common Western usage.


Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 39
and to come with their followers, horses, and equipment in proportion to the size of their fiefs. This resembled the feudal system then prevailing in W estern Europe, though with certain im portant differences. The fiefs were small in extent and were not, as a rule, hereditary. The tim ariots and ziams owed allegiance to none but their ruler, from whom they directly held their land. A nd in con trast to the W estern European limit of forty days’ annual service the timariots and ziams were liable to be summoned for service for any length of time and at any moment. Thus the sultan was assured of a large body of cavalry, de pendent entirely upon him for its m aterial welfare, and always ready to m arch under his banner. In addition to these feudal levies, O rk h an’s successor, M urad I (1 3 5 9 -1 3 8 9 ), organized the body of infantrymen known as the janissaries, a term derived from the Turkish “yenicheri” or “new force.” In later cen turies these janissaries were to win international fame as the scourge of Chris tendom. The janissary corps consisted of slaves who were either prisoners of war or were bought from slave traders. In order to distinguish them from other troops the slave guards were provided with tall white caps, which later became the distinctive headgear of the janissaries. Such a body of slave soldiers was by no means uncom mon among Moslem rulers at this time. But one feature rendered the janissary corps unique. This was the introduction of the devshirme, or child-tribute, as a means of recruitment. At some uncertain date, probably during the reign of the same M urad I, the T urks began to fill the ranks of the janissaries by forcibly recruiting and training the children of their Christian subjects. This practice, discussed in Chapter 6, probably started as a special levy and then became regularized, with one fifth of the Christian children being recruited every five years. These military developments converted the nascent O ttom an state into a most powerful engine for war. O rkhan was now ready for expansion, and his line of advance was already foreshadowed. He could hardly strike back into Asia M inor, occupied as it was by Moslem principalities. To have done so would have been to sin against Islam. But to the west was the rich but feeble Byzantine E m pire, and beyond it other still w eaker C hristian states. Not only was the Balkan Peninsula open to invasion, but the whole of Christendom in the fourteenth century was weakened and divided to an unprecedented degree. The Ottomans hardly could have selected a more propitious moment to begin their advance across the Straits into Europe.
STATE OF CHRISTENDOM
The Ottom ans were aided in the first place by the paralyzing effect upon Europe of the terrible Black Death. Pestiferous Genoese galleys spread the disease from Black Sea ports to Constantinople in 1347, and in the fol lowing year to harbors throughout the M editerranean. Thence the disease


40 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
spread all over W estern Europe and east to Poland and Russia. In every country whole sections of the population were carried off. The econom ic and m oral effects of this disaster were incalculable. Com m unications with the L evant were partially cut off, and were not fully resum ed until after the T urks were firmly rooted on the European side of the Straits. The plague also con tributed much to the outbreak of the Jacquerie in France (1358) and the Peasant Revolt in England (1 3 8 1 ). Countries suffering such calamities were not likely to concern themselves with events occurring at the other end of Europe. The following sequence of events suggests some relationship be tween social fragility in Christendom and O ttom an success in Southeastern Europe: 1354, first Turkish settlement on the Gallipoli Peninsula; 1358, Jacquerie in France; 1381, Peasant Revolt in England; 1389, Serbian defeat at Kosovo; 1514, Peasant Revolt in Hungary; 1523, Peasant Revolt in G er many; 1526, H ungarian defeat at M ohacs; 1529, Turks besiege Vienna. England and France were also absorbed during these crucial decades in their ruinous H undred Y ears’ W ar. The dates of this conflict are significant. It started in 1338, a year after Nicom edia in A sia M inor fell to O rkhan, and it lasted to 1453, when the Ottomans capped their Balkan conquests by tak ing Constantinople. Conditions in Italy were equally unpromising. Its two great com mercial powers, Venice and Genoa, were interested only in destroying each other and in advancing their trading interests in the Levant. T o attain the latter they did not hesitate to sign commercial agreements and even outright alliances with the growing O ttom an power. Likewise the Papacy, which hitherto had been the driving force behind the Crusades against Islam, was at its lowest ebb during these decades. The Babylonian Captivity, the G reat Schism, and the C onciliar M ovem ent all diverted the attention of fourteenthcentury popes from the growing peril of Islam in the East. Even had circum stances been more favorable, the popes would have been little disposed to rally W estern Christendom to the rescue of the Byzantine heretics. Finally, there was the helpless impotence of Byzantium herself. The destructiveness of the Latin occupation, the hard blows of the Serbian Dushan, the economic strangulation by the Italian merchants, the dynastic conflicts, and the economic distress and social strife— all these ailments, which we noted in the preceding chapter, made it impossible for the empire to rally once more as it had so frequently in the past. N or were the other Balkan kingdoms in a more vigorous state. Both the Serbs and Bulgars were wracked by rival pretenders, warring nobles, and deep-rooted social and religious strife. The popularity of the revolutionary Bogomil heresy, a dualistic creed that was widespread in Bulgaria and Bosnia, attests to the social fragility of the South Slav states. According to the testi mony of a contem porary opponent of the Bogomils, “ . . . they blaspheme the wealthy . . . ridicule the elders, condem n the nobles, regard as vile in the sight of G od those who serve the tsar, and forbid all slaves to obey their m asters.” 2 In this attack we can discern the significance of the Bogomil


Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 41
movement, arising from the common people, led by ordinary parochial priests, and seeking to bring relief and liberation to the oppressed multitudes. Persecuted by the Catholics and the O rthodox churches alike, many of these Bogomils, as will be seen in the next chapter, turned to Islam and welcomed the Turks as their deliverers. We may conclude that the entire Balkan Peninsula on the eve of the Turkish invasion was socially as well as politically ripe for conquest. In the words of a m odern authority, “A feudal society, grinding the peasants, was surprised by the shock [of the Turkish onslaught] and crum bled before it. . . . This social reality explains the ravages and startling successes of the con querors. . . . The conquest, wiping out the great landholders, was from cer tain view points, a ‘liberation of p o o r devils.’ ” 3 A nother historian has em phasized this point as follows:
Again and again gifted Serbians, or Bulgarians, or Greeks, who in their own country could not rise from the position in which they were born, found an open way to wealth, honour and power, a path to the saddle of a Beyler Bey (Commander-in-Chief), or to the carpet of a Vizier, and perhaps to the golden cage of one of the daughters or sisters of the Sultan himself! It seems a paradox to say that the Turks opened new horizons to the people of the Balkan Peninsula. Yet their political system, a combination of absolute despotism with the very broadest democracy, had much in it that was novel and acceptable. To the notions of an average Greek, and especially to the notions of an average Serbian or Bul garian, that system was not more unnatural or more disagreeable than the feudal system which secured all the good things of the world only to the nobles and the priests.1
Thus the fabulous successes which awaited the Ottom ans become com prehensible. They were due only in p art to the strength and single-m ind edness of the invaders. More im portant was the disorganization and division of W estern Europe, which precluded a united Christian resistance, and the fatal weakness of the Balkan states themselves, which created a vacuum quickly filled by O ttom an power.
CROSSING TO EU RO PE
The Osmanlis first entered Europe not as conquerors or as settlers but as m ercenaries. In 1345 an am bitious Byzantine official, John C antacuzenus, solicited the help of O rkhan to support his bid for the imperial throne. He offered O rkhan the hand of his daughter, Theodora, in return for the services of six thousand soldiers. The offer was accepted, the O ttom an troops crossed the Hellespont, and took part in a campaign that carried them to A drianople, to the Black Sea, and, as allies of the usurper, into Con stantinople itself. Four years later came a second invitation, this time for twenty thousand soldiers to help save Saloniki from Stephen Dushan. O rkhan again responded and his troops, having effected their purpose, once m ore re turned home. Still a third time Cantacuzenus, now engaged in civil war,


42


Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 43
sought the help of the Ottomans, robbing the churches of Constantinople of their plate to pay O rkhan the money he demanded. Having thus learned of the wealth and attractions of Europe, and also of its disunion and weakness, the O ttom ans soon took the next logical step. In 1354 O rk h an ’s son led a body of troops across the H ellespont, not as mercenaries but as invaders. He seized the city of Gallipoli near the Aegean end of the Straits, where he constructed strong fortifications and stationed a large garrison. Gallipoli now became a strong O ttom an base for further expansion into the Balkans. Cantacuzenus has fared badly at the hands of historians for his col laboration with the Turks. It is doubtful, however, that his invitations sensibly hastened the coming of the O ttom ans. T he fact is that had he not called them to Europe, they would have come of their own volition. Furtherm ore, Stephen Dushan also was seeking an alliance with the Turks, and the Genoese and Venetians likewise were not averse to such a move. Cantacuzenus merely anticipated his rivals, and in doing so he probably delayed rather than hastened the fall of Constantinople. If he had followed a hostile policy to ward the Turks, and the latter had retaliated by siding with the Serbs or the Italians, it is unlikely th at C onstantinople could have held out for another century. As it was, Byzantine diplomacy diverted the Turks against the other B alkan states, and during the following decades O rk h an ’s successors ad vanced not against Constantinople, but around the city into the Balkan interior.
MURAD DEFEATS THE SOUTH SLAVS
The next Sultan, M urad I (1 3 5 9 -1 3 8 9 ), did not long leave the world in doubt about his intentions. Marching suddenly to the northwest, he over ran large parts of Thrace and compelled the emperor to relinquish title to the province. In 1362 he captured Adrianople, the great emporium and fortress com m anding the route up the M aritsa Valley into the central Balkans. Sig nificantly enough, he made this E uropean city his capital in place of Brusa in Asia M inor, and it remained the O ttom an capital until the conquest of Con stantinople. Thus the Turks established themselves firmly in the Balkans. They entrenched their position by systematic colonization measures, remov ing large numbers of the native population to Asia M inor and settling Turkish settlers in their place. The Central European states, whose borders the Turks were ap proaching, now became alarmed. It was scarcely more than a century since the Mongols had swept through Eastern Europe, overrunning Hungary, Poland, and Germany. A nd now a new host of Asiatic conquerors was m arch ing on Central Europe from the southeast. A t the instigation of Pope U rban V, a crusading army of Hungarians, Serbians, Bosnians, and W allachians was formed, and in 1364 it set forth to recapture A drianople. It marched undis turbed to the M aritsa, but there it was surprised by a night attack and cut to pieces.


44 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
The Christian defeat on the banks of the M aritsa hastened the fall of Bulgaria. This country was divided politically among three pretenders and religiously by three creeds— Orthodox, Catholic, and Bogomil. It was also harassed from the north by King Louis of Hungary, who aspired to Bulgarian territory under the pretext of the defense of the Catholic faith. The atrocities of Hungarian soldiers and the forceful proselytism of Franciscan missionaries prepared m any Bulgarians for willing submission to the Turks as the lesser of two evils. Thus M urad overran the country with little opposition, and com pelled its leaders in 1366 to becom e his vassals. The Serbians offered stiffer resistance but with no more success. Their great D ushan had died in 1355, and his weak successor was ignored by the nobles, who plunged the country into near anarchy. Nevertheless, the Serbs resolved to stop the Turks in the valley of the M aritsa and marched as far as Chernomen, between Philippopolis and Adrianople. There, at dawn on September 26, 1371, a greatly inferior Turkish force surprised them and slaughtered large num bers. So great was the carnage th at the battlefield is still called “the Serbs’ destruction.” Macedonia was now at the mercy of the Turks. Kavalla, Drama, and Serres fell into their hands as they m arched west to the V ardar. In 1372 they crossed the V ardar and made raids into Bosnia, Albania, and Greece. But these were still raids, not perm anent conquests. The T urks next pushed north w ard into the central B alkans, capturing the key city of Sofia in 1384 or 1385. This opened the route to the Serbian tow n of Nish, which fell in 1386. But most of Serbia was allowed to rem ain under its Prince Lazar on the con dition that he become vassal to M urad, pay tribute, and furnish troops when demanded. Precisely the same arrangement had been forced upon the By zantine em peror a few years earlier. In fact, a definite pattern is discernible in the O ttom ans’ strategy of conquest. First they established their suzerainty over neighboring rulers, re quiring them to pay tribute and to furnish troops when required. M urad’s successor, Bayezid I, was the first sultan who took the next step, imposing direct rule by eliminating the native dynasties, dividing the land among his followers, and recording the population and resources into official registers or defterdars. At this point it should be noted that the obligations assumed by the native rulers during the first stage were by no means nominal. Over and over again the Ottom ans won victories with the aid of substantial Chris tian contingents. This was true of the great battle which in 1389 destroyed the rem nants of Serbian independence. M urad had been called to A natolia by dis orders in his Asian domains. L azar seized the opportunity to combine forces with the king of Bosnia, Tvrtko, for a final bid for independence. In 1388 the two leaders defeated the Ottom ans in three successive battles. These vic tories drew together a coalition of Bosnians, Serbians, Bulgarians, W allachians, and Albanians. M urad meanwhile had pacified Asia M inor and hurried back with all his forces. He sum m oned to their duties his south Ser


Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 45
bian, Bulgarian, and Albanian vassals, and on June 15, 1389, fought a great battle on the Kosovo Plain near the Serbian-Bulgarian border. It was the culminating conflict, an irretrievable disaster for the South Slavs. The story of the struggle has become the subject of legend to such an extent that we do not know exactly what happened on the battlefield. Sultan M urad was assassinated during or after the battle by a faithless ally, a deserter, or a wounded soldier. But assassinated he was, and the Ottom ans avenged their leader by killing the common prisoners as they captured them and executing Lazar and the other Christian princes after the battle. To complete the tragedy of the day, Bayezid, on hearing of the death of his father, and his own consequent accession to the throne, gave orders for the immediate murder of his brother Y akub. There was to be no question of the succession to the throne. For the next two centuries it was the settled prac tice for the sultans, upon their accession, to put to death their brothers and other collaterals lest they should dispute the accession.
BAYEZID THE THUND ERBOLT
Before his accession Bayezid I (13.89-1402) had earned by his prowess on the battlefield the title Yilderim or “Thunderbolt.” As sultan he lived up to this reputation. During the thirteen years of his rule he firmly established Turkish domination over the Balkans and paved the way for the capture of Constantinople a half century later. Bayezid followed up the great Kosovo victory by forcing Stephen, the successor of Lazar, to sue for peace. The terms agreed upon provided that Serbia should be an autonomous state, recognizing O ttoman suzerainty, paying an annual tribute, and providing a contingent of five thousand soldiers for the use of the sultan. Bayezid calcu lated that these lenient conditions would assure him Serbian support in future campaigns, and he was not mistaken. In the great battles of Nicopolis against the W estern crusaders, and of A nkara against the Mongols, Bayezid had no m ore loyal soldiers than the Serbians led by Prince Stephen in person. Having come to terms with Serbia, Bayezid turned his attention to A sia M inor. It is a curious and im portant fact that the O ttom an E m pire at this point was more European than Asiatic. Its greatest extent lay to the west of the Straits and its capital had been moved from Brusa to A drianople. This westward orientation had been due partly to the strength of the Anatolian em irates, in contrast to the weakness of the Balkan states, and partly to the reluctance of earlier Osmanlis to fight fellow Moslems. The latter considera tion was of no concern to Bayezid, and as for military strength, his state now possessed far greater resources than any A natolian em irate. Accordingly in 1390 he began his conquests in Asia M inor. It is im portant to note th a t the ghazis or w arriors of the faith, who had spearheaded the onslaught on the Christian Balkans, were reluctant to participate in a cam paign against M oslem states. This was due not only to obvious religious reasons but also to the more mundane consideration that


46 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
looting and pillaging could not be practiced so freely in Moslem lands. Thus Bayezid was forced to rely mostly on the janissaries and on Serbian and G reek contingents. This use of Christian infidels against Moslem states scan dalized the faithful and later boomeranged fatally against Bayezid at a critical stage of his fortunes. Despite these com plications Bayezid had little difficulty in occupying the Aegean coastlands and penetrating into the interior. By 1394 he had overrun Karam ania, the leading A natolian emirate, and also had absorbed by various means several others, thereby extending his frontier to Sivas. His Asiatic domains now were bordered by the weak Christian states, Armenia, Georgia, and Trebizond, and by friendly Moslem kingdoms in Syria and the Tigris-Euphrates Valley. The only menace to the Ottom ans was from the aggressive Mongols, who were approaching Asia M inor from the east led by their formidable conqueror Tim ur the Lame or Timurlane. But Tim ur at this point turned away from Asia M inor, embarking instead on his whirl wind campaigns through southern Russia, Turkestan, Persia, India, and Syria. Bayezid thus had a respite of seven years, during which time he ex tended his domain in the Balkans. T he strength and boldness of Bayezid is shown by the fact that while campaigning in Asia M inor he had at the same time overrun eastern Bul garia and W allachia and laid siege to C onstantinople itself. Eastern Bulgaria hitherto had enjoyed an independent existence, but on July 17, 1393, its capi tal, T irnovo, fell to a large Turkish arm y. This event com pleted the servitude of the Bulgarian people. Their entire country now was under O ttom an rule. A lthough the exact sequence of events is obscure, the latest research ■' indicates that the Turks overran W allachia following their successes in Bul garia. W allachia was a newly formed Balkan state situated on the northern bank of the Danube. Its inhabitants, the Latin-speaking Rumanians, were the descendants of the Daco-Roman stock of the ancient period. After cen turies of barbarian invasions and periods of Bulgarian, Hungarian, and T atar overlordship, the Rum anians had succeeded in the first half of the fourteenth century in form ing two principalities, W allachia along the D anube and M ol davia to the north. It was the ruler of W allachia, Prince Mircea, that Bayezid defeated on May 17, 1395. Bayezid withdrew after M ircea agreed to pay tribute and to cooperate against the H ungarians. T he latter point is im por tant. The W allachians faced two enemies, the Hungarians as well as the Turks. Of these, the former probably were considered the more dangerous. The kings of Hungary were determ ined not only to reduce W allachia to po litical servitude but also to impose the Catholic faith on its O rthodox popula tion. The Ottomans, in contrast, granted their Bogomil and O rthodox sub jects liberty to practice their own rites to an extent inconceivable to pious Catholic rulers. The Turks were also indifferent to the constitution or leader ship of their vassal states so long as they paid regularly the tribute of money and men. These considerations helped to explain the ambivalence of Mircea and his W allachians when the W estern crusaders appeared a few years later.


Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 47
Meanwhile E m peror John V had died in 1391, and his son, M anuel, who had been kept virtual hostage at B ayezid’s court, secretly fled to C on stantinople, where he was installed on the throne. Bayezid promptly sent an envoy to the new em peror with the following message: “If you wish to exe cute my orders, close the gates of the city and reign within it; but all that lies outside belongs to m e.” 8 This was not an idle threat. For four years Bayezid compelled the em peror to do his bidding, even to the point of forcing him to join in the Asia M inor campaigns. M anuel accepted the hum iliation in the hope of thereby saving Constantinople. But in the end he realized that ap peasem ent would not suffice and that the sultan aimed at nothing less than the conquest of what remained of the empire. Manuel then decided to break definitely with Bayezid and turned to the W est for support. Bayezid in turn sent an army to ravage the Peloponnesus while he himself began about 1395 the first Turkish siege of Constantinople. For nearly eight years he invested the city, until T im u r’s invasion forced him to m arch eastw ard to his doom . Only the weakness of the Ottoman navy, which was unable to cut Byzantine contact with the outside world, enabled Constantinople to survive the ordeal of these years.
NICOPOLIS CRUSADE
Bayezid’s conquests were not confined to the Balkans. H e also cap tured the fortresses of Nicopolis, Vidin, and Silistria, thus opening the way into Hungary, while his akinjis, or m ounted scouts, spread terror over the H ungarian plains, burning and destroying villages, and carrying off their in habitants as slaves. King Sigisniund of Hungary at first resorted to diplomacy. He sent an embassy to Bayezid to ask by what right he had invaded Bulgarian lands which were ancient possessions of the H ungarian crown. Bayezid led the ambassadors to his arsenal, pointed to Bulgarian weapons hanging on the walls, and replied that so long as he could seize such arms, he had right not only over Bulgaria, but also over Hungary itself. Sigismund appealed to the W estern princes for assistance. He was supported by Pope Boniface IX , who called for a crusade against the infidels. The enthusiastic response, reminiscent of earlier Crusades against the Sara cens, was due in part to the growing fear of the Turks, but probably more to the tem porary cessation of the Hundred Y ears’ W ar, which left the undisci plined chivalry of Europe unoccupied and restless. Nobles and their attendants cam e from all parts of France, G erm any, England, and the Netherlands. In the spring of 1396 they joined the H un garians at Buda. A part of the H ungarian force marched through the T ran sylvanian mountains to W allachia with the intention of forcing the hesitant Prince M ircea to join their ranks. In this they succeeded, and the two forces crossed the Danube near Nicopolis, where they met the main body, which had followed the shorter and easier route down the Danube Valley. Even in Catholic Germany and Hungary the crusaders had behaved disgracefully. When they entered the Balkans they treated the Orthodox peasants as though


48 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
they were the enemy. The clergy urged the leaders to check the pillaging and debauchery, but the response, as they ruefully observed, was as though they had been talking “to a deaf ass.” T he whole arm y, in fact, was in a state of indiscipline and disorder, boastfully contemptuous of the enemy, and spend ing its time in gambling and in riotous living with the large num bers of courtesans. For two weeks the crusaders besieged Nicopolis. They did not at tem pt an assault, being undecided whether they should go further to seek the T urkish arm y or to aw ait its coming. Bayezid did not leave them long in un certainty. Summoning his Christian allies he descended upon the crusaders and prepared for battle on the plain before Nicopolis. The two armies were of approximately equal strength, though their numbers remain disputed, estimates ranging from twenty thousand to a hundred thousand on each side. The W estern knights repeated the worst tactics of Crecy and Poitiers. Refusing to heed the advice of Sigismund, who had experience with O ttom an strategy, they charged recklessly against the Turks and to their own destruc tion. They broke the first line of the enemy but this consisted only of irregu lars. When they came upon the veteran and disciplined Ottom an regulars, their energy was spent and their horses were tired. The outcome was inevi table; the proud nobles perished in droves and the rem ainder were forced to surrender. The Hungarian infantry fared no better, while the W allachians, seeing how the battle was going, discreetly withdrew from the field without a fight. Only the H ungarian center under Sigismund held out, but its fate was sealed when the Serbians under Prince Stephen came to the aid of Bayezid at a critical moment. The m ain body of the W estern army lied in utter confusion. Those who escaped across the Danube suffered at the hands of the outraged peas antry as they crossed the Carpathians to Hungary. The prisoners were exe cuted by order of Bayezid in retaliation for the m assacre of the Turkish ir regulars by the French knights. Only a handful of Christian leaders were spared, for whose release Bayezid later exacted a ransom of 20,000 pieces of gold. Thus ended the ill-fated Nicopolis crusade. Not only was the disaster a humiliation for European chivalry. It sealed the fate of Constantinople, confirmed the grip of the Ottomans upon the Balkans, and prepared the way for their later advance to Buda and Vienna.
TIM UR THE LAME
Bayezid’s overw helm ing trium ph at Nicopolis contributed, ironically enough, to his defeat and death at the hands of Tim ur a few years later. The explanation is to be found in the very ease with which Bayezid had defeated the W estern knights. This so emboldened him, and led him to overestimate his strength so grossly, that he became arrogant and insulting in his relations with the great Mongol conqueror. The result was the outbreak of war be tween Bayezid and Tim ur in 1402. T im ur cam e from a m inor T urkish noble family in T urkestan. A fter


Coming of the Ottoman Turks: to 1402 49
long and relentless fighting he restored the vast empire of Genghis Khan. He subdued C entral A sia, the G olden H orde in southern Russia, India, Persia, Mesopotamia, Syria, and then turned against the arrogant sultan of the O tto m an Em pire. W hen hostilities began, it soon becam e apparent th at Bayezid’s position was not as strong as it seemed to be on the surface. His use of Christian forces against the Anatolian emirates now told decisively against him. A num ber of the deposed M oslem rulers were to be found in T im u r’s camp. Also, the local A natolian levies proved to be unreliable when the final test came with the battle of A nkara in July, 1402. Bayezid placed the inferior A natolian troops in the front line in accordance with the established O ttom an practice that had proved so successful at Nicopolis and elsewhere. But in this case the tactic proved his undoing. The A natolians showed no desire to fight for the O ttom an sultan, and being out in front they were able to desert in a body to Tim ur. Since they com prised a full q u arter of Bayezid’s army, their defection decidcd the issue. The Serbian levies fought bravely and loyally for the sultan but to no avail. Tim ur won an overwhelming vic tory, capturing Bayezid him self as he attem pted to flee. Tim ur followed up his trium ph by overrunning the greater part of Asia Minor and reinstating the Anatolian emirs who had been dispossessed by the O ttom ans. In order to forestall a future resurgence of O ttom an power he gave the K aram ania em irate much m ore territory than it had controlled before. Its new frontiers jutted northward, serving as a barrier between the reduced O ttom an state and the interior of Asia Minor. The unfortunate Baye zid, despairing of the future of his em pire, com m itted suicide in M arch, 1403, while still in captivity. It is interesting to speculate how different the course of events might have been if the Nicopolis crusade had not occurred until the time of T im ur’s victory. Instead of perishing on the Danube, the crusaders might have reached the Straits and ended O ttom an rule in Europe forever. As it was, precisely half a century after Bayezid’s suicide, M oham m ed the C onqueror was able to realize Bayezid’s am bition by taking possession of C onstantinople.


4. Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481
T
J L h e year 1403 marked the nadir of Ottom an fortunes. W ith Bayezid dead and his sons fighting for the succession, it appeared that T im ur had destroyed the rising O ttom an power with one stroke. Yet within a decade the empire was restored and the career of conquest resumed. And half a century later the T urks captured C onstantinople, ending the city’s m illenium of suzerainty over the dom ains of Byzantium . M oham m ed 11, the conqueror of Constantinople, then proceeded to establish direct Turkish rule over virtually the entire territory from the Black Sea to the Adriatic, and from the C arpathians to the Aegean. Thus the Balkans came fully and in disputably under O ttom an domination before the end of the fifteenth century.
OTTOMAN RECOVERY
T he restoration of the O ttom an E m pire following T im ur’s great tri um ph was not due entirely to good fortune as is som etim es assum ed. T im ur’s departure from Asia M inor in 1403 and his death in China a few years later certainly aided the O ttom an cause. The Mongol conqueror left nothing behind him, neither an army nor an administration. A power vacuum was created, which the Ottom ans quickly exploited to re-establish their authority. But they w ere by no m eans able to do so sim ply by virtue of T im ur’s death. O ther parties might have taken advantage of the situation, including the W esterners who had been defeated at Nicopolis, the Balkan Christians who had only recently been subjected to Turkish rule, and the Karamanians who had been built up by Timur as a counterweight to the Ottomans. The question remains why none of these parties asserted themselves whereas the Ottomans were able to do so. T he answ er is to be found in the ghazi dom ination of the B alkan Peninsula. The warriors of the faith had disapproved of, and refused to par ticipate in, Bayezid’s cam paigns against the A natolian em irs and against
50


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481 51
Timur. Furtherm ore, Tim ur had not crossed the Straits; hence the ghazis remained the unchallenged masters of the peninsula. This explains why B ayezid’s defeat and death were not followed by a W estern invasion of the Balkans or by an uprising of the Balkan peoples themselves. Thus the ghazis provided the basis necessary for the resurgence of O ttom an power. In fact, they also decided in large measure who was to be the successor to Bayezid. O f all B ayezid’s sons, it appeared at first th at the oldest, Suleim an, was to succeed his father. Following the disaster at A nkara, Suleiman was able to escape across the Straits and establish himself at Adrianople. A little later he also secured T im u r’s approval of his rule of the Balkans. By con trast, his youngest brother, M ohammed, was precariously maintaining a hold ing in Asia M inor, threatened constantly by both Tim ur and the Karam anians. Yet in the end it was M oham m ed who prevailed and became the sultan of the O ttom an Em pire. The reason is that the Balkan ghazis preferred him over Suleim an. T he latter was rath er effem inate and yielding, as is evidenced by the many concessions that he made to Christian rulers in order to con solidate his position. To the Byzantines he surrendered Saloniki, Thessaly, and certain islands, while to Venice he gave certain ports in Albania and the Peloponnesus. The ghazis viewed these measures with deep revulsion. As fighters for Islam they wanted a ruler who would lead them against the infidel, not one who yielded territory already conquered. It was this opposition of the ghazis to Suleiman that eventually proved decisive during the internecine w ar am ong B ayezid’s sons. O n F ebru ary 17, 1411, Suleim an was killed in a battle n ear Sofia and Bayezid’s youngest son succeeded to the throne as Mohammed I (1413-1421). In view of the circum stances of M oham m ed’s succession it is not surprising' that his reign witnessed the renewal of O ttom an pressure against Christendom . Ghazi hosts once more were let loose on Hungary and Styria. A t the same time, however, it was dem onstrated that the Turks were not yet ready to meet the Christians at sea. The Turks had been building for some time a naval base and arsenal at Gallipoli. This caused the Venetians much concern because of the threat it represented to the passage of their Black Sea trading fleet. In M ay, 1416, an unusual concentration of O ttom an w ar ships at Gallipoli led to friction with the Venetians which culminated in a naval battle in which the bulk of the Turkish fleet was captured or destroyed. M oham m ed recognized the superiority of the enemy and wisely negotiated an honorable peace. This naval engagement was the prelude to the great m aritime wars that were to be fought a few decades later after the Turks had served their apprenticeship at sea.
MURAD II
M oham m ed’s successor, M u rad II ( 1 4 2 1 -1 4 5 1 ), was a stern and aggressive ruler who continued the ghazi tradition. His three decades on the throne were years of continual warfare. By the time of his death he had


52 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
decisively defeated the European powers, re-established undisputed control over the Balkan Peninsula, and isolated the Byzantine capital so completely that its final downfall no longer could be postponed. A t the tim e of M u rad ’s accession, the aged Byzantine em peror, M anuel II, withdrew from state affairs in favor of his son, John V III. The latter lacked his fath er’s experience in dealing with the T urks and rashly d e cided to support a claim ant to M u rad ’s throne. T he pretender’s revolt failed and M urad determined to avenge the perfidy by capturing Constantinople and putting an end to the troublesome Greek empire. In 1422 he besieged the city closely though without success. The cannon, then used for the first time by the O ttom an army, were not as yet effective against the great walls of the capital, and the Turkish navy was not able to cut off Constantinople from the outside world. The appearance of a new pretender forced M urad to raise the siege and turn to A sia M inor, where he reduced the hostile emirs to com plete subjection. O n the death of M anuel in 1425, M urad, in lieu of re newing the siege of Constantinople, forced upon Em peror John a new treaty exacting heavy tribute and stripping him of almost every possession beyond the walls of his capital. M urad now turned his forces against the naval might of Venice. This great commercial power traditionally had been careful to placate the O tto mans for fear of jeopardizing its trade interests in the Levant, especially the vital grain supply from the Black Sea region. In pursuance of this policy Venice had negotiated a commercial agreement with the Turks as early as 1388. It had also refrained from committing itself to any anti-Turkish coali tion, a precaution which had drawn upon it the denunciation of Christendom, particularly during the Nicopolis crusade. A t this time, however, Venice was forced to stand firm against the Turks. The growing sea power of the O tto man Em pire and its steady advance into Albania and toward the Adriatic coast confronted the Venetians with the nightmarish prospect of Turkish control of the O tranto Strait. To forestall such an eventuality the Venetians extended their coastal possessions in A lbania and the Peloponnesus, and in 1423 gained control of the great M acedonian outlet, Saloniki. This large city had been governed by one of E m peror Jo h n ’s brothers who, realizing that he could not hold it against the Turks, handed it to the V enetians with the stipulation that they would “protect and nourish it, raise its prosperity, and make it a second Venice.” But Saloniki remained Venetian for only seven short years. The Turks refused to tolerate an Italian outpost in M acedonia and started a naval campaign against Venetian establishments throughout the Aegean. The O ttoman navy was now shown to have caught up with and surpassed the Venetian in the decade since the defeat of M o ham m ed’s fleet at G allipoli. V enice was also handicapped by a w ar which broke out with Milan. The Turks thus were able to ravage the Venetian sta tions in the Aegean, capture Saloniki in 1430, and force Venice to sue for peace. Having disposed of the Venetians, M urad proceeded to settle ac


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481 53
counts with the Hungarians. First he invaded Serbia, whose prince, George Brankovich, had attem pted to assert his independence by seeking the sup port of the Hungarians and ceding to them the fortress of Belgrade. After a brief campaign in J439 Serbia was once more a Turkish province and Brankovich a refugee across the river in Hungary. A new figure now arose to check for a time the O ttom an advance. John Hunyadi was a Rum anian who had entered the service of Hungary and fought with such success against the Turks that he became a Hungarian na tional hero. The “white knight of W allachia,” as he was called on account of his silver arm or shining in the van of battle, became a m aster of frontier warfare and for twenty years was the terror of the O ttom an armies. In fact, he might be described as a Christian ghazi, dedicated to fighting against the hosts of Islam. He began his victorious career when, following his appoint ment as governor of T ransylvania in 1441, he defeated the T urks several times on the slopes of the C arpathians and in the neighborhood of Bel grade. These victories aroused great enthusiasm in E urope and inspired an other crusade to drive the Ottom ans back to Asia.
VARNA CRUSADE
Pope Eugenius tried to mobilize Christendom against the Turks but the usual dynastic rivalries prevented a united effort. In the end a coalition was formed led by Vladislav, king of Hungary and Poland, and including Prince Vlad of W allachia, the exiled Brankovich of Serbia, and a consider able num ber of French and Germ an knights. Though nominally led by Vladislav, the Christian host actually was under the command of the re nowned Hunyadi. In 1443 he took the offensive, defeated two Turkish armies in Serbia, captured Nish, crossed the Balkan range in winter, and advanced to Sofia. By January his supplies had run short, so he returned to Buda to dis play his trophies and receive a co n q u ero r’s trium ph. M urad decided to come to terms with the Christians because the Greeks in the Peloponnesus had revolted, the A lbanians were also up in arms, and trouble had broken out in Asia M inor. Accordingly he signed a ten-year truce in June, 1444, in which he recognized the independence of Serbia and abandoned W allachia to Hungary. Having secured peace with these conces sions, M urad left the Balkans to campaign in Asia M inor. The Hungarians noted that M urad was absent and that only about seven thousand Turkish troops were left in Thrace. So, with the encouragement of the pope, they broke the truce and resumed the crusade. The Hungarians planned to march quickly through the Balkans while the Venetians prevented the Turks from recrossing the Straits and the Greeks m ade diversionary attacks in the Pelo ponnesus. Only the Greeks fulfilled their task and for this they later paid a heavy price. The Venetians were prevented by unfavorable winds from seal ing the Straits, and M urad was able to bribe the Genoese to transport his army to the European shore on barges. Meanwhile the Hungarians and their


54 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
allies started their advance later than planned and without the support of Brankovich, who was unwilling to risk his newly regained throne. The re duced Christian army invaded Bulgaria, descended the Danube to the coast, and thence marched to Varna. There they were confronted by a superior Turkish army led by M urad, who had hastily returned from Asia Minor. The ensuing battle, on November 10, 1444, was a repetition of Nicopolis. Despite their inferior num bers the Christians at first had the advantage. But in the end the Turks won out because of their greater discipline. King Vladi slav, less fortunate than Sigismund, perished on the battlefield, while H unyadi saved himself only by ignominious flight. The V arna battle stands out prominently in the history of TurkishW estern relations. It shattered the belief of the Christians that they were capa ble of driving the Turks back into Asia. Christian princes took the defeat as a judgment of God against Vladislav for having broken the peace. The V arna crusade represented the last attempt of W estern Europe to rescue the sinking Byzantine Em pire. Now Constantinople was left to its fate. M eanwhile the T urks encased V ladislav’s head in a b arrel of honey and sent it to Brusa, where it was stuck on a pike and carried jubilantly in the streets. In the m onth in which the V arna battle was fought, M urad retired from the throne as he had done several years earlier for a brief period, and went to a luxurious retreat in A sia M inor to spend his rem aining days'. In August, 1446, he returned to the throne for reasons that remain obscure. A t once he swung into action as of old. First he invaded the Pelo ponnesus and compelled its Greek princes to become his vassals. Then in 1448 he again defeated H unyadi on the same field of Kosovo where in 1389 M urad I had subdued the Serbians. In contrast to the first Kosovo battle, the Serbians under their wily Prince B rankovich now refused to join Hunyadi and remained neutral. This cautious policy earned Serbia a few more years of precarious autonom y, though it did not prevent the final annexation of the country by the next sultan. Only in distant A lbania did M urad fail to impose his rule. There a primitive pastoral people, under the inspired leadership of their great national hero, George Kastriotis— more commonly known as Skanderbeg— fought a fierce and successful guerrilla w arfare against successive O ttom an arm ies.’'1 In fact, Skanderbeg was on his way to join forces with Hunyadi when the latter was defeated by the Turks at Kosovo. Despite this setback, Skanderbeg was able to hold his own in the m ountains of his native land. M u rad ’s failure in A lbania was trivial in com parison with his o u t standing accomplishments elsewhere. He more than held his own against the naval might of Venice. He firmly buttressed the D anube frontier with his victories at V arna and Kosovo. A nd he left Constantinople completely sur rounded by Turkish territory, without hope of relief from any quarter.
* See pages 496-501.


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481 55
M O H A M M E D ’S P R E P A R A T IO N S
The new sultan, M ohammed II (1451-1481), was determined that the imperial prize that awaited him on the shores of the Bosphorus should not elude him as it had his forebears, Bayezid I and M urad II. Contem porary travelers described Constantinople as a city still awe-inspiring with its splen did imperial traditions, still impressive with its tiers of mighty fortifications, but with negligible inner resources to m aintain this glittering façade.
It is very strong walled in a way that is a marvel to see. . . . the walls are very high and are made of great marble blocks bound together. . . . The city is sparsely populated. . . . The inhabitants are not well clad, but sad and poor, showing the hardship of their lot. . . . The Emperor’s Palace must have been very magnificent, but now it is in such a state that both it and the city show the evils which the people have suffered and still endure. . . . properly regarded, he [the Emperor] is like a Bishop without a See. . . . I believe that God has spared it [Constantinople], more for the holy relics it contains than for anything else.1
M ohammed was not a man to be deterred by either holy relics or m arble walls. During the winter 1452-1453 he made elaborate preparations for the siege. In 1452 he completed the Rum eli Hissar, or Castle of Europe, at a narrow point on the BQsphorus north of Constantinople and opposite the older Anadol Hissar, or Castle of Asia. This assured freedom of passage between Anatolia and Europe, and closed the Bosphorus to Constantinople. M ohammed also had the services of a certain Urban, of H ungarian or Wallachian origin, who cast for him enorm ous bronze bom bards firing stone balls thirty inches in diam eter. M ohammed was the first sovereign in history to possess a real park of artillery: fourteen batteries consisting of thirteen great bom bards and fifty-six smaller cannon. These were dragged by oxen to Con stantinople, w here they played a decisive role in the battle. M oham m ed’s arm y is estim ated at roughly a hundred and fifty thousand, the core being the formidable janissaries, who at that time were recruited exclusively from Christian families. In addition to the janissaries and the regular levies from the European and Asiatic territories, there were about one hundred thousand irregulars and cam p followers eager for the sack of the city. This was the force that faced the hitherto impregnable walls of Con stantinople. The city is built in the shape of a triangle, bounded on the north by its harbor, the Golden H orn, on the south by the Sea of M arm ora, and on the west by the plains extending to the foothills of Thrace. On all sides the city was protected by a massive wall which was strongest on the land front age, where three walls rose in successive tiers. The outer wall was a breast work surmounting a m oat some forty feet wide and fifteen feet deep. The second wall was twenty-five feet high, the third forty feet, and each of these was furnished with towers capable of sheltering considerable num bers of sol diers. Between these walls were enclosures sixty feet broad, in which the de fending forces could assemble their arms and supplies and march from one


56 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
section to another. These powerful fortifications, built by Em peror Theodosius II in the fifth century, had protected the city through twenty sieges. But now, two factors tipped the scales for the first time against the defenders: the artillery of the Ottomans and the unprecedented weakness of the Greek forces. T he capital’s population by this tim e had sunk to about sixty to seventy thousand. O f this num ber some five thousand were ready to bear arm s against the T urks. E m p ero r C onstantine’s appeal to E urope produced few recruits. In the hope of winning the support of W estern Christendom, earlier emperors on three separate occasions had agreed to the submission of the O rthodox Church to the pope (Unions of Lyons, 1274; Rome, 1369; and Florence, 1 4 3 9 ). B ut each agreem ent for union proved meaningless in the face of the undying hatred of the Orthodox Greeks for the Catholic Latinsa hatred intensified by the barbarities of the Fourth Crusade and the merci less strangle hold of the Italian m erchants. A t this tim e, therefore, the po p e’s reply to the em peror’s plea was to send C ardinal Isidore to Constantinople with a total of two hundred soldiers. When the cardinal arrived he proceeded to St. Sophia, the great church of the O rthodox world, where he read a sol emn promulgation of the union dictum of the Council of Florence and cele brated the union liturgy, including the name of the pope. This so agitated the populace that it raised the cry “ Better Islam than the pope”— a bitter and de fiant answer to the Latins’ “Better Islam than schism.” This exchange had often been heard before, but this time Islam was at the gates, ready and able to accept the invitation. The papal contingent was followed by others from Italy and Spain, the most im portant being seven hundred Genoese under Giovanni Giustiniani, a brave and experienced soldier of fortune who proved to be the main sup port of Constantine. The total force available for the defense of the city amounted to no more than eight thousand, a num ber totally inadequate to m an the series of walls and to repair the breaches pounded by the enemy cannon. Y et Constantine proceeded with the defense of the city with a cour age, energy, and devotion worthy of a last em peror of thousand-year-old Byzantium. He collected supplies from the neighboring countryside, strength ened the walls which had been badly repaired by fraudulent contractors, and called on his subjects to fight for the faith and for the “city protected by G o d .”
FALL OF CONSTANTINOPLE
On April 2, Easter Monday, the Turkish guns were dragged near the edge of the moat and amidst the beating of drums and the shouting of thou sands of excited men the first mass bom bardm ent in history began. It was a slow affair, the great bom bards requiring two hours to load and firing only seven times a day. The huge balls gradually tore breaches in the ancient walls, and on A pril 18 M oham m ed ordered an assault down the Lycus V al ley at approxim ately the m id-point of the land walls. G iustiniani was in com


57


58 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
m and at this critical sector and, with a withering fire from harquebuses, wall guns, bows, and catapults, he swept back the attackers after a four-hour struggle. Two days later occurred the only good fortune which the Christians experienced during the whole siege. Three large Genoese ships and an im perial transport, loaded with soldiers and munitions, gallantly fought their way to the G olden H orn through a m osquito fleet of a hundred and fifty small Turkish ships. The spirits of the defenders soared high and for a moment they imagined the city was saved. Two days later they beheld an extraordinary and terrifying spectacle: Turkish ships were riding in the upper part of the Golden H orn despite the heavy boom which still held firm at the mouth. M ohammed, probably on the advice of Italian engineers, had constructed a wooden runway from the Bosphorus to a stream called The Springs that flowed into the Golden Horn. Some seventy or eighty ships were dragged over the greased planks by oxen, slipped quietly into the stream, and floated down into the harbor in the rear of the boom. This stratagem forced the Greeks to stretch their thin lines still fur ther to man the menaced sea wall. M eanwhile the bom bardm ent had con tinued unabated, and M ohammed ordered an assault about the Romanus G ate on May 7 and again on M ay 12. Both were beaten back by Giustiniani with great slaughter. These repeated failures and the constant rumors that a Hungarian army was nearing Constantinople from the north and the papal fleet from the south led the Turks to lose heart. M oreover, their overwhelm ing numerical superiority was creating a serious supply problem. Unless they could win the city by the end of the m onth they would have to abandon the siege as so m any other armies before them had been forced to do in the past. Even M ohammed grew doubtful and, failing to induce the em peror to sur render the city on terms, he summoned a council of war on Sunday, May 27, to ascertain the opinions of his generals. The grand vizir, Khalil Pasha, de clared in favor of abandoning the siege, whereupon a general, Zagan Pasha, replied with a speech that described perfectly why Constantinople was even now a doomed city despite the heroism of its defenders.
Thou, O Padishah, knowest well the great dissensions that are raging in Italy especially, and in all Frankistan [Christian Europe] generally. In consequence of these dissensions the Giaours [infidels] are incapable of united action against us. The Christian potentates never will unite together. When after protracted efforts they conclude something like a peace amongst themselves, it never lasts long. Even when they are bound by treaties of alliance, they are not prevented seizing territories from each other. They always stand in fear of each other, and are busily occupied in intriguing against each other. No doubt they think much, speak much, and explain much, but after all they do very little. When they decide to do anything, they waste much time before they begin to act. Suppose they have even commenced something. They cannot progress very far with it because they are sure to disagree amongst themselves how to proceed. . . . Therefore, O Padishah, do not lose hope, but give us the order at once to storm the city I J


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403—1481 59
M ohammed was won over and he ordered a simultaneous assault on the land and sea walls for Tuesday, M ay 29. The main attack was to be in the Lycus Valley about the Rom anus Gate, where the middle wall was practically leveled for a length of four hundred yards and the m oat partly filled by the debris of the wall and by fascines. The attack was to be pressed without let or pause, night and day, until the defenders were so exhausted that the final assault would prevail. M oham m ed further proclaimed to his troops that when the city was captured it would be given up to them to sack at their will for three days. They received this with tum ultuous shouts of de light and awaited impatiently the order to advance. Very different was the atm osphere within the doomed capital. A few days earlier a small scout ship had slipped into the harbor with the report that there were no signs of the prom ised papal fleet. This news shattered the last hopes of the weary defenders, now reduced to a bare four thousand. In the midst of the gloom the em peror m aintained his courage and dignity. A t the close of a religious procession through the streets he exhorted his people to remember that they were “the descendants of the heroes of ancient Greece and Rom e” and to so conduct themselves that their memory would be as glorious as that of their ancestors. On Monday evening a solemn service was held in St. Sophia, m em orable as the last Christian service before its conver sion into a mosque. O ne who was present w rote, “ If a man had been made of wood or stone, he must have wept at the scene.” In preparation for the attack the em peror decided to concentrate his rem aining forces in the enclosures betw een the inner and middle walls. W hen the men had taken their posts the great gates of the inner wall were closed and locked. There was to be no retreat. Either the Turks would be repulsed or the defenders annihilated. T he attack began betw een one and two o’clock T uesday m orning. First came the irregulars, the least skilled of the army, to exhaust the strength and munitions of the besieged. A fter they had suffered heavy losses M oham med withdrew them and sent forth the A natolian infantry. Some broke into the enclosure but were driven back by the defenders led by Giustiniani. M o ham m ed now personally led the final attack with the elite of his army— the twelve thousand janissaries supported by archers, lancers, and picked infan trymen. They tore at the stockades, but the defenders fought back stubbornly and held their ground. A t this crucial moment Giustiniani was gravely wounded and one of the gates of the inner wall was opened to allow him to be carried out. With him departed some of his Genoese soldiers. This loss caused confusion and dismay, which the experienced eye of M ohammed quickly perceived. He shouted to his troops, “We have the city! It it ours! The wall is undefended!” T hey rushed the stockade and fought their way into the enclosure. The em peror, seeing that all was lost, threw himself into the melee and died fighting. The Greek and Italian soldiers, trapped between the walls, were m assacred to a man. The Turks now made their way easily through the undefended inner wall and the prom ised three-day sack began.


60 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
AFTERM A TH
In this moment of trium ph M ohammed showed himself to be a states m an as well as a conqueror. H ad he so wished he could have destroyed C on stantinople and m assacred its citizens, as the Mongols had done repeatedly with even more populous cities. This, in fact, would have been in accord with the precepts of Islam for a city that had resisted to the end. But after the three days of merciless pillage and m urder, which was the custom of the time and probably not as destructive as the handiwork of the Christian crusaders in 1204, M oham m ed firmly restored order. He had decided to make his prize the capital of his empire and did not wish to be left with a hollow shell. He set about immediately to repeople the city, whose numbers for long had been dwindling during the decline of the empire. Many citizens who had fled before and after the siege returned on the promise of protection to their property and religion. Thousands were deported en masse from Serbia, A lbania, and Greece to repeople Constantinople. Thousands more arrived in the following decades as slaves, prisoners of war, religious refugees from the W est, and voluntary im m igrants attracted by the opportunities in a flour ishing and expanding capital. Thus the ancient city experienced not extinction but rejuvenation, its imperial borders expanding suddenly from its own bat tered walls to the Danube River and the Taurus M ountains. M oham m ed was equally farsighted in m atters of religion. The atti tude expressed in the cry “Better Islam than the pope” had been his powerful ally in the taking of the city and he wisely resolved to nourish it further. He selected an eminent Greek clergyman, Gennadius, to be the Patriarch of the O rthodox Church and he assured him “all the privileges of your predeces sors.” * He exempted the clergy from taxes, allowed the church full auton omy in its adm inistration, and perm itted religious services to be freely cele brated. He even paid repeated visits to the new patriarch, discussed theology with him, and requested him to write a tract on Christianity. This toleration, so far ahead of current practice in W estern C hristendom , was not youthful romanticism but enlightened statesmanship. By satisfying the religious as pirations of his non-M oslem subjects he had perpetuated the schism between W estern and Eastern Christianity and assured himself the stable rear neces sary for the further conquests he planned. The fall of Constantinople shocked Christian Europe, particularly since M ohamm ed had been considered a weakling because he had perm itted his father to depose him. A chorus of lam entation arose in the West, even though little had been done to avert the loss. M any schemes for driving the infidel back to Asia were propounded during the following decades. Con stantinople and Greece now took the place of Jerusalem and the Holy Land as the objectives of the proposed crusades. Successive popes sought to arouse
* See Chapter 7 for a discussion of the Patriarchate of Constantinople under the Ottoman Empire.


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403—1481 61
Christendom, and a series of diets or congresses met to organize expeditions, but all to no avail. By the mid-fifteenth century the state of European society no longer was propitious for a revival of the crusades. Pope Pius II realisti cally depicted the contem porary Christian world in his well-known letter w ritten in 1454:
People neither give to the Pope what is the Pope’s, nor to the Emperor what is the Emperor’s. Respect and obedience are nowhere to be found. Pope and Emperor are considered as nothing but proud titles and splendid figureheads. Each State has its particular Prince, and each Prince his particular interest. What eloquence could avail to unite so many discordant and hostile powers under one banner? And if they were assembled in arms, who would venture to assume the general command? What tactics are to be followed? What discipline is to prevail? How is obedience to be secured? Who is to be the shepherd of this flock of nations? Who understands the many utterly different languages, and is able to control and guide the varying manners and characters? What mortal could reconcile the Eng lish with the French, the Genoese with the men of Aragon? If a small number go to the Holy War they will be overpowered by the infidel, and if great hosts pro ceed together, their own hatred and confusions will be their ruin. There is diffi culty everywhere. Only look at the state of Christendom.3
Some W esterners hoped that the possession of the great imperial prize would satisfy and preoccupy the youthful sultan and turn his thoughts from further conquests. This was soon proved to be an illusion. M ohammed considered the taking of Constantinople the beginning rather than the end of his career. He viewed himself the heir of Byzantium and he resolved to re claim w hat Byzantium had possessed in its prim e and lost in its decline. The princes of Serbia, Bosnia, and the Peloponnesus had hastily offered their submission to him following the capture of Constantinople. But M ohammed was not content with this prevailing system of vassal states paying tribute and retaining their autonomy. He decided upon the complete and direct subjection of the entire Balkan Peninsula, and after that, he would deal with the E uro pean powers that had poached upon the preserve of declining Byzantium.
M OHAM M ED SUBJUGATES THE BALKANS
Bulgaria had been incorporated as a province of the Ottoman Em pire half a century earlier, and M ohammed now set out to reduce Serbia to a similar status. Before the siege of Constantinople he had hum ored the Serbian prince, George Brankovich, and assured him his autonomous status, but now M oham m ed claimed the country through his stepm other, a Serbian princess. No sooner had he set siege to some Serbian fortresses than the Hungarians, alarmed for their own safety, came to the aid of the Serbs. John H unyadi, the veteran enemy of the Turks, renewed his raids into the central Balkans, using Belgrade as his base. In June, 1456, M oham m ed gathered his arm y and dread artillery before Belgrade, boasting th at within a fortnight the town would be his. But Hunyadi, with the assistance of a fiery Franciscan


62 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
friar, John of Capistrano, led an army of peasant crusaders through the Turk ish lines into the beleaguered city. N ot only did they repulse the repeated assaults but, in a bold sortie, they charged to the mouths of the enemy can non and broke the Turkish lines. M oham m ed himself was wounded in the struggle and retreated in disorder to Sofia. Pestilence now broke out in the H ungarian cam p, taking the lives of both H unyadi and C apistrano and pre venting the victors from following up their advantage. Belgrade was saved for H ungary but Serbia was doomed. The aged Prince Brankovich died late in 1456 and the ensuing dynastic strife, complicated by Catholic-Orthodox rivalry, left the country open to the O ttom ans. By the sum m er of 1459 all Serbia, excepting Belgrade, had become a Turkish pashalik. To the west of Serbia lay two other Slavic kingdoms, Bosnia and Herzegovina, which now attracted the attention of M oham m ed. The Slavic tribes that had settled in these territories were constantly pressed by powerful neighboring states— Hungary, Croatia, Venice, and Serbia. Occasionally the Bosnians and Herzegovinians had been able to win a few years of independ ent existence. M ore frequently they were forced to acecpt the suzerainty of one or another of their neighbors. A nother im portant factor in the history of these peoples was the prolonged conflict over religion. Being situated on the frontier between Orthodox and Catholic Christianity, the Bosnians and Herze govinians were torn between the two creeds. In contrast to the Serbs, who were located in the central Balkans and were solidly Orthodox, the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina never allied themselves permanently with either the pope or the patriarch. M any of them, instead, became ardent Bogomils. We have seen that Bogomilism was not only a heresy akin to that of the Albigensians in the W est and the Paulicans in the East, but also a revolutionary movement of social protest. Hence the fierce persecution to which the Bogo mils were subjected by both the W estern and Eastern churches. In 1325 Pope John X X II wrote thus to the king of Bosnia:
To our beloved son and nobleman, Stephen, Prince of. Bosnia,— knowing that thou art a faithful son of the Church, we therefore charge thee to exter minate the heretics in thy dominion, and to render aid and assistance to Fabian, our Inquisitor, forasmuch as a large multitude of heretics from many and divers parts collected hath flowed together into the principality of Bosnia, trusting there to sow their obscene errors and dwell there in safety. These men, imbued with the cunning of the Old Fiend, and armed with the venom of their falseness, cor rupt the minds of Catholics by outward show of simplicity and the sham assump tion of the name of Christians; their speech crawleth like a crab, and they creep in with humility, but in secret they kill, and are wolves in sheep’s clothing, cover ing their bestial fury as a means to deceive the simple sheep of Christ.4
T he B osnian rulers enforced the p ope’s injunction to the full. Forty thousand Bogomils fled from Bosnia to neighboring countries, and others who did not succeed in making their escape were sent in chains to Rome. But this violent persecution did little to diminish the strength of the heretics. Instead, it caused them to look for relief to the Turks, especially since the


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481 63
latter proclaimed themselves the champions of the poor as against the native Balkan aristocracy which they consistently and ruthlessly exterminated. In a letter written in 1463 by Stephen, the last king of Bosnia, to Pope Pius II, we find these rem arkable words: “The Turks prom ise freedom to all who side with them, and the rough mind of the peasants does not understand the artfulness of such a promise, and believes that such freedom will last forever; and so it may happen that the misguided common people may turn away from me, unless they see that I am supported by you.” W hen M ohammed did invade Bosnia, S tephen’s fears proved all too justified. T he B osnian peas antry refused to take up arm s against the T urks, saying, “It is not our busi ness to defend the king; let the nobles do it.” 5 By the end of 1463 Bosnia had become another O ttom an dominion and twenty years later the same fate be fell Herzegovina. This conflict of religions is im portant in explaining not only the easy trium ph of the Turks but also the later history of the South Slavs. With the establishment of O ttom an rule the majority of the peasants accepted Islam. Contem porary travelers almost invariably remarked that about three fourths of the population of Bosnia-Herzegovina was Moslem and the remainder Catholic or Orthodox. The Slav nobles also accepted conversion as a means of retaining their lands and feudal privileges. T hus Bosnia-H erzegovina, in contrast to Serbia, presents the curious phenomenon of a ruling landholder class, Slav by race yet M oslem by religion. These landholders, or beys, be came in the course of generations more fanatical than the Turks themselves. The peasants, as we shall see later, became predom inantly O rthodox during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, while their nobles rem ained aggres sively Moslem. This explains why the Serbian nationalist awakening in the nineteenth century could develop only in Serbia proper where the population, being solidly peasant and Orthodox, had both social and religious unity. In contrast, Bosnia-Herzegovina, with its M oslem Slav ruling caste and its Chris tian Slav peasantry, rem ained a stronghold of Turkish power long after Serbia had regained its freedom. Returning to the days of M ohammed, we find him next in another Serbian land, where a totally different reception awaited him. Serbia, Bosnia, and Herzegovina had fallen, but M ontenegro, a barren and m ountainous nat ural fortress, successfully defied the Moslem hosts in this dark hour of Serbian history. Stephen C rnojevich, the founder of M ontenegro, had spent his life defending his country against M oham m ed’s father, M urad. His son, Ivan the Black, continued the struggle with indomitable spirit. W hen his position be came impossible with the fall of Bosnia in the north and A lbania in the south, he went up to lofty Cetinje, which thereafter remained the capital of his peo ple. There, he and his descendants established a tiny m ountain commonwealth which the T urks often invaded "but never perm anently conquered. In Albania, also, M oham m ed met with a resistance typical of a united m ountain people. A lbania in the preceding century had formed a part of D ushan’s Serbian em pire. U pon his death in 1355 all central authority dis


64 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
appeared and the country fell under the control of local chieftains. A t the same time a feudal social system was developing, particularly in the coastal areas. In fact, serf revolts broke out in 1343 and 1351 because of the heavy exactions of the lords. But this social cleavage was not so widespread and acute as to leave the country divided when the Turkish invaders appeared. On the contrary, a remarkable unity and steadfastness was shown under the inspired leadership of the famous chieftain, George Kastriotis, popularly known as Skanderbeg. Skanderbeg organized in 1444 a League of Albanian Princes which pooled resources and manpower for the resistance struggle. With this support Skanderbeg built fortresses throughout the countryside and also organized an extrem ely mobile defense force. W hen the T urks attacked they found it nec essary to disperse their troops because of the scattered fortresses. This left them vulnerable to the hit-and-run tactics of the Albanians, who could move more swiftly about the m ountainous terrain than the more heavily armed Turks. Skanderbeg also received some assistance from Venice, Naples, and the Papacy. Thus he was able to repulse thirteen invasions between the years 1444 and 1466. Only after his death in 1468 were the Turks able to conquer Albania. In the following centuries the majority of the Albanians accepted Islam and, together with the Bosnian Moslems, they became the bulwark of Turkish power in the western Balkans. In G reece there was neither the leadership nor the will to resist. The Duchy of Athens, which was held by a Florentine m erchant family, surren dered to the Turks in 1456. The ancient Parthenon, originally a pagan tem ple and later the Church of the Holy Virgin, now was turned into a mosque. Further to the south, in the Peloponnesus, utter anarchy prevailed. Thomas and Demetrius, the worthless brothers of the gallant Em peror Constantine, were heedlessly fighting each oth er for suprem acy. T hus M oham m ed’s army m et with little opposition as it passed through the Peloponnesus, besieging and capturing the petty strongholds. By 1460 the sultan possessed the whole area with the exception of a few seaports in the hands of the Venetians. The last spark of Greek independence had passed away, and for almost half a millenium the sons of the ancient Hellenes were to remain under the rule of the Turk. It remains to speak of the fate of the Rum anian Christians at the other extreme of the Balkan Peninsula. In Chapter 2 we saw that in the four teenth century they had organized the Principalities of M oldavia and W al lachia and m aintained a precarious autonom y against their aggressive neigh bors, the Hungarians in the west and the Turks in the south. M ircea, the prince of W allachia, had participated in the battles of Kosovo and Nicopolis, and following these disastrous defeats, was forced to accept Turkish suze rainty. This arrangement was unsatisfactory to M ohammed for strategic reasons. So long as he did not firmly control the Principalities, his empire rem ained open to invasion from Hungary through Transylvania and W al lachia, or from Poland through Moldavia. Furtherm ore, an aggressive Wal


Conquest of the Balkans: 1403-1481 65
lachian prince, Vlad IV, had come to power in 1456 and refused to pay the custom ary tribute. A fter a fierce struggle, in which the Turkish armies suf fered several defeats, M ohammed was able to install a ruler who could be depended upon to heed his wishes. This procedure was repeated in Moldavia where, some years later, an outstanding ruler, Stephen the G reat, defied M oham m ed by invading W allachia and dethroning its vassal prince. W hen the Turkish armies re taliated, Stephen resisted stoutly and held his ground. He realized, however, that he could not hold out indefinitely and, having failed to enlist the sup port of the neighboring Christian states, he advised his son to submit to the O ttom an pow er. This was done upon the accession of M oham m ed’s suc cessor in 1512, and henceforth the R um anians of both principalities were definitely under Turkish control. They were allowed, however, more freedom than the Christians to the south of the Danube, including the privilege of electing their own princes. This privilege, however, was later withdrawn, as will be shown in C hap ter 7.
WAR W ITH VENICE
M ohammed was now the m aster of the Balkans from the Black Sea to the Adriatic and from the Carpathians to the southern tip of Greece. The only exceptions were the independent principality of M ontenegro; the cityrepublic of Ragusa (D ubrovnik), which was autonomous though tributary to the sultan; the provinces of Slovenia and Croatia, which were under the H apsburgs and H ungarians, respectively; and a num ber of ports in D alm atia, Albania, and Greece which the Venetians controlled together with several islands in the eastern M editerranean. These Venetian possessions represented the only significant challenge to O ttom an hegem ony in the Balkans. Having been wrested from declining Byzantium they were now coveted by Byzan tium ’s vigorous successor. For M ohamm ed, it was not a case of war for the sake of war, or of barbaric disregard for the benefits of trade. Immediately after the capture of Constantinople he had confirmed the vast trading privileges which the Vene tians and Genoese had enjoyed under the Byzantine emperors. Thus, when he reached out for the string of Venetian ports and islands, his concern was for the balance of power in the Balkans and the eastern M editerranean. The disappearance of Byzantium brought the expanding Ottoman land power into almost inevitable conflict with the intrenched V enetian sea power, in the same m anner that centuries later the disintegration of the O ttom an Em pire was to set tsarist Russia against imperial Britain. The w ar with Venice began in 1463 and dragged out its course for sixteen weary years. There were no decisive battles because the Venetians dared not come to grips with the powerful O ttom an fleets. M ohammed be sieged and captured the Venetian outposts one after the other, while Venice struck back by raiding the Anatolian coasts and inducing the Albanians and the Persians to attack the Turks. These diversions proved inadequate and in


66 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
1470 M oham m ed captured the strategic island N egroponte o r E uboea, off the eastern coast of Greece. In the following years he wiped out the Venetian outposts in Albania and sent raiders to the very outskirts of Venice. Deeply discouraged by these losses and by the failure of W estern Europe to provide assistance, the Venetians sued for peace in 1479. They surrendered several stations in Albania, the Negroponte and Lemnos Islands in the Aegean, and agreed to pay annually the sum of ten thousand ducats for the privilege of resuming their commerce in the Levant. The end of the Venetian war left M ohammed free to launch two new naval expeditions in the following year. The first landed an army in Italy itself, where it stormed the city of O tranto and laid waste the surrounding countryside. The second set siege to Rhodes, the island fortress of the Knights of St. John, who for years had harassed Turkish com m unications in the Aegean. The heroic defense of the knights inflicted upon the Turks a setback rem iniscent of their defeat before Belgrade years earlier. M oham m ed’s death the following year relieved both Rhodes and Naples, and ended what ap p eared to be a carefully planned cam paign for the conquest of all Italy.®


5. Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566
T
J L h e c o n q u e s t s o f M o h a m m e d had left the O ttom an
E m pire as m uch E uropean as Asiatic. M oham m ed’s grandson, Selim I, altered the balance by overrunning Syria and Egypt and extending the Ottom an Em pire to the Nile and M esopotam ian valleys. Selim’s son and successor, Sulei man the Magnificent, renewed the westward expansion at the expense of Christendom. He thrust the O ttom an frontiers deep into the heart of Europe, conquering H ungary and besieging V ienna itself. A t the same tim e Suleim an’s armies fought against the Persians in the E ast while his fleets engaged the Portuguese in the Indian Ocean and the Venetians and the H apsburgs in the M editerranean. It was under Suleiman that the O ttom an Empire reached the dazzling height of its fortunes. The O ttom an leaders were all too aware of their pre-em inence, considering themselves infinitely superior to the infidels of the W est. O ne of Suleim an’s vizirs haughtily addressed a C hristian envoy on a state occasion as follows: “ Do you not know th at our M aster is like the sun and that, as the sun rules the heavens, so he rules the earth.” 1
BAYEZID II
The brilliant reign of M oham m ed was followed by the prosaic rule of Bayezid II (1 4 8 1 —1 5 1 2 ), the least significant of the first ten sultans of the O ttom an dynasty. The two outstanding events of his reign were the m anner of his accession and the successful war with Venice which consolidated the O ttom an control of the Balkans. Bayezid’s accession was com plicated by the fact th a t no custom or law defined a fixed line of succession. The practice, rather, was for the reign ing sultan to decide which of his sons should follow him, and then to ap point him to a strategic post near the capital. In order to avoid civil w ar M oham m ed had extended legal sanction and even compulsion to the practice of fratricide adopted by many earlier rulers. . . whoever among my illus
67




Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 69
trious children and grandchildren may come to the throne,” he decreed, “should, for securing the peace of the world, order his brothers to be exe cuted. Let them hereafter act accordingly.” 2 This Draconian law was en forced for well over a century, as the numerous little coffins in the royal mausoleums bear tragic witness. Although it prevented in definitive fashion the protracted dynastic wars common in W estern Europe at the time, it also created a situation of unstable equilibrium as soon as the sons of a sultan began to grow up. Each knew that he must either seize the throne or follow his father to the grave. In the case of M ohammed it appears that he had decided in favor of his younger son, Jem, who was a more forceful and attractive personality than the sober Bayezid. The latter, however, was the first to arrive in Constanti nople, where he found that the janissaries had instituted a reign of terror, having m urdered the grand vizir and plundered the houses of Christians and Jews. The janissaries greeted Bayezid by asking forgiveness for their excesses, but they asked for it in battle array, and accompanied their petition by a de m and for an increase of pay and a large present on their new sovereign’s accession. Bayezid complied, and thus he was able with janissary support to defeat his brother. But a precedent had been established, and henceforth the distribution of large sums of money upon every accession was expected and always forthcoming. The war with Venice (1 4 9 9 -1 5D3) broke out partly because of the numerous incidents that occurred between the Venetian maritime empire and the O ttom an land power all along the line from Istria to Rhodes. A nother cause was V enice’s acquisition by bequest in 1489 of the strategic island of Cyprus. Bayezid wished to develop Turkish sea power and therefore resolved to prevent Cyprus from becoming a new and powerful Venetian base in the Levant. The course of the war demonstrated the decline of Venice and the rise of Turkey as a naval power. The O ttom an fleet of three hundred ships included vessels of eighteen hundred tons— at that time the largest in the world. T he fleet was com m anded by K emal Re’is, a seam an of probably G reek origin who became the first great adm iral of the Turks. He had dis tinguished himself in 1483 when he ravaged the coasts of Spain in support of the hard-pressed M oors of G ranada. In this w ar with Venice he won a hardfought battle of Lepanto in 1499, and in the following year he held his own against the com bined fleets of Venice, Spain, and the Papacy. O n land the Turks captured Lepanto, M odon, and Koron in the Peloponnesus, while ten thousand of their horsemen raided Venetian territory as far as Vicenza. These defeats forced Venice to sign a treaty in which she ceded the stations she had lost, though she still kept N auplion in Greece and some of the Ionian Islands, as well as Cyprus and Crete. Despite these possessions Venice no longer was the dom inant power in the Levant. This w ar m arked the begin ning of the O ttom an suprem acy in the eastern M editerranean that was to last for almost three hundred years. The sea approaches to the Balkan Peninsula


7 0 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
were now under Turkish control, and a few decades later Suleiman the M ag nificent was to lead his armies across the Danube into the heart of Europe without fear of a rear attack from the south.
SELIM I AND THE TRADE ROUTES
B ayezid’s son and successor, Selim I (1 5 1 2 -1 5 2 0 ), stands out in O ttom an history as the conqueror of Syria and Egypt. The details of his audacious campaigns do not concern us here because they did not directly affect the Balkans. Suffice it to note that a com bination of dynastic and re ligious factors embroiled him in a war with the powerful Shah Ismail of Per sia. Selim emerged victorious, w hereupon the M ameluke ruler of Egypt and Syria aligned himself with the shah in order to redress the balance of power in the N ear East. Selim retaliated with his customary impetuosity. In a whirlwind campaign he invaded Syria, defeated and killed the Mameluke Sul tan Kansuh in the battle of M arj-D abik (A ugust 23, 1516), and trium phantly entered Cairo on January 30, 1517. A t this point it is w orth pausing to consider the relationship betw een Selim ’s conquests and the im mensely significant shift th at was now occurring in East-W est trade routes. For centuries spices and other commodities that Asia supplied to Europe had been funneled mostly through the Mameluke ports in Syria and Egypt, where they were purchased by Venetians and other Italian middlemen for resale throughout W estern Europe. This transit trade became the lifeblood of the Mameluke economy, providing not only govern m ent revenue in the form of customs duties, but also a source of livelihood for thousands of m erchants, clerks, sailors, shipbuilders, camel drivers, steve dores, and all the rest who were directly or indirectly connected with the trade. Certainly this commerce was in large part responsible for the great wealth and high culture of the M ameluke Empire. Suddenly this flourishing empire was struck in its vitals when Vasco da Gam a sailed into Calicut H arbor, India, on May 22, 1498, ten months after leaving Portugal. A t last the W estern Europeans had direct access to fabulous India and to the coveted spice islands of the East Indies. Lengthy as the voyage was on the all-water road around the Cape of Good Hope, it still was infinitely more economical than the old course through the M am e luke ports in the eastern M editerranean. The latter route involved several loadings and unloadings to traverse the land barrier separating Alexandria from the Red Sea, and the Syrian ports from the Persian Gulf. Also, there were customs duties to be paid at several points along the route, as well as Bedouin m arauders who had to be placated by money or wares or both. This combination of high transportation costs, customs dues, and outright extor tions raised the price of spices in Alexandria to more than 2,000 per cent above their original cost in India. A nd there still rem ained the Italian m er chants to levy their far from modest charges before the goods finally reached the consum er in France or England or Germ any. It is not surprising, then, to


Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 71
find th at in the four years 1502—1505, the V enetians were able to obtain an average of only 1,000,000 English pounds of spices a year at Alexandria, whereas in the last years of the fifteenth century they had averaged 3,500,000 pounds. Conversely, Portuguese imports rose from 224,000 pounds in 1501 to an average of 2,300,000 pounds in the four years 1503-1506.3 The Turks frequently are held responsible for this shift in the trade routes. According to this theory Selim conquered Syria and Egypt and then proceeded to interfere with the flow of spices through those countries to such an extent that W estern Europe suffered a serious shortage. Hence the efforts of the Portuguese captains to find a direct route to the F ar East, culminating in the successful voyage of Vasco da Gam a around the Cape of Good Hope. This reasoning is palpably incorrect because, as we have seen, G am a reached C alicut in 1498; Selim overran Syria and Egypt eighteen years later in 15161517. N ot only did the Turks have nothing to do with the appearance of the Portuguese in the Indian Ocean; on the contrary, they made every effort to drive the Portuguese out in order to revive the prosperity of their newly won Syrian and Egyptian possessions. Selim did not live long enough to turn his attention to the Portu guese, but Suleiman sent several naval expeditions to the Indian Ocean to clear out the interlopers. These efforts all proved ineffective. The Turks and their Levantine subjects were at home in the M editerranean, but in the In dian Ocean they were no match for the Portuguese seam ean, trained in the school of Henry the Navigator, and tested on the long voyage around Africa. The failure of the Turks had far-reaching repercussions for the en tire N ear East. It marked the beginning of the end of Levantine predominance in world commerce. The stress should be on the word “beginning.” The old routes did not disappear overnight. A fter the lirst shock of the Portuguese intrusion a gradual recovery occurred. There even were years when the vol ume of trade through the Levantine ports surpassed that which rounded the Cape. In fact, it can be said that throughout the sixteenth century both routes were used, with now the one prevailing and now the other. The survival of the old channels is surprising in view of the natural advantages of the all water route. The explanation seems to have been the excessively high rates set by the Portuguese and the corruption of Portuguese officials, who were willing for a consideration to perm it cargoes to enter the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf. It was not until some time in the seventeenth century, after the penetration of the m ore efficient D utchm en into the Far East, that the balance swung decisively in favor of the Cape route. Only then did the Levantine ports sink into that insignificance and obscurity out of which they were not to emerge until the late nineteenth century. This shifting of trade routes, gradual though it was, marked the be ginning of a changing relationship between W estern Europe and the Near East, and indeed between W estern Europe and the rest of the world. A t a time when the Turks were steadily advancing from the Balkans into Central Europe, the Portuguese were outflanking the entire Moslem world by open


72 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
ing the sea route to India. In 1498 O ttom an advance guards were pushing into Venetia but in the same year Vasco da Gam a landed at Calicut. In 1503 Venice lost M odon, K oron, and Lepanto to the Turks, but in 1509 the Por tuguese destroyed an Egyptian fleet that had been sent to drive them out of the Indian Ocean. Thus at the time when the strongest Moslem state was spearheading ever deeper into Central Europe, the W esterners were executing a vast outflanking movement and attacking the M oslem world in its “soft underbelly.” This development not only had im portant strategic implications but also involved infinitely more significant economic and political repercus sions. It dealt a severe blow to the economic developm ent of the N ear East, it opened up vast new vistas for the W estern world, and it cleared the way for European economic penteration of the vast Asian continent, which in turn led eventually to a political dom ination that was to prevail until the twen tieth century.
SULEIM AN THE M AGNIFICENT
Selim left behind him only one son, Suleiman, surnam ed by Christian writers “the M agnificent,” and by his own people “ El K anuni” or “the Legis lato r.” Suleim an occupies a position in his country’s history com parable to that of Louis X IV in France. During his long reign (1 5 2 0 -1 5 6 6 ) he added enormously to his empire. Belgrade, Rhodes, nearly the whole of Hungary, the Crimea, great parts of M esopotamia and Armenia taken from Persia, Y em en and A den in the A rabian Peninsula, a wide extension of Egypt in the direction of Nubia, and the coast of North Africa from Egypt almost to the Atlantic— these were the contributions that he bequeathed to his successors. Suleim an’s talents and unceasing labors were in p art responsible for his suc cesses. Also, he had the good fortune to appear on the historical stage at precisely the right moment: following the great contributions of Mohammed II and Selim, and preceding the many symptoms of decay that were to be come so evident by the end of the century. Finally, Suleiman had the ability to select gifted advisers and the sense to keep them in office as long as they were useful. His first vizir and great favorite, the G reek Ibrahim , served from 1523 to 1536; after him came the Bulgarian Rustem from 1544 to 1553 and 1555 to 1561; and finally the Bosnian Sokolli (Sokolovich), from 1565 to 1579. Suleiman delegated authority to all these men to an unprecedented degree. In effect, they were vice-sultans with unlim ited powers so long as they enjoyed their m aster’s confidence. This system w orked well with a strong ruler like Suleiman, who knew how to control his advisers as well as to select them. His weak successors could do neither, thereby depriving the empire of that unity and decisive leadership that had been the envy and despair of the W estern powers. Suleiman first turned his attention to the northw estern frontier along the Danube. There the H ungarians still held Belgrade and other strategic fortresses, but their grip was weakening. No longer were they able to fulfill their traditio n al role of C hristendom ’s bulw ark against Islam . T heir king,


Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 73
Louis II, who was also ruler of Bohemia, was a dissolute youngster and was regarded by all his subjects as a foreigner because of his Polish descent. Be sides, the Hungarians were weakened by religious dissension between C ath olics and Lutherans, and by a deep social cleavage between the nobility and the landless peasantry. Finally, there was the added distraction of the H un garian “nationalist,” party which demanded a native dynasty for Hungary. Its leader was John Zapolya, a Transylvanian magnate who cherished per sonal am bitions concerning the proposed native dynasty and who was to ally himself with Suleiman when these ambitions were frustrated. It is to these circum stances th at we m ust attribute the astonishing fact that when Suleiman reached the Danube he found no army, whether H un garian or Bohemian, to oppose his advance. He had to deal only with the garrisons of the towns he besieged, their governors having appealed in vain for relief from Buda or Prague. Thus Suleiman was able in the summer of 1521 to reduce without distraction several Hungarian fortresses on the D an ube and the Sava. Then he surrounded Belgrade itself, and on August 29 the city that had defied so m any T urkish arm ies in the past accepted his liberal terms for surrender. From Belgrade, Suleiman turned to Rhodes, the island fortress of the Knights of St. John. Rhodes at this time was probably the most strongly fortified position in the world. Having repulsed M oham m ed II forty years earlier, the grand masters of the island had lived ever since in constant fear of a new attack. All the spare funds available from the o rd er’s com m anderies throughout Europe had gone into stone and mortar. The defenses were of the most modern style, specially designed to withstand artillery lire, and manned by a resolute force of about six thousand men. These precautions now proved fully justified. Suleiman was determ ined to destroy the strong hold that sheltered a swarm of Christian pirates who preyed on Turkish shipping. A nd W estern E urope was too engrossed in the French-H apsburg war to offer any aid. The siege began on July 28, 1522. W eek after week Suleiman pressed the siege, using every means at his com m and: artillery fire, underground mines, and constant assaults. It was not until late December that the grand master agreed to surrender, and even then it was shortage of ammunition th at decided the issue. Suleim an’s term s were generous: the knights were to be free to leave the island with all their personal property, while the native inhabitants were to be relieved of taxes for five years and were to enjoy free exercise of their religion. So ended the last outpost of militant Christendom in the eastern M editerranean. Suleiman had captured the two outposts of Christendom that had defied the conqueror of Constantinople. But in doing so he had not accom plished something original or unexpected. He was merely following in the footsteps of his predecessors and completing their work. A t this point oc curred an incident that changed com pletely T urkey’s position in E urope and started a new era in the history of O ttom an relations with the West.


7 4 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
OTTOM AN EM PIR E AND CHRISTIAN EUROPE
Prior to this time Turkey had not been regarded as a mem ber of the European family of nations. The medieval idea of the solidarity of Christian Europe precluded acceptance of a Moslem empire. Rather, Christian princes were expected to propagate the true faith and to exterminate the enemies of Christendom. Hence the long series of Crusades against the Moslems of the Holy Land and later against the Turks after they had overrun the Christian Balkans. But by the fifteenth century this crusading spirit had evaporated. Both the H ungarians at Belgrade and the Knights of St. John at Rhodes dis covered this when they begged the Christian monarchs for aid against Sulei man. A more dram atic dem onstration of this drift away from Christian unity was the appeal that Suleiman received in December, 1525, from Francis I, the king of France. The appeal was for a Turkish attack upon the Holy R om an Em peror and head of the House of Hapsburg, Charles V! And this was from the “Eldest Son of the Church”— from the king of the country with the most glorious crusading traditions! T he explanation is to be found partly in the influence of certain new forces th a t had gradually transform ed the m edieval w orld and shattered its unity. The most im portant of these were humanist concepts, dynastic inter ests, nationalist considerations, and the Protestant Reformation. Another factor that exerted a m ore immediate influence in the sixteenth century was the overwhelming increase in H apsburg power and territorial possessions. A t the time when Selim was conquering Syria and Egypt, all the accum ulated heritages of Spain, A ustria, and Burgundy, together with the crown of the Holy Rom an Empire, were falling into the lap of Charles V. The only serious rival of the Hapsburgs was the king of France, but he was taken prisoner by the victorious em peror at the battle of Pavia in 1525. Francis looked around in desperation for a pow er strong enough to restore the balance in Europe. There was only one possibility, the O ttom an Empire. Hence the appeal to Suleiman and the beginning of that cooperation between Turkey and France that was to last for nearly three centuries. This relationship was denounced at the time as the “impious alliance” and “the sacrilegious union of the Lily and the Crescent.” But it continued nonetheless, for it was as much to the interest of Suleiman, as of Francis, to put a stop to Hapsburg expansion. Thus the O ttom an Em pire becam e an accepted and active participant in E uropean affairs, and remained so until its disintegration four centuries later. Francis, it should be noted, played a double game throughout his reign. He posed as an eager defender of Christendom when that seemed advisable; yet he re mained secretly allied to Suleiman, whose interests, however, he never hesi tated to sacrifice when it was profitable to do so.
VICTORY AT MOHACS
Suleiman responded to Francis’ appeal for aid by crossing the Danube in 1526 and overrunning Hungary. The invasion was calculated to ease the pressure on F rancis and at the sam e tim e to satisfy the janlssm ii s. who were


Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 75
openly rebellious after four years of inactivity. The Hungarians, on their part, were in no better condition to resist the Turks at this time than in 1521. The same internal cleavages still divided them, while the loss of Belgrade and of the other fortresses made defense m ore difficult. There was little likelihood of assistance from the outside to bolster the Hungarians. Poland had just concluded a peace settlement with the Turks, Venice had been able to obtain a favorable commercial treaty in 1521 and now was unwilling to risk losing its benefits. In fact, Venice congratulated Suleiman on the capture of Rhodes. The pope, although anxious to stem the advance of Islam, was able to contribute only limited funds. There remained only the two Hapsburg rulers, Em peror Charles and his brother Ferdinand, who ruled the Austrian domains. Both men had a personal interest in sup porting Hungary, Charles because of his position as tem poral head of C hris tendom, and Ferdinand because King Louis was his brother-in-law, and, m ore im portant, because the fall of H ungary would bring Suleim an’s arm ies to the Austrian frontier. Yet neither Charles nor Ferdinand was able to con tribute much, thanks to the multitude of pressures and crises that were ever arising in their sprawling empire. E m peror C harles’s policy was first to restore C hristendom ’s unity within a new Holy R om an Em pire and then to turn against the infidel Turks. But powerful interests in C hristendom were unwilling to accept unification under Hapsburg aegis. A t this very m om ent, for example, France, the Papacy, and the Italian states were com bined in the powerful League of Cognac to drive the Hapsburgs out of Italy. Thus Charles was constantly preoccupied by the opposition of his Christian rivals and was unable to send significant forces to the East. Likewise in G erm any there was great reluctance to give aid to the Hungarians because it was generally believed that the Turkish danger was exaggerated. Otherwise, it was asked, why did not Charles aid King Louis of Hungary who was his own cousin? Furtherm ore the Rom anists and the L utherans in G erm any were at each o th er’s throats. In fact, the L utherans opposed any efforts against the Turks because they might redound to the advantage of the Papacy. Luther went so far as to say, “To fight the Turks is to resist the judgm ent of G od upon m en’s sins.” 4 U nder these circum stances the Germ an Diet that met in the summer of 1526 refused to vote aid to Hungary until the religious issues had been settled. Finally Ferdinand promised that a conciliar council would meet within eighteen months to consider church reform, and that in the interval everyone “would live, act, and rule their subjects in such wise as each one thought right before G od and his Im perial M ajesty.” 5 Having obtained what it wanted, the Diet voted 24,000 men for the defense of Hungary and then adjourned on August 27. Four days later the Hungarians suffered fatal defeat at Mohacs. Suleiman had set out from Constantinople at the head of his army in A pril, 1526. By the end of July he had storm ed the fortress of P eterw ardein on the south bank of the Danube. He continued his march along the river until lie reached the junction of the D rava and the D anube in mid


76 Age o) Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
August. Here he expected to find the Hungarians drawn up on the other bank, prepared to resist his further advance. Instead, they were immobilized by contentious councils on the plain of M ohacs thirty miles to the north. Some urged retreat until expected reinforcements had arrived; others opposed the surrender of most of the country without offering resistance. The latter group prevailed, and on August 29, 1526, the fateful battle of Mohacs was fought: 25,000 to 28,000 H ungarians and assorted allies on the one side, and on the other 45,000 Turkish regulars supported by 10,000 to 20,000 lightly arm ed irregulars. The issue was never in doubt. Only a freak of chance could have saved the Christian army, rent as it was by dissension and its several parts acting independently. The heavily armed H ungarian cavalry broke the T ur kish center, but was then held up by the O ttom an artillery, while the strong Turkish wings outflanked the Christian army. Within an hour and a half the battle was decided. The Turks took no prisoners and few of the defeated escaped. W hat Kosovo had been for Serbia, M ohacs was now for Hungary. N ot only the bulk of the army but almost all its leaders, including the king, had perished. Suleiman was able to advance to Buda and to enter the capital without opposition. He stayed only two weeks and then started with his army on the road back to Constantinople. He had decided not to annex Hungary but to make it a tributary principality like W allachia. In this design he was aided by the scheming and ambitious Hungarian nobleman, John Zapolya. The death of King Louis left Bohemia and Hungary without a sov ereign. The obvious candidate for both thrones was Ferdinand of Hapsburg, brother of Em peror Charles and brother-in-law to Louis. With the use of judicious bribery Ferdinand persuaded the Bohemian nobles to proclaim him their king. But in Hungary he had to contend with Zapolya, the leader of the Nationalist party, who had occupied Buda after the departure of Suleiman. Ferdinand easily defeated the disorganized forces of Zapolya, and by the end of 1527 he had won the crown and gained control of most of the country. Zapolya now followed Francis’ example and appealed to Suleiman for support. The sultan, having conquered Hungary, was not disposed to sit back and perm it the Hapsburgs to reap the fruits of his victory. He had under taken the expedition to check the Hapsburgs, not to add still another king dom to their empire. Since Suleiman did not wish to annex Hungary directly, a dependent Zapolya in Buda -was the obvious solution. Accordingly he prom ised Zapolya the throne and assured him of his support. This marked the beginning of the struggle between the Hapsburg and O ttom an empires that was to continue to the end of the eighteenth century. H itherto Venice and Hungary had borne the burden of the Turkish on slaught. But Venice was now thoroughly intimidated and Hungary destroyed. Only the Hapsburgs had both the land and the sea power necessary to take the place of Venice in the M editerranean and of H ungary in C entral Europe.


Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 77
Henceforth the Hapsburg Empire was the march of W estern Christendom against the Moslem world. Indeed, the menace of the ever-victorious Turk became a m atter of growing concern in Central Europe, as the following G erm an folk song attests:
From Hungary he’s soon away, In Austria by break of day, Bavaria is just at hand, From there he’ll reach another land. Soon to the Rhine perhaps he’ll come. . . ,8
DEFEAT AT VIENNA
Suleiman left C onstantinople for H ungary on M ay 10, 1529. O n the M ohacs Plain he met Zapolya, who paid him homage and contributed a con siderable cavalry force to the expedition. Continuing northw ard, Suleiman recaptured Buda with little trouble, and on Septem ber 18 he reached the A ustrian border. Ten days later he arrived before Vienna and the siege began. Meanwhile Ferdinand had been desperately seeking to scrape together money and men for the defense of his capital. His biother, the em peror, being still at war with Francis, was able to spare only a small num ber of Spanish in fantry. The Germ an princes were more helpful, while Luther had abandoned completely his earlier unconcern now that Suleiman was approaching the borders of Germany. “ 1 fight,” Luther declared, “ until death against the Turks and the God of the Turks.” 7 All in all, nearly tw enty thousand men were gathered in the city be fore the Turks cut it off from the outside world. Most of the defenders were professional soldiers and, under the leadership of the seventy-year-old vet eran, Nicholas von Salm, they fought off the superior Turkish forces with courage and skill. Suleiman sorely missed the heavy artillery that he had been forced to leave behind because of the torrential rains that plagued him from the outset. The light cannon that rem ained made little impression on the city walls. He resorted to mining operations and repeatedly ordered assaults upon the breaches opened by the mines. But the attacks invariably were repulsed. The Turkish soldiers became so dispirited that their officers had to drive them forward with staves and sabers. W ith the failure of a final assault on October 14 Suleiman raised the siege and ordered retreat. The expedition had been successful at least politically. Suleiman had driven F erd in an d out of H ungary and installed in his place an obedient vassal. B ut more significant was the fact that a Turkish army had been beaten back before the walls of V ienna by a force m uch inferior in num bers. This may be considered the beginning of the end of O ttom an military supe riority. In the past the feudal cavalry of Persia, Egypt, and Hungary had been no match for the Turkish military machine with its disciplined janis saries and deadly artillerists. But at Vienna Suleiman discovered that W estern artillery was equal to his own and that A ustrian and Spanish foot soldiers,


78 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
with their harquebuses and long pikes, were, if anything, superior to his janissaries. There were still many trium phs in store for Suleiman and his successors, but the days of easy victories had passed. It should be noted that geographic factors played an im portant role in this and other Turkish campaigns to the north of the Danube. O ttom an armies destined for Central Europe traditionally left Constantinople on April 23, the day of the holy m an corresponding to St. George. They needed about two months to reach southern Hungary; hence, allowing a similar period for the return, only eight to ten weeks rem ained for trans-D anubian operations. Thus the distance involved, together with the difficult terrain and unpredictable weather, protected Central Europe from the domination of Constantinople.
TRUCE ON THE DANUBE
If the W estern m onarchs were equal to Suleiman in the art of war, their political disunity still kept them hopelessly inferior in the conduct of war. This became painfully evident when Ferdinand attem pted to follow up his success at Vienna. W ith the Turkish arm y recuperating from its losses and obviously incapable of a winter campaign, Ferdinand could have taken the offensive, driven Zapolya out of Hungary, and perhaps even recaptured Belgrade. But most of the troops provided at Vienna came from princes that were intensely jealous of the growing power of the Hapsburgs. They were willing to cooperate in a war against the com m on enemy but they refused to help Ferdinand win the H ungarian crown. M ost of them , indeed, hoped for the success of Zapolya despite his Moslem patronage. Ferdinand likewise could not count on the support of his brother Charles. The harassed em peror had just made peace with Francis but was now hastening northward to deal with the Lutherans. First he would punish the Protestant heretics within the empire and then the M oslem infidels without. Under the circumstances Ferdinand had no choice but to send envoys to Constantinople to seek peace. Suleiman, however, was determined to avenge the humiliation he had suffered at V ienna and was already preparing another expedition. In April, 1532, he left Constantinople at the head of an immense army, openly avowing that he would m arch to Vienna and give battle to the head of Christendom , the Em peror Charles. Faced with this imminent danger, Charles hurriedly made concessions to the Lutheran heretics. It is paradoxical th at an invading M oslem arm y should have con tributed so much to the cause of Protestantism in its critical formative stage. The restoration of peace enabled Charles to gather a large army, contingents arriving from Spain, Italy, Austria, the Netherlands, and the Germanies. Vienna was much better prepared to withstand Suleiman than on the previous occasion three years earlier. This may explain why the siege never materialized. Leaving Belgrade on June 25, Suleiman crossed the D rava and then, instead of following the Danube northward to Buda and Vienna, he turned westward to the narrow


Ottoman Empire at Its Height: 1481-1566 79
strip of H ungarian territory still held by Ferdinand. Perhaps his strategy was to lure the imperial army out of Vienna and onto the Hungarian plains, where there would be a chance for a second M ohacs. But Charles refused to budge and Suleiman was left free to devastate the countryside, though he carefully avoided another exhausting ordeal before Vienna. After besieging the small town of Guns in desultory fashion for twenty days Suleiman turned aside, ravaged Styria, and then led his arm y homeward. Thus the anticipated duel between the sultan of the East and the em peror of the West never took place. Suleiman now was ready for peace. While he had been campaigning in H ungary, the em peror’s G enoese adm iral, A ndrea D oria, had captured the fortress of K oron in the Peloponnesus and ravaged the adjacent coasts. M uch more worrisome was the outbreak of fighting with Persia on the eastern frontier. Suleiman could not hope to wage war simultaneously on the H un garian plains and on the Persian plateau. He decided, therefore, to make peace in the W est in order to be free for a campaign in the East the follow ing year. On June 22, 1533, he signed the first Turkish-A ustrian treaty with Ferdinand. The terms were that Zapolya should remain king of Hungary but Ferdinand was to keep the third of the country he occupied at the time. This settlem ent was with only one of the Hapsburg brothers. Charles V was not a signatory, so that in the following years Suleiman waged a naval war against the em peror and a land war against the shah of Persia.
PERSIAN AND MEDITERRANEAN EXPEDITIONS
We consider the Persian campaigns, separately at this point only for the sake of convenience. Actually they were part and parcel of the intercon tinental wars of these decades. The shah was in league with the em peror in the sam e m anner that the sultan was with the king of France. Suleim an’s in vasion of Persia was inconclusive though by no means fruitless. His grand vizir, Ibrahim , occupied the shah’s capital, T abriz, on July 13, 1534. The following year Ibrahim , together with Suleiman, took over Baghdad from its Persian com m ander, who treacherously surrendered the city. The shah, how ever, was by no m eans beaten. T aking a lesson from his fath er’s unfortunate experience at the hands of Selim, he avoided battle and instead harassed the .Turkish army with hit-and-run tactics. Suleiman suffered heavy losses pur suing the elusive shah until he realized the futility of attem pting to pin him down. Then he evacuated Tabriz after thoroughly sacking the city, and re turned to Constantinople in January, 1536. This proved to be only the be ginning of a protracted struggle that was to drag on intermittently for twenty years. Suleiman led new expeditions against Persia in 1548 and 1553, but with the same inconclusive results. Finally, he ended the tedious and costly war by accepting a peace settlem ent in which he abandoned all claim to the Tabriz region but kept lower M esopotam ia, including Baghdad and a frontage on the Persian Gulf. In the m eantim e O ttom an fleets under the leadership of the famous


80 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
N orth African corsair, Khaireddin Barbarossa, had spread terror throughout the M editerranean. In 1533 Suleiman had appointed Barbarossa to the post of Kapudan Pasha or Lord High Admiral, thereby combining N orth African Moslem sea power with the resources of the O ttom an Empire. During the following years B arbarossa successfully fought against the com bined fleets of the Holy League— Venice, the Papacy, and the Empire. Following Barbarossa’s death in 1545 his veteran captains continued his work. By 1562 M oslem vessels were sailing through the Straits of G ibraltar, venturing out into the A tlantic as far as the Canaries, and preying upon the treasure-laden galleons from the New W orld. The Turks suffered a setback in 1565 when they failed to take M alta, the last rem aining stronghold of the Knights of St. John. Y et the fact remains that during his reign Suleiman had added the entire N orth African coast to his empire, the sole exception being the small stretch from O ran westward, which belonged to the Spaniards. The year after the failure at M alta, Suleiman, now seventy years old, was carried in a litter, at the head of his army, on his thirteenth march out of Constantinople. The destination once more, as so frequently in the past, was the disputed kingdom of Hungary. M any events had occurred in that unfortunate country since 1533, when Suleiman concluded an agreement with Ferdinand of H apsburg in order to be free against Persia. M ost im por tant had been the death in 1540 of his vassal king of Hungary, Zapolya. Fer dinand immediately m arched in from the west to make good his claim to the whole country. Suleiman, in turn, invaded from the south, ostensibly to de fend the interests of Z apolya’s infant son. B ut as soon as he entered Buda, Suleiman proclaim ed Hungary an O ttom an province and established his di rect imperial administration. Ferdinand had no choice but to accept the fait accompli, and for nearly a century and a half almost all of Hungary was in Turkish hands. Now, in 1566, Suleiman was heading north once more. The failure of the M alta expedition weighed heavily on his m ind and -he was determ ined to end his career with a success as signal as that against Belgrade in the first year of his reign. Also, he had a score to settle with the new em peror, M ax imilian II, who had perm itted raids upon Turkish territory. So Suleiman was borne northw ard from Constantinople to Sofia, Belgrade, Semlin (Z em un), and finally Szigeth. There he halted on August 5 to lay siege to the strongly fortified city that had successfully resisted him before. Exactly a m onth later, while his guns were thundering against the obstinate defenders, the great sultan died, a fitting end for the old warrior. His body was embalmed and carried in the royal litter, while orders continued to be issued over his name. For three weeks his death was kept secret from the army, until arrangements had been completed for the peaceful accession of the new sultan, the besotted Selim II.


6. Ottoman Institutions
L J u l e i m a n t h e M a g n i f i c e n t represents the great di
vide in the history of the O ttom an Empire. Before his reign, O ttom an his tory was one of victories and expansion; after his reign it was marked by defeats and contraction. The decline admittedly was not uninterrupted. We shall note brief periods of recovery and even of expansion. But the general trend was downward, culminating finally in the partition of the empire after W orld W ar I. O ur W estern world is m ore aw are of these later centuries of deca dence th an it is of the earlier centuries of strength and efficiency. This is u n derstandable, for the various European states that suffered the blows of the Turks in their prim e have long since disappeared. In contrast, the presentday great powers came into close contact with the Turks only after the evils and weakness of their empire had become apparent. Thus the word “Turkish” became associated in the W estern m ind with such phrases as “Sick M an of E urope,” “ Bulgarian atrocities,” and “Armenian massacres.” This association is as unsound as it is unjust. T he R om an E m pire admittedly was feeble and decadent in the fifth century a .d ., but this does not detract from its splendor and contributions in earlier centuries. Likewise, the O ttom an Em pire was a dying organism in its later years, and Tsar Nicholas I was fully justified in referring to it as the “Sick M an of E urope.” But it should be recalled that a Spanish ambassador used precisely the same phrase to describe England in the sixteenth century, and that during the same century the O ttom an Em pire was regarded by W estern Europeans with a combination of awe, respect, and fear. Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq, the judicious and observant Hapsburg am bassador in Constantinople at the time of Suleiman, com pared the sultan to a thunderbolt— “he smites, shatters, and destroys whatever stands in his way.” 1 As late as 1634, well after the decline of the empire had set in, a thoughtful English traveler concluded that the Turks were “the only m odern
81


82 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
people great in action,” and that “he who would behold these times in their greatest glory, could not find a better scene than Turkey.” 2 A n empire that commanded such respect obviously had little in com m on with the weak and degenerate “Sick M an” of popular conception. In this chapter we shall examine the conditions and institutions of this empire at its height— its vast dom ains with their polyglot peoples, its formidable armies, its advanced culture and exceptional religious freedom, and, above all, its unique administrative system based exclusively upon slaves of Chris tian origin.
LANDS AND PEOPLES
The O ttom an Em pire sprawled over three continents. In E urope it included the Balkan Peninsula to the Danube River, together with the fol lowing provinces north of the river: Transylvania, M oldavia, W allachia, most of Hungary, Podolia in Poland, and the entire north coast of the Black Sea. In Asia it embraced Asia M inor, Armenia, most of the Caucasus, the Tigris and Euphrates valleys down to the Persian Gulf, the western coast of the Persian Gulf, and all the lands on the eastern coast of the M editer ranean together with a wide strip running down the entire length of the A rabian Peninsula to the Gulf of Aden. Finally in Africa, the empire encom passed Egypt, Tripoli, Tunisia, and Algeria. And to complete the picture we should add Crete, Cyprus, and the islands of the Aegean. W ithin this vast em pire lived peoples of diverse strains and creeds. The Turks, Tatars, Arabs, Kurds, Turkom ans, Berbers, and M amelukes all belonged to Islam, together with large numbers of Bosnians, Albanians, and Bulgarians who had apostatized to the conquering creed. The remaining ethnic groups— Greeks, H ungarians, South Slavs, Rum anians, Armenians, Georgians, and Egyptian Copts— all belonged to the various Christian churches, of which by far the most im portant was the Orthodox. In addition there were the Jews who at this time were migrating in large num bers to the lands of the sultan because they found there a degree of religious tolerance un known and unimaginable in the Christian E urope of that day. All in all, a population of approxim ately fifty m illion com pared to the five m illion in contem porary England.
SULTAN AND SLAVES
The sultan was the supreme ruler of these lands and peoples. A l though he was generally regarded as a despot, his despotism in fact was rigidly limited by a specific and im m utable constitution. This constitution, known as the Sheri or Sacred Law of Islam, was based upon the word of God— the Koran— and upon the sayings of M ohammed— the Hadith. The Sheri was not merely a religious law like the canon law of Christendom . It left no scope for secular laws to regulate mundane affairs. It was theoretically adequate to govern the Islamic world and to regulate minutely the social, ethical, religious, and econom ic life of all its members.


Ottoman Institutions 83
In actual practice the Sheri soon became obsolete, at least as a po litical constitution. It was designed to regulate the primitive society of the Arabian Peninsula rather than the world empire that Islam soon conquered. Furtherm ore, this sacred law, believed to be of divine origin, was unchange able by its own provisions. Judges and jurists attem pted to provide elasticity through interpretation, but this procedure by itself was insufficient. A ccord ingly, the sultans supplem ented the sacred law by decrees of their own known as kanuns. These decrees did not constitute a secular law rivaling the Sheri. They were merely regulations applying to matters undefined by the Sheri, with the precepts of which they could not conflict. These kanuns allowed the sultans a certain latitude, though it was quite limited and rigidly circum scribed. No kanun could be effective unless it received the support of the conservative Moslem population and unless it was approved by the decisions of the established heads of law and religion, known collectively as the ulema. The latter, in fact, more than once forced the deposition of sultans who were judged to have violated the sacred law.
These restrictions left the head of the O ttom an Em pire with little legislative power. But his administrative authority was virtually absolute; the reason was that the administration and the,standing army were composed almost entirely of slaves over whom the sultan had the power of life and death. The use of slaves was not uncom m on in Moslem states, especially for military purposes. The O ttom an rulers from an early period maintained a standing army of slaves in addition to a feudal cavalry force composed of freeborn Moslem landholders. The slaves either were purchased or, more commonly, were taken prisoners in the campaigns against the Christian in fidels. But, as we noted in C hapter 3, M urad I (1 3 5 9 -1 3 8 9 ) hit upon a new expedient, namely a periodic levy of the male children of his O rthodox C hris tian subjects. The children were taken from their parents at between the ages of ten and twenty, reduced to the status of slaves, and trained for service to the state. This system had two great merits in the eyes of the sultans: the child slaves cost nothing, and they were completely dependent upon their master. These advantages led to a further development. In the earlier days the adm inistration of the growing empire had been conducted by free M os lems; these were now replaced alm ost w ithout exception by the sultan’s slaves. The long line of able and energetic rulers who preceded Suleiman perfected this unique system to the point where it became the solid foundation of the empire. The slaves were carefully selected, thoroughly trained, and then sent out to fill the ranks of the regular arm y and the adm inistration. This vast slave organization, together with its imperial m aster who owned and con trolled it, is com m only known as the Ruling Institution.


84 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
RECRUITING AND TRAINING OF SLAVES
The O ttom an sultans had much precedent in Islamic history for using slaves in their adm inistration and arm ed forces. But they were quite original in using these slaves to the exclusion of free Moslems. Thus we have the paradox of a great M oslem empire being governed and, in part, defended, by slaves of Christian origin. This in turn m eant that the freeborn Moslems could enter only the legal, religious, and educational institutions of their empire. Those who did so are commonly referred to collectively as the M oslem Institution in contradistinction to the Ruling Institution. We shall consider later the composition and function of the Moslem Institution in more detail. To return to the Ruling Institution, it should be noted that not all of its slave members were recruited as children from O rtho dox families. O thers were captured in w ar and still others were purchased in the slave markets. These markets were kept supplied by two sets of profes sional slave raiders: the Barbary corsairs who preyed upon the shipping and exposed coasts of Southern and W estern Europe; and the Crimean Tatars who devastated the steppe lands of Poland and M uscovy. It is estim ated that seven to eight thousand slaves entered the sultan’s service annually, of which about three thousand were from the child-levy. U pon joining the sultan’s great slave household the recruits were first examined and classified by highly trained officials. A bout 90 per cent were sent to Asia M inor to spend several years in the service of feudal land holders. There they were expected to learn Turkish, to master the art of war, and to be converted to Islam. Then they returned to Constantinople to enter one of the military corps. Meanwhile, in the famous Palace School established by M oham m ed the C onqueror, the rem aining 10 per cent, who were selected for their handsome appearance and apparent ability, were being trained to become the great men of the empire. A fter graduation they usually filled m inor posts in the provinces. From then on they were free to rise, on the basis of merit, through the ranks of the hierarchy to the most exalted posi tions in Constantinople. It is easy to arouse m oral indignation against the practice of buying slaves in the m arket place or of taking young children away from their par ents. But if we consider these practices in the light of contem porary condi tions and mores they appear more natural and understandable. We should keep in mind that slavery in Islam was a very different institution from slavery in the West. The Moslem master recognized no color line. Normally he m aintained warm personal relations with the slaves. Frequently he freed them as a meritorious act enjoined by the Koran. And not uncommonly he gave his daughters in m arriage to those of his slaves whom he held in highest esteem. Thus slavery under Islam involved servitude but very little social in feriority. And in the Ottom an Em pire, where the most favored slaves were at the same time the actual rulers, the use of the word “slave” is perhaps un avoidable but certainly unfortunate and misleading.


Ottoman Institutions 85
C ontem porary evidence concerning the child-tribute is significantly contradictory. Some observers emphasized the reluctance of Christian parents to part with their sons. Stephen Gerlach, the chaplain to the Hapsburg am bassador in Constantinople, noted in 1577 that Christians “give wives to their sons in their eighth or ninth year, only so that they may be freed from the Turkish child-levy, for married ones are not taken.” 3 In contrast, the Venetian ambassador reported a century earlier that Christian parents re garded the child-tribute a boon which provided their sons with an oppor tunity for advancement. Both these attitudes undoubtedly prevailed. Certainly the imperial capital opened horizons for the new recruit that he could not have imagined in his native village. Indeed, there were instances of Moslem parents so anx ious to enter their own freeborn children into the sultan’s slave family th a t they bribed their Christian neighbors to exchange children surreptitiously. It is true that a C hristian family of deep religious convictions could never countenance the loss of children to Islam, whatever the rewards might be. But here again we must recall that religious lines at this time were consid erably blurred. It was not until the later centuries of O ttom an weakness and W estern aggression that both Moslems and Christians became fanatical and intolerant. Of the long list of insurrections against Turkish rule, we know of only one minor disturbance that can be ascribed specifically to this childlevy. It is significant that Suleiman the Magnificent issued a decree in which, after listing the peoples-—Russians, Persians, Gypsies, and Turks— from whom boys were not to be levied, he added: “ If any officer recruits any of these, either for a bribe or at som eone’s request or because of the interven tion of people in high places, and adds them to the num ber of my loyal slaves, may the curse of God and the hundred and twenty-four thousand prophets be upon him.” 4 The net result of this remarkable system was that a great Moslem empire was based upon Christian brawn and Christian brain. During the period from 1453 to 1623, when the em pire was at its height, only five of the forty-seven grand vizirs were of Turkish origin. The remaining forty-two con sisted of eleven Albanians, eleven South Slavs, six Greeks, one Circassian, one Armenian, one Georgian, one Italian, and ten of unknown origin. Con tem porary W estern observers could not help being impressed and overawed by this unique system which took humble Christian peasant boys and trans formed them into the great leaders of Islam and the most feared enemies of Christendom. Observed Ambassador Busbecq:
In Turkey every man has it in his power to make what he will of the position into which he is born and of his fortune in life. Those who hold the highest posts under the Sultan are very often the sons of shepherds and herds men, and, so far from being ashamed of their birth, they make it a subject of boasting. . . . Thus among the Turks, dignities, offices, and administrative posts are the rewards of ability and merit; those who are dishonest, lazy, and slothful


86 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
never attain to distinction, but remain in obscurity and contempt. This is why the Turks succeed in all that they attempt and are a dominating race and daily extend the bounds of their rule. Our method is very different; there is no room for merit, but everything depends on birth. . . .5
ARMED FORCES AND ADMINISTRATION
The armed forces and the administration are considered together here because they were inseparable and to a large degree identical. W ith few exceptions all adm inistrative officers were soldiers and all army officers had adm inistrative duties. T he explanation for this m erging of functions is th a t the Turks were warriors before they were administrators. W hen they con quered territories they gave adm inistrative duties to their officers who at the same time retained their original military titles and duties. The greater part of the O ttom an armed forces consisted of a feudal territorial cavalry known as spahis. These were meritorious Moslem soldiers to whom the sultan granted the right to collect certain taxes from specified villages. This was the equivalent of a settled income, in return for which the incum bent was required to reside on the land and to be ready to give war service at a m om ent’s notice. T he size of the fief determ ined the num ber of extra armed horsemen that the spahi was required to bring to battle. During Suleim an’s reign the enfeoffed lands in E u ro pe supplied about 80,000 cavalry and those in Asia about 50,000. This arrangem ent superficially resembled the feudal system of W est ern Europe. In practice it was much more centralized and efficient when the empire was at its height. The spahis were required to serve as long as they were needed, in contrast to the limitation of forty days a year common in the West. The spahis also paid allegiance to only one lord, their sultan, and no subinfeudation was allowed to weaken this relationship. Furtherm ore, the spahis were directly supervised by the sultan’s slaves sent out from C on stantinople to adm inister the provinces. These officials were of several ranks, the highest being the sanjakbey, who governed a district or sanjak, and the beylerbey, who had authority over all the beys of his province. The central government did not pay these administrators regular salaries from the treasury. Instead, it attached fiefs to the offices, and the proceeds of the fiefs were available for the support of the officeholders. The latter, therefore, were feudal landholders themselves, but only in a limited sense— only by virtue of their office and for the duration of their tenure. Fiefs were set aside not only for adm inistrative offices but also for num erous mili tary posts, for m em bers of the im perial family, and for the sultan’s private dom ain. Thus the spahis, who alone enjoyed hereditary rights, controlled less than half of the enfeoffed land. This in turn m eant that O ttom an feudalism was correspondingly m ore centralized than th a t in the W est. In later days, as we shall see, provincial potentates did arise who successfully defied the au thority of Constantinople. Hut rarely were they rebellious spahis. Rather,


Ottoman Institutions 87
they usually were powerful officeholders who refused to relinquish their posts and the attached lands to a government that had grown lax and feeble. W e need to note also that the sultan ’s slaves who were sent to govern the provinces were responsible not only for administrative but also for mili tary duties. In time of war they acted as military officers, assembling the spahis of their districts and leading them to th^ meeting place set by the sultan. Originally these warrior-adm inistrators had been drawn from the Moslem landed families, but with the adoption of the child-levy the sultan replaced them with his slaves. In doing so he assured his authority over the feudal spahis, whether scattered over the countryside or gathered for war. N ot only did the sultan control the feudal cavalry by appointing his slaves to the command posts; he also controlled the regular standing army because its entire membership from top to bottom consisted of his slaves. This standing army comprised two great sections: the infantry known as the janissaries and the regular cavalry known as the spahis of the Porte— to be distinguished from the feudal cavalry or spahis. The spahis of the Porte were an elite corps, noted for their magnificent dress and accouterments, and re spected for their incom parable skill as horsemen and bowmen. U nder Sulei man they num bered ten to twelve thousand, and, with their attendant horse men, who also rode into battle, they totaled forty to fifty thousand. The most famous and feared unit of the O ttom an military machine was the corps of janissaries, in which were included smaller groups of arm or ers, artillerymen, and transport troops. Numbering ten to twelve thousand men in Suleim an’s tim e, the janissaries possessed a discipline and esprit th at made them the terror of the Christian world. They were almost as feared, however, within their own empire, for they had a strong sense of what they considered to be their rights and privileges. They caused much trouble and anxiety to as strong a ruler as Suleiman. In later centuries they dom inated weak sultans to the point where they became a menace to the order and security of the empire they were supposed to protect.
THE M OSLEM INSTITUTION
We have seen that a basic difference between the Ruling and Moslem Institutions was that the former was slave-manned, whereas the latter of necessity was exclusively Moslem. The core of the M oslem Institution com prised those true believers who were experts in their knowledge of the Koran and who served as teachers, as judges, and as jurist-theologians. The teachers taught in schools which were usually attached to mosques and which were in three grades: prim ary schools (m ektebs), col leges (m edressehs), and law schools of university grade (higher m edressehs). The graduates of the colleges were eligible to teach in the prim ary schools and to attend to ecclesiastical duties. Those who completed the long and arduous course in the law schools could choose one of several callings: they might become professors of law in their turn, or they might join the select


88 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
and distinguished class of jurists, or enter the judicial system. In the latter case they would be appointed as judges or kazis, of which there were num er ous and com plicated categories, culm inating in the kaziasker or chief judge of Rumeli (Europe) and the kaziasker of Anatolia (A sia). The kazis might be com pared to the judges of W estern courts. The law they administered was the sacred law supplemented by the kanuns of the sultans and the customs of the regions in which they served. Contem porary W estern observers were impressed by the speed and definiteness with which the kazis settled their cases, though they also reported that bribery and corruption were as common as in their own countries. Those university graduates who became jurists ranked the highest in public esteem. These jurists or muftis were assigned as counselors to the kazis of every im portant city and to the sanjakbeys and beylerbeys. The function they fulfilled had no exact parallel in W estern society. A ppointed for life, the muftis lived in retirem ent and could not take the intiative on any issue. Rather, they served as a sort of court of appeal or of reference. If a judge or a bey or any private citizen faced a problem involving knowledge of the sacred law he would refer it to the mufti. The latter, after careful consid eration, gave his professional opinion or fetva, which usually settled the case. The mufti of Constantinople, known as the Sheik ul-Islam, was the highest religious and legal authority of the empire. His position might be com pared to that of the Supreme C ourt in the United States. He interpreted and de fended the sacred law, the O ttom an equivalent of the Am erican Constitution. In a sense he stood above the sultan himself. He could pass judgment, if re quested, upon any action o r legislation by the sultan, and if he found it in violation of the sacred law, the sultan then could rightfully be deposed. This greatly simplified description of the M oslem Institution gives some notion of its extraordinary authority and influence. All these teachers, judges, and jurists, known collectively as the ulema or learned men, had an identical training and a com m on philosophy of life. They were the exponents and guardians of the sacred law. And since this inflexible body of doctrine was essentially hostile to change and progress, the Moslem Institution became the instrum ent of a blighting bondage upon the empire and its peoples. W hereas the W estern world em ancipated itself from a com parable scholasticism, the O ttom an Em pire, partly because of the influence of the M oslem Institution, rem ained in servitude until the nineteenth century. In short, the ulema gave the empire a monolothic unity which at first was impressive and effective but which in the long run proved a fatal millstone.
THE DIVAN
Having considered both the Moslem and Ruling Institutions, we turn finally to the Divan, the body that brought them both together and gave unity to the organization of the em pire. T he early sultans presided in per son over the meetings of the Divan, but Suleiman and his successors usually delegated this function to their grand vizirs. The latter were the sultans’ “ bur


Ottoman Institutions 89
den-bearers” in fact as well as in name. They supervised the entire im perial administration, both central and provincial. They controlled the army and were expected to lead it in the field if necessary. Together with the kaziaskers they served as a supreme court of justice. And throughout the year they pre sided over long sessions of the Divan four days each week. The Divan consisted of ex officio members who represented both Institutions. The kaziaskers of Europe and Asia represented the Moslem Institution. Their counterparts from the Ruling Institution were the two ad ministrative heads, the beylerbeys of Europe and Asia, and the two financial heads, the defterdars of Europe and Asia. The latter were the treasurers of the empire, responsible for all incoming and outgoing funds. The janissaries were represented by their general or agha, and the naval forces by their ad miral or kapudan pasha. Finally there was the nishanji, the head of the im perial chancery, which made and preserved a record of every act of the governm ent. The Divan transacted an enorm ous am ount of business with effi ciency and dispatch. Discussion was brief and to the point, the Turks being traditionally close-tongued. All decisions were subject to the approval of the sultan, but when this was given they were irrevocable. Since the sacred law was the constitution of the empire, the Divan had no legislative authority. But it was the top judicial and administrative organ of the state— the cap stone of the Moslem and Ruling Institutions.
STATUS OF NON-M OSLF.M S
The O ttom an Em pire was unique not only for its slave system of adm inistration but also for its unequaled degree of religious tolerance. In a period when Catholics and Protestants were massacring each other and when Jews were being hounded from one Christian state to another, the subjects of the sultan were free to worship as they wished with com paratively m inor disabilities. The explanation is to be found partly in the religious law -of Islam and partly in O ttom an political strategy. The sacred law recognized the Christians and Jews as being, like the Moslems, People of the Book. Both had a scripture— a written word of revelation. Their faith was accepted as true, though incomplete, since M oham m ed had superseded Moses and Jesus Christ. Islam therefore tolerated the Christians and Jews. It permitted them to practice their faith with certain restrictions and penalties. Islam also laid down exact rules for all the concerns of life. It was both a religious and a civil code. C onsequently, in tolerating the religions of the non-M oslems it also accepted their usuages and customs. This was imple m ented by perm itting non-M oslem subjects to organize into communities with their own ecclesiastical leaders. These communities were known as millets, of which there were as many as there were religious groups. Thus the theocratic O ttoman Empire was organized not on the basis of ethnic groups but rather


90 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
of ecclesiastical communities. The O ttom an authorities divided their subjects not into Greeks or Bulgarians or Rumanians, but rather into the following millets: Orthodox, Gregorian Armenian, Rom an Catholic, Jewish, and Prot estant. The most privileged of these millets was the Orthodox, partly be cause of its superior num bers but also because of certain political considera tions. After conquering Constantinople, M ohammed II sought to perpetuate the rift between Orthodox and Catholic Christianity by encouraging his O r thodox subjects to regard him as their benefactor and protector against the pope. For this reason he arranged for the election of a new patriarch to head the O rthodox Church, and granted the patriarch ecclesiastical and secular jurisdiction which in certain respects exceeded that which had been allowed by the Byzantine emperors. In the following chapter we shall examine the precise degree of reli gious autonomy enjoyed by the Balkan Christians under O ttom an rule. We shall note also that they did not have full religious equality. Among other discriminations they were required to pay a special capitation tax and they were also subject to the child-tribute, which was enforced until the seventeenth century. But granting all this, the position of the nonconform ist was much more favorable in the O ttom an Empire than in Christian Europe. T he m ost striking evidence of O ttom an tolerance is the large-scale immigration of Jewish refugees following their expulsion from Spain. The newcomers were welcomed and were accorded the same privileges enjoyed by other non-Moslems. This unprecedented reception stimulated new waves of Jewish immigration until a total of approximately one hundred thousand found refuge under the star and crescent. As merchants, artisans, and pro fessional men, they soon played an im portant role in the affairs of the em pire. A certain Joseph Nasi exerted such influence upon Selim II that foreign am bassadors respectfully courted this “G reat Jew” and reported his com m ents and actions. Jewish traders and craftsm en were to be found in alm ost every city in the empire. Jewish physicians, interpreters, and financiers made themselves indispensable to O ttom an officials. Lady M ary W ortley M ontagu, wife of the British am bassador, was so impressed by the unique position of the Jews that she described it at length in a letter to her sister on M ay 17, 1717:
I observed most of the rich tradesmen were Jews. That people are an incredible power in this country. They have many privileges above all the natural Turks themselves, and have formed a very considerable commonwealth here, being judged by their own laws, and have drawn the whole trade of the empire into their hands, partly by the firm union among themselves, and prevailing on the idle temper and want of industry of the Turks. Every pasha has his Jew, who is his homme d’affaires; he is let into all his secrets, and does all his business. No bargain is made, no bribe received, no merchandise disposed of, but what passes through their hands. They are the physicians, the stewards, and interpreters of the great men.6


Ottoman Institutions 91
OTTOMAN CULTURE
Of the many popular misconceptions concerning the O ttom an Em pire, the most com m on have to do with its culture. It is widely believed that the empire was large and powerful but backward and barbarous, and that the literature and arts it did possess were the product not of the Turks but rather of the Greeks, the Syrians, the Egyptians, and the other subject peoples. Considering first the question of the ethnic origins of O ttom an cul ture, we find that the Turkish contribution was not as predom inant as might be expected. But it should be rem em bered that the Turkish people were a small minority in their empire, and furtherm ore, a m inority whose energies were concentrated to a great extent upon war and conquest. Perhaps an analogy may be drawn here between the Turkish warrior and the American frontiersman. The conquest of an empire may have left as little time and in clination for cultural pursuits as the conquest of a wilderness. W hether or not this analogy is tenable, there rem ains the basic question of the validity of considering the numerous writers and artists of non-Turkish origin as Greeks or Syrians or Armenians or whatever their ethnic strain might have been. For illustration we may take the case of Sinan Pasha, the most famous architect of the O ttom an Empire. Born in 1589 of an obscure Christian G reek family in A sia M inor, he was inducted into the janissary corps through the child levy. He rose quickly through the ranks because of his skill in devising ferries and building bridges during the cam paigns. Soon he was engaged exclusively in building mosques and palaces commissioned by the rulers and grandees of the empire. During his long lifetime of ninety years he worked with such energy and distinction that he gained an international reputation as the “Turkish Michelangelo.” In every part of the empire, from Bosnia to Mecca, he left the imprint of his genius. Before his death at the age of ninety he had erected no less than 343 build ings, including 81 m osques, 55 schools, 50 chapels, 34 palaces, and 33 baths. Two of his pupils, it might be noted, later were responsible for the Taj M ahal. T he significance of Sinan’s career is th a t it dem onstrates why O tto man culture cannot be considered simply the sum total of several individual national contributions. Sinan was definitely an O ttom an rather than a Greek architect. He was so not only because his style was distinctively Ottom an but also because his training, his prom otions, and his amazing productivity are explainable only within the context of the O ttom an Em pire with its wealth and its unique opportunities for advancem ent. Sinan Pasha was an O ttom an rather than a G reek architect for the sam e reason that Carl Sandburg is an A m erican rather than a Swedish poet. Turning from the origin of O ttom an culture to its content, we find that it was far from being scanty and inferior. Instead, it was sophisticated, highly advanced, and im portant in the life of the empire. O n the other hand, it cannot be placed in the first rank of world civilizations. It lacked the origi nality and creativeness of a truly great culture like that of the ancient Greeks.


92 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
One reason was the stultifying influence of Islamic religious taboos. The strict injunction against the reproduction of the human form precluded any work in sculpture and painting. Perhaps an even greater handicap was the over powering influence of the Persian, Arabic, and Byzantine civilizations to which the Turks fell heir. So massive and overwhelming was this heritage that in the long run it acted as an anesthetic rather than a stimulant. Im por tant branches of O ttom an culture never freed themselves from the numbing influence of the past. O ttom an literature provides the classic example of this cultural bondage. Until the mid-nineteenth century it consisted almost exclusively of poetry, prose being reserved for utilitarian purposes. An outstanding feature of this poetry was its immense popularity. Indeed, it was socially indispensa ble. Just as the W estern gentleman of this period quoted Latin and Greek authors, so the O ttom an gentleman garnished his speech with Persian quo tations. If he were able, in addition, to write verse of his own, then his social status and advancem ent were assured. The imperial court swarmed with poets, many of whom received handsome pensions or comfortable sinecures. It was not uncommon for sultans to hold literary competitions and to partici pate in the brilliant repartee and extem poraneous versifying. Many of the sultans— twenty-one of the thirty-four— have left verses of their own com position. By the seventeenth century this passion for poetry had become a veritable craze. One grand vizir wrote his reports from the battlefield in verse, and the sultan in reply sent his instructions also in verse. Despite its popularity and honored position, O ttom an poetry re m ained artificial and unoriginal. It was alm ost entirely Persian in tone, form , and sentiment. The Seljuk Turks first adopted the highly developed Persian culture and then transm itted it to their O ttom an successors. U nfortunately the creative genius of Persia had by that time become sterile. The Ottom ans therefore inherited a literature that was subtle and brilliant yet static and stultifying. O ttom an poets wrote their verses in Persian meters and Persian forms. They dropped the simplicity of early Turkish verse in favor of m eta phors, similes, homonyms, anagrams, and a host of other rhetorical embellish ments. They faithfully repeated the traditional phrases and associations. “The ‘m oon-face,’ the ‘cypress-form ,’ the ‘ruby-lip,’ occur with wearisom e repeti tion. . . . W hen the ‘nightingale’ is m entioned we m ay be sure the ‘rose’ is not far away, and if we read of the ‘m o th ’ in one line we m ay feel safe about m eeting the ‘ta p e r’ in the next.” 7 The themes likewise were those of the Persian masters. Although only a score in number, these traditional themes were presented again and again with ever-increasing beauty of language and ever subtler ingenuity of phrase. Even the language did not escape the overmastering Persian influ ence. The original rugged T atar dialect became a marvelous literary language — brilliant, harmonious, subtle— but so artificial and so far removed from everyday speech that it became incom prehensible to all but the educated


Ottoman Institutions 93
O ttom an gentleman. And he, of course, represented only a small percentage of the total population.
THE OSMANLI AND THE TURK
O ttom an poetry was a class poetry. This was true also of the other arts practiced and patronized by the ruling circles in Constantinople. Al though the empire was democratic in the sense that the classes were not rigid and exclusive, the fact remains that they did exist. Class distinction was clear and sharp, especially in cultural m atters. This is strikingly evident in the different meaning of the two words “Osm anli” and “T urk.” An Osmanli was an educated gentleman of broad intellectual interests who used the refined literary language heavily encrusted with Persian and A rabic words. A Turk, by contrast, was an unlettered provincial of Asia Minor who spoke the purer but cruder and despised Turkish idiom. The Osmanli looked down upon the Anatolian peasant Turk, calling him Kaba Turk or rough Turk, and Eshek Turk or donkey Turk. Evliya Chelebi, the noted seventeenth-century traveler, is a good ex ample of the Osmanli gentleman. His writings reflect a deep-seated and un affected feeling of superiority reminiscent of a nineteenth-century British colonial official. Evliya came by his attitude naturally. He had behind him three centuries of successful em pire building as well as the basic contem pt of a devout Moslem for all infidels. He looked with scorn upon the Christian subjects of the empire. He loathed the Persians because they were schismatic Moslems. He had few favorable comments to make when he journeyed through Germ any, the Low Countries, Scandinavia, and Poland. Yet with all his prejudices, Evliya was a man of considerable culture. Like his fellow Osmanlis he had a thorough knowledge of the sacred Islamic literature and he could quote freely from the Persian classics. He appreciated the arts and was a fine musician. He was typical of his class in his love for country life, ani mals, gardening, and sports. He himself was an expert horseman, archer, and swimmer. For all his mysticism and piety, Evliya was very much the gourmet, describing with relish the choicest viands and sweets and indicating precisely where they might be found. As a good Moslem he disclaimed any firsthand knowledge of wines; yet he showed himself thoroughly familiar with the best brands consum ed by the unbelievers in the taverns across the G olden Horn. In short, Evliya was an all-round man— a typical Osmanli. The Turk, on the other hand, had different training and different tastes. The literary language and the sophisticated poetry were for him a closed book. Instead, he obtained his amusement at the popular Punch and Judy show, com m only know n as K aragioz. This was a m arionette show per form ed at night against a white linen screen lighted from behind to show off the figures. These were made of tinted camel hide and m anipulated at the end of strings by the m aster of the show. Every evening as soon as it grew dark, crowds gathered in the innum erable coffeehouses where the shows were


94 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
usually held. There they watched the moving silhouettes of the puppets and roared with laughter at the hum orous sallies in the dialogues. There was much ribaldry and coarse joking, but not infrequently this was a cover for political and social satire. The principal character, Karagioz, was the em bodi ment of the plebeian Turk. Seemingly naive and crude, he was in reality shrewd and cunning. In the end he invariably bested his more sophisticated rivals. His foil was the pom pous Hadjievat, who had acquired a sm attering of “culture” and who decorated his speech with elegant Arabic phrases. These were incomprehensible to Karagioz, and in mocking imitation he turned them into crude indecencies and puns to the delight of the sympathetic audience. The guilds also played an im portant role in the social life of the Turks who lived in the towns and cities. Evliya Chelebi has left a vivid description of a roisterous three-day procession before the sultan in Constantinople in 1638. The various guilds participated— seven hundred and thirty-five in alland Evliya describes them for us as they file past the im perial pavilion. E ach guild is preceded by its band, followed by several wagons bearing symbolical groups representative of the particular craft or profession. As the wagons roll along, the occupants scatter sweets in all directions and amuse the spec tators by shouting, dancing, gesticulating, grimacing, and bantering in car nival fashion. There were the scavengers who paid “for the right to search the city dunghills for coins, nails, precious stones and other small articles” ; the miners, mostly Armenians, “a foul-smelling set of men, yet indispensable in sieges” ; the Chief Executioner “girt with a fiery sword, his belt bulging with all the instruments of his craft” ; “the corporation of thieves and footpads, a very numerous one who have an eye to your purse” ; “the corporation of pimps and bankrupts who are also without num ber” ; and the night-watchmen who, as they pass along, “strike their staves on the ground and cry out, as if they were after a thief: ‘Hie! C atch him! D on’t let him get away! T here he goes!’ and, by way of a joke, they lay hold of the nearest spectators giving them a thorough fright, all in fun. The crowd, at their approach, open out on both sides so as to give a wide berth to their frolics.” We see the divers who spit oil from their mouths to m irror the bed of the sea, and who adorn their ears with m erm aids’ hairs; also the lion keepers, the bear leaders, the coffeehouse storytellers, the Greek charcoal burners, the snowmen from M ount Olympus with sacks of snow to provide the palace with iced drinks, and the Turcom en syrup sellers who, “with their sugar-sweet tongues . . . succeed in wheedling themselves into the hearts of women and obtaining from them the sweetest of favors. Such sly fellows are these wily Turks.” More prosaic were the guildsmen connected with the m arket: the cooks, dried-garlic merchants, butchers, m ustard merchants, sherbet sellers, pastry m akers, fisherm en and fish cooks, textile m erchants, honey dealers,


Ottoman Institutions 95
goldsmiths, fruit merchants, watchmakers, poulterers, furriers, tanners, shoe m akers, brewers, and tripe sellers— the latter not without significance, for Evliya gives us a preventive for a hangover: tripe soup, to be eaten last thing before retiring. All in all, a brilliant and fascinating pageant of the O ttom an Em pire at its height.8


7. Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule
I
H o p e r i o d of modern European history remains so obscure as the five centuries of O ttom an rule in the Balkans. C ontem porary W estern observers, fascinated and awed by the ever-expanding Ottom an Em pire, wrote detailed accounts of what they saw and experienced. But most of these accounts are limited to Constantinople and to a few other cities. The travelers who ventured into the Balkan lands seldom strayed from the great E uropean road running from Vienna through Budapest, Belgrade, Sofia, A drianople, and on to the O ttom an capital. Very few contem poraries had any contact with, or interest in, the mass of Christian peoples living in the B alkan countryside. A ccordingly, we are well inform ed about the institutions of the empire but largely ignorant of its subjects. We know much about the sultans and their courts and armies but very little about the Christian peasants and how they fared under Ottom an officials and Turkish feudal lords. The Balkan peoples themselves have left few records of this period of their history. Having lost their ruling class, which alone was educated and articulate, they were left leaderless, anonymous, and silent. Even their clergy men were largely illiterate. The few who did have a smattering of learning contented themselves with ecclesiastical discourses and fanciful chronicles. Thus for centuries the Greeks, Albanians, Rum anians, and South Slavs were “peoples without a history.” A nd when at long last they recovered their in dependence they turned their backs on the preceding O ttom an period as one of national humiliation and ignominy. Instead, their historians wrote of earlier periods of glory and greatness. The Greeks recounted the illustrious achieve ments of their classical and Byzantine ancestors; the Bulgarians turned to their great tsars, Simeon and Samuel; and the Serbians to their Stephen D ushan. C onsequently five centuries of B alkan history still rem ain in large part blurred and indiscernible. In adequate as o u r knowledge is of O ttom an rule in the Balkans, we can at least dismiss as m yth five centuries of unrelieved tyranny and opprcs
90


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 97
sion. The origins of this myth are natural and understandable. It was fostered in the nineteenth century by the various B alkan peoples who, fired by their newly awakened national consciousness, rejected and denounced everything connected with their past servitude. It was accepted and reinforced by W est erners who were more familiar with the em pire of Abdul Ham id than that of Suleim an the M agnificent. Hence it cam e to be considered a fact th at for five hundred years the Balkan Christians had been despoiled and persecuted. This interpretation is a typical exam ple of m odern nationalist mythology but it bears little resem blance to historical fact. T he purpose of this chapter is to analyze as clearly as our present know ledge will allow the actual position of the Balkan peoples during the half millenium of O ttom an rule.
MIGRATIONS OF PEOPLES
The Balkan Peninsula did not change radically in its ethnic com position during the Ottom an period. It did not experience mass migrations com parable to those of the Slavs during the Byzantine era. But it did undergo considerable change in the details of its ethnic configuration. C ertain A siatic Moslem peoples settled in appreciable num bers in various localities, and the Balkan peoples themselves shuffled back and forth under the pressure of economic necessity and historical events. The T urkish conquerors settled in the Balkans in com paratively small numbers. Those who resided in the towns as adm inistrators and soldiers nat urally withdrew with the shrinking of the Ottom an frontiers during the eight eenth and nineteenth centuries. The only Turks that remained were those who had actually settled as agriculturists. Most of these were to be found in the Constantinople area, in Bessarabia, the D obruja, southern and eastern Bul garia, and in certain valleys in M acedonia and Thrace. It is estim ated th at on the eve of W orld W ar II approxim ately one million T urks resided in Constantinople and its environs, and another million were scattered about in isolated settlements in the various Balkan states. Certain other M oslem peoples appeared in the Balkans, the most nu m erous being T atars who cam e from the C rim ea in the late eighteenth cen tury, and Circassians from the Caucasus about a century later. Both these groups settled in the D obruja and in eastern Bulgaria. A nother significant immigration was that of the Jewish refugees who came from Christian Europe in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Constantinople received thirty to forty thousand of the newcomers, Saloniki fifteen to twenty thousand. Almost every other Balkan town had its community of Jews, invariably engaged in trade, crafts, and the professions. These additions to Balkan ethnography did not affect the dom inant position of the native peoples— the Greeks, Albanians, South Slavs, and R u manians. Of these peoples, the Greeks emigrated to foreign countries in larg est numbers, particularly during the long series of Turkish-V enetian wars. Some settled in Dalm atia, Venetia, southern Italy, Corsica, Sicily, and M alta,


!
where they were gradually assimilated by the native inhabitants. Others mi grated to Italian cities, where they founded communities which later made im portant cultural and economic contributions to the motherland. W ith the growth of trade in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, thousands of Greek merchants settled in the urban centers of the northern Balkans, Central Europe, and southern Russia. These communities also contributed greatly to the Greek awakening that preceded the national revolution in 1821. A t the same time that the Greeks were going abroad, large numbers of Albanians were migrating southward into Greece. These agriculturists and stockbreeders settled large areas in central Greece, the Peloponnesus, and even a few islands near the mainland. Since they were an unlettered people, and of the same religion as the Greeks, they were gradually Hellenized by the G reek church and Greek schools. As late as the m id-nineteenth century, how ever, one could find many villages where the women and young children knew only a few words of Greek. The Albanians also expanded during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries into “Old Serbia,” particularly the Kosovo region. Since many Serbians already had migrated northward, the Albanians were able to assimilate those that rem ained behind. Thus this area has re m ained predom inately A lbanian, even though it is now a p art of the Y ugo slav state. The most extensive migrations during the O ttom an period occurred among the Serbian people. W ith the conquest of Serbia in the fifteenth cen tury, large num bers crossed the Danube to Hungary while others migrated to Dalmatia, Bosnia, and Croatia. M ore Serbians crossed over into Hungary at the end of the seventeenth century following the defeat of the Hapsburg armies that they had supported. These migrations, together with the ravaging effects of the A ustrian-Turkish wars, left northern Serbia sparsely populated. The mountaineers of “Old Serbia” and western M acedonia took advantage of the opportunity for better land and migrated in large numbers into the area between the M orava and D rina rivers. A t the same time other mountaineers were migrating westward from Bosnia and Dalm atia to western Slavonia, and from M ontenegro and Herzegovina to western Croatia. These population movements had im portant repercussions. They extended the sway of the Serbian people considerably further to the west and to the north, and they established in southern Hungary a large Serbian population that was to con tribute as much to the awakening of the Turkish-ruled Serbs as the overseas Greek communities did to their com patriots at home. In addition to these individual waves of migrations there was a com mon tendency among the Balkan Christians to move out of the urban centers in order to avoid the Turkish officials and garrisons. As a result the towns became denationalized. During most of the O ttom an period they reflected the nationality of those who held political and economic power. Accordingly, the towns, regardless of their location, consisted largely of Turkish artisans, adm inistrators, and soldiers, and of Greek and Jewish traders and artisans. W estern travelers, between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries, described
98 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 99
the principal Balkan cities as follows: Belgrade— “A mass of buildings and extensive suburbs inhabited by various races, Turks, Greeks, Jews, H ungar ians, Dalmatians, and many others” ; 1 Sofia— “A place so wholly Turkish, that there is nothing in it that appears m ore antique than the T urks them selves” ; 2 Philippopolis— “Almost wholly inhabited by Greeks” ; 3 and Adrianople— “M ost of the rich tradesmen are Jews.” 4 W hen a Serb, R um anian, or Bulgarian, went into a town in his na tive land he found himself a foreigner. This anomalous situation continued until these people gained their independence and until trade and industry gained m omentum. T hen the towns grew fairly rapidly and in doing so drew their population from the surrounding countryside. In this manner the na tional character of the towns gradually changed until the nationality of the land recaptured the towns. This transform ation caused serious frontier dis putes in border regions. In southern Albania and M acedonia the Greeks claimed certain regions because of their past or even continued control of the urban centers, while their opponents pointed to the predominantly nonG reek population in the countryside.
A D M IN ISTR A TIO N
The Ottoman Em pire was divided into two parts for administrative purposes. The European section was headed by the beylerbey (lord of lords) of Rumelia and the Asiatic by the beylerbey of Anatolia. W ith the great expansion of the empire under Selim and Suleiman this simple division be cam e adm inistratively cum bersom e. T he num ber Of beylerbeys was then steadily increased until by the end of the sixteenth century, when the empire reached its greatest extent, they num bered about thirty-five. A t the' same time their title was changed from beylerbey to veli, and the territories they administered were known as eyalets rather than beylerbeyliks. A typical eyalet in the Balkan Peninsula comprised a considerable area: for example, Morea, Bosnia, or Temesvar. Each veli had a staff for the adm inistration of his eya let. This included a mufti (interpreter of the K o ran ), a reis effendi (recording secretary), a defterdar (treasurer), and a considerable num ber of clerks. Below the veli in the adm inistrative hierarchy stood the sanjakbey, who administered a sanjak, of which there were several in each eyalet. Each sanjakbey had a num ber of assistants corresponding to those of the veli. In the smaller towns the sanjakbeys were represented by the subashis, who were supplied with a sufficient num ber of janissaries to m aintain the peace. T he position of the Christian peasants governed by these officials varied considerably from region to region. W hen the Turks overran the Bal kan Peninsula they abolished the feudal arrangements prevailing under the former Byzantine, Latin, Serbian, and Bulgarian rulers. In their place they introduced a feudal system of their own which was more lenient and cen tralized. They granted fiefs in the newly conquered lands to their m ost de serving warriors. As noted in an earlier chapter, these fief holders, or spahis, were of two ranks, the ziams with large fiefs (ziam ets) and the tim ariots who


1 00 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
held small fiefs (tim ars). In time of w ar each spahi was required to report for service with a num ber of armed followers proportionate to the size of his fief. W hen the empire was at its height, there were approxim ately twelve thousand fiefs in the B alkan lands. Turkish immigrants settled down and actually occupied the land only in certain localities noted above. In the rest of the peninsula the Turks nor mally parceled out the most fertile plains areas as fiefs to the spahis. This in turn caused a considerable number of Greek and Slavic peasants to migrate to nearby m ountainous regions. Peasants who lived in the m ountainous areas th a t were not divided into fiefs paid taxes directly to the governm ent tax farm ers. The taxes consisted prim arily of the light head tax required from all non-M oslems and also the tithe which normally took one tenth of the farm produce. Peasants on the m ilitary fiefs paid taxes to the spahi or to his rep resentative. These taxes were similar to those paid to the government. They comprised the head tax— which the spahi transm itted to the treasury— the customary tithe, and light money dues depending on the amount of land the peasant cultivated. M any peasants lived on fiefs not held by spahis. In fact, the spahis controlled less than half the enfeoffed land of the empire. The rem ainder com prised fiefs that were set aside for the support of higher administrative officers, members of the imperial family, and the sultan himself. A nother large category of peasants lived on land known as vakf, which was not under feudal tenure. Vakf land was designated for the support of religious, educa tional, and charitable enterprises, such as schools, libraries, public baths, mosques, and convents for dervishes. Some of this land originally had been set aside by sultans. Private individuals later contributed more parcels of land. Since no vakf property could be confiscated, it increased steadily in extent until it included, according to one estim ate, a third of all the arable land of the empire. The average Balkan peasant during the early Q ttom an period tilled his land under better conditions than his counterpart in Christian Europe. One advantage was the lighter tax burden. He had hereditary use of a definite tract of land, which he regarded as his own and for which he paid only the head tax, the tithe, and a few minor additional imposts. A nother advantage was the freedom from the feudal services and seigniorial jurisdiction charac teristic of W estern feudalism. The spahi had no legal right of lordship and justice over the peasants living in his fief. H e was not allowed to eject them by force or, theoretically at least, to prevent them from moving and settling elsewhere. He was perm itted only to collect the customary dues in return for which he gave military service in time of war. In other words, the Balkan peasant enjoyed the great advantage of being regarded simply as a source of revenue. This basic difference between W estern and O ttom an feudalism ex plains the favorable position of the Balkan peasant— a least for as long as O ttom an feudalism remained vigorous and unimpaired. Undoubtedly there was considerable difference between the theory and the practice of Turkish


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 101
feudalism, even when the empire was unimpaired. Nevertheless, the bulk of contem porary evidence indicates clearly that the Balkan peoples at this early period enjoyed substantial advantages denied to their counterparts in the W est.
AUTONOM OUS REGIONS
T he adm inistrative and tax system described above is a simplified blueprint of O ttom an rule in the Balkans. But the blueprint does not apply to all sections of the peninsula. Regional conditions varied too greatly to make complete uniformity possible. Also, Ottoman adm inistration developed in an ad hoc fashion. During the period of conquest special local arrange ments and concessions were common. Once made, they were likely to be perpetuated by the inertia and conservative spirit of the em pire. Thus we find in every section of the peninsula num erous variations and exceptions to the general pattern of government. O ttom an authorities customarily granted special privileges to groups, villages, and even entire districts th at they considered to be contributing in some manner to the welfare and security of the empire. Groups that received partial or complete tax exemption included miners, bridge builders, ferryboat operators, rice cultivators, official couriers, and guards of bridges, forests, and mountain passes. Also, certain villages were freed from taxation because they produced some valuable commodity and shipped a stipulated portion of their output to Constantinople. O ther villages were granted complete self-governm ent as well as tax exem ption in return for direct contributions to the armed forces. Examples of this arrangem ent were certain Bulgarian villages that provided the Ottom an army with regular and auxiliary troops, and also cer tain Greek islands that sent an annual quota of sailors to the O ttom an navy. Some areas— Athens and Rhodes, for example— were removed from the reg ular imperial adm inistration and enjoyed a large degree of self-government because they were the perm anent appanages of members of the royal family. Finally, certain regions received at the time of their conquest special con cessions that were observed thereafter. Typical examples were the city of Y anina in northw estern Greece and the Timok area along the Danube. In the latter place hereditary Serbian leaders dispensed justice, collected taxes, and retained arm ed guards with no Turkish interference until 1833. The most significant exceptions to regular administrative procedure were to be found in certain inaccessible mountain areas that the Turks could not subjugate completely or did not deem worth the effort to do so. This was true in northern Albania, where the O ttom an authorities encountered so much resistance that in the mid-sixteenth century they granted complete autonomy and tax exemption in return for contingents of fighting men. A similar situa tion prevailed in M ontenegro. Until the late seventeenth century the M onte negrin m ountaineers paid the head tax with reasonable regularity and in re turn were allowed to manage their own affairs. But in 1688 they began their


102 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
long struggle for independence, which they continued with varying fortunes until their final success in 1799. Turkish authority was equally tenuous in the mountainous Souli and Cheim arra districts of northwestern Greece and in the Mane district of southern Greece. The inhabitants of these areas paid with much reluctance and irregularity an annual tribute to Constantinople. But in their internal affairs they enjoyed complete autonomy, recognizing the authority only of their own tribal chieftains. The regions we have considered to this point were included in the customary eyalet administrative units. Theoretically they were subject to the regular imperial government, though in practice their only connection with Constantinople was the periodic tribute. We will consider now the status of four remaining regions: Moldavia, W allachia, Transylvania, and Ragusa. These were unique in that they were not divided into eyalets and were not under jurisdiction, actual or theoretical, of O ttom an officials. The Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia may be considered to gether, since they were both inhabited by Rum anians and both stood in a similar relationship to Constantinople. We noted in Chapter 4 that the Turks overran W allachia in the fifteenth century and M oldavia in the sixteenth. They granted complete autonomy to the two principalities in return for the paym ent of tribute. They also allowed the Rum anian nobles or boyars to elect their own princes or hospodars. Although this practice continued for some time, it soon becam e meaningless. The Candidates for office custom arily bribed the sultan ’s m inisters for their favor, which was decisive. Thus the hospodars followed one another in quick succession to the profit of the officials in the capital who pulled the strings. W hen Peter the G reat ap proached the principalities at the head of his army in 1711, both hospodars proclaim ed themselves in his favor. From then on the O ttom an government appointed to the two thrones only members of a group of Greek adm inistra tors and financiers known as Phanariotes. Since these Phanariotes came from Constantinople they could be appointed and removed w ithout any difficulty. This arrangement continued until the Greek revolution of 1821, after which the Phanariotes were replaced once more by native Rumanian hospodars. But by that time the O ttom an government no longer held undisputed dom ina tion over the principalities. Russian influence and intervention were becom ing increasingly strong until the Crim ean W ar made possible the creation of an autonomous and united Rumanian state in 1861.* The third of the four autonom ous Balkan dependencies of the O tto man Em pire was the kingdom of Transylvania. Its population was predom i nantly Rumanian, though with large H ungarian and Germ an minorities. Be fore the Turkish conquest Transylvania had been a province of the Hungarian kingdom. When Suleiman overran Hungary he granted Transylvania an au tonomous tributary status. His successors respected this arrangement, allow ing the native nobility to elect their kings with little interference. A fter the
* See C hapter 18.


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 103
failure of the Turks to take Vienna in 1683 their influence declined in T ran sylvania. A few years later, by the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699, they ceded the entire area to the Austrians. It rem ained under the Hapsburgs until W orld W ar I, after which it was incorporated in the enlarged Rum anian kingdom.* The fourth and final Balkan dependency of the O ttom an Em pire was the tiny city-republic of Dubrovnik or Ragusa. Founded in the seventh cen tury by fugitives fleeing before the invading Slavs, it soon becam e the leading commercial center of the Dalm atian coast. For centuries its m erchants and literary men played a leading role in the economic and cultural life of the peninsula. But it never possessed the resources necessary for complete inde pendence. Accordingly, the Ragusans paid tribute to the most powerful neigh boring state in order to be free to carry on their trade. First they recognized the sovereignty of Venice, then of H ungary, and finally of the O ttom an E m pire. The Turkish conquest of the Balkans proved a boon for the Ragusans. The numerous customs barriers erected by the former rulers were replaced by low and uniform duties applying to the whole peninsula. Thus the Ragu sans not only accepted Turkish overlordship but actively opposed Venetian attempts to gain control of adjacent territory. This mutually satisfactory re lationship with the Turks lasted until the early nineteenth century, when N apoleon acquired all D alm atia and incorporated Ragusa in his newly cre ated province of Illyria. In 1815 the city passed to the H apsburgs and re mained under their rule until it became a part of the new Yugoslav state in 1918. In conclusion, the rule of the O ttom an sultans in the Balkans might be compared to that of the Chinese em perors in Eastern Asia. The lands south of the Danube were ruled, with certain exceptions, directly from C on stantinople, just as the territory south of the G reat Wall was ruled, with sim ilar exceptions, directly from Peking. Likewise, the status of M oldavia, W al lachia, and Transylvania resembled that of Mongolia, Sinkiang, and Tibet. So long as the central government remained strong, these outlying regions acknowledged its sovereignty and paid the custom ary tribute. B ut when it became weak, these autonomous regions were the first to come under the control or influence of powerful neighboring empires— Russia and Austria in the case of the Balkans, Russia and Britain in the case of E astern Asia.
PATRIARCHATE
It is an irony of history th at the patriarch of C onstantinople enjoyed greater ecclesiastical and secular jurisdiction under the O ttom an sultans than under the Byzantine emperors. One reason for this anomalous situation was the desire of M ohammed II to perpetuate the rift between the Catholic and Orthodox worlds. Accordingly, he arranged for the election to the patriarchal seat of Gennadius Scholarius, an eminent Orthodox jurist and a strong oppo
* See C hapter 30.


104 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
nent of the Latin church. M ohammed also granted Gennadius a berat or ordi nance defining the new status of the church. The berat declared the patriarch to be “untaxable and irremovable.” It assigned to him and to his synod the authority to settle all m atters of doc trine, to control and discipline all m em bers of the church, to manage all church property, and to levy dues on laity and clergy alike. The berat also granted full freedom of conscience. O rthodox Christians were free to keep sacred books and icons in their homes and to attend church services un molested. Finally, the berat invested the patriarch with considerable civil au thority as the head not only of the Orthodox church but also of the Orthodox community or millet. Ecclesiastical tribunals could pass on matters concern ing marriage, divorce, and inheritance. G radually they extended their juris diction to all civil cases since Christian litigants usually preferred the verdict of the bishop to that of the Turkish kadi. Thus the O rthodox bishops func tioned in their dioceses virtually as prefects over the Christian population as well as ecclesiastical prelates. A nd the patriarch in C onstantinople was not only the head of the O rthodox Church and of the O rthodox millet, but also a recognized Ottom an official, holding the rank of vizir, and serving as inter mediary between the O rthodox Christians and the imperial government. The other factor explaining the increased authority of the patriarch was the sudden extension of the imperial frontiers from the environs of Con stantinople to the valley of the Danube. This made possible a corresponding extension of the frontiers of patriarchal jurisdiction. During the preceding centuries the trend had been in the opposite direction. The decline of Byzan tium and the rise of the Bulgarian and Serbian empires had led to the estab lishment of independent Bulgarian and Serbian churches and to the corre sponding contraction of the Constantinople patriarchate. Conversely, the disappearance of the Bulgarian and Serbian states with the Turkish invasion was followed also by the disappearance of their respective churches. The Bul garian p atriarchate, which had been established originally in the time of T sar Simeon, came to an end in 1393. Likewise, the Serbian patriarchate, which had arisen under Tsar Dushan, was abolished in 1459. During the following centuries the ecclesiastical center of the Balkan Slavs was the Bulgarian A rch bishopric of Ohrid, which retained a certain degree of autonomy. But the seat of ecclesiastical authority was now definitely in Constantinople. The jurisdic tion of the patriarch, like that of the sultan, was unchallenged throughout the Balkans. It remained unchallenged until 1557, when the G rand Vizir M oham med Sokolli (Sokolovich), who was of Serbian origin, used his influence to establish the Serbian Patriarchate of Ipek (P ec). For over a century this pa triarchate played an im portant role in Serbian national life. D uring the series of Hapsburg-Ottom an wars in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth' cen turies, the patriarchate threw in its lot with the Hapsburgs. But the latter finally were forced to withdraw across the Danube, leaving the Ipek patriar chate in an impossible position. At this time when the Serbians had been


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 105
discredited, the Phanariotes and other Greek elements were gaining influence in Constantinople. This com bination of circumstances led to the abolition of the Ipek patriarchate in 1766 and of the Ohrid archbishopric the following year. The Constantinople patriarchate once more reigned supreme in the peninsula. It continued to do so as long as the Balkan peoples remained sub ject to O ttom an authority. But with the rise of national consciousness and the establishment of independent nation-states we note a repetition of what happened in the late Byzantine period. The imperial frontiers shrank back toward Constantinople and the scope of patriarchal jurisdiction contracted correspondingly. One after another the various Balkan states gained inde pendent or “autocephalous” churches until, by the end of W orld W ar I, the Constantinople patriarchate exercised authority only in Constantinople and its environs. In retrospect, the position of the Orthodox Church under O ttom an rule appears extraordinarily favorable. But a distinction must be drawn be tween paper privileges and actual practice. The Christians had a substantial degree of religious freedom but this did not mean religious equality. N onMoslems were forbidden to ride horses or to bear arms. They were required to wear a particular costume to distinguish them from the true believers. Their dwellings could not be loftier than those of the Moslems. They could not repair their churches or ring their bells except by special permission, which was rarely granted. They were required to pay a special capitation tax levied on all non-M oslem adult males in place of military service. A nd until the seventeenth century the O rthodox Christians paid the tribute in children from which the Jews and the Armenians were exempted. In addition to these discriminatory obligations and disabilities, nonMoslems were always subject to illegal violations of their privileges. The sul tan might confirm the institutional rights of the church but this was no guarantee against outbursts of Moslem fanaticism or arbitrary actions by provincial officials. Church property all too frequently was confiscated and the clergy humiliated and persecuted. The sultans themselves changed their atti tude toward the O rthodox Church as they came to realize that there was no danger of a united Christian assault. Their former deference to an esteemed ally therupon changed to scorn for a powerless subject.
BALKAN CHRISTIANITY
O ttom an religious policy is one of the m ajor factors determ ining the historical development of the Balkan peoples. We have seen that the position of the O rthodox Christians under the M oslem Turks was far from ideal. They suffered from various disabilities and discriminations. In later years they suf fered also from arbitrary exactions and occasional violence. Despite this, they enjoyed much more freedom than did the various religious minorities in con tem porary Christendom . By way of illustration it is sufficient to m ention the


106 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
plight of the Huguenots in Catholic France, the Catholics in Anglican Eng land, the O rthodox in Catholic Poland, the Moslems in Catholic Spain, and the Jews in all Christian lands. M ore revealing is the difference in the m anner with which the T urks and the Venetians treated their Greek O rthodox subjects. The Venetians in variably forbade the appointment of O rthodox bishops, compelled the lower clergy to obey the Catholic hierarchy, and supported the latter in their efforts to convert the population to Catholicism. W hen the French traveler M otraye landed at M odon on the west coast of the Peloponnesus in 1710, he discov ered that the townspeople were extremely hostile toward their Venetian over lords, who had gained possession of the Peloponnesus by the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699. A m ajor grievance was the unceasing proselytism of the Catholic clergy. One of the local inhabitants complained to M otraye that “their priests come to us to talk against our religion, bothering us incessantly and urging us to embrace theirs, something that the Turks never dream ed of doing. On the contrary, they gave us all the liberty that we could have wished fo r____ ” B The significance of this difference between O ttom an and W estern re ligious policy is that it explains in large part the success of Balkan C hristian ity in surviving the centuries of Moslem rule with rem arkably few losses. Mass conversions to Islam occurred only in a few parts of the peninsula, the most im portant being A lbania and Bosnia. In both regions the majority of the population had turned away from Christianity by the middle of the seven teenth century. The inhabitants of certain parts of Bulgaria also accepted Islam and came to be known as the Bulgarian-speaking Pomaks. Among the G reeks the only large-scale shift occurred on the island Of Crete. T he T urks captured the island in 1669 and within a century half of its inhabitants had become Moslems. This shift did not have a perm anent effect because the C retan Moslems emigrated to Turkey when the island passed under Greek control. In some cases special local circumstances explain these conversions. The large num ber of Bogomils, harried by both the O rthodox and Catholic churches, contributed greatly to the Islam ization of Bosnia. The C retan is landers appear to have been influenced by the striking contrast between the rapacity and intolerance of their former Venetian masters and the easygoing, laissez-faire policy of the Turks. In other parts of the peninsula a com bina tion of factors prom pted the acceptance of Islam. Some Christians wished to escape the child-tribute and the financial exactions, though the latter were never as burdensome as the taxes imposed by the Venetians in their Balkan possessions. O ther Christians were driven to Islam by the apathy and igno rance of some of their clergy. Still others com m itted apostasy lightheartedly because of a tendency toward cultural assimilation between Christian and M oslem communities. This was especially true in A lbania, where contem po rary observers noted that many Moslems baptized their children, becartie (he


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 107
godfathers of Christian children, and attended the festivals for Christian saints. W hatever the com bination of factors that prevailed in specific re gions, the im portant point is that the B alkan Christians were never subjected to systematic and sustained proselytism. They never experienced the persecu tion that the Moslems and the Jews suffered in Spain. H ad they done so, the religious map of the Balkans probably would be quite different today. A t least two sultans, Selim I and M urad III, did consider seriously the mass exter m ination of all Christian subjects who refused to em brace Islam. They were dissuaded from their project by the arguments of their religious advisers and also by the prospect of losing the revenue from the capitation tax. B ut if they had carried out their plan it is difficult to believe that they would not have been substantially successful, given the defenselessness of the Christians and the prestige and attraction of Islam at the time. If Islam had tirum phed in large areas it would have involved more than simply a shift in the balance of religions. Religious affiliation frequently has determined national consciousness in the Balkans. Thousands of Alba nians and Vlachs becam e Hellenized through their m em bership in the G reek O rthodox Church. Likewise, thousands of Greeks on the island of Crete con sidered themselves Turks and chose to emigrate to Turkey because of their Moslem faith. Thus if a large portion of the Balkan peoples had become Moslems, not only their religious but also thpir cultural and political develop ment would have been altered to a fundamental degree. It is often stated that the great contribution of O rthodoxy during the Turkish era was that it preserved the religion and culture, and hence the national identity, of the B alkan C hristians. T his claim is valid, but it should be noted at the same time that the O rthodox Church was able to accomplish its mission because it functioned under conditions which, if not favorable, at least were not uncompromisingly hostile as in the West. Therein lies the sig nificance of O ttom an religious policy for the historical developm ent of the Balkan peoples.
FOLK CULTURE
The Turks had little influence on Balkan culture. One reason was that they were separated from their subjects by religious and social barriers. A nother was that the Turks resided mostly in the towns. Accordingly, their cultural influence was limited largely to urban institutions. In fact, Balkan towns took on a m arked O riental character with their bazaars and mosques and narrow streets lined by flimsy wooden houses. Turkish influence on the Balkan languages was substantial. The few books w ritten in the Balkan ver naculars during or immediately following the Turkish period contain a high percentage of words of Turkish origin. These words were gradually eliminated during the decades following liberation, so that eventually they were lim ited mostly to m atters relating to urban life. Thus an A m erican who dines in a G reek or Serbian restaurant in the U nited States today will find a large


108 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
proportion of Turkish words on the menu— pilaf for rice, shish-kebab for m eat grilled on skewers, moussaka for eggplant pâté, and dolma for vine leaves stuffed with chopped meat. The superficiality of Turkish influence allowed the Balkan peoples to develop their respective cultures freely. In each case they made their most im portant contributions in their folk literature. This was usually anonymous, com posed in the vernacular, and passed on from generation to generation by word of m outh. Certain characteristics are com m on to all Balkan folk songs. M ost striking is the personification of nature. M ountain peaks dispute with each other; plants and animals hold allegorical conversations; and birds bring aid, give advice, and deliver love messages. Some of the most artistic and lively of the G reek folk songs are known as the klephtika. These extoll the feats of the klephts, or Robin Hood outlaws, who took to the mountains and started a guerrilla resistance that lasted until the winning of national independence. Among the most popular of these songs is “T he D eath of the K lepht,” a piece th at is typical not only in its m ilitancy but also in its fearless and nonm etaphysical attitude tow ard death and the afterlife.
Eat and drink, my comrades, rejoice and let us be gay, nothing ails me but a wound! H ow bitter is the wound, how venom ous the bullet! Come, lift me up and set me yonder. Come, some of you brave lads, and take me and carry me up to a high hill. Strew green branches; then set me down, and from the priests fetch me sweet wine to wash the wound, for 1 am hurt, and take my knife, my silver scimitar, and dig my grave and build my coffin, wide, long, room y enough for two to stand erect, fight, take cover, reload, and on my right side, leave a window, so that birds may fly in and out, the nightingales of Spring.6
Most Balkan ballads are of m oderate length or quite short. The one exception is Serbian epic poetry. This is one of the m ost artistic creations of all the ballad literature of Europe. The epics usually are divided into nine cycles that present a fascinating picture of the history of the Serbian people. Starting with the medieval kingdoms, they continue through the Turkish conquest and occupation, the resistance of the haiduks (corresponding to the G reek klephts), the struggle for independence in the early nineteenth century, and finally the events of the postliberation period. The Serbian heroes in these epics were adopted by the neighboring South Slavic peoples and glorified in their respective literatures. This is particularly true of the burly, blustering, impulsively chivalrous haiduk, M arko Kraljevich. M arko is a spoiled child. He is strong, self-willed, capricious, at times cruel, but always brave, alvyays


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 109
fighting and hating the Turks, and always protecting the weak and the friend less. M arko also is a fabulous drinker, and so is his steed, Sharatz. N either touches anything but wine. “ Half he drinks himself, half he gives to Sharatz.” These qualities endeared M arko to all South Slavs, and he became their greatest hero. One evening his m other asked him to settle down.
W eary is thy m other of washing from thy shirts the crim son stain But do thou now yoke ox to plow, and plow the hill and the plain.
Humbly M arko promises to obey his mother. The next morning he goes out with oxen and plow. But he knows nothing about husbandry. He starts the oxen cross country and tears up the “ tsar’s highway.”
Some janissaries come thereby; three packs of gold had they: “Plow not the tsar his highway, Prince M arko,” said they then. “Ye Turks, mar not my plowing!” he answered them again. “Plow not the tsar his highway, Prince M arko,” they said anew. “Ye Turks, mar not my plowing!” he answered thereunto. But M arko was vext; in anger he lifted ox and plow, And the Turkish janissaries he slew them at a blow, And their three packs of treasure to his mother he bore away: “Lo, mother, what my plowing hath won for thee to-day!” 7
ECCLESIASTICAL C U LTU R E
Turning from the folk arts to the written literature and formal learn ing of these ccnturics, we enter another world utterly different in every re spect. Here again we find certain common characteristics prevailing through out the peninsula. The most basic was the all-pervading influence of the O rthodox Church. In the theocratically organized society of this period it nat urally dom inated education, w ritten literature, and general intellectual life. The few teachers invariably wore priestly robes. The few books, with unim portant exceptions, were theological treatises. In place of several Balkan liter atures there existed only one Orthodox ecclesiastical literature, written either in a debased classical G reek incom prehensible to most Greeks, or in an archaic Church Slavonic incom prehensible to most Slavs. A second com m on characteristic was the terribly low level of learn ing. Among the Greeks, for example, the m ost distinguished scholars had fled to Italy with the Turkish invasion. Patriarch Gennadius attem pted to maintain standards b y . establishing in 1454 the Patriarchal Academy. For centuries this institution fulfilled a most im portant function in training the Phanariote adm inistrators who filled the top posts in both empire and church. But even this school operated with difficulty, being forced to close down periodically because of lack of funds. In the Greek provinces conditions were infinitely worse. Church schools appeared sporadically in a few towns, strug gled along with meager means, and then closed down. The level of learning declined from generation to generation, reaching a low point at the end of


1 1 0 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
the sixteenth century. Persons with even a modicum of education were so scarce that church positions rem ained vacant. M any villages in central and northern Greece were left w ithout priests. Even archbishops had difficulty in writing their own names correctly. Similar conditions prevailed amongst the non-Greek peoples of the peninsula. Before the Turkish conquest the outstanding cultural center in the northern Balkans was the Bulgarian capital, Tirnovo. The Bulgarian patri arch, Euthym ius, was the most learned Slav of his time. Pupils came to his monastery from Serbia, Rumania, and Russia. Tirnovo came to be known as the A thens of the South Slavs. But in 1393 the Turks captured Tirnovo, forcing Euthym ius and his disciples to flee to neighboring countries. In the following centuries learning throughout the northern Balkans sank to the same low level we noted in the Greek lands. The Bulgarians, who formerly had been the most advanced, now were left the farthest behind. The Rumanians had the advantage of a certain degree of autonomy which later allowed their more enlightened princes to endow schools and establish printing presses. The Greeks and the Serbians could look forward to economic aid and intel lectual stimulus from their more fortunate com patriots living in foreign countries. But the Bulgarians had neither autonomy at home nor the pros pect of assistance from abroad. This explains in part why the Bulgarians were to lag behind the Greeks and the Serbians in developing a sense of national consciousness and in winning their independence. A third common cultural characteristic was the phenomenon of bilinguism. This arose because of an im portant difference between the linguistic development of the Latin West and the Greek East. Classical Latin was too closely identified with the R om an Em pire to be able to survive its collapse. Hence the development of several Rom ance languages during the medieval period. In the East, on the other hand, the survival of the Byzantine Em pire to the fifteenth century, together with the enorm ous prestige of the classical language and literature, combined to prevent, the ancient Greek language from developing along the same lines as classical Latin. Instead, the ancient language was preserved in a corrupted form known as the katharevousa or “pure” language. This was the language of the cultured Greeks, in the same m anner that literary Turkish was the language of the cultured Osmanlis, m entioned in the preceding chapter. But the katharevousa was as unintelligible to the G reek peasant as literary T urkish was to the A natolian peasant. During the intervening centuries a demotic or vernacular language had developed with simplified gram m atical constructions and with a certain num ber of Slavic, Albanian, Turkish, and Italian words. This dem otic lan guage differed as much from ancient Greek as m odern English does from th at of C haucer’s time. N evertheless the katharevousa rem ains the official Greek language to the present day, creating serious educational and literary problem s.*
* See Chapter 34.


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 1 1 1
Bilinguism was a problem in the northern Balkans as well as among the Greeks. In addition to their respective cultures, the South Slavs and the Rum anians had an artificial literary language known as Church Slavonic. This language dates back to the ninth century when the Bulgarian Tsar Boris accepted the Byzantine form of Christianity and encouraged the missionary work of Clement and his followers. These missionaries translated the Holy Scriptures and church books into an archaic Slavic perm eated by G reek con struction forms and ecclesiastical terminology. This Church Slavonic lan guage continued to be used for centuries. It became the official ecclesiastical and literary language, not only of the Bulgarians, but also of the other peo ples who adopted O rthodox Christianity— the Serbians, the Rumanians, and the Russians. For these people the Church Slavonic was as artificial and in comprehensible as the katharevousa was for the Greeks. But whereas the Greeks retained their “pure” language under the influence of their classical tradition, the other O rthodox peoples were less attached to the Church Slavonic and from the seventeenth century onw ard gradually dropped it as a literary language. The fourth and final characteristic of Balkan culture was its antiW esternism. The church itself was profoundly hostile to the West. Gennadius became the first patriarch under the Turks precisely because he was irre concilably anti-Catholic and anti-W estern. He and most of his successors op posed the West as the home of Catholicism and Protestantism and as the birthplace of the Renaissance. They rejected vigorously everything the Ren aissance represented— the exaltation of reason in place of dogma, the turn to Greek antiquity, and the preference for Plato rather than Aristotle. In short, Balkan Orthodoxy opposed the W est not only because it was heretical but also because it was becoming modern. The inevitable result of this opposition was the intellectual isolation and stagnation of the Balkan peoples. The one exception, significantly enough, was in Ragusa and in the Venetian-held Greek islands. There we find an entirely different civilizationsecular, sophisticated, individualistic, and maintaining close ties with the West. Its written literature was not church-dominated as was the case on the mainland. Instead, it consisted of epic poetry, lyrics, and dram a, comparable to the literature of Italy at this time. The greatest literary creation of the m odern G reek people is the epic poem Erotokritos com posed about 1650 by the C retan w riter, V incenzo K ornaros. It is notew orthy th at this w ork is written in the vernacular demotic rather than in the artificial katharevousa favored by the church on the mainland. Likewise in Ragusa, Ivan Gundulich wrote a famous epic poem, Osman, in which he glorified his beloved city and anticipated the liberation and unification of all South Slavs. Such writing and such ideas were completely foreign to the peoples of the mainland. Their intellectual horizon did not extend beyond the con cepts of faith and local community affairs. Living in a static and self-con tained Orthodox theocracy, they remained oblivious to the new learning,


1 1 2 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
the scientific advances, and the burgeoning of the arts that were transform ing and revivifying the W estern world. The hostility of Balkan Orthodoxy to the West might be compared with the opposition of Russian Orthodoxy against Peter the Great. In fact, P atriarch Dositheus of Jerusalem actively participated in the campaign against the tsa r’s W esternization program and particularly against his plan for an A cadem y of Sciences organized on W estern lines. The Orthodox leaders failed in Russia because in that country the state power was arrayed against them. But in the Balkan Peninsula the O ttom an officials were uninterested and the peasantry inert. Consequently, the O rthodox hierarchy was the un challenged arbiter in all m atters intellectual. A nd it rem ained unchallenged until the eighteenth century, when, as we shall see in Chapter 9, new forces produced new classes with new ideas that spelled the beginning of the end of the age of theoracy.
“pa x o t t o m a n ic a ”
O ne of the m ost com m on m yths relating to B alkan history is th at the five centuries of T urkish rule were centuries of unrelieved tryanny and op pression. It is often stated th at during th at period the C hristians had yearned for freedom and had awaited impatiently for an opportunity to rise against the infidel conqueror. This interpretation fails to explain the actual course of events. The various Balkan peoples admittedly outnum bered the Turks. They lived in com pact groups and retained their languages and religions. If they had been oppressed and ready for revolt, they would have caused more trouble for the Turks than they actually did. But for most of this period the Turks had less trouble ruling their Christian subjects in the Balkans than their M oslem subjects in Asia. T he explanation is th at the com ing of the T urks was for m any B alkan peasants a boon rather than a disaster. The preceding Byzantine emperors, Greek despots, Frankish nobles, Venetian signors, and Bulgarian and Serbian princes had for two centuries ravaged the peninsula with incessant wars and severe exploitation. The O ttom an conquerors wiped out these dynasties and ruling classes, and put an end to their feuds and extortions. It does not follow that the O ttom an invasion was a pleasant or painless experience. M assacres and mass enslavem ent were all too common. But once the shock of conquest had passed, the condition of the subject peoples in most regions took a turn for the better. M uch contemporary evidence supports this conclusion. M ost impres sive is the testim ony of M ichael K onstantinovich, a Serbian who was taken prisoner in battle with the Turks in 1454. He was forced to enter the janis sary corps and for nine years fought under their banner in Asia M inor and the Balkans. In 1463 he escaped to the Hungarians and later settled in Poland. There he wrote his memoirs in which he exhorted “all peoples who honor Jesus Christ” to “help the [Balkan] Christians against the pagans.” Konstantinovich was a Serbian patriot and an ardent Christian who clung to


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 113
his faith despite generous treatm ent and rap id prom otion by the Turks. It is all the more significant, therefore, when he concedes that “amongst these pagans there is great righteousness, they are just to themselves and am ong each other and also toward their subordinates, whether those were Chris tians or Jews . . . because the T sar [SultanJ himself looks sternly to it. . . .” Konstantinovich also describes from his personal experience how the O ttom an armies were scrupulously respectful of private property and paid fair prices to the Christian peasants for provisions.
Extraordinary taxes they [the Christians] never give, neither to the Tsar nor to their masters [the spahi feudal lords]. But when the T sar’s arm y is passing by, no one may go through the green crops nor make any damage, nor take away from anyone anything against his will. And if someone should take something from anyone w ithout his will, the other pagan masters would not let him do it, nor would they forgive each other, because they don’t wish the dam age of the poor, and if one should take only one hen by force, one would lose his head. Be cause the Tsar wants under no condition that evil should be done to the poor. When the Tsar orders the Christians, they must send many thousands of samars or horses, who carry food; and they will sell where they are ordered to, each sepparately, because the things are priced justly without damage to them.
If it is recalled th at this was a period when W estern arm ies alm ost invariably behaved in a barbarous manner, respecting neither the persons nor the property of their own Christian peasants, then the import of Kon stantinovich’s testim ony may be appreciated. T o illustrate the stern justice of the “pagan masters,” Konstantinovich relates the following incident, which it is to be hoped is apocryphal but which is not w ithout significance in its context.
Thus it happened during Tsar M urad that a woman accused an Azab [irregular infantryman] that on the road he took milk away from her and drank it. T hen T sar M urad ordered that he be caught and his belly be cut open, so that one may see w hether there is milk in the stom ach, and they found th at there is although he denied it; and if there w ouldn’t be found any the sam e would happen to the woman; and thus the poor soldier was left without a head and the woman without milk; and that happened near Plovdin going to Chrnom en.8
We may conclude that the Turks ruled the Balkans as long as they did because they satisfied the needs of their subject peoples to an acceptable degree. In later centuries their administrative institutions deteriorated and became corrupt and oppressive. But in doing so O ttom an rule became less dangerous for the Balkan peoples. It did not threaten their national identity and cohesiveness. Its inefficiency and flabbiness eliminated the possibility of denationalization and gave assurance for the future of the subject Christians. The significance of this point becomes clear if we compare the rule of the Turks on the mainland with that of the Venetians in the Greek islands and in the Peloponnesus. The Venetians levied much heavier taxes, allowed no self-government, controlled commerce strictly, and encouraged prosely


114 Age of Ottoman Ascendancy to 1566
tism. In almost every respect their rule was more oppressive and more unpop ular. Contemporary observers were nearly unanimous on this point. Stephen Gerlach, the chaplain of the H apsburg embassy in Constantinople, noted in his diary in 1575 that “the Venetians kept their subjects in Cyprus (like the Genoese theirs in Chios) worse than slaves. . . . A fter the Turks came, the poor people are freed of their burden and are equally free, but their masters, who had tortured them, were caught and sold in Turkey.” 9 Venetian rule was not only more oppressive but also more threaten ing. The Venetians incited dissension among their subjects deliberately and effectively. They treated the aristocratic landowners generously, permitting them to retain their estates and titles. The latter responded by identifying themselves with their foreign masters rather than with their own countrymen. On the island of Crete the native nobles either remained neutral or actively supported the Venetians during the peasant revolt of 1567-1573. Likewise, in the Ionian Islands the cleavage among the Greeks was so complete that the peasants in 1638 revolted against their native landowners rather than against the Venetians. This “divide and rule” strategy was so successful that its effect continued to be felt long after the Venetians departed. The Turks, by contrast, unwittingly strengthened the group solidarity of their subjects. They did so by granting a large degree of communal auton omy, by imposing regulations separating Moslems from non-Moslems, and by exterminating the native aristocracies. The latter policy deprived the Balkan peoples of their leaders but also freed them from social differentiation and strife. During the long centuries of O ttom an rule they continued to exist as a peasant mass— separate, homogeneous, and united. It is interesting to speculate how different the course of B alkan his tory might have been if the Turks had followed the contem porary Venetian policy of “divide and rule” or the contem porary W estern policy of forceful religious conformity. Either course would have strengthened very considera bly their hold over the peninsula. The fact that they adopted neither ex plains in large part why the Balkan peoples were able to retain their unity and identity, and eventually to win their independence. In conclusion we may dismiss the myth of five centuries of “d ark ness and slavery” as a part of the folklore of Balkan nationalism. Turkish rule in the early period was in many respects commendable. It provided the Balkan peoples with a degree of peace and security that previously had been conspicuously absent. It permitted them to practice their faith and to conduct their communal affairs with a minimum of intervention and taxation. Any com parison with V enetian rule in G reece during the sam e period is largely favorable to the Turks. In the following chapter we shall note that the situa tion later changed drastically. The deterioration of the O ttom an imperial structure inevitably had its effect on the subject peoples. In contrast to the form er discipline and efficiency, they now were subjected to the rapacious ness of government officials and to the violence of uncontrolled soldiery and robber bands. Indeed, the plight of the Christians during this period was no


Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule 115
worse than th at of the M oslems. B ut im perial degeneration is not a p h e nomenon peculiar to Turkish rule. A nd it should not be allowed to obscure the role and significance of Pax Ottomanica in the history of the Balkan peoples.




I 5 6 Ü 1815
Pari III. Age til Ottoman Decline
8 . D e c lin e o f th e O tto m a n E m p ir e
T
J L h e O t t o m a n E m p i r e reached the height of its pow er and prestige during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent. But in 1622, little more than half a century after Suleim an’s death, the British envoy in Constantinople, Sir Thom as Roe, reported that the empire was in a state of disintegration.
. . . it is impossible that the em pire.can endure, though no stranger had a finger to help forw ard their disintegration. . . . all the territory of the grand signor is dispeopled for w ant of justice, or rather by violent oppressions, so much as in his best parts of G reece and N atolia, a man may ryde 3, and 4, sometimes 6 daies, and not find a village able to feed him and his horse; whereby the r'evenew is so lessened, that there sufficeth not to pay the soldiour, and to m ayntayne the court. . . . I can say no more, then that the disease yet works internally that must ruyne this empire: we daily expect more chaunges, and effusion of bloud: the wisest men refuze to sitt at the helme, and fooles will soone runne themselves and others upon the rocks.1
Fortunately for the empire, the “fooles” did not succeed one another in uninterrupted succession. In times of direst crisis, strong sultans or grand vizirs appeared to ride out the storms. They even staged short-lived come backs such as the conquest of Crete in the m id-seventeenth century. But the fact remains that after Suleiman we come to a period of general decline— a period in which the Ottom ans ceased to be feared and began themselves to fear. Roe was correct in his prediction that “the disease yet works internally th at m ust ruyne this em pire.” O ur problem now is to diagnose this disease. W hat was the ailment which, despite repeated efforts at cure, poisoned the vitals of the em pire and eventually brought about its downfall?
117


118 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
DEGENERATION OF THE DYNASTY
The O ttom an Em pire was essentially a military machine. The engine that powered this machine was the Ruling Institution. The person who di rected the Institution was the sultan. Hence the critical im portance of the sultan’s personality in O ttom an history. F o r tw o and a half centuries a re m arkable succession of ten outstanding rulers had led the empire from vic tory to victory. A fter Suleiman, an equally rem arkable succession of incapable sultans lost control of the empire to such a degree that it was left leaderless and powerless. The well-known Turkish proverb “The fish stinks from the head” emphasizes the significance of this dynastic degeneration. The cause for this degeneration probably had little to do with laws of eugenics. Inbreeding certainly could not have been a factor. The mothers of the sultans continued to be drawn from all countries and ethnic strains. The decisive factor appears to have been the system of succession, which in turn was responsible for the appalling m anner in which the royal princes were trained for their duties. We noted in Chapter 5 that M ohammed II issued a Draconian fratricide decree enjoining his successors to execute their brothers in order to avoid civil strife. The decree was obeyed until the end of the sixteenth century. Then it was modified in two ways which together proved disastrous. First the slaughter of royal princes was halted and, in stead, all of them, with the exception of the sons of the reigning sultan, were confined to special quarters in the palace and denied all com m unication with the outside world. These pathetic creatures spent their lives in the com pany of a few eunuchs, pages, and sterilized harem inmates. Inevitably they became mental and moral cripples, pitiful victims of a vicious environment. Yet it was these very individuals who, by a change in the law of succession, were placed upon the imperial throne and entrusted with the destiny of the em pire. The change in succession occurred following the death of Sultan A hm ed I in 1617. T he sultan’s sons were n o t of age, and since no m inor had ever sat on the im perial throne, A hm ed’s b ro th e r was chosen as successor. A t the same time a decree was issued stipulating that henceforth the throne should pass to the oldest member of the imperial house. This m eant that future sultans were to be drawn not from the royal princes, who were raised under relatively norm al circumstances, but rather from the brothers, uncles, and cousins, who had passed their lives in the degenerating seclusion de scribed above. These individuals were unequal to the trem endous responsibility of their position and also were incapable of selecting worthy advisers. It was only natural that they should continue to depend upon the peculiar com panions of their boyhood. These worthies now became imperial favorites, using the puppet sultans as tools for the plundering of the empire. By the end of the sixteenth century the sultan as the actual governing power had passed from the scene, reappearing on a few rare occasions as a phenom enon with no


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 119
lasting effect. O ttom an history henceforth was the history of endless strife between various individuals and cliques seeking to gain the confidence of the sovereign, and through him, the control of the empire. The “eldest m ale” system of succession, it should be noted, persisted from 1617 until the fall of the dynasty in 1924. But the practice of incarcerating the princes was gradually abandoned during the nineteenth century.
CORRUPTION OF THE ADMINISTRATION
The degeneration of the dynasty was accompanied by the corruption of the administration. W hen the Ruling Institution functioned properly it received from the Palace School a steady supply of superbly trained slaves. These were appointed to administrative posts throughout the empire and ad vanced on the basis of merit. This system proved extraordinarily efficient until the end of the sixteenth century. Then it deteriorated rapidly, partly because of the failings of the dynasty, but also because of certain other fac tors which probably would have taken their toll regardless of what went on in the palace. The O ttom an slave bureaucracy could function effectively only so long as two conditions prevailed. One was that war should be waged con tinually and successfully, for war provided many of the slaves who were to become the administrators, and also provided the booty to support these administrators and their imperial master on the munificent scale to which they had become accustomed. The other condition was that the M oslem-born population should continue to accept a system whose distinguishing charac teristic was that it excluded them from participating in the adm inistration of their own empire. Toward the end of the sixteenth century neither of these conditions was met. W ars continued, but they were becoming increasingly defensive and unsuccessful. Instead of yielding slaves and booty, they imposed burdens which became heavier as defeats became commoner. Likewise, the Moslem population was successfully challenging the slave monopoly of its government. In 1594 a Venetian am bassador reported that “the native Turks continue to sustain the greatest dissatisfaction, from seeing the governm ent reposed in the renegades.” The am bassador added his opinion that “one may reasonably hope . . . for some notable revolution within a short tim e.” 2 The revolution occurred, perhaps not in as dramatic a fashion as the V enetian anticipated, but with a m ost far-reaching and devastating effect. The sultans and their ministers began to accept “gifts” from candidates for office. T he practice began in the latter p a rt of Suleim an’s reign, when the imperial.finances were strained by continual war and an increasingly luxurious court. A t first the com petence of the candidates counted for more than their ability to pay. Gradually and inevitably the financial consideration prevailed. One result was that the merit system gave way to the bribe system. A nother was that the Moslems, who previously had been excluded from their govern


ment, now were free to participate in it if they had the means or the influence to secure a post. These two developments completely destroyed the basic features of the old bureaucracy: its merit system and its slave personnel. A fundamentally different adm inistrative system developed, one in which every im portant posi tion was available to the highest bidder. The bidders were numerous and eager, for everyone now could aspire to office. Indeed, the num ber of candi dates was so m uch greater than the supply of offices that appointm ents began to be made for one year only in order to redress the balance and, incidentally, to increase the num ber of gifts. Only the subordinate officials continued to hold their positions and to receive prom otions according to the old criteria of satisfactory service and seniority. The tax collection system was equally unsatisfactory. Government officials originally collected the taxes directly. But so many of those officials proved dishonest that M ohammed II substituted a tax-farming arrangement. Henceforth all taxes were farm ed out to the highest bidders, usually courtiers or high officials. These individuals in turn sold their concessions piecemeal. The process frequently was repeated several times, each vendor making a sub stantial profit. The crushing burden of this oppressive structure rested finally upon the helpless peasant population, Moslem as well as Christian. We may conclude that from the seventeenth century onward the typical O ttom an official holding a position of any im portance regarded it as a private investment from which he was justified in deriving as large a return as possible. W estern observers, who form erly had noted th a t the sultan’s sub jects were justly ruled and lightly taxed, now began to report precisely the opposite. Likewise, the more public spirited of the O ttom an officials recog nized and deplored the defects of the system under which they operated. Mehmed Pasha, who rose to be the treasurer of the empire at the beginning of the eighteenth century, described the effects of the all-pervading bribery in the darkest colors.
Bribery is the beginning and root of all illegality and tyranny, the source and fountain of every sort of disturbance and sedition, the most vast of evils and greatest of calamities. . . . If it becomes necessary to give a position because of bribes, in this way its holder has permission from the governm ent for every sort of oppression. Stretching out the hand of violence and tyranny against the poor subjects along his route [of travel] and spreading fire among the poor, he de stroys the wretched peasants and ruins the cultivated lands. As the fields and villages become empty of husbandmen, day by day weakness comes to land and property, which remain destitute of profits and revenues and harvest and benefit.3
D ISINTEGRATION OF TH E ARM ED FORCES
The corruption of the bureaucracy extended to the armed forces. In this case also, one of the im portant factors was the inability to extend fur ther the imperial conquests. The Ottoman armies hitherto had been ready
120 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 1 2 1
and eager for war because war invariably had meant rich booty, valuable slaves, and m ore land to be divided into fiefs. In fact, the O ttom an expansion in the Balkans was to a considerable degree the work of frontier soldiers who, like the American frontiersmen, kept pushing westward with little re gard for central authority. Both M ohammed II and Bayezid II were unable to prevent raids across the border into the countries with which they were anxious to m aintain peace. Sir Thom as Roe observed in 1623 that
the T urkish soldiour is not only apt, but desirous to make invasion; because all things are prey, and all kinds of licence given them ; and his hope is m ore upon booty and prisoners, then upon conquest; every boy or girle slave being here the best m erchandize, and worth 100 dollars; so that every village is to them a magazine, and they retorne rich.4
When war brought defeat rather than victory, and destruction instead of plunder, the Turks no longer were “desirous to make invasion.” The Eng lish diplom at Sir Paul Rycaut accom panied the O ttom an arm y in its cam paign against the H apsburgs in 1665. He noted that after several setbacks the Turkish soldiers became demoralized and refused to fight.
The Souldiery was greatly terrified and possessed with a fear of the Chris tians . . . and having Wives and Children and Possessions to look after, were grown poor, and desired nothing more than in peace and quietness to return to their homes, so that nothing could come more grateful to this Cam p, no largesses nor hopes could pacifie the minds of the Souldiery more than the promises and expectations of Peace. And this was the true cause that brought on the Treaty of Peace between the Em peror and the Turk.5
O ttom an military strength declined not only because of this external pressure but also because of certain domestic developments. Some of these developments affected primarily the standing army of janissary infantrymen and others the feudal army of spahi cavalrymen. Considering first the janis saries, we have noted that during their golden age they were exclusively of slave origin, superbly trained, form idable in war, but also notoriously prone to rebellion. W ith the advent of weak rulers the janissaries became increas ingly unruly and at the same time they made themselves almost unassailable by sinking roots into the Moslem community. This process involved several steps. Some time in the first half of the sixteenth century the formerly celibate janissaries won permission to take wives and raise families. This at once raised the problem of financial support. Even without family dependents this had become acute. Between 1350 and 1600 janissary pay had increased four times but the cost of living had risen ten times. Thus the m arried janissaries were quite incapable of supporting their families and therefore were allowed to supplement their meager allow ance by engaging in trade and industry. Then in 1574 they won the right to enroll their sons in the corps. But these sons also continued in their fathers’ respective professions. The outcome was that the most famous and feared unit of the O ttom an army gradually changed into a militia of city traders


1 2 2 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
and artisans. This trend was hastened by the influx of many civilians who bribed their way into the corps in order to gain the tax-exemption privilege traditionally enjoyed by the janissaries. In many cities the various janissary companies became virtually guilds of bakers, butchers, cobblers, armorers, and so forth. This trend reached such proportions that in Saloniki at the end of the eighteenth century the janissaries and their families comprised fully one half of the total population of sixty thousand. The child-tribute that formerly had filled the janissary ranks obvi ously was anachronistic in these new circumstances. Recruits from the Chris tian population were desired neither by the government, which was em bar rassed by the expense of the greatly inflated corps, nor by the janissaries themselves, who regarded newcomers as interlopers and competitors. Hence the child-levy was enforced less and less frequently, the last recorded case being in 1637. The transform ation of the corps was now complete. The janissaries started as the slaves of the sultan, owing allegiance solely to him, and de pendent upon him for everything. By the seventeenth century they had be come a privileged and self-perpetuating caste, recruited from the Moslem population, and assured of its support. The effect on the empire was deplora ble. Although the janissaries increased from twelve thousand under Suleiman to over one hundred thousand by 1825, only two thousand of the latter were actually trained. The corps had become useless as a fighting force, and yet it could not be disbanded. No other standing army existed to challenge its primacy. In case of emergency it could draw upon the enormous reserve force of the urban population of which it had become an integral part. More than one sultan and grand vizir who sought to neutralize or abolish the corps discovered at the cost of their lives how firmly entrenched was this monstrous vested interest. The deterioration of the janissaries was paralleled by that of the spahis or tim ar-holding cavalrymen. In this case the difficulties arose from various abuses in the granting of fiefs. One of these abuses was the diversion of the fiefs or tim ars to dum m y holders. Palace favorites and provincial offi cials obtained by devious means timars for their own retainers and then collected the revenue which normally would have supported spahi horsemen. This subterfuge became a serious m atter when some individuals accumulated as many as fifty tim ars and in return contributed nothing to the armed forces. A nother abuse was the practice of adding timars to the imperial domain. This was occasioned by the increasing indebtedness of the govern m ent after Suleim an’s reign. Since tim ar revenues w ent to the spahis rather than to the treasury, the government frequently refused to reassign tim ars that fell vacant. Instead it assimilated the property into the imperial lands and auctioned the revenue to the tax farmers, thus obtaining sorely needed funds. This practice brought some relief to the government treasury, but it weakened correspondingly the feudal army. These abuses, and others


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 123
of a similar nature, explain the decline in the num ber of spahis and of the horsemen they were required to furnish. The total dropped from two hun dred thousand in the time of Suleiman to no more than twenty-five thousand by the eighteenth century. We may conclude that after the sixteenth century O ttom an military strength deteriorated rapidly. The janissaries had degenerated into a privi leged social class interested more in their immunities than their duties, while the feudal spahis bore little resemblance to the great cavalry armies that at one time had swept irresistibly through the Balkans and across the Hungarian plains to the walls of Vienna. The government was forced to contend against the growing strength of neighboring powers by using T atar horsemen from the Crimea, untrained levies, and undisciplined volunteers. These motley forces frequently did more damage to the inhabitants of the villages through which they passed than to the foreign enemy. We noted in Chapter 7 Kon stantinovich’s testim ony that if a soldier “should take only one hen by force, one would lose his head.” T hat was in the mid-fifteenth century. A little m ore than two hundred years later the O ttom an official, M ehm ed Pasha, deplored the indiscipline and excesses of the imperial armies.
Practicing brigandage, they are not satisfied with free and gratuitous fodder for their horses and food for their own bellies from the villages they meet. They covet the horse-cloth and rags of the rayas [peasants], and if they can get their hands on the granaries they become joyful, filling their sacks with barley and oats for provisions and fodder. While they behave in this way and make thus a habit of ruin, setting themselves to harm and oppress, the sighs and groans of m ankind attain the heavens and it is certain that they will be accursed.6.
R U LIN G OLIGARCHY
The deterioration of the dynasty, the corruption of the administra tion, and the weakening of the armed forces combined to transform the once formidable O ttom an Em pire into a flaccid and rickety structure ruthlessly exploited by a small clique entrenched in Constantinople. This clique con sisted of courtiers and high officials who used the puppet sultans as a screen for their operations. A t rare intervals a sultan showed up who attem pted to exercise his prerogatives and to follow an independent policy. O n such occa sions the oligarchy usually aroused the janissaries and used them to depose the sultan and to p u t a m ore tractable person in his place. It is not w ithout significance that the great majority of the janissary revolts were engineered from above. .The oligarchy used similar m ethods to secure com pliant grand vizirs. Only when the empire was in danger of complete destruction did they accept men of ability and will power. The assum ption of office in 1656 by the m as terful M oham m ed K iuprili is explained in precisely these term s by a con tem porary English observer.


124 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
The Government was so broken, and things so unsettled, that a Vizir could scarcely hold his place to the end of a year; whereby things came to a very bad pass, soldiers not to be governed, and the revenue anticipated above five years beforehand; and then as the properest remedy for those evils, a rigid, cruelnatured fellow was found out, and made Vizier, who was the famous old Cuperli [Kiuprili]; a man so obscure that he was even known to few, and had been em ployed only in some petty Bashalik, and at that time was poor and in debt.7
Such men as Kiuprili were able to ride out the storms and to keep the empire afloat. But they were not able to eliminate the evils that were the basic cause of the difficulties. They were not able to destroy the janissaries, wipe out the corruption, and remove the palace favorites. In short, they failed to transform a decaying military machine into a m odern state capable of holding its own in the new Europe that was emerging. The m ore time passed, the greater became the disparity between the Ottom an Em pire and the West, a disparity that gradually forced the empire into a semicolonial status and eventually into oblivion.
ECO N O M IC SUBSERVIENCE TO TH E W EST
In analyzing the reasons for the decline of the O ttom an E m pire it is necessary to consider not only the internal factors but also the external. The decline cannot be studied as though it occurred in a vacuum. Contem porary developments in W estern Europe must also be taken into account. The very concept of the decline of the em pire is relative in nature— relative, th at is, to what was happening in the West. Furtherm ore, the developments in the West created new conditions and released new forces that affected the O tto m an Em pire in numberless ways and completely altered its relations with the rest of Europe. Considering first the economic conditions and relations, we find that until the mid-sixteenth century the O ttom an Em pire was at least abreast of the Christian European countries. The vast extent and varied climes of the empire assured it of virtual self-sufficiency. The fertile plains of Hungary, W allachia, Asia Minor, and Egypt produced an abundant supply of food stuffs and raw materials. The skilled artisans of Constantinople, Saloniki, Damascus, Baghdad, Cairo, and other ancient cities turned out a multitude of handicraft products. The empire also possessed large tim ber resources and im portant mineral deposits, particularly iron, copper, and lead. All these goods were bought and sold without hindrance in the vast free-trade area provided by the far-flung O ttom an frontiers. T he em pire’s strategic position at the junction of seas and continents also prom oted a substantial foreign and transit trade. Various minerals were exported to the M iddle East. Silks, velvets, rugs, leather, copper, and dyestuffs were sent westward through the Balkans to Poland, Austria, and Venice. A nd despite the opening of the Cape route in the early sixteenth century, Baghdad, Aleppo, and Cairo con tinued to attract the products of Persia, India, the East Indies, the Arabian Peninsula, and the Sudan.


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 125
The prosperity of the empire was reflected in the annual surplus left in the treasury. Suleim an’s revenues in the early p art of his reign totaled about six million ducats and his expenditures about four and a half million ducats. In his later years, after he had conquered large areas in Europe and Asia, the am ount of revenue increased to seven or eight million ducats, a substantially larger sum than that collected by Charles V. This vast amount must be attributed to the wealth and flourishing state of the empire rather than to an excessive rate of taxation. We have seen that the average Christian peasant paid a small head tax, a tithe of approxi m ately one tenth of the produce of his farm , and, if he was a tenant on a feudal fief, certain additional obligations to his spahi overlord. These dues were far from burdensome. Contemporary travelers frequently remarked that the Balkan peasants were less heavily taxed and were generally better off than their counterparts in the W estern lands. T here is little doubt th at this was actually the case. W e have m uch evidence that O ttom an rule had a great attraction for many people in neigh boring Christian countries. When Barbarossa raided the Italian coasts he found considerable pro-Turkish feeling, even to the point of revolts in his behalf. Likewise, M artin L uther observed that “one finds in G erm an lands those who desire the future of the Turks and their governm ent, as well as those who would rather be under the Turks than under the Emperor and the Princes.” 8 A considerable num ber of those who “would rather be under the Turks” did cross the frontier into the Ottom an Empire, especially after the series of peasant revolts in C entral E urope in the first half of the sixteenth century. Despite this impressive beginning, the Ottom an economy fell far be hind that of W estern Europe within a comparatively short time. The explana tion for the unexpected reversal is th a t the O ttom an E m pire did not experi ence the so-called Commercial Revolution which basically transform ed W estern economic institutions and practices between the fifteenth and eight eenth centuries. During that period the restricted noncapitalist economy of medieval Europe gave way to the expanding and dynamic capitalist economy of modern times. In commerce this m eant the gradual disappearance of the old m er chant guilds operating on a local, or at the most, a continental scale, and im posing num erous restrictions on prices and profits. In their place appeared the joint-stock companies trading on a world-wide basis and making as large profits as possible. This change in commerce affected industry. The old craft guilds were quite incapable of meeting the demands of the new world m ar kets. Gradually they gave way to the entrepreneur who used his capital to buy raw. m aterial, to hire labor, and to sell the finished product at the m arket price rather than at a regulated price. These developments in commerce and industry were ]3art and parcel of the general expansion of the E uropean economy until it attained world-wide proportions. The O ttoman economy was remaining static during this period when


126 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
W estern capitalism was enveloping the entire globe. It was not the O ttom an m erchants who exploited W estern Europe. R ather, it was the French, the English, and the Dutch who organized their respective Levant companies and exploited the resources of the O ttom an Empire. The first to appear were the French. In 1535 they negotiated a treaty which provided the legal basis for their trade in the Levant. By this treaty French subjects were perm itted to reside and trade in the O ttom an Em pire without being subject to O ttom an taxation or to the jurisdiction of O ttom an courts. These special privileges or “capitulations” were extended in 1583 to the English and the Dutch. As a result, W estern merchants during the sixteenth century obtained an increas ingly large proportion of the eastern M editerranean trade formerly m onopo lized by Italian middlemen. This development of direct trade with W estern Europe proved detri m ental to the economy of the O ttom an Empire. French, English, and Dutch m erchants loaded their ships with foodstuffs and with raw materials needed by their home industries. In return they brought various native and colonial products, and, during the sixteenth century, large quantities of bullion that originated in the New W orld. B ut the bullion did not rem ain in the sultan’s domains. Instead, it was exchanged for the spices and the fine fabrics that were brought in across the eastern borders. Thus the O ttom an Empire, like Spain, found itself in an unenviable position in international trade. It had become merely a funnel through which the bullion from the W est flowed on to the Middle and Far East. The results were as injurious for the O ttom an economy as for the Spanish. The most obvious manifestation was the marked inflation after the mid-sixteenth century. Contributing causes were the debasement of currency, the increasing extravagance and corruption of the government, and the heavy burden of wars which no longer were as successful and profitable as in earlier times. It is significant, however, that between 1550 and 1600 the price of w heat rose approxim ately five tim es in the A n kara region of central A natolia and ten times in the A egean coastal area. A sim ilar price trend is noticeable in the case of other commodities which were being shipped to the West. The net result was a vicious circle so far as the O ttom an economy was con cerned. The scarcity and high price of raw materials seriously handicapped O ttom an industry, and this in turn stimulated the inflow of m anufactured goods and the outflow of bullion. The imperial government was slow to take action, lacking as it did the experience and the mercantilist traditions of the West. In 1563 it ordered one hundred and fifty thousand pieces of canvas for the fleet but discovered that the order could not be filled because of the shortage of cotton thread. Likewise, the O ttom an officials found it increasingly difficult to obtain food supplies for the capital and for the army. Consequently, the government deemed it necessary in the latter part of the sixteenth century to ban the export of bullion to the East and various materials to the West, including cotton, cotton thread, lead, gunpowder, horses, and certain foodstuffs. But


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 127
O ttom an officials were even m ore lax in enforcing such restrictions than their Spanish counterparts. Bullion continued to drain out of the O ttom an Em pire as it did out of Spain, while W estern captains loaded cargoes as easily in the Levant ports as they did in the Spanish colonies. A fter the sixteenth century the economic position of the Ottoman Em pire grew worse. The Dutch forced their way to the East Indies in the first half of the seventeenth century and blocked the transit trade through the O ttom an lands much more effectively than had their Portuguese predecessors. A t the same time the Venetians gradually were being squeezed out of the Levant trade. Their twenty-five-year war with the Turks (1 6 4 5 -1 6 7 0 ) cost them so heavily in money and ships that they sank from a first- to a third-rate commercial power. This enabled the W esterners to dominate the foreign trade of the O ttom an Em pire. Furtherm ore, they now brought in less bullion and more m anufactured goods as their home industries grew stronger. They were able to sell these goods on the Ottom an m arket with virtually no hindrance because the treaty capitulations specifically limited im port and export duties to between 3 and 5 per cent ad valorem. Thus O ttom an indus tries were left without protection and the empire steadily declined to a de pendent status in its economic relations with the West. Like South Am erica and the F ar East, it served merely as a m arket for Western manufactures and a source of raw materials for Western industries. In conclusion, it is apparent th at the stagnant O ttom an econom y ex perienced none of the revolutionary changes that were transforming the West. O ttom an merchants did not combine their resources to form joint-stock com panies. One reason was the conservatism and individualism of a Moslem so ciety that refused to countenance large-scale, impersonal business enterprises. A nother reason was the tendency of O ttom an officials to regard any overly rich subject as fair game for extortion and confiscation. In any case the O tto man merchants, who were almost invariably Armenians, Jews, and Greeks, confined themselves to individual operations within the borders of the empire. O ttom an industry likewise rem ained at the handicraft stage in tech nology, and at the guild stage in organization. W hereas few guilds played an im portant role in the W estern economy by the late seventeenth century, in the Ottoman Em pire they continued to dominate both industry and com merce. The craftsm en and the m erchants worked and trafficked in little shops built along narrow and crooked streets, and sometimes roofed over, street and all, to form the low ram bling buildings known as bazaars. These were picturesque but scarcely a m atch for the new capitalism of the West. The inevitable outcom e is depicted in the following observations of an English traveler in Constantinople in 1800:
Suppose a stranger to arrive from a long journey, in w ant of clothes for his body; furniture for his lodgings; books or maps for his instruction and amuse ment; paper, pens, ink, cutlery, shoes, hats; in short those articles which are found in almost every city of the w orld; he will find few or none of them in C on


128 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
stantinople; except of a quality so inferior as to render them incapable of an swering any purpose for which they were intended. The few commodities exposed fo r sale are either exports from England, unfit for any other m arket, or, w hich is worse, German and Dutch imitations of English manufacture. . . . Let a for eigner visit the bazaars . . . he will see nothing but slippers, clumsy boots of bad leather, coarse muslins, pipes, tobacco, coffee, cooks’ shops, drugs, flower-roots, second-hand pistols, poignards, and the worst m anufactured wares in the world. . . . View the exterior of Constantinople, and it seems the most opulent and flourishing city in Europe; examine its interior, and its miseries and deficiencies are so striking that it must be considered the meanest and poorest metropolis of the w orld. T he ships w hich crowd its ports have no connection with its w elfare: they are for the most part French, Venetian, Ragusan, Sclavonian, and Grecian vessels, to or from the M editerranean, exchanging the produce of their own coun tries for the rich harvests of Poland; the salt, honey, and butter of the Ukraine; the hides, tallow, hemp, furs, and metals of Russia and Siberia; the whole of which exchange is transacted in other ports w ithout any interference on the p art of T u r key. N ever was there a people in possession of such advantages, who either knew or cared so little for their enjoyment. U nder a wise government, the inhabitants of Constantinople might obtain the riches of all the empires of the earth. Situated as they are, it cannot be long before other nations, depriving them of such impor tant sources of wealth, will convert to better purposes the advantages they have so long neglected.9
OTTOMAN AND W ESTERN
M ILITA RY D EV ELO PM EN TS
The relative economic decline of the O ttom an Empire contributed to a corresponding military decline. During the fifteenth century the Ottom an armies had prevailed against the forces of Persia, Egypt, and the Balkan states because of two decisive advantages: their superior artillery and their incomparable janissary infantrymen. By the mid-sixteenth century these ad vantages no longer prevailed. In the place of the poorly disciplined feudal levies they had routed in the past, the T urks now encountered the veteran Spanish and Austrian foot soldiers serving under the Hapsburgs. After their long campaigns in Italy these men were better trained than the janissaries, particularly in large-scale and precise maneuvers. Also, they possessed more effective arms. Both side used the harquebus as a missile, but for an addi tional weapon the Turks clung to the saber while the W esterners were now using the pike. The superiority of the latter weapon already had been proved at the sieges of Rhodes and M alta, where the Hospitalers with their pikes repeatedly had cleared the janissaries out of the breaches. In the future the H apsburg forces were to win repeated victories by answering the fire of the Turkish harquebuses and then advancing with their pikes. The arm am ent superiority of the W estern armies became decisive with the development of firearms. The Turks from the outset had depended heavily on W estern assistance for the forging and manning of their artillery. This assistance explains in large part their superiority in the field over the


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 129
Persians, the M amelukes, and the Byzantines. But the Turks never were able to keep up with the W esterners. They were almost a century behind when they first used cannons in the mid-fifteenth century. This disparity increased as W estern industry forged ahead of the Ottoman. The Turkish traveler, Evliya Chelebi, informs us that the Germans were “a race of strong, warlike, cunning, devilish, coarse infidels whom, excelling as they did in artillery, Sultan Suleyman endeavored to get equal with by recruiting gunners and ar tillerym en from all countries with the offer of rich rew ards.” 10 The Turks also failed to make adequate use of even such weapons as were available to them. In 1548, for example, Suleiman attem pted to per suade two hundred of the regular Turkish cavalry to use carbines and pistols in place of the traditional bow. The time was long overdue for the change; yet the cavalrymen were so mocked by their companions and so averse to trying new weapons that the experim ent failed. It was not until the end of the century that the Turkish cavalry generally made use of small arms. Like wise, the janissaries stubbornly and successfully delayed the adoption of new weapons and tactics until they themselves were eliminated in 1826. In the same m anner that the backwardness of O ttom an industry con tributed to the technological lag of the army, so the backwardness of the O ttom an m erchant marine and shipyards contributed to the weakness of the navy. The Turks started out as a land people with no naval traditions. They established themselves in Asia M inor and overran the Balkans by relying exclusively on their armies. It was not until their defeat by the Venetians at Gallipoli in 1416 that they sensed the need for a fleet to protect and round out their conquests. The O ttom an navy was created for the specific purpose of defeating the V enetians. By the tim e of M oham m ed II it had becom e a respectable force and contributed to the capture of Constantinople. Under Suleiman II it reached its height. W ith the leadership of Barbarossa and the support of N orth A frican sea power, the O ttom an navy made itself felt as far afield as the western M editerranean, the Red Sea, the Indian Ocean, and the Persian Gulf. Even during this glorious period the O ttom an navy was in a certain sense an artificial creation. It had, it is true, the great advantage of abundant mineral resources in the Balkan countries and an inexhaustible store of tim ber on the shores of the Black Sea. But this did not counterbalance the fatal lack of an O ttom an merchant marine. The basis of W estern naval strength at this time was the rapidly growing num ber of merchantm en. These vessels kept the shipyards operating, provided an adequate number of trained seamen, and, in case of emergency, planted naval guns on their decks and served as menof-war. But the O ttom an Em pire had only small coastal ships, in no way com parable with the Spanish galleons that circled the globe to M anila or with the English merchantm en that were to be found on every ocean. This mercantile deficiency explains to a great extent why the O tto man navy remained an essentially non-Turkish organization without deep roots in the em pire. M ost of its ships were designed by Italian naval archi


130 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
tects, built by Greek shipyard workers, and manned by heterogeneous and usually unreliable Christian crews. Likewise, the O ttom an navy failed to keep up with the W est in the transition from the oar to the sail-propelled warship. Following a disastrous defeat at the hands of the Venetians in 1656, the Turks set about building sail warships of their own. But they lacked the experienced mariners needed to navigate and maneuver the new ships, and soon reverted to the traditional galleys. The foreseeable result was the loss of M orea to Venice in 1699 and the advance of the Russians around the Black Sea during the eighteenth century. We may conclude that the O ttom an military decline was due to in ternal failings, such as the disorganization of the janissaries and the feudal spahis, as well as to the superior progress of the W estern powers in devel oping new techniques and weapons in land and sea warfare.
OTTOMAN AND W ESTERN
PO LITIC A L EVOLUTION
The O ttom an Em pire fell behind the W est not only in the economic and military spheres but also in the political. W ith the advent of the Renais sance, W estern Europe witnessed the rise of nationalism and the nation-state, the one stimulating and strengthening the other. The growth of absolutist monarchies, the appearance of a middle class desiring unity and order, the spread of literacy, and the development of new techniques for mass propa ganda and indoctrination— all these contributed to the evolution of the m od ern nation-state. This state was the institutional form into which the idea of nationalism was infused, transforming former ducal subjects and feudal serfs and town burghers into the all-inclusive nation. The O ttom an Empire never experienced such a political integration. It remained a congeries of peoples, religions, and conflicting loyalties. The average O ttom an subject thought of himself primarily as a member of a guild if he lived in a city, or as a member of a village community if he lived in the countryside. If he had any feeling of broader allegiance it was likely to be of a religious rather than a political character. It was likely to be directed to the head of his millet rather than to the person of the sultan. Thus the O ttom an Em pire differed fundamentally from the W estern nation-state. It was not a cohesive institution commanding the active loyalty and allegiance of all its subjects. Rather, it was a conglom eration of num erous disparate groups that were to a large degree self-centered and self-sufficient. This looseness of organization weakened the resistance of the em pire to foreign aggression. In the eighteenth century A ustria and Russia were able to annex vast provinces north of the D anube with little difficulty. The reason, apart from military considerations, was that these provinces had-few ties with Constantinople, and their populations felt no particular attachm ent to the central government. The empire was vulnerable not only to military aggression but also to intellectual aggression in the form of nationalist idc


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 131
ology. Since nationalism did not serve as a cement to hold the empire to gether, it functioned instead as a centrifugal force which eventually tore the empire apart. The absence of O ttom an nationalism left an ideological vacuum which was filled by the several Balkan, A rab, and even Turkish na tionalisms. As a result W orld W ar I acted as a plunger that detonated with explosive force these nationalist sentiments and demolished the O ttom an imperial structure.
W ESTER N SCIENCE AND OTTOM AN
“eyes of oxen”
The O ttom an Em pire lagged behind the W est in economic develop ment, military strength, and political cohesion; it also lagged behind in intel lectual progress. This lag is often attributed to the stultifying influence of Islam . But the brilliant attainm ents of M oslem science and scholarship in the Middle Ages indicate that Islam cannot be equated with intellectual stagnation. The failure of the Ottom ans to keep up with W estern thought is to be explained not by the tenets of Islam but rather by its m oribund state when the Turks adopted the faith. W hen the Ottomans were building their empire in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, Islam had degenerated to the point where it m eant little more than a series of rituals to be perform ed and a Heaven-sent book to be memorized. This had its effect on the Moslem colleges or medressehs. From the outset the Ottom an medressehs emphasized theology, jurisprudence, and rhetoric at the expense of astronom y, m athem atics, and medicine. It is not surprising that the graduates of these schools showed no interest in the science and scholarship of the Greek and A rab worlds. They made no at tem pt to use the original manuscript sources to which they had easy access by virtue of their dom inant position in the N ear East. By contrast, W estern E urope in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries was producing men like Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, and Robert Grosseteste, who were the har bingers of the coming era of observational and experimental science. M oham med II in the mid-fifteenth century was a notable exception to the prevailing intellectual sterility. He was extraordinarily open-minded and curious. Contem poraries described him as “neither Moslem nor Chris tian.” In addition to founding the unique Palace School for the training of slave adm inistrators, he also reorganized the curriculum of the medressehs by placing greater emphasis on scientific subjects. He himself selected out standing scholars from all the M oslem world to fill the chairs in m edicine, astronomy, and mathematics. Both scholastic philosophy and G reek science were intensively studied during his reign. Symposiums were held to which the greatest native and foreign scholars were invited. Behind all this activity was an earnest effort to replace dogmatic by critical thought. U nfortunately M oham m ed’s influence did not long survive his death. During the splendid reign of Suleiman the Magnificent there was an almost


132 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566—1815
abnorm al interest in literature but very little in the sciences. The one excep tion was in the field of geography. Piri Reis, the outstanding Turkish cartog rapher of the sixteenth century, won international recognition for his geo graphical book on the M editerranean Sea. This contains two hundred and seven fine charts drawn by the author, as well as a considerable am ount of reliable scientific information. A nother work by Piri Reis that has attracted much attention recently is a large m ap of the world which he drew in 1513. The one extant section of this map was discovered in Constantinople in 1929. It depicts the Atlantic Ocean and the surrounding territories— Brittany, the Iberian Peninsula, and the northwestern coast of Africa to the east, and the Atlantic Coast of North and South Am erica to the west. The accuracy and scope of this m ap are rem arkable if it is recalled that it was draw n only a decade after the voyages of Columbus. This indicates how well informed the Turks were of the western discoveries. In fact, Piri Reis explains on the m ar gin of his m ap that he had in his possession various Portuguese maps and a copy of the chart that Columbus compiled during his voyages. T he significance of Piri R eis’s m aps can be exaggerated. They indi cate merely that the Turks were able to keep up for a while with the geo graphic discoveries of the West. But apart from this specialized field the Turks were completely ignorant of the more basic advances of W estern sci ence. They knew nothing of the epoch-making achievements of Paracelsus in medicine, Vesalius in anatom y, and Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo in as tronomy. At a time when Turkish armies were advancing into Central E u rope, an intellectual iron curtain separated the O ttom an Empire from the West. The basic reason for this isolation was the dogmatic spirit which reigned suprem e in the lands of Islam. T his is m ade clear in the writings of Katib Chelebi, the famous Turkish bibliographer, encyclopedist, and historian who lived in the first half of the seventeenth century. Com ing from a poor family, he was unable to obtain a formal higher education. This proved to be a blessing in disguise. He was spared the superficial, hair-splitting special ization on Moslem sacred studies that characterized O ttom an education at this time. The fact that he was self-taught explains in large part his openmindedness toward W estern learning. O ne of C helebi’s works was a short naval handbook w hich he com piled following the disastrous defeat of the O ttom an fleet by the Venetians in 1656. In the preface of this work Chelebi emphasized the need for mastering the science of geography and map making, a field in which the Turks had fallen sadly behind during the century that had elapsed since the days of Piri Reis.
For men who are in charge of affairs of state, the science of geography is a matter of which knowledge\ is necessary. They may not be familiar with what the entire globe is like, but they ought at least to know the map of the Ottoman State and of those states adjoining it. Then, when they have to send forces on campaign, they can proceed on the basis of knowledge, and so the in


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 133
vasion of the enem y’s land and also the protection and defense of the frontiers becomes an easier task. Taking counsel with individuals who are ignorant of that science is no satisfactory substitute, not even when such men are local veterans. Most such veterans are entirely unable to sketch the map of their own home regions. Sufficient and convincing proof of the necessity for learning this science is the fact that the heathen, by their application to and their esteem for those branches of learning, have discovered the New World and have over-run the m arkets of India.11
In his last work before his death in 1657, Chelebi courageously criti cized the dogmatism of his contemporaries. After describing the splendid achievements of Moslem science and scholarship in the time of the Abbassids, he pointed out that philosophy and science had been ignored by the Ottom an medressehs after Suleim an’s reign. As a result, w arned Chelebi, “ H enceforth people will be looking at the universe w ith the eyes of oxen.” 12 The significance of Chelebi is th at he realized th at the O ttom an E m pire could not afford to remain self-satisfied and self-centered at a time when the West was forging ahead so rapidly. This may seem obvious, but to Chelcbi’s contem poraries it was incom prehensible. O ttom an officials and scholars looked down upon the West with contem pt and arrogance. “Do I not know you,” broke out the grand vizir to the French am bassador in 1666, “that you are a Giaour [non-believer], that.you are a hogge, a dogge, a turde eater?” 13 As late as 1756, when the French am bassador announced the alli ance between France and A ustria th at m arked a turning point in the diplo matic history of Europe, he was curtly informed that the O ttom an government did not concern itself “ about the union of one hog with an o ther.” 14 This attitude may explain a rem arkable incident that occurred in 1770 when a Russian fleet sailed from the Baltic around Europe into the eastern M editer ranean and attacked the Turks. The latter, apparently having forgotten Piri Reis’s m aps, protested to the V enetians for perm itting the R ussians to sail from the Baltic into the Adriatic! The military defeats and internal disorders of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries forced intelligent men to adm it that all was not well with the empire. Indeed, they acknowledged the need for reform and specifically advocated it in a long series of works know n collectivey as the N asibat litera ture. This literature consisted of books of “Good Counsels for Rulers.” But the counsels they embodied invariably were based on the assumption that the troubles were purely domestic and had nothing to do with what was happen ing in the West. All these writers looked back with nostalgia to the glorious days of Suleiman the Magnificent. All were oblivious to the fact that the new capacities and techniques of W estern Europe no longer could be ignored with im punity. Not until the French Revolution and the landing of Napoleon in Egypt and Syria did reality force itself into the O ttom an mind. But even then the forces of reaction rem ained strong and unyielding. The m edressehs still


134 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
taught the old dogmas and the janissaries still dom inated the armed forces and intimidated the government. In Russia, Peter the G reat had been able to crush the mutinous Streltzi and to curb the hostile O rthodox Church at the end of the seventeenth century. But a hundred years later Selim III was de posed and strangled when he attem pted to take similar measures. The curtain separating the O ttom an Empire from the W est did not lift appreciably until the mid-nineteenth century. A nd it was not until the empire itself disappeared that A taturk, like Peter, was able to launch his program of compulsory, forced-draft W esternization.
PLAGUE EPIDEM ICS
One of the most appalling results of Turkish obscurantism was the persistence of the bubonic plague in the O ttom an Em pire for over a century after it had petered out in the West. Following the Black Death of the mid fourteenth century the plague continued to devastate W estern Europe until the eighteenth century. Then it receded to the Eastern European lands, and until the mid-nineteenth century the O ttom an Em pire suffered cruelly from the effects of this dread disease. Travelers frequently reported that in Constantinople the plague was not considered to have reached m ajor proportions unless it claimed a thou sand victims a day. Epidemics broke out every few years with particularly devastating results in the cities. Forty thousand were killed in Constantinople in 1770. Bucharest and Belgrade lost one third of their total populations be tween 1812 and 1814. In particularly bad years, such as 1778 and 1812, the losses in the empire as a whole reached as high as 150,000 people. Medical authorities do not agree as to the reasons for the persistence of the plague in the O ttom an Empire. It seems clear, however, that an im p ortant contributing factor was the refusal of O ttom an officials to adopt the preventive measures developed in the West. For the devout Moslem Turk an epidemic was an act of God. He was convinced that his days were numbered by Divine Providence. Accordingly, he regarded quarantine precautions as superfluous and even sinful. And in doing so he was neither stupid nor apa thetic; he was simply religious. Contem porary observers leave no doubt as to the paralyzing effect of the epidemics upon the commerce, agriculture, and population of the empire. The following comments are typical:
William M acmichael in 1817:
T he num ber of its [A drianople’s] inhabitants, and the extent of its com merce have been greatly diminished by the plague of four years ago. . . . The two annual fairs which were held in the neighborhood, to which Russians with furs, and G erm ans w ith cloth, were in the habit of resorting, no longer exist.-. . .15
William Ham ilton in 1837:
A t Beg-shehr [in Asia Minor] the plague was bad; at Kcrali, which I reached the following day, still worse; and at Kara-Aghach three fourths of the


Decline of the Ottoman Empire 135
population had died within the last three months, and the corn for many miles round the town remained uncut or uncarried. A more striking instance of the destroying character of this dreadful malady cannot be imagined, than this vast extent of uncut corn rotting on the ground, when you are told that not only there exists no one to claim it, but no one even to carry it away without a claim. . . . The very cattle have perished when tiedup in the stables because, when the owners were dead, there was no one either to fed them or to release them .16
W. Eton, about 1800:
W ithout going further back than the memory of persons now living, it is easy to prove th at depopu lation has been inlatter times, astonishingly rapid. . . . The great causes of this depopulation are the following:
1st. T he plague, of which the em pire is never entirely free. 2dly. Those terrible disorders which almost always follow it, at least in Asia. 3rdly. Epidemic and endemic maladies in Asia, which make as dreadful ravages as the plague itself and which frequently visit that part of the empire. 4thly. Fam ine, owing to the w ant of precaution in the governm ent, when a crop of corn fails, and to the avarice and villainy of the pashas, who generally endeavor to profit by this dreadful calamity. 5th and lastly, the sicknesses which always follow a famine, and which occasion a much greater mortality. . . .
. . . a great part of European Turkey, except the countries towards the A driatic and H ungary . . . [ar6] almost destitute of inhabitants. This state of the country is particularly striking on the road from Belgrade through Sophia, Phillippopolis, and A drianople, to C onstantinople.17
No systematic study has been made of the history and the precise in fluence of the plague in the O ttom an Empire. The evidence indicates, how ever, that it disrupted the economy and reduced the population, and this at a time when the external pressures upon the empire were the most severe. It is probably too m uch to say that the plague bears a causal relationship to O ttom an decline. We have seen that various other factors had set the empire on the downward path as early as the beginning of the seventeenth century. B ut it is quite clear th a t the devastating epidem ics did accelerate the decline during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
OTTO M A N D ECLIN E IN RETRO SPECT
T he decline of the O tto m an E m pire is an extrem ely com plex phe nomenon. If any pattern exists, it appears to center around the fact that the empire was essentially a military machine. It needed short, victorious wars to m aintain its efficiency and prosperity. In the fourteenth and fifteenth cen turies it was able to wage such wars because of the military weakness and social instability of the surrounding states. During those centuries the Turks went on from victory to victory— from Asia M inor to the Balkans, the A rab world, Egypt, and then across the Danube into Central Europe. W ith each


136 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
conquest they gained strength and gathered momentum. To contemporary W esterners they appeared to be “a daily increasing flame, catching hold of w hatsoever com es next, still to proceed fu rth er.” 18 The Turks might very well have proceeded farther if the states of Central and W estern Europe had resembled those of the Balkans and the N ear East. But they did not, thanks to the Renaissance, the discoveries, the Commercial Revolution, the scientific advances, and the rise of the absolutist monarchies. These developments transform ed and strengthened immensely the W estern world. The O ttom an Em pire, in contrast, remained unaffected and unchanged. This explains in large measure why the Turks were halted at Vienna and soon afterward pushed back across the H ungarian plains. For a military empire these reverses m eant much more than merely the stabilization of the frontier along the Danube. This was noted and em phasized by Sir Paul Rycaut.
It hath been an ancient Custom, and Policy amongst the Turks, in the time of their prosperous Successes by which their Em pire was enlarged, never to continue a W ar longer than for three Y ears, in which tim e they always advanced considerably, and would make no Peace with their Neighbors, until their T ri umphs and Acquisitions would answer the expenses, and effusions of their Blood, and Treasures. . . . But these last W ars [culm inating in the 1699 T reaty of K arlowitz] have quite put the Turks out of their Ancient M ethods; for instead of m ain taining a W ar no longer than T hree Y ears, they have been forced to continue it for m ore than Tw enty, to the great Ruin and D estruction of their E m pire.10
Rycaut makes clear the fundamental contradiction facing the O tto man Em pire after the sixteenth century. It was organized for conquest and expansion but it now entered a period of defeat and contraction. The result was internal tension and dislocation. This increased the disparity between the empire and the West, which in turn led to more defeats, more contraction, more internal difficulties. A nd all this was com pounded by the severe and frequent epidemics of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In short, the empire was caught in a vicious circle that persisted to the end. The only way out was a basic reorganization of the imperial institutions, but this proved incapable of realization. The failure of the O ttom an Em pire was, in the broad est terms, a failure in adjustment, a failure to respond to the challenge of the new dynamic West.


9. Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline
T
-M.HE i m p o s i t i o n of O ttom an rule upon the B alkan peoples was not an unm itigated m isfortune as is often assum ed. We have noted that the coming of the Turks was in certain respects a boon rather than a calamity. The new rulers forcefully established peace throughout the pen insula and put an end to the oppressive native nobility. In many regions the position of the peasantry improved substantially under the new regime. This situation changed drastically when the Ottoman Empire began to decline. The imperial deterioration at once affected the Balkan peoples, as indeed it did also the Moslem subjects. We shall see that the effects of the decline upon the Balkan Peninsula were most far-reaching, extending into every field— political, economic, and cultural. The net result was the devel opm ent of new conditions and institutions, which in turn created a new in tellectual atmosphere characterized primarily by a growing sense of national consciousness. The historical role of this new Balkan nationalism was to end the preceding Age of Theocracy and to introduce the Age of Nationalism. During the course of the nineteenth century, nationalism gradually but stead ily prevailed, culm inating after W orld W ar I in the establishm ent throughout the peninsula of nation-states in place of the old imperial structure.
TERRITORIAL CHANGES
A t the height of its power the O ttom an Em pire em braced the entire Balkan Peninsula with the exception of Slovenia and western Croatia, which were held by the Hapsburgs. We noted earlier that the rule of the Ottoman sultans in the Balkans was com parable to that of the Chinese emperors in eastern Asia. The outlying Balkan and D anubian provinces— M oldavia, W al lachia, Transylvania, and Hungary— had an autonomous status comparable to that of the outlying Chinese provinces— Mongolia, Sinkiang, and Tibet. And in the sam e way that the Chinese provinces passed under British and


138 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
R ussian influence wien Peking becam e w eak, so the border B alkan areas were annexed by nighboring great powers when Constantinople declined. We shall note that letween the time of Suleiman the Magnificent and the beginning of the ninteenth century, the Turks lost Hungary, Transylvania, Croatia, Slavonia, Eilmatia, and the Banat of Temesvar to the Hapsburgs, and the northern shre of the Black Sea to the Pruth River to the Russians, while the Danubiai Principalities possessed an antonomous status under R ussia’s aegis. T hu the B alkan peoples found themselves, as a result of O ttom an feebleness, divided among the three great empires of Eastern E u rope. The politics effect of A ustro-Russian expansion to the south was to make it much moredifficult for the Balkan peoples to win their national in dependence. They d w had to contend with three empires rather than one; furthermore, the Rmanoffs and the Hapsburgs were more formidable ad versaries than the (ttomans. A ustro-Russian intrusion into the Balkans also had im portant ecoomic and cultural repercussions. Those areas that came under Hapsburg rul reached a far higher level of economic and cultural de velopment than thee that remained under the Turks or that passed to the Russians. Schools, Ewspapers, factories, and railroads appeared much earlier to the north of the iava-D anube line than they did to the south of it. W hen the Yugoslav state vas organized after W orld W ar I it was noticeable that m arkedly higher eonomic and cultural levels prevailed in regions such as Slovenia, Croatia, nd the Banat, than in Serbia, M ontenegro, and M ace donia. Precisely thi sam e discrepancy existed w ithin G reater R um ania be tween Transylvaniaon the one hand and the old Provinces on the other. It should aso be noted th at during the nineteenth century the m ore advanced peoples mder Hapsburg rule aided their retarded brothers under the T urks to win tieir independence. T he H apsburg Serbs, especially, con tributed greatly to the liberation of their fellow Serbs across the Danube, while they themsefes remained under foreign rule for another century. Thus the division of the Balkan peoples between a relatively advanced and strong Hapsburg Empire ind a weak and backward O ttom an Em pire led to the paradox of the m et retarded areas of the peninsula forming the first inde pendent states.
TIM AR TO C H IFLIK
By far themost im portant effect of O ttom an decline upon the Bal kan peoples, and a e which vitally affected their everyday life, was the break down of the tim ar andholding system established at the time of the conquest, and its replacemer. with the infinitely more onerous chiflik system. We saw in Chapter 7 thatw hen the Turks overran the peninsula they parceled out the m ost fertile plins areas as fiefs o r tim ars to deserving w arriors. These fief holders, or sphis, were strictly controlled by the central government. Their obligations /ere carefully defined, as were also the rights and privi leges of the Christan peasants or rayas. The latter enjoyed hereditary use of


Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline 139
their land and could not be evicted unless they failed to till it for three years. Their obligations— consisting of tithes to the spahi, taxes to the government, and limited corvée duty— were generally lighter than those borne at the time by the peasantry of Christian Europe. Furtherm ore, the rayas were protected against extortion by imperial laws or kanuns, which specified the taxes and services that could be exacted in each district. The spahis, on the other hand, were required to give military service in time of war in return for the revenue they derived from their timars. Unlike the rayas, they did not possess heredi tary title to their fiefs and could be deprived of them if they failed to m eet their military obligations. This tim ar landholding system has been described by a Turkish his torian as “ a happy com bination of the state’s m ilitary needs and social se curity for the peasantry.” 1 Indeed, its outstanding feature was strict control of the spahis so that they could neither exploit the rayas nor defy the state. D uring the early years of O ttom an rule, w hen this tim ar system was in its prime, the rayas enjoyed security and justice. But by the end of the sixteenth century the system began to break down, with most unfortunate repercussions for the Balkan peasantry. One reason for the deterioration of the timar system was the pro gressive weakening of the central government. The spahis promptly took ad vantage of this development to violate the two regulations that they found the most objectionable, that is, the nonheritable nature of their fiefs, and the legal limits on the rayas’ obligations. In other words, the spahis seized the opportunity to transform their fiefs into free and heritable property and to exploit their rayas as they pleased. A nother factor contributing to the degeneration of the tim ar system was the cessation of imperial territorial expansion after the mid-sixteenth century. We noted above that this caused serious trouble because it m eant no m ore plunder and no m ore land for new fiefs. The difficulties increased as the em pire began to lose its extensive trans-D anubian territories in the late seven teenth century. Large num bers of spahis and officials who had lived in those provinces now recrossed the Danube and tried to make a living in the Balkan lands by obtaining new fiefs or usurping the established ones. The increase in the num ber of spahis led to the division of the existing timars, which became increasingly smaller and inadequate to support the fief holders. The distress was accentuated by the accumulation of numerous timars by certain power ful individuals. This naturally produced pressure to abandon the limits set upon the rayas’ obligations in order to increase the income of the spahis. Still another factor explaining the breakdown of the tim ar system was the extension of the activities of the janissaries from the urban centers to the countryside. We noted above that the janissaries gradually had turned toward economic vocations, supplementing their meager military pay with earnings from commerce and the crafts. But this shift was paralleled by a general demographic decline. The population of the O ttom an cities fell after 1600, with the result that the urban markets shrank at the very moment when the


140 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
num ber of janissary soldier-artisans was increasing. This disparity induced the janissaries to transfer their attention and their investments from urban enterprises to the land. In various legal and illegal ways— by foreclosing on mortgages, by offering “protection,” or by simply taking advantage of the growing anarchy in order to dispossess rayas and spahis— the janissaries accumulated properties which they exploited as free personal holdings. Finally, the tim ar system was undermined by the pressure of the constantly expanding economy of W estern Europe. As stated above, the general European price inflation caused by the influx of New W orld bullion began to affect the O ttom an Em pire about 1580. The resulting price dis location disorganized the old economic system, including the land regime. Furtherm ore, urban population growth in W estern E urope necessitated food imports and consequently stimulated maize cultivation throughout the Balkans. Likewise, the rise of cotton m anufactures in the W est stimulated cotton cultivation on the M acedonian plains. The spread and the significance of these new crops will be considered shortly in more detail. Suffice it to note here that the foreign demand for these new agricultural goods provided a powerful incentive to violate the tim ar system in order to obtain full con trol of the land and to exploit the peasants without hindrance for the pro duction of export commodities. These various factors explain the disintegration of the landholding system established at the time of the conquest and the replacement of the timars with chifliks. In some cases the spahis simply converted their timars into chifliks, while in others outside individuals— janissaries or powerful officials— usurped the estate or gave “ p rotection” in return for perhaps a third of the produce. In the latter instance the outsider came between the spahi and the peasants, while the spahi continued to collect his traditional tenth. So far as the peasant mass was concerned, the main change was that the new chiflik owner now held the land as his full heritable property which he could dispose of as he wished. Consequently, he was free to evict the peasants if they refused to accept his tenancy term s. This was a far cry from the old tim ar in which the peasant had enjoyed hereditary rights to his plot while the spahi had been limited to certain specified revenue. It follows that rents on the chifliks were much higher than on the timars. The precise arrangements varied considerably from region to region, but the following procedure was fairly widespread and illustrates the oner ousness of the new regime. The total crop was assembled in the square of the chiflik village, where one tenth or one eighth was first taken as state tax. Then the necessary seed was subtracted, and the rem ainder was divided equally between the chiflik owner and the tenant. Frequently, however, the tenant received considerably less than one half because he was required to pay the state tax farm er and the chiflik manager for their services. Thus the tenant usually was left with about a third of his produce. Furtherm ore, the ten an t’s freedom of m ovem ent was in practice severely restricted, though theoretically he was not tied to the land. His low


Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline 141
share of the gross product commonly forced him to borrow from the chiflik owner in order to feed his family and to buy draft animals and tools. So long as he rem ained in debt he could not leave, and since he rarely could pay off the principal and the high interest, he was in effect bound to the estate. Thus the peasantry that worked on the chiffiks were tenants in nam e but serfs in fact. As late as 1860 a British consul stationed in Saloniki reported that the Moslem peasants had grievances as well as the Christian, but that the latter were particularly oppressed by the onerous chiflik system.
As the M ussulm an peasantry are not as well off as they might be, the distinction between the condition of the Christians and that of the Musselmans in the villages is in some respects only relative. One point of difference consists in the fact that the irregularities of the tax and tithes collectors and the excesses of the police force, not to speak of the depredations of brigands, are practised to a larger extent and with more barefacedness on the Christian than on the Mussulman peasantry. . . . The M ussulman peasantry, nevertheless, suffer from the same causes as their fellow-labourers on the soil only to a smaller degree. T here is, however, a positive difference, and a very im portant one, in the condi tion of the Christian peasants on the farms (“tchiftliks” ) held by Turkish pro prietors. They are forcibly tied to the spot by means of a perpetual and even hereditary debt which their landlord contrives to fasten upon them. This has practically reduced many of the peasant families to a state of serfdom. As an illustration I may mention that when a tchiftlik is sold, the bonds of the peasantry are transferred with the stock to the new proprietor. In Thessaly there are Chris tians who own farm s on the same conditions. U pon one occasion in which the landlord, who was a merchant, had become a bankrupt, 1 remember noticing that amongst the assets borne on his balance-sheet there figured the aggregate am ount of the peasants’ debts to him, and it form ed a rather large item .“
The form ation of the chiffiks was never legally recognized but they were tolerated to such an extent that they eventually replaced the timars as the basis of O ttom an feudalism. The conversion process began in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries and continued more rapidly during the following two centuries. The chiffiks spread throughout the fertile plains areas, including the Peloponnesus, Thessaly, Macedonia, Thrace, the M aritsa Valley, Danubian Bulgaria, the Kosovo-M etahija basins, parts of Bosnia, and the coastal plains of Albania. The oppressiveness of the chiflik system together with the disorder and brigandage arising from the deterioration of central authority led to widespread depopulation in the countryside. This reached such proportions that decrees were issued against the influx of peasants into Constantinople. Even so, E uropean observers frequently reported the abandonm ent of hold ings and the disappearance of villages. As early as 1675, Rev. John Covel wrote as follows: “ I assure you this p art of Thrace is very little inhabited and lesse cultivated. . . . I am confident, above 2 thirds of the land lyes unoccupyed. . . . In many, many miles riding, we saw neither corn-field, nor pasture, nor llocks, nor herds, but onely wild neglected cham pion [unculti


142 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
vated] ground.” 3 By the beginning of the nineteenth century another British traveler observed,
I should have mentioned a part of Bulgaria, and a great part of Euro pean Turkey, except the countries towards the Adriatic and Hungary, as almost destitute of inhabitants. This state of the country is particularly striking on the road from Belgrade through Sophia, Phillippopolis, and Adrianople, to Con stantinople. . . . In taking a separate view of European Turkey, of Greece, and of Egypt, we shall find similar traces of that devastation, occasioned by the com plicated evils under which this em pire has so long groaned.4
GROW TH OF C O M M ER C E AND INDUSTRY
The period of O ttom an decline in the Balkan lands was characterized also by the rapid development of commerce and industry, with the at tendant rise of a class of m erchants, artisans, shipowners, and mariners. O ne reason for this economic trend was the shift to chifliks. This in turn led to the widespread cultivation of the new colonial products, cotton and maize, which were exported to W estern Europe, where there was a steady and growing demand. Cotton first began to be grown in the Serres region of Eastern M acedonia in the late seventeenth century and then its cultivation spread westward to Saloniki and Thessaly. By the second half of the eight eenth century, cotton was by far the most im portant product of M acedonia and Thessaly. It was exported overland by way of the Danube to Budapest and Vienna, and also by sea through Trieste and Saloniki. M aize cultivation was also introduced in the seventeenth century. Unlike cotton, it was possi ble to grow maize in many parts of the peninsula. By the second half of the eighteenth century it was being exported from several regions, including the plains of Durazzo, the Epirote Plain of Arta, the coastal plains of Albania, the D anubian Principalities, and the Peloponnesus. In most cases the maize was grown for export purposes, the workers on the chifliks living on sorghum. It is significant that the geographic p attern of maize and cotton cultivation corresponded to the geographic pattern of the chiflik institution. The free m ountain villages were the last to accept the new maize culture. The development of the new crops for export in turn contributed to the growth of a class of native Balkan m erchants and mariners. Foreign mer chants and shipping handled much of the export business but a considerable proportion fell to the new entrepreneurs. The result was a rapid growth of the Ragusan, Dulcignote, and G reek m erchant fleets, and also the enrich m ent of the Greek and M acedonian merchants who controlled much of the overland trade up the Danube Valley into Central Europe. A nother factor that contributed to the growth of Balkan commerce was the restoration of peace by the 1699 Karlowitz Treaty, which permitted the resumption of trade between the Balkan lands and the Hapsburg Em pire and Venice. Equally im portant was the Russian expansion to the Black


Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline 143
Sea at the end of the eighteenth century. This made possible the exploitation of the U krainian plains, which in turn led to a lively com m erce between the Russian Black Sea ports and the Balkan lands. Finally, the Anglo-French wars of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries disrupted commerce in the M editerranean and ruined the W estern m erchants who had established themselves in various Balkan ports and had monopolized the overseas trade. Local merchants promptly took the place of the W esterners and exported Balkan products through overland trade channels into Central Europe. These developments enormously increased the volume of Balkan commerce, both foreign and domestic. Trade was carried along transversal and longitudinal routes. The transversal routes began in the Adriatic ports of Dubrovnik (R agusa), Split (S palato), Durazzo, and A rta, and ended in Novi Bazar, Belgrade, Saloniki, Serres, V arna, and Constantinople. The longitudinal routes began in Budapest and Chernovtsy (C ern au ti), and ended in Saloniki and C onstantinople. A t first the G reeks, Jews, and V lachs con trolled most of the trade, but gradually the Serbs and Bulgars also partici pated in it. The expansion of trade in tu rn stim ulated the dem and and the out put of handicraft products. Im portant m anufacturing centers appeared in various parts of the peninsula, frequently in isolated m ountain areas where the artisans could practice their crafts with a minimum of Turkish interfer ence. In Bulgaria and Greece particularly, village artisans turned out sub stantial quantities of woolen and cotton thread and textiles, stockings, clothes, carpets, silks, and furs. M ost of the output was m arketed within the empire, but certain products were also exported to foreign countries, mostly in Cen tral Europe. The degree of industrial expansion can be easily exaggerated. It never approached W estern proportions for various reasons, including the lack of security, the competition of W estern manufactured goods, the active opposition of W estern consuls and the absence of a persistent mercantilist or cam eralist policy on the part of the O ttom an government. Nevertheless, the fact remains that industrial output in the Balkans rose sharply during the course of the eighteenth century. The rise of commerce and industry stim ulated the growth of a mer chant marine. The most im portant maritime centers were along the Dalma tian coast (Zadar, Kotor, Trogir, Split, and Ragusa, or D ubrovnik), the Albanian and Epirote coast (Durazzo and A rta) and the Greek littoral and islands (Hydra, Spetsai, Psara, Galaxidi, and C rete). The new m erchant marine exported Balkan products such as cotton, maize and other grains, dyeing materials, wine, oil, and fruits, especially currants. In return they brought back mostly manufactured goods and colonial products, particularly spices, sugar, woolens, glass, watches, guns, and gunpowder.


144 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
POLITICAL DEVELOPM ENTS
The developments in agriculture, commerce, and industry had farreaching political repercussions. One was the appearance of a persistent and growing bandit movement. The bolder peasants, driven to desperation by the extortion and exploitation arising from the breakdown of order and the spread of chifliks, abandoned their plots and took to the m ountains or forests, where they led the perilous but free lives of outlaws. In Greece these outlaws were known as klephts, in Serbia as haiduks, and in Bulgaria as haiduts. These men refused to accept any Turkish authority whatsoever. Instead, they organized themselves into small bands of twenty to a hundred men, though sometimes they num bered as many as two or three hundred. They robbed the Turks and sometimes the rich Christian oligarchs and the monks of the wellstocked monasteries, in preference to the poor peasants or the parish priests. They came to be regarded, therefore, not as ordinary brigands but rather as cham pions of the lowly and the downtrodden. Countless ballads glorified them as romantic Robin Hoods performing spectacular feats against the Turkish tyrant and against oppression in general. T heir chief historical significance is th at they kept alive the idea of justice and freedom. They themselves had no political consciousness or ide ology. Their ballads did not call on the Christians to create independent Balkan states. Instead, they glorified local skirmishes and extolled the fabu lous exploits and magnificent trappings of individual guerrilla heroes. These warriors were almost invariably illiterate. They had no comprehension of the cultural and historical traditions of their respective peoples. A Greek scholar of this period relates that when he met the renowned guerrilla leader Nikotsaras, he acclaimed his prowess as equal to that of Achilles. Nikotsaras was deeply offended that he should be com pared to an unknown. “W hat nonsense is this,” he replied indignantly, “and who is this Achilles? Did the musket of Achilles kill m any?” 5 Despite their limitations, these outlaws did create a tradition of resist ance that profoundly influenced the popular mind. And they also provided a ready-m ade fighting force when various factors which they dimly com pre hended culminated in the series of national uprisings in the nineteenth century. The spread of chifliks produced not only bands of outlaws but also periodic peasant revolts. The contrast was very sharp between the exploita tive chiflik system and the original tim ar arrangem ent which had provided security and justice to the Christian peasantry. The peasants naturally re sented their new degraded status in which they lost rights to their plots and lacked protection against excessive levies and corvée duties. The result was that peasant revolts became increasingly frequent as the chifliks, which first appeared in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, spread steadily during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The significance of these re volts is th at they provided the mass basis for the nationalist m ovem ents and


Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline 145
insurrections that developed among all the Balkan peoples during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The leadership of the nationalist movements was assumed to a con siderable degree by the new middle-class elements created by the growth of commerce and industry. These groups, by their very nature, were dissatisfied with the O ttom an status quo. They had little use for a government that was unable to maintain roads, curb brigands, or prevent the open and never-ending extortions of its own officials. In this respect the following anonymous letter that appeared in the Moscow journal Vestnik E vropy [Herald of Europe] in January, 1805, is revealing:
. . . the insecurity of life and property take away the stimulus to establish fac tories. Even the boyars in the D anubian Principalities consider this dangerous. . . . Not long ago a wealthy lord, Sandulati Sturza, the son-in-law of the present hospodar, M uruzi, started a woolen factory, but for safety’s sake he built it in his village and not in town. . . . They have no understanding of prom issory notes. . . . [Borrowers] have to pay 30 to 40 percent, which sum is subtracted at once from the loan. F or transfer to G erm any or to France, the banker charges 10 to 20 percent.0
The new middle-class groups also tended to be radically minded be cause of their contacts with the West. M erchants and seamen who journeyed to foreign lands could not help contrasting the security and enlightenment they witnessed abroad with the deplorable conditions at home. Very naturally they would conclude that their own future, and that of their fellow country men, depended upon the earliest possible removal of the Turkish incubus. It does not follow that every m erchant and shipowner was an ardent revolu tionary. We shall see later that when the Greek W ar of Independence began in 1821 some of the fabulously wealthy shipowning families hesitated to enter the struggle precisely because they had so much to lose. But they were excep tions. M ore typical of this group was the following lam ent of a Greek m er chant, John Priggos, who had made his fortune in A m sterdam . While living in that city he had been impressed by the security and justice with which commercial operations could be conducted.
But all this cannot exist under the Turk. He has neither order nor justice. A nd if the capital is one thousand he multiplies it tenfold so that he may loot and im poverish others, not realizing th a t the w ealth of his subjects is the wealth of his kingdom . . . . he is altogether unjust, and he is not one for creating any thing but only for destroying. May the Almighty ruin him so that Greece may become Christian, and justice may prevail, and governments may be created as in E urope where everyone has his own w ithout fear of any injustice. . . .7
M erchants like Priggos made im portant contributions to Balkan na tional development not only because of their political activities but also be cause of their role as intermediaries between their native countries and the outside world. The Serbian merchants in southern Hungary, the Bulgarian


146 A ge of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
merchants in southern Russia and in the Danubian Principalities, and the Greek m erchants scattered widely in foreign cities such as Trieste, Venice, Vienna, Am sterdam , Budapest, Bucharest, and Odessa, all contributed greatly to the intellectual awakening of their fellow countrym en. They did so by bestowing upon their native towns and villages lavish gifts of books, equip ment, and money. Frequently they financed the education of young men of their race in foreign universities. Also, they made possibile the publication of books and newspapers in their native languages. These books usually were printed in E uropean cities and then shipped to the B alkan lands. It is strik ing and significant that the first Greek newspaper and the first Serbian news paper were published in Vienna in 1790 and 1791, respectively; that for many years almost all Serbian and Bulgarian books in the Cyrillic script were printed by the Budapest University press; that the first Bulgarian book was published in Rimnik, W allachia, in 1806; that the Philike Hetairia which planned the Greek W ar of Independence was organized in 1814 by Greek merchants in Odessa; that Bulgarian m erchants in the same city were re sponsible for the first Bulgarian schools and the first Bulgarian textbooks used in their hom eland; and that Novi Sad in southern Hungary was for long known as the “Serbian A thens” because of its contributions to the develop ment of Serbian culture and national consciousness.
PASSING OF THE THEOCRATIC AGE
The various forces analyzed above created a new intellectual climate in the Balkan world. There was not only more education but a new type of education. It was no longer primarily religious. Instead, it was profoundly influenced by the current Enlightenment in W estern Europe. The students who studied abroad returned with a firsthand knowledge of the new body of thought. A contemporary Protestant missionary complained:
The educated portion of Greece, the elite of her gifted sons, are in the habit of sipping the poison of Voltaire and of Rousseau, whose writings have been put into modern Greek. I have met Greeks who have keenly defended the chilly theory of deism, and to meet their sophistries requires talent. . . . Can we won der, therefore, if an impious, ignorant, lifeless [Greek] ministry produce a host of infidels? Is it at all surprising that young Greeks educated in Italy, Germany, France or England, should return to the classic land disciples of Alfieri, of Schiller, of Voltaire, of Lord Shaftesbury? 8
As the missionary observed, the works of Voltaire and of Rousseau, and also of Locke, Descartes, Leibnitz, and others, were now being translated, usually into Greek first, and then into the other Balkan languages. The Greeks took the lead for various reasons. They had more contacts with' the West because of their geographic position and extensive commerce; their merchants were more numerous and provided more funds for general edu cational purposes; moreover, their language and culture had been dominant


Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline 147
for centuries and had prevailed in the church schools in their hom eland and, indeed, throughout the peninsula. These advantages enabled the Greeks to take the lead in translating foreign authors as well as in transform ing their educational system. They were the first to break clerical control of educa tion and to establish secular schools with humanistic curricula. Hitherto most schools had been content to train the children to read the church service books, to write simple letters, and to do simple figuring. Now well-equipped new schools were built using new texts and offering new subjects, including m odern languages and sciences. This development was of importance for the Greeks and their neigh bors. This was especially true in Rum ania, where G reek adm inistrators, m er chants, and teachers occupied a prominent position. In fact, Bucharest so ciety was essentially Greco-Rum anian in character, and it was directly and fully influenced by intellectual currents in the Greek world. Greek teachers taught at the Academy of Bucharest and at its counterpart in Jassy. G reek newspapers published in Vienna circulated widely throughout the Princi palities. Greek translations of W estern authors were common, and the French originals also could be read because of the new modern language instruction in the schools. Thus at a time when there was no direct contact between Bucharest and the W estern capitals, W estern ideas penetrated to the Prin cipalities through Greek channels by way of Constantinople and Greece. It is also notew orthy th at a considerable num ber of B ulgarian pupils attended the new G reek schools. This is understandable in view of the fact that in 1750 only twenty-eight so-called cloister schools were to be found in Bulgaria, of which only two were located in towns and the rem ainder in villages. These cloister schools were of a very low level, offering only a little arithmetic, and reading and writing in the old Church Slavonic that was incomprehensible to the people. Consequently, Bulgarian students flocked to G reek schools in Athens, Chios, Y anina, Constantinople, Smyrna, Bucharest, Jassy, and elsewhere. The teaching naturally was in Greek but the significant point was its secular content. This had a dynamic effect upon the Bulgarian students who returned to their homeland and spread the new learning. They opened what were called “Greco-Slav” schools which represented a transi tion between the older cloister schools and the fully Bulgarian schools started in the 1830’s w ith the support of B ulgarian m erchants in O dessa.* Bulgarian scholars have recognized the contribution of Greek learning to their national awakening.
We should recognize, despite everything, that our renaissance owes much to the Greek schools. They gave instruction, education and progress to the Bul garian people. . . . Several of our Bulgarian leaders received their education in Greek schools. . . . Greece, because of her favorable geographic position, came under the influence of Italy, and through the medium of Greece this influence also contributed to our renaissance.9
* Sec Chapter 19.


148 A ge of O ttom an Decline: 1566-1815
Serbian students also attended Greek schools. Outstanding was Dimitrije Obradovich (c. 1743-181 1), the founder of modern Serbian lit erature.* An im portant stage in his intellectual developm ent was his attend ance at a Greek school in Smyrna between October, 1765, and April, 1766. Obradovich himself relates that his teacher was
free from all superstition . . . a sworn foe and rehuker of monkish abuses, false hoods and begging; of fraudulent ikons and relics; and of miracles wrought for money. Whenever anybody told him that such and such an ikon was miraculous, he would inquire: “Does it float in the air all by itself, or is it nailed or pasted on a wall or hung on a peg?” And when he heard that the first of these things was not true and the second was, he would say, “So you see that it is not miraculous.” 10
W hen O bradovich left Smyrna he was well on his way to becoming an eighteenth-century rationalist. His new ideas were crystallized and deep ened when he journeyed to Vienna in 1771. Later, when he registered as a student at the university in Halle, he began, as he put it,
to publish a book on my own adventures, in which I had two primary purposes: first, to show the uselessness of monasteries for society; and second, to show the great need for sound learning, as the most effective method of freeing men from superstition and of guiding them to a true reverence for God, to rational piety, and to enlightened virtue, whereby a man gifted with reason enters on the true path of his temporal and eternal welfare.11
O bradovich was as ardent a nationalist as he was a rationalist. In his writings he addressed himself “to every person who understands our lan guage. . . . 1 shall pay no heed whatever to what religion and faith any man belongs, n o r is th a t a m atter for consideration in the present enlightened age.” 12 O bradovich had many counterparts in Greece, outstanding being the revolutionary Rhigas Pheraios (1 7 5 7 -1 7 9 8 ).f Rhigas likewise turned his back on religious distinctions. In his fam ous revolutionary song, “T hourios,” he called on all enslaved peoples, Christian or M oslem, white or Negro, to rise sim ultaneously in revolt “from Bosnia to A rab ia.” His fiery slogans were the complete antithesis of Orthodox theocratic ideology: “Freedom of faith for all” ; “O ur hearts for our cou n try ” ; “D raw the sword for liberty.” 13 A nother prom inent Greek exponent of the new ideology was the educator A dam antios Kora'is. Born in Smyrna, he cam e as a youth under the influence of a Dutch pastor who acquainted him with the Enlightenment. In 1782 he left for France to study medicine and never returned to his hom e land. The impact upon him of W estern society, and especially of the city of P aris, is reflected in the following letter he w rote to a friend:
I have been in the celebrated city of Paris since the 24th of May [1788], the home of arts and science, the Athens of today. Imagine a city, much larger
* For details concerning Obradovich, see Chapter 14. [For more details concerning Khigas, see Chiiplcr 15.


Balkan Peninsula D uring O ttom an Decline 149
than Constantinople, with 800,000 people, all sorts of academies, public libraries, where science and art have been developed to perfection, where learned men are to be seen all over the city, in boulevards, market places, cafes, etc. In the latter place you find political and literary newspapers written in German, English, and French, and in all other languages. . . . Such, my friends, is Paris. Anyone is bound to be astonished at these things, but for a Greek who knows that his an cestors had reached, two thousand years ago in Athens, an equal (if not higher) degree of learning, his surprise is mingled with melancholy. And when, more over, he realizes that all these blessings exist no longer in Greece but have instead been replaced by myriad evils, that where once governed the wise laws of Solon (whose name, my friend, I have often heard mentioned with reverence by the learned men here) now reign ignorance, malice, force, wickedness, insolence, and shamelessness, that instead of a Miltiades and Themistocles, whom Europe still admires, we are governed by scoundrels and stupid men as well as by an ignorant clergy who are even worse than our foreign tyrants the Turks. When, 1 say, the unfortunate Greek is confronted with these things and recalls the past, then, my friend, his melancholy becomes sheer indignation and despair.14
In this manner the Balkan world was thoroughly transform ed, so that by the beginning of the nineteenth century it was quite different from what it had been a century or two earlier. Ecclesiastics no longer were the sole spokesmen of the faithful; priests no longer were the sole teachers in the schools; and theological treatises no longer were the sole texts for instruc tion. The Age of Theocracy was giving way to a new Age of Nationalisman age of secular ideas and leaders and aspirations.
ROLE OF THE ORTHODOX CHURCH
The O rthodox Church, as an institution, was generally hostile to the new currents of secularism and nationalism. Before considering the reasons for this situation it should be noted that the church contributed fundamentally to the preservation of the identity of the Balkan peoples. It is true that C hris tianity rested very lightly on the mass of the peasantry, which was illiterate and superstitious. Y et the fact remains that religion did serve as a barrier between the Moslem Turks and their Christian subjects, thereby forestalling the possibility of racial and cultural assimilation. Religion also represented a basic element in Balkan historical tradition and helped to keep alive mem ories of past independence and greatness. Furtherm ore, the church was the repository of the feeble remnants of literacy and culture during the centuries of darkness. Finally, the church served as a com m on and strengthening bond among the Balkan Christians until the advent of disruptive nationalism. These factors were operative and significant during most of the pe riod of Turkish rule. But by the eighteenth century a rift began to develop between the church and the new elements in Balkan society that were chal lenging the status quo. The explanation is to be found in the position that the church occupied in the O ttom an imperial fram ework. We saw in Chap ter 4 that M ohammed II had granted the church extensive ecclesiastical and


150 A ge of O ttom an Decline: 1 5 6 6 -1 8 1 5
secular jurisdiction immediately after capturing Constantinople. But in the following centuries the church became corrupt and demoralized and incapable of independent action. The main reason for this deterioration was the simony which per m eated the entire ecclesiastical structure. This evil was partly a reflection of the corrupt O ttom an bureaucracy, but it was also a result of the rivalries of church factions that did not hesitate to intrigue and to bribe in order to ob tain the coveted patriarchal throne. One of these factions succeeded as early as 1467 in deposing the incum bent patriarch by offering to pay one thousand gold pieces to the O ttom an government. This practice proceeded apace, with the Turks naturally encouraging it until it became the rule. Large sums were spent regularly as bribes to courtiers, eunuchs, janissaries, and female favor ites of the sultans. The patriarchate came to resemble the medieval Papacy in the means employed to control elections. O f the 159 patriarchs who held office between the fifteenth and twentieth centuries, 105 were dethroned by the Turks; 27 abdicated, many of them involuntarily; 6 suffered violent deaths by hanging, poisoning, or drowning; and only 21 died natural deaths while in office. It is apparent that an institution functioning under such con ditions was quite incapable of independent decision or action. T he church’s freedom of action was further ham pered by the fact that it was part and parcel of the O ttom an imperial machinery. The patriarch had the rank of vizir, and his bishops in the provinces worked together with the T urkish governors. T he chu rch ’s position in the em pire certainly was not ideal, but it was recognized and established, and this inevitably led to a certain reluctance to challenge the status quo. The church becam e further compromised in its relations with the O ttom an state when the Phanariotes gained a preponderant position in church councils. The origins and role of the Phanariotes will be exam ined in C hapter 15. Suffice it to note here that they were G reeks who entered the O ttom an service and gained great power and wealth as adm inistrators, tax farmers, merchants, and contractors. The Phanariotes then infiltrated the Patriarchate, and with their wealth and government connections they were able by the end of the seventeenth century to dominate the church. A t one point they were in a position to intervene decisively in the election of all church officials, including the patriarch himself. In view of the fact that the Phanariotes were O ttom an officials, their predom inance in the church n at urally committed that institution more than ever to the im perial status quo. It does not follow from the above that the O rthodox prelates were at all times loyal to the sultan. In certain respects their position in the empire was ambivalent, which in turn made their own attitude and conduct ambiva lent. M embers of the O rthodox clergy, from the highest to the lowest, were subject to the caprice of the sultan and his ministers. Y et these same clergy exercised a civil authority over their Christian followers that they had never possessed in Byzantine times. Their church property was subject to pillage and confiscation, but in spiritual affairs the Moslem overlord, in contrast to


Balkan Peninsula D uring O ttom an Decline 151
his Byzantine predecessor, was indifferent and aloof. Thus the church was at once pam pered and scorned, privileged and persecuted. Correspondingly, the church leaders wavered between loyalty and sedition toward the Ottom an master. As a rule they exhorted the faithful to respect the new em peror in C onstantinople— to render unto C aesar such things as were C aesar’s. Y et it was ever galling that the Caesar should be a Moslem sultan. A nd when this sultan became progressively weaker, and his rule progressively corrupt and tyrannical, some Orthodox leaders turned to another Caesar who was both Christian and Orthodox— the tsar of Russia. A considerable num ber of patriarchs, bishops, and monks made the pilgrimage to Moscow to implore the aid of “our T sar,” “our Orthodox T sar,” “our sovereign of the True Faith.” The petitioners came not only from Constantinople but also from the Serbian, Bulgarian, and Rum anian lands. The bishop of Transylvania presented to Tsar Alexis in 1668 a petition that was typical of others, both before and after.
We will contribute willingly whatever will help to defeat the Turks, but nothing is possible without the help of other Christians and other sovereigns, and without the will and aid of God. . . . A large number of Orthodox Slavs live in these regions: Serbs, Bulgarians and Wallachian's, and all these people wait only for the signal to be given to fall upon the vile Turk; since they groan in misery and oppression they would form, with the permission of God, a completely pre pared army.15
Such appeals were natural and understandable, for they were made to the Tsar of Holy Russia, the Protector of the True Faith. But when the call for revolution came from W estern-inspired leaders who wished to estab lish modern nation-states rather than to further the cause of Orthodoxy, the church leaders inevitably reacted violently. They did so not only for m ate rial reasons, not merely because of historic and advantageous commitments to the O ttom an regime. They were also repelled because of ideological con siderations. The new doctrines from the W est represented a challenge to the intellectual foundations of Balkan Orthodoxy. Throughout the centuries of Ottom an rule the O rthodox Church had been profoundly anti-W estern. It had opposed the West because it was the home of Catholicism and Protes tantism and because it was the birthplace of the Renaissance with its ration alism and secularism. Thus the church now regarded the French Revolution and its attendant ideology as the abom inable culmination of this modern secular trend. It denounced the tenets of the Enlightenm ent and it opposed the agitation for revolution and for national independence. This opposition ex tended to all Balkan national movem ents— not merely to the South Slav and R um anian, as is often assum ed, but also to the G reek. Thus we find the Constantinople Patriarchate prohibiting under pen alty of excommunication the reading of those works of Rhigas Pheraios that related to the church. We find also the patriarch cooperating with the _ sultan in measures against the klephts. W hen the latter becam e dangerously


152 A g e of O ttom an Decline: 1 5 6 6 -1 8 1 5
strong in the Peloponnesus in the opening years of the nineteenth century, the patriarch, at the request of the sultan, issued a synodal excommunication directed against all C hristians who refused to aid the authorities in the drive against the klephts. The most detailed exposition of the antinational attitude of the church hierarchy at this time is to be found in the pam phlet “ Paternal Instructions,” published in 1798 in C onstantinople under the name of Anthimos, Patriarch of Jerusalem, though the actual author appears to have been the Patriarch of Constantinople, Gregory V. The pamphlet propounds the thesis th at the O ttom an E m pire is a divinely sanctioned institution estab lished to ensure the religious liberty of the O rthodox and to protect them from the heresies of the West.
Behold, how our merciful and omniscient Lord has arranged things, to preserve again the integrity of the holy and Orthodox faith of us, the pious, and to redeem everybody; He raised from nothing this powerful kingdom of the Ottomans instead of our Roman [Byzantine] kingdom, which had somehow started to deviate in matters of our Christian orthodox spirit. And He raised that Ottoman kingdom above any other kingdom, to prove beyond doubt that this was according to His divine will . . . and to provide a great mystery, that is the salvation of His chosen people. . . . The Devil devised another evil trick in the current century. . . . that is, the now much-talked-of system of liberty, which on the surface seems as if it were good. . . . But there is an enticement of the Devil and a destructive poison destined to cast people down into catastrophe and disorder.
Brethren, do not be cheated out of the way of salvation. . . . Close your ears and give no attention at all to those newly professed hopes of freedom. . . . Besides being contrary to the Holy Scriptures, they are professed deceitfully to cheat you and strip you of any heavenly and earthly wealth. Everywhere this illusory evil system of liberty has caused poverty, murders, losses, plunder. De ceitful, Christian brethren, arc the teachings of those new apostles, and be careful.
He [the Sultan] is, after God, their Lord, The depository of the goods and guardian of their life. Both divine and human laws command strongly, Call both young and old to faith and submission. And above all, the Scripture says, that we should pray For our king constantly. . . . And that he who opposes such authority Opposes the command of God himself. As we are indebted (to the Sultan] for all the charities We enjoy, both the old and young of us, Not only should we surrender every possession of ours But also detest every anarchy.16
A reply to this apologia for the status quo was published in the same year, 1798, in the form of a brochure by Korai's entitled“Brotherly Instruc tions.”Korai's criticized the argum ent that the Turkishconquest was divinely ordained in order to shield O rthodox from W estern heresies. He pointed


Balkan Peninsula During Ottoman Decline 153
out that this protection had never been extended to the more numerous O rthodox Christians in Russia, and he denounced O ttom an dom ination as an abomination rather than a divine blessing. The patriarch, added Korais, should have censured the corruption of the clergy who were fleecing their flocks. “ It is readily understood,” he wrote, “ why the rapacious clergy fear the destruction of the Ottom an Empire and the attainm ent of liberty, because it will m ark the beginning of their own m isfortune.” 17 In the same year that this polemical exchange took place, the revolu tionary Rhigas Pheraios was apprehended by the Turks and executed. As he was about to die he declared defiantly, “ I have sown. O thers will reap.” H is tory soon vindicated him and repudiated the patriarch. The reason was that the church no longer had the inlluence th at it had enjoyed a century or two earlier. Its position had been underm ined by the com bination of forces de scribed above. The Age of Thcoracy was giving way, and with the coming of the nineteenth century one after another of the Balkan peoples took up arms to win the liberty that the patriarch had denounced and that Rhigas and Korais had acclaimed.


10. Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube:
1566-1699
T
J . H E c e n t u r y f o l l o w i n g the death of Suleiman in 1566 was generally one of decline and demoralization. Y et during this period the O ttom an Empire lost no territory. Its far-flung frontiers remained un broken. T he explanation is to be found in the fact th at the neighboring states at this time were equally weak and disorganized. Persia experienced a revival under A bbas I but sank back into her usual anarchy following his death in 1629. The Hapsburgs offered no serious threat to O ttom an integrity during the long and ineffectual reign of Em peror Rudolf from 1576 to 1612. Six years later the outbreak of the Thirty Y ears’ W ar provided the Turks with another long respite from foreign aggression. Thus a fortunate com bination of historical accidents enabled the O ttom an Em pire to reach the mid-seven teenth century intact if not unscathed. During the second half of the seventeenth century the Ottoman E m pire suffered devastating defeats and lost extensive territories. This occurred despite the fact that the empire at this time experienced a m arked recovery under the leadership of the great Kiuprili grand vizirs. T he paradox is to be explained by new diplomatic and military developments. The Hapsburg em peror, Leopold I, organized an overwhelming anti-Turkish coalition includ ing Poland, Venice, and Russia. He also com m anded the services of three rem arkable military leaders, the Duke of Lorraine, the M arquis of Baden, and Prince Eugene of Savoy. These men enjoyed the great advantage of new military techniques that had emerged from the Thirty Y ears’ W ar but which had not yet been adopted by the Turks. The seventeenth century conse quently closed with the epoch-making Treaty of Karlowitz in which for the first time “the ever-victorious frontier” shrank back from the walls of Vienna to the valley of the Danube.
154


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 155
s e lim ii: 1566-1574
Selim II was a very different m an from his distinguished father and predecessor, Suleiman the Magnificent. The latter owed his reputation in part to his impressive appearance and irreproachable character. The H apsburg ambassador Busbecq describes him as “frugal and tem perate,” “a strict guardian of his religion and its ceremonies,” “not indulging in wine,” and of a “general physical appearance worthy of the ruler of so vast an em pire.” 1 Selim was the exact opposite in almost every respect— lazy, fat, dissipated, and so addicted to wine that he was known to his subjects as Selim the Sot. Y et he was not as degenerate as his disgraceful successors. He was not the puppet of harem intrigues. Although lacking the driving force and self-discipline of his father, he was intelligent, artistic, a fine poet, and capable of ac cepting good advice. H e stands, in short, halfway between the great sultans who preceded him and the pathetic creatures that followed. D uring Selim’s reign additional territories were obtained at the ex pense of Venice in the west and Persia in the east. The acquisition of V ene tian territory points up a notable shift in Ottom an foreign policy. Under Suleim an it had been directed against the H apsburgs. Some of Selim’s ad visers favored the continuation of this policy. They wished particularly to strike against E m p eror C harles’s son, Philip 11 of Spain, who had hounded the Moors out of his country. O ther advisers favored, instead, an attack upon the Venetian-held island of Cyprus, which was being used by Chris tian corsairs to prey upon Ottom an commerce and upon the pilgrim traffic to M ecca. The latter course was adopted, and in M ay, 1570, a fleet sailed from Constantinople for Cyprus. The Venetians soon discovered that aid from other Christian states was not forthcoming. The only power in a position to give substantial assist ance was Spain. It might be imagined that this country would welcome a Venetian alliance, given the constant threat of O ttom an aggression and the never-ending depredations of the Moslem N orth African corsairs. Y et Philip held back, fearing that the Venetians would use a Spanish alliance to make terms with the Turks and leave them free to attack him. N or were his fears wholly unjustified. We know that the Signiory throughout this period con ducted secret negotiations with Constantinople. Even the Venetians them selves were concerned lest an alliance with Spain should increase Spanish influence in Italy and threaten their own predom inance in the Adriatic. U nder these circum stances it is not surprising that the negotiations dragged on for over a year. The only disinterested figure on the scene was Pope Pius V, and it was largely due to his efforts that a Triple Alliance (Spain, Venice, and the Papacy), was concluded on M ay 20, 1571. By that date it was too late to save Cyprus. T he T urks had landed on the island on July 1, 1570. T hey laid siege to the capital, Nicosia, and captured it on A ugust 8. Then they pro ceeded to invest Famagusta, the principal fortress of Cyprus. It was heroically


156 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
defended by a mixed force of Italians and Greeks under the command of Bragadin, a gallant and experienced Venetian general. Hopes were raised at first by the news that an allied fleet of 187 ships was coming to the rescue. But the com mander of the Spanish contingent had received secret instructions from Philip II to procrastinate and to avoid committing his ships in battle. These orders were carried out so effectively that the fleet did not reach Crete until Septem ber. It was then decided th at it was too late in the season to proceed further. The expedition turned back, leaving the defenders of Fam a gusta to their fate. The siege dragged on through the winter of 1570. It was not until August of the following year that the garrison surrendered, its provisions exhausted and only seven barrels of powder remaining. The Turks paid dearly for the victory, suffering some fifty thousand casualties. This heavy loss may account for the perfidious breach of the surrender terms. After promising to spare the lives of the defenders, the T urks executed B ragadin’s im m ediate companions, tortured him to death, and made captives of the rest. But when the victors arrived in C onstantinople with the prisoners and booty, they found the capital gloomy and depressed. News had just arrived of the great Chris tian naval victory at Lepanto on October 7, 1571. The Christian allies had am assed a form idable fleet in the sum m er of 1571 for the relief of Famagusta. Profiting from the experience of the previous year when a similar fleet had accomplished nothing because of dis sension among the com m anders, the allies placed this fleet under the supreme command of Don John of Austria, the natural son of the late Emperor Charles V. Don John had at his disposal a total of 200 to 210 galleys, mostly V enetian and Spanish, together with 6 Venetian galleasses or supergalleys. This arm ada was at anchor off one of the Ionian Islands when news arrived early in O ctober that Fam agusta had fallen two months earlier. Some cap tains now urged retreat, but the majority, Don John among them, m aintained that a defeat of the Turkish fleet would com pensate to some extent for the loss of Cyprus even though it would not recover the island. Accordingly, the allied fleet crossed to Lepanto at the entrance of the Gulf of Corinth where the main Turkish fleet was reported to be gathered. M eanwhile the Turks on their part were also divided on the advisa bility of engaging in battle. The top com m ander, Ali Pasha, was a young m an with little naval experience. The veteran corsair, Uluch Ali, was the second in command, and a certain Perted Pasha commanded the troops. Both Uluch and Perted opposed an immediate battle on the ground that their men were inadequately trained. But Ali was able to show the sultan’s definite orders to fight and thus silenced the opposition. O n O ctober 7 the two fleets met just inside the entrance of the Gulf of Lepanto. The Turkish galleys were de cidedly superior in numbers, approximately 270 as against the slightly more than 200 under Don John. But the Christian vessels were larger and carried more soldiers, nearly 20,000 in contrast to the 16,000 Turks. Furtherm ore, the Christian soldiers wore more arm or and carried more firearms than their


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566—1699 157
opponents. Many of the latter had only bows and arrows and wore no arm or whatsoever. This Christian superiority in soldiers proved decisive, for the Lepanto battle was essentially a land battle on the water. The two fleets, draw n up in parallel lines, met in head-on collision. They became inextricably mixed, with several galleys frequently locked together and the soldiers battling to the finish on the decks. The melee went on for about three hours before the Turkish center and right wing began to give way. Uluch, in com m and of the Turkish left wing, succeeded in outmaneuvering the opposing Christian gal leys, several of which he cut off and captured. When he became aware that the main O ttom an fleet was being defeated, he made a dash with forty of his galleys and succeeded in breaking through. These were the only Turkish ships that escaped. The rem ainder were sunk, driven ashore, or captured. In contrast, the allies lost only fifteen vessels. The casualties were approxim ately nine thousand Christians and thirty thousand Turks. It was an overwhelming defeat for the Ottom an Empire and the whole of Christendom received the news with trem endous enthusiasm and religious fervor. With the Turkish high-seas fleet annihilated, it rem ained to be seen how the victors would exploit their trium ph the following year. Various pos sibilities presented themselves— an expedition to recover Cyprus, a blow against the corsair nests in N orth A frica, or even an attem pt at the D ard a nelles, where the Turks were reported to be hastily rebuilding the entrance forts. The problem was to find a project agreeable to all the allies. This proved impossible. The Venetians were interested only in strengthening their position in the Levant. But the Spaniards did not wish to jeopardize their naval forces so far from home, especially since war with France was always possible. They preferred, instead, to strike against the North African pirates who were a constant scourge in the western M editerranean. Finally, the death of Pope Pius V in M ay, 1572, deprived the allies of their only sincere and disinterested m em ber and ended the possibility of resolute and effective united action. Don John did bring the main Spanish fleet to Corfu, where the V ene tians were waiting. But he did not arrive until September, 1572. And when the combined force set out to look for the Turks it received an unpleasant surprise. The Turks were waiting with a fleet fully as powerful as that which they had lost at Lepanto. Thanks to the energy and organizational ability of G rand Vizir Sokolli (Sokolovich), no less than one hundred and sixty gal leys and eight galleasses had been built during the preceding winter. Uluch, the new captain pasha of the O ttom an fleet, decided not to risk battle with the Christians. The most serious loss suffered at Lepanto had been the skilled mariners, who were more difficult to replace than the lost galleys. Uluch now discovered that his crews had little experience in navigation or in warfare. Accordingly, he set out for the strongly fortified harbor of Modon on the west coast of Greece. W hen the allied fleet under D on John appeared before the harbor, Uluch refused to venture out. Don John landed soldiers


158 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
in order to take M odon from the rear, but they were repulsed by strong Turkish reinforcements from the interior. By this time October had come, and with it the danger of storms. Don John decided to end the expedition and return to winter quarters. Uluch likewise returned to Constantinople and the operations were over for the year. The tardiness of King Philip together with the unexpected appearance of a new O ttom an fleet had prevented the allies from exploiting their victory at Lepanto. The abortive 1572 expedition proved to be the last common effort of the Christian league. It was apparent to the Venetians by this time that the recovery of Cyprus was most unlikely. Furtherm ore, the war with Turkey had disrupted the Levantine trade and precipitated a serious economic crisis. These considerations led the V enetians to decide in favor of peace. Sokolli’s terms were severe, for the shrewd Bosnian knew that he had the whip hand. On M arch 7, 1573, the Venetians signed a treaty in which they formally ceded Cyprus and also paid an indemnity of three hundred thousand ducats. The terms could not have been worse if the battle of Lepanto had never been fought. This indicates that despite the rejoicing of the Christian world the battle was not decisive in the strategic sense. It did not alter the balance of power in the M editerranean. By signing the peace treaty Venice tacitly accepted O ttom an naval supremacy in the eastern M editerranean. Don John continued the war in the western part of the sea. In 1573 he cap tured Tunis but the following year the Turks recovered the base. From then on, naval operations were spasmodic and indecisive, consisting mostly of small-scale raids by each side. The reason was that both the Spaniards and the T urks now had m ore pressing problem s elsewhere— the Spaniards in the Atlantic and the N orth Sea and the Turks along the Persian frontier. During these years Persia was seriously weakened by incompetent rulers and by continual attacks from the Uzbeks to the east. The Turks seized the opportunity to launch an invasion from the west in 1578. They overran several provinces and retained them despite persistent Persian efforts. Finally, in 1590, they forced the Persians to accept a treaty ceding Georgia, A zer baijan, and Shirwan. Thus the Turks extended their frontiers to the Caucasus M ountains and the Caspian Sea. W ith these trium phs the O ttom an Em pire reached its greatest extent. The island of Cyprus and the Persian provinces proved to be, with two ex ceptions, the last acquisitions of the Turks. The exceptions were the island of Crete and the province of Podolia, which were won from Venice and Po land in 1668 and 1676, respectively. But by that time the empire was being buffeted from all sides and was about to lose vast territories north of the Danube. We may conclude that the period from the death of Suleiman in 1566 to the Persian treaty of 1590 represents the crest of the wave of O tto m an expansion. In the following years the em pire declined rapidly, and it continued to do so, with the exception of the short reign of M urad IV, until the accession of the great Kiuprili dynasty of grand vizirs in 1656.


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 159
RULE OF THE SULTANAS
The predominance of the harem in the late sixteenth century was both a sym ptom and a cause of the em pire’s decline. Selim 11, despite his vices and indolence, had not been altogether a puppet or a nonentity. But his son and successor, M urad III (1 5 7 4 -1 5 9 5 ), devoted himself exclusively to the voluptuous life of the harem . He distinguished himself only by the num ber of his children, one hundred and three in all, of which forty-seven sur vived him. Since twenty of these were males, his successor, M oham m ed III (1 5 9 5 -1 6 0 3 ), began his reign by slaughtering his nineteen brothers. The next sultan, Ahmed I (16 0 3 -1 6 1 7 ) left no sons of age and was succeeded by his lunatic brother M ustafa. After a few m onths M ustafa was deposed in favor of Osman II (1618-1622). The Ottoman traveler and chronicler, Evliya, notes in his journal that this unfortunate ruler “was removed by a rebellion of the Janissaries, and put to death in the Seven Towers, by the compression of the testicles; a mode of execution reserved by custom to the Ottoman Em perors.” 2 The lunatic M ustafa was then reinstated on the throne for a fifteen-month period, probably the worst reign in O ttom an history. Out of this morass of degeneracy there now emerged unexpectedly and almost miraculously a ruler as forceful and capable as the early sultans. M urad IV (1 6 2 3 -1 6 4 0 ) put an end to the anarchy and demoralization of the preceding years and inaugurated an exciting though short-lived period of recovery. The reigns of the puppet rulers between Selim II and M urad IV might not have been so disastrous if capable grand vizirs had been entrusted with the adm inistration of the empire. But Sokolli (Sokolovich) unfortunately had been assassinated in 1578 and from then on the real rulers w ere harem favorites and self-seeking courtiers. O utstanding among these was Sultana Batfo, a Venetian noblewoman who had been captured by corsairs and sold to the harem of M urad III. She proved to be as clever and ambitious as she was beautiful. For three decades she dominated one ruler after another. After she lost her influence other favorites took her place. Although less famous, they played a similar role in the affairs of the empire. It was these women, together with their collaborators in the palace, who determ ined high policy, made and unm ade grand vizirs, profited from the sale of offices, and fom ented janissary revolts when it suited their interests. Such was the state of the em pire when it faced renewed war on the Danube and aggression in the east by a revived Persia.
WAR ON THE DANUBE
The D anubian basin had been relatively peaceful since the great in vasions of Suleiman the Magnificent. But toward the end of the sixteenth century new factors upset the balance in that region and plunged it once more into a series of wars. The settlement in the various D anubian countries following Suleim an’s conquests m ay be sum m arized as follows: H ungary was ruled directly by the Turks with the exception of a small strip in the north


160 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
and west, which was left to the Hapsburgs; Transylvania was governed by the Zapolya princes, who recognized Turkish suzerainty; and the Danubian Prin cipalities of Moldavia and W allachia were under native Rum anian princes nominally elected by the nobility but actually selected by the dom inant cliques in Constantinople. This settlement was disturbed by the declining influence of the two great empires, the Ottoman and the Hapsburg. We have noted the type of rulers that succeeded Suleiman in Constantinople. Likewise in Vienna we find in place of Charles V the weak and ineffectual Rudolf II (1 5 7 6 -1 6 1 1 ). This ruler was an unsociable eccentric and an uncompromising Catholic. In con trast to his tolerant father, M aximilian II, he strove earnestly to re-Catholicize the areas lost to Protestantism. This policy involved him in continued wrangles with the Protestants of Bohem ia and G erm any. It also w eakened his influence in Hungary and Transylvania, where many of the numerous Cal vinists and Lutherans preferred the tolerant government of the pasha of Buda to the bigotry and persecution of the Jesuit-ridden court of Vienna. T he decline of H apsburg and O ttom an influence in the D anubian basin created a fluid situation which allowed local leaders to assert them selves and to extend their authority. In Transylvania, for example, the Za polya princes had been, on the whole, docile subjects of the sultan. But this dynasty died out in 1570 and its place was taken by the B athory princes, who showed much more independence. Stephen Bathory was even elected king of Poland and conducted a successful war against Ivan the Terrible of Russia. He was preparing far-reaching plans for a Central European coali tion against the Turks when he died suddenly in 1586. His successor on the Transylvanian throne, Sigismund Bathory (1 5 8 1 -1 6 0 2 ) was equally hostile to the Turks and collaborated with E m peror R udolf against them. A nd in W allachia M ichael the Brave was elected prince in 1593. This intrepid ruler started out by massacring the imperial tax collectors who were ruining the principality with their extortions. Then he routed the Turkish forces sent against him and even made a winter raid across the Danube as far south as Adrianople. This was the situation in the D anubian lands when A ustria and T u r key drifted to war in 1593. During the two previous years both sides had car ried on frontier raids. T hese culm inated in the crushing defeat of the Turkish governor of Bosnia, who was killed together with almost all his men during an expedition into C roatia in June, 1593. Imm ediately full-scale fighting be gan and a number of border fortresses changed hands by the end of the year. In 1594 the Turks took to the field with a large arm y of one hundred thou sand men. But the result was disappointing, only one city of any im portance falling to the invaders. The old days, when a single campaign won a kingdom, obviously were over. \ This fact encouraged Danubian rulers to form anti-Ottoman coali tions. In 1595 Sigismund Bathory concluded with Em peror Rudolf an offen sive and defensive alliance aim ed at C onstantinople. In the same year Michael


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 161
of W allachia accepted Sigismund’s suzerainty in return fo r aid against the Turks, who were still seeking to regain the principality. The aid actually m a terialized and M ichael was able in 1595 to cross the Danube once more and to sack towns in Bulgaria. At the same time the combined Hapsburg-Transylvanian arm ies were winning im portant victories in Hungary. This m arked a low point in O ttom an fortunes. The prospect ap peared so dark that the grand vizir insisted that the new sultan, M ohammed III, should take the field in person during the 1596 cam paign. M oham med did so, not too willingly, and after much m aneuvering a decisive two-day bat tle was fought at Kerestes in northern Hungary. At first the allied forces were successful all along the line. M oham m ed was ready to llee and his staff barely restrained him from doing so. At the last moment the tide was reversed by the cupidity of the C hristian soldiers. H aving burst into the sultan’s cam p, they broke ranks and scrambled around for plunder. A t this point a large body of Turkish irregular cavalry which had been held in reserve bore down upon the disorganized enemy with irresistible force, carrying everything before them. T housands of G erm ans and H ungarians fell in the rout and ninetyseven guns were abandoned on the field. The Turkish victory was decisive in a negative sense. If the T urks had not won, all the lands north of the D anube would have fallen to the allies. But from the positive viewpoint the battle was of little significance. The Turks were unable to exploit their advantage. Indeed, a clear indication of O ttom an military decline is the fact th at the great victory at Kerestes was followed by a series of defeats rather than territorial gains. By 1598 the Hapsburg gen erals reached Buda and laid siege to the capital. Only the approach of winter saved it from capitulation. The war dragged on a few more years without decisive results. The T urks were distracted by a serious rebellion in Asia M inor and by an even more serious invasion from Persia. Em peror Rudolf also had his troubles. His attem pt to reimpose Catholicism by force drove the Transylvanian no bles back into the Turkish fold. In 1599 they deposed the pro-H apsburg Sigismund and elected in his place a succession of princes who accepted Turkish suzerainty and rem ained neutral in the war. Thus both the A ustrians and the T urks were ready to end hostilities, and in N ovem ber, 1606, they signed the Peace of Sitva-Torok. This treaty is significant for its form rather than its content. The frontiers remained virtually unchanged, and Transyl vania was recognized once more as an O ttom an dependency. But the H aps burgs no longer were required to pay tribute to Constantinople for the part of H ungary under their control. Nor were they compelled to accept the ig nominious language of previous treaties which had been phrased as conces sions granted to inferior princes. For the first time the O ttom an governm ent negotiated with a Christian state a treaty drawn up as a settlem ent on equal terms between two sovereign powers. Considering briefly O ttom an-Persian relations at this time, it should be noted first that Christian Europe owes a considerable debt to Persia for


162 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
maintaining a second front against the O ttom an Em pire and preventing it from turning full force upon the West. In this respect Persia played a role similar to that of Russia against Germany during the two world wars. In the late sixteenth century, when the O ttom an Empire was declin ing, Persia experienced a spectacular though short-lived revival under one of its greatest rulers, Abbas the Great. W hen he came to the throne in 1587 he found the country in a deplorable state. Tribal chiefs were independent of the central government while the Turks were attacking from the west and the Uzbeks from the east. A bbas first concluded in 1590 an unfavorable peace with the Turks. He ceded various territories to them in order to be free to deal with the Uzbeks. Then he defeated the latter so decisively that Persia was freed of their depredations for many years to come. Abbas turned next to domestic reorganization. He forced the unruly tribes to accept his authority and ruthlessly exterminated banditry. He started building projects throughout the country, especially roads and bridges. He organized the first infantry regiments to supplement the tribal cavalry which hitherto had been the mainstay of Persian armies. In recruiting his infantry men Abbas imitated the O ttom an janissaries by using Christian Georgians and Armenians converted to Islam. In his military reforms Abbas had the assistance of two Englishmen, A nthony and Robert Sherley. These fabulous adventurers arrived in Persia in 1598 with twenty-six followers. Abbas em ployed them to organize regiments of infantry and batteries of artillery. He also sent the brothers on three diplomatic missions to W estern Europe with instructions to obtain allies for a w ar against the Turks. Their adventures in the various European capitals attracted much attention at the time but came to no fruitful conclusion. The W estern diplomats were unwilling to commit themselves, some for fear of jeopardizing the profitable Levantine trade and others because they had more pressing problems closer to home. Despite the failure to find allies, Abbas began his long-planned war against the Turks in 1602. The time was well chosen. The O ttom an armies were involved in Hungary, and the A natolian rebellion was still alive. Taking advantage of this situation Abbas fell upon the Turkish flank in A rm enia and within a year won back all the territories he had ceded in 1590. Hostilities ceased in 1612 but were renewed in 1616. Two years later the Turks ac cepted a peace settlement by which they surrendered Azerbaijan and Georgia.
m u r a d iv: 1623-1640
Meanwhile the O ttom an Em pire was going headlong to ruin. The intrigues and corruption at the court and the recurring mutinies of the janis saries had produced a veritable state of anarchy. We have an authoritative account of this deplorable situation in the reports of the British ambassador, Sir Thomas Roe. He arrived in Constantinople in 1622 with instructions to obtain protection for British shipping from the depredations of the North A frican corsairs. He had little success in this m atter. O ttom an officials prom


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 163
ised redress but their instructions were simply ignored in Tunis and Algeria. Sir Thom as repeatedly stressed in his reports the helplessness of the central government and the manifold symptoms of decay.
. . . this mighty monarchy hath no other walls to defend it, but the uncivill dissentions of Christian princes. It never had but two pillars of any strength, the Janizaries and the gallies: These [latter] are rotten and decayed, and what are left, are unfitt for service, and the few fitt, without munition, and men to serve in them : T he other [the janissaries] are corrupted from their antient disci pline and institution, and have shaken off that reverence to their emperors . . . . and now they are neither souldiers, nor subjects. . . . they dem and in troopes, at this court, all offices of gayne, to be stewards to the revenues of churches, which are great; to take the farmes of customes, and there commit those outrages that are insufferable. T he viziers dare deny them nothing: they drink in the streetes w ithout prohibition, contrary to their laws; and stand in com panyes in the open day, and exact money without any punishment. . . . Complayne no man dares; or if he doe, to no purpose; the vizier answercth, That he cannot meddle with them ; they have m urthered their ow ne king, and all the bassaes [pashas]. . . ,3
Sir Thomas sent this report in 1622. The following year M urad IV cam e to the throne. F o r the first tim e in half a century the em pire had a sultan with sufficient intelligence and will pow er to end this ruinous anarchy. Since M urad was only eleven at the time of his accession, the janissaries were able to continue their seditious activities for another nine years. During this period they com pelled no less than seven grand vizirs to resign from office. By 1632 M urad felt strong enough to assert his prerogatives. He proceeded to do so with a ruthlessness th at is said to have cost the lives of one hundred thousand of his subjects. The bloodletting proved effective. During the remaining eight years of his reign the empire experienced a revival that was soon felt both at home and abroad. The Turkish traveler Evliya knew M urad intimately, having served under him as a page. T he picture he has left of his hero is of a m an strikingly reminiscent of Tsar Peter the G reat— the same magnificent physique, the same will power and ruthlessness, and the same success in restoring order at home and winning victories abroad.
In short, Sultan M urad was a man who had the nature of a Dervish, but he was brave and intelligent. His fingers were thick, but well proportioned, and the strongest wrestler could not open his closed fist. H e generally dressed in blue coloured silk, and liked to ride very fast. N either the O ttom an nor any other dynasty of Moslem princes ever produced a prince so athletic, so well-made, so despotic, so much feared by his enemies, or so dignified as Sultan M urad. Though so cruel and bloodthirsty, he conversed with the rich and the poor without any m ediator, made his rounds in disguise night and day to be inform ed of the state of the poor, and to ascertain the price of provisions, for which purpose he fre quently went into cookshops and dined incognito. No m onarch, however was guilty of so many violent deeds. On the m arch to Baghdad, when he left Caesarea, a wild goat was started in the mountains of Develi K ara H isar. The em peror im


164 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
mediately gave chase, struck it with his spear, followed it up amongst the rocks, and divided his prey amongst his vizirs. The whole army was surprised to see him dism ount and climb up the craggy mountain in pursuit of his game.4
M u rad ’s interests were not lim ited to sports and to war. Evliya adds that he was also “a good poet,” that he surrounded himself with dancers, musicians, poets, and divines, and that he met regularly with his ministers to consider m atters of state. “In such a m anner,” concludes Evliya, “did he w atch over the O ttom an states, th at not even a bird could fly over them w ithout his knowledge.” 5 M u rad ’s chief aim was to reconquer the territories lost to the P er sians. In preparing for war he pitilessly suppressed insubordination in the armed forces and obtained the necessary funds by drastic financial measures, including the confiscation of large fortunes. In contrast to his predecessors, M urad personally led his armies in two campaigns against the Persians. The latter as usual refused to fight pitched battles, so that the war consisted of a series of sieges. So long as A bbas was alive the Persians were able to hold their own. But the great shah died in 1629 and from then on M urad steadily gained the upper hand. Finally, in 1638, the Persians accepted a peace settle ment providing for the cession of Baghdad and the surrounding territory to the Turks. Eighty years were to pass before another major war was fought between these traditional rivals. When M urad returned to Constantinople he was greeted, according to Evliya, “with a splendour and magnificence which no tongue can describe.” Enthusiastic multitudes crowded the streets shouting, “The blessing of God be upon thee O conqueror!” M urad was a fitting hero for such a welcome. “The em peror looked with dignity on both sides of him, like a lion who had seized his prey, and saluted the people as he went on, followed by three thou sand pages clad in arm our. T he people shouted ‘G od be praised!’ as he passed and threw themselves on their faces to the ground.” 0 Here was the ideal Turkish war lord, the idol of.an adoring people, and the leader of an arm y that had recovered its ancient discipline and prow ess. W estern diplomats must have wondered anxiously where the conqueror would strike next. In fact, he openly voiced his ambition to crush his W estern neighbors as he had the Persians. Furtherm ore, he began a complete over hauling of the whole m ilitary system. He held a census of the m iltary fiefs and attem pted to eliminate the abuses that had underm ined the feudal forces. He abolished the child-tribute and reduced the janissary corps with the apparent aim of ultimately replacing it with a m odern arm y of the W estern type. B ut before these measures could take effect, M urad died in 1640, a victim of prodigiously hard work and equally hard drinking.


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 165
DECLINE c o n t i n u e s : 1640-1656
U nder M u ra d ’s successor, Ibrahim I (1 6 4 0 -1 6 4 8 ), the old disorder and corruption immediately returned. This points up a basic difference be tween M urad and Peter the Great. As individuals the two men were extraor dinarily alike. But as rulers, the tsar represented a turning point in the history of his country, whereas the sultan was a mere flash in the pan. An obvious reason for this difference is th at Peter ruled for thirty-six years and M urad, in effect, for eight. If the latter had lived another two or three decades, O tto man history in the seventeenth century undoubtedly would have been sub stantially different. O n the other hand, there is little doubt that M urad never would have effected such far-reaching reform s as did Peter. O ne reason is th at the opposition to W esternization was much stronger in Turkey than in Russia. A n other is th at the sultan was not a confirm ed “W esterner,” as was the tsar. M urad was ready to imitate W estern armies but Peter was determined that his people should also m aster W estern science and technology. M urad walked in disguise through the streets of his capital to apprehend lawbreakers, whereas Peter journeyed through W estern E urope in order to learn w hat was un known in his country. M ost revealing, perhaps, is the spectacle of M urad’s favorite, Evliya, returning from a trip through N orthwestern E urope filled with contem pt for the strange customs and m anners of the Christian infidels. If anyone had suggested to him that he m.ight have learned som ething bene ficial in the W estern lands he would have been com pletely dum foundcd and undoubtedly would have rejected the notion as fantastic and sacrilegious. In contrast, half a century later Peter was forcing thousands of his subjects to go to school in the W est and inviting W estern teachers and craftsmen to Russia. W hatever might have been the outcome had M urad lived longer, the fact remains that when Ibrahim became the sultan in 1648 the old evils im mediately returned. Evliya, who witnessed the events of these years, relates that Ibrahim “fell into the hands of all the favourites and associates of the harem, the dwarfs, the mutes, the eunuchs, the women. . . .” and that together “they threw everything into confusion.” 7 D espite this decadence, Ibrahim involved the em pire in a long and exhausting war with Venice. The immediate occasion was the capture of a Turkish galleon by Maltese corsairs. Among the captives was one of Ibra him ’s wives and her young son. Ibrah im ’s first reaction was to send a fleet against M alta but his advisers wisely rem inded him of Suleim an’s failure to take that stronghold. They persuaded him instead to attack the more vulner able island of Crete, at that time a Venetian possession. The fact that the cor sairs had stopped at certain Cretan harbors on the way home provided a convenient pretext for the assault. A n expedition of approximately one hun dred vessels and fifty thousand m en left C onstantinople in A pril, 1645. W ith the help of the local G reek population, which detested V enetian rule, the T.urks were able by August to capture the port of Canea at the western end


166 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
of the island. The following year they took Retim o near the center of the northern coast, and in 1648 they began the m em orable siege of the capital, Candia. The siege dragged on a full twenty-five years. The reason for this un conscionably long ordeal was the inability of the Turks to protect their supply lines. A technological revolution had occurred in naval warfare since the days of Lepanto. T hat battle is m emorable in naval history as the last m ajor en gagement fought by galleys. These vessels were encum bered with oars, benches, and rowers, and were too frail to carry heavy guns or to withstand their fire. In fact, they were essentially similar to the trirem es and drom ons of ancient times. Both in equipm ent and in tactics the battle of Lepanto had been a repetition of the battle of Actium sixteen centuries earlier. But now in the seventeenth century the Venetians began to use sail-propelled warships together with the traditional galleys. They had employed sailing-ships long before this date but only for commerce. In applying the sail to naval warfare the Venetians were following the example of the N orthern Europeans, who had made the change earlier because of the impracticability of the galley in the stormy Atlantic. The sail warship or galleon was an infinitely m ore efficient fighting m achine than the galley. It was larger and more seaworthy; it carried heavy arm am ents on all sides; and it could undertake long voyages free from the lim itations im posed by hum an muscles. Since the T urks were very slow in adopting the new warship, the Venetians usually had the advantage in the naval battles th at accom panied the C retan cam paign. T he clim ax cam e in the years 1654 to 1656, when the Venetians destroyed an O ttom an fleet in the Dardanelles, blockaded the Straits, and captured the nearby islands of Lemnos and Tenedos. M eanwhile anarchy prevailed within the empire. The janissaries had deposed Ibrahim in 1648 and replaced him with his ten-year-old son, M o ham m ed IV. The governm ent naturally rem ained in the hands of the harem. But the harem was divided by the struggle between two strong women, the mothers of the deposed ruler and of the new sultan. Both women had their supporters among the janissaries and the spahis, with the result that there were frequent disorders in the capital. Rycaut relates that all was in “a horrid and affrighting Confusion . . . and the whole City laid open to be pillaged and sacked by the licentiousness of an unbridled Souldiery. . . So desperate was the situation that the ruling oligarchy decided to accept the restraints of a strong hand in order to save the em pire from com plete destruction. U nder these circumstances, Rycaut informs us, they
called for the Pasha of Damascus to receive the Dignity of the Great Vizier; for he being a person of eighty Years of Age, and of long Experience in Affairs, having managed the most weighty Charges of the Empire, was looked on by all as the most proper Person to compose and heal those great Distempers in the State; and this was that famous Kuperlu. . . .s


In this m anner the great Kiuprili family made its entrance on the stage that it was to dominate for a full half-century.
k i u p r i l i v iz ir s : 1656-1676
M ohammed Kiuprili, the founder of the remarkable dynasty of min isters, came from humble Albanian stock. His grandfather had migrated to Kiupril, a small town in Asia M inor, whence the family took its name. M o ham m ed began his career as a kitchen boy. He rose to be a cook, steward to the grand vizir, grand falconer, and then governor successively of Damascus, Tripoli, and Jerusalem. W hen he was offered the grand vizirate he refused to accept the post save under certain conditions: that his measures should be ratified without discussion or delay, and that he should have a free hand in the distribution of offices and honors. These conditions having been accepted, M oham m ed entered upon the w ork of his high office. The task he faced was staggering. C ourt intrigue and military insub ordination reigned supreme in the capital at a time when the Venetians were in possession of the islands com m anding the entrance to the Straits. M oham med promptly proceeded to use his powers with the utm ost severity. No de linquency, past or present, escaped his attention. He planted his spies in every province of the empire and ruthlessly rooted out the corrupt and the incom petent. T he m ore fortunate were dism issed from office. T he rem ainder were sum m arily executed. It is said th at during his five years of office thirty-six thousand persons were put to death on his command. Since M oham m ed had acquired a reputation for mildness and humanity as a governor, it may be assumed that this bloodletting was not without justification or purpose. The beneficent results speedily became apparent throughout the em pire. Corruption and injustice were stayed. Discipline was restored in the army and the naval strength of the empire revived. The Venetians were driven from the Lemnos and Tenedos islands, and revolts in Transylvania and Asia M inor were quelled. O ttom an authority was asserted even on the distant Don and Dnieper rivers, where new fortresses were built. M ohammed died in 1661 and was succeeded by his son Ahmed. The new grand vizir proved to be one of the greatest of O ttom an statesmen, pos sessing the natural abilities of his father together with an excellent education and a thorough adm inistrative training. A hm ed came to office the same year in which Louis X IV assumed the reins of government in France. To W estern eyes the “Sun King” appears as the arbiter of his age. In actual fact, the O tto m an minister played a role fully as decisive and significant. His policies di rected the course of events in Austria, Russia, Poland, and the M editerranean. In foreign affairs A hm ed wished to continue his father’s policy of maintaining peace on the land frontier in order to press the Cretan war against Venice. He was diverted from this course by the aggressiveness of the Austrians, who had recovered from the effects of the Thirty Years’ W ar and resumed their raids across the frontier. Full-scale war broke out in 1663
Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 167


168 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
over the question of Transylvania. The local prince, George Rakoczy, as pired to make himself independent of Constantinople and attem pted to win the support of the M oldavian and W allachian princes. Ahmed promptly de posed Rakoczy and appointed in his place the compliant Prince Michael ApaiTy. W hen the H apsburg em peror, L eopold I, refused to recognize the new ruler, Ahmed declared war and marched north from Belgrade at the head of an army of a hundred and twenty thousand men. The Austrians were not prepared to meet such a force in pitched battle and withdrew behind their line of frontier fortresses. After capturing the im portant stronghold of Neuhausel and several neighboring positions, Ahmed retired to winter quarters to prepare for more decisive action in the following year. The spectacle of a Turkish army, comparable to that of Suleiman the Magnificent, advancing westward once more, after the interval of a century, made a profound impression in Europe. It aroused a faint echo of the old crusading ardor. H ungarian m alcontents rallied to E m peror L eopold’s b an ner, stimulated, no doubt, by the ravages of the T atar horsemen. The Im perial Diet voted a levy of money and troops, and even Louis X IV provided a contingent of four thousand men to the common cause. This outside aid en couraged the Hapsburg com m ander, Count Montecuculi, to take the initiative. He recovered some of the forts lost the previous year and then entrenched him self behind the river R aab. O n A ugust 1, 1664, the two arm ies met near the convent of St. G o tth ard , which gave its nam e to the m em orable battle that ensued. Despite a substantial numerical superiority the Turks were de cisively defeated. They fought with their usual courage and tenacity, but their arm s and tactics were those of Suleim an’s day. T heir artillery was inferior to that of their opponents and they still used the scim itar at a time when the pike h ad becom e the suprem e infantry w eapon. T he battle of St. G otthard is significant as evidence of the passing of Turkish military superiority and as augury of the great Austrian victories a few decades later. Ten days after their victory the Austrians surprised Europe by sign ing the unfavorable Treaty of Vasvar. They had lost too heavily at St. G ott hard to undertake the arduous task of clearing the Turks out of Hungary. The A ustrians also were suspicious of French designs in the W est and dared not commit themselves further in the east. The outbreak of the W ar of Devo lution three years later proved their suspicions justified. These considerations explain the willingness of the Austrians to pay a financial indemnity, to sur render several frontier fortresses and districts, and to recognize Apaffy as the prince of Transylvania. Although defeated in battle, Ahmed had won the peace and had added to the empire of the sultan. The grand vizir now turned his attention to Crete, where the war had dragged on without issue since 1645. He assumed personal com m and of the siege of Candia and pressed it relentlessly for three years. Despite the gal lantry of the Venetian general, Francesco Morosini, and the assistance of a French fleet and of volunteers from all countries, the city was forced to capit ulate in September, 1669. In the following peace treaty the Venetians sur


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 169
rendered the entire island, with the exception of three small ports which they retained for commercial purposes.
RUSSIA AND TH E U K RA IN E
The scene now shifts to the northern extremity of the empire where the wild no m an’s land know n as the U kraine was emerging from obscurity as the bloody battleground of three contending powers— Turkey, Russia, and Poland. This region was inhabited by two warlike and unruly frontier peo ples, the Orthodox Cossacks and the M oslem Tatars. The latter controlled the entire Crimean Peninsula, together with the treeless steppes along the Black Sea shore from B essarabia in the west to Circassia in the east. These Crim ean Tatars, as they were collectively known, came under O ttom an su zerainty in the fifteenth century. T he arrangem ent was m utually satisfactory and continued to the Russian conquest in the late eighteenth century. The Tatars could count on military aid from Constantinople when needed. In re turn they provided the Turkish armies with hordes of wild horsemen and also kept the imperial slave m arkets well stocked with the thousands of unfortu nate victims that they rounded up during their incessant raids into Russia and Poland. The Cossacks were the Christian counterparts of the Tatars. They resem bled the A m erican frontiersm en in that they were a sociological rather than an ethnic group. They hailed originally from Russia and Poland, whence they lied southward to the frontier lands to escape the bonds of serfdom that were being imposed upon the peasantry from the sixteenth century onward. By the early seventeenth century they had organized themselves into three separate Cossack “hosts,” on the Don, Ural, and Dnieper rivers. The first two had come mostly from Russian lands and recognized in a vague and nominal fashion the suzerainty of the Muscovite tsar. The Dnieper Cossacks, having originated from Polish territories, accepted a corresponding connection with the king of Poland. All three hosts at this time were in fact independent. They fought, pillaged, and negotiated when and as they pleased, particularly with the Crimean T atars and the Turks who controlled the river mouths to the south. The main issue in the mid-seventeenth century was the Polish-Russian struggle for the control of the Cossack-occupied Ukraine. The conflict began in 1648 with the great Cossack revolt against the Poles, who had at tem pted to extend serfdom to the Ukraine. For six years the Cossacks fought under their famous hetman, Bogdan Khmelnitsky. Finally they concluded an agreement with Tsar Alexis placing themselves under the protection of Rus sia. Being O rthodox to a man, the Cossacks declared for “the T sar who be longs to the Eastern O rthodox Faith,” in preference to the Catholic king of Poland. This fateful decision increased enormously the potential of Russian power and made inevitable the Polish-Russian W ar which immediately en sued. For thirteen more years the Ukraine was devastated by rival Cossack


170 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
bands, T atar raiding parties, and Polish and Russian armies. Finally the Treaty of Andrussovo (1667) divided the disputed land, Russia obtaining Kiev and the territory to the east of the Dnieper, and Poland the territory to the west. One reason for this compromise settlement was the disquieting resur gence of O ttom an activity under Ahm ed Kiuprili. The Turks hitherto had regarded the Ukraine as a buffer zone and had refrained from direct inter vention. But the steady extension of Polish and Russian authority southward now led A hm ed to counter with a thrust northw ard. H e found a useful ally in Peter Doroshenko, a Cossack chieftain who had won considerable follow ing as the opponent of both the Polish and Russian regimes. In place of the partitioned Ukraine created by the Andrussovo settlement, Doroshenko de manded an autonomous and united state. He turned to Constantinople for support and was warmly welcomed by Ahmed. In December, 1668, an agree ment was concluded whereby Doroshenko accepted Turkish suzerainty and agreed to pay annual tribute; in return the sultan recognized the autonomy of the U krainian lands and of the U krainian O rthodox Church, and also un dertook to provide a force of six thousand men to uphold D oroshenko against his enemies. This arrangem ent was perfectly natural in the light of O ttom an administrative practice. The Ukraine was to occupy a position in the imperial framework similar to that of M oldavia, W allachia, and Transylvania. Ahm ed had tim ed his intervention in U krainian affairs perfectly. The C retan W ar was drawing to a close, the Poles were divided by their perennial dynastic succession difficulties, and the Russians were immobilized by Stenka R azin ’s form idable p easant revolt. A hm ed was fully inform ed of these devel opments, both through his own agents and through Doroshenko. In August, 1672, he crossed the Dniester River at the head of a powerful army composed of veterans of the Cretan campaign. He was joined by contingents of Crimean T atars and by twelve thousand of D oroshenko’s Cossacks. H e quickly cap tured the im portant Polish city, Kameniec, and compelled the Polish king to sign the Treaty of Buczacz (1 6 7 2 ) ceding the province of Podolia to Turkey and recognizing the western Ukraine as independent under O ttom an protec tion. The Polish Diet refused to ratify the treaty and the war was resumed. Under the able leadership of John Sobieski, and with some Russian assist ance, the Poles won two im portant victories. But the superior resources of the Turks finally prevailed and in 1676 Sobieski accepted the Treaty of Zoravno. The Turks retained Podolia, but the western U kraine was divided, the northern part remaining Polish and the southern passing to the Turkish sphere. This treaty is significant in tw o respects. I t m arks the high-w ater point of Turkish advance into Eastern Europe and it also represents the be ginning of direct Turkish-Russian contact and conflict. Having defeated the Poles in the western Ukraine, the Turks now faced the Russians along the D nieper River. Hostilities began almost at once, the precipitating factor being


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 171
the refusal of the Cossacks to accept Turkish rule. Even D oroshenko, who was bitterly disappointed by the provisions of the Zoravno Treaty, turned against his form er T urkish allies and threw in his lot with the Russians. The Turks had no choice but to wage war with Russia in order to retain the ter ritory they had won from the Poles. For three years Turks and Tatars fought Russians and Cossacks. The countryside along the western bank of the lower Dnieper was completely dev astated and its population fled eastw ard across the river. The inconclusive and exhaustive character of the war finally inclined both sides to peace. The Treaty of Radzin (1 6 8 1 )— also known as the Bakhchisarai Treaty after the k h a n ’s residence, w here it was initially concluded— recognized M uscovite authority east of the Dnieper and in the Kiev enclave. It also provided that the Turks should withdraw from the southwestern Ukraine which they had wrested from the Poles, and that the Russians should not send troops or offi cials into this disputed region. Instead, it was to serve as a buffer zone sep arating the Russian-controlled Ukraine from the territory of the Crimean T atars. In the light of later developm ents it is notew orthy th at the treaty also allowed Russian subjects to trade in the Crim ea and to journey to the Holy Land to worship.
SIEGE O F V IE N N A ! 1683
The T urks’ willingness to surrender their foothold in the Ukraine was part of a grandiose plan formulated by a new grand vizir in Constantinople. A hm ed K iuprili had died five years earlier and was succeeded by the sultan’s son-in-law, Kara M ustafa. The new grand vizir was ruthless, energetic, and ambitious, but totally lacking in the sound judgment that had distinguished his predecessor. In all his actions he displayed a haughty contem pt for the Christian infidels which would have been understandable a century earlier but which now had no relation to reality. His great aim was to declare war on Austria, capture Vienna, and make himself the viceroy of the ample provinces between the Danube and the Rhine. In preparation for this rash undertaking he accepted the unfavorable Radzin Treaty, hoping thereby to assure the neutrality of Russia during the coming war. A rebellion in the Hapsburg portion of Hungary provided M ustafa with a convenient pretext for beginning hostilities. The rebels, led by Count Emeric Tekeli, appealed to Constantinople for aid against Em peror Leopold. Their appeal was strongly supported by the French government. Louis X IV had designs on the Rhineland which would be facilitated if the Hapsburgs were involved in a Turkish war. Accordingly, the French am bassador in Constantinople gave full assurances that no French troops would participate in the defense of Vienna. This was sufficient to cause M ustafa to reject the H apsburg request for a renewal of the twenty-year Vasvar truce (1664) that was about to lapse. In the spring of 1683 M ustafa set forth from Belgrade with an army


172 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
of almost two hundred thousand men. The Austrians were poorly prepared, having spent precious time bickering over the command of the army and over such details as the salaries of the officers and the bread ration of the soldiers. The Duke of Lorraine, who commanded the Hapsburg forces, had no choice but to retreat. M ustafa marched quickly toward Vienna. A panic seized the capital. In great confusion the em peror, his court, and many of the wealthier citizens fled the city. C ount Stahrem berg was left to conduct the defense with a garrison of twenty-two thousand. The siege began on July 17. The defenders repulsed six m ajor as saults in as many weeks. At the end of that time both the besiegers and the besieged were suffering from lack of food. The latter were worse off, having lost six thousand men and exhausted virtually all their supplies. A t this point the city was saved by the arrival of the Polish army under King John Sobieski. Despite the opposition of French diplomacy, Emperor Leopold had concluded an anti-Turkish alliance with the Poles in M arch, 1683. Neither side was to conclude a separate peace, and provision was made for the ad herence of other powers that wished to fight the Turks. After much delay Sobieski gathered an army of fifty-three thousand for the relief of Vienna. Thanks to the incompetence of M ustafa, he was able to effect a juncture with the D uke of L orraine’s tw enty-seven thousand A ustrians. O n Septem ber 11 the combined force reached M ount Kahlenberg overlooking Vienna. Between the m ountain and the Turkish encampment below were several valleys formed by streams running into the Danube. M ustafa had neglected to man these natural ram parts and the allied army advanced in a great semicircle upon the Turks. The T atar irregulars and the Moldavian and W allachian auxiliaries broke and fled, spreading confusion to the rest of the arm y. Sobieski led his best troops against the Turkish center and carried all before him. The janis saries, who had been left in the trenches before the city, were now attacked on two sides, by the relief army from the rear and by the Vienna garrison on the front. Terrible slaughter followed, and the whole of the Turkish camp, with immense booty, fell to the victorious allies. The debris of the O ttom an arm y m ade its way to Buda. M ustafa continued to Belgrade, where he was put to death by order of the sultan. His successor made peace overtures to Em peror Leopold. The latter now had to make a critical decision. Louis X IV had invaded the Spanish Netherlands while Vienna was being besieged. He was willing to cease hostilities if Spain and A ustria recognized his gains. The problem facing Leopold was whether he should accept a Turkish peace in order to force Louis to disgorge, or a French peace in order to follow up the V ienna victory. Leopold decided in favor of the latter, partly because of the popular clamor to deal once and for all with Islam, and partly because a Turkish cam paign offered much more assurance of victory than did a French. This decision was a fateful one. It precipitated a war which continued to the end of the century and which finally freed Christendom from the Turkish menace and established Austria as the foremost power of Central Europe.


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 173
W AR OF THE HOLY LEAG U E: 1683-1699
Once the decision had been made for war against the Turks, atten tion was focused on the organization of a league of Christian powers. Leo pold found an invaluable ally in Pope Innocent XI, who worked tirelessly to unite Christendom for another crusade. His exhortations, together with the victories of the Austrian generals who were trouncing the Turks in the upper Danube, induced the Venetians to join the existing Austrian-Polish alliance. The treaty, signed in M arch, 1684, defined the territorial interests of the three allies and called on the rest of Europe to support the great effort to drive the Turks back to Asia. Leopold was anxious to add Russia to the Holy League, as the anti-Turkish coalition was christened. After considerable diplomatic pressure he induced the Poles (A pril, 1686) to recognize Russian rule over Kiev and Smolensk, and in return the Russians agreed to send an army against the Crimea. Meanwhile military developments had kept pace with the diplomatic. The eastern allies had little success. The Russian assaults on the Crimea (1687 and 1689) proved abortive, while Sobieski failed in his attem pts to occupy the Danubian Principalities and to capture the Kameniec fortress that he had lost to the Turks in the previous war. But these campaigns were subsidiary. The decisive battles were being fought and won by the Austrians in Hungary and by the Venetians in the Peloponnesus. The A ustrians did not win spectacular victories during the first two years of the war, 1684 and 1685. But they did soften the Turkish defenses sufficiently to make possible the great successes that followed. In 1686, under the brilliant leadership of the Duke of Lorraine, they captured Buda, the capital of Turkish Hungary. The following year they won a great victory at M ohacs, on the very scene of Suleim an’s trium ph over the H ungarians a hun dred and sixty years earlier. In 1688 the Austrians crowned their successes with the capture of the key city of Belgrade, thus opening the route into the Balkans. The Venetians meanwhile had taken advantage of the concentration of the main Turkish forces in the D anube Valley to launch simultaneous at tacks upon the Dalm atian Coast and upon southern Greece. In the latter area the command was entrusted to Francesco Morosini, the hero of the Cretan W ar. He was aided by galleys contributed by the pope, the Duke of Tuscany, and the Knights of M alta, as well as by an army of hired H anoverian troops commanded by Count Konigsmark. In 1685 Morosini established a beach head in the Peloponnesus by taking the port of Coron on the western coast. The following year he overran the southern part of the peninsula. In 1687 he stormed Patras, entered the Isthmus of Corinth, and proceeded to Attica, where he laid siege to A thens. It was at this time that the Parthenon, which had survived so many centuries intact, was shattered by a bomb and reduced to the ruins that we now see. T he surrender Of A thens in Septem ber, 1687, m arked the high point of the Venetian campaign.


174 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
The allied victories in Hungary and Greece created a panic in Con stantinople. Sultan M oham m ed paid for his fatal error in appointing M ustafa grand vizir by being deposed in 1687. The new sultan, Suleiman II, showed a certain courage and initiative that was surprising in view of his long in carceration in the imperial “Cage.” After suppressing the mutinous janissaries in Constantinople he made peace overtures to the allies. B ut Louis X IV still wished to keep the Turks in the field against the Hapsburgs. To achieve this he began the W ar of the League of Augsburg in 1688. The Turks, as Louis anticipated, promptly raised their peace terms so high that Leopold rejected them. All hopes for peace disappeared the following year with the appoint ment to the grand vizirate of M ustafa Kiuprili, brother of the great Ahmed. The new grand vizir acted with the energy and firmness typical of his family. He immediately broke off the peace negotiations and started a thorough housecleaning in preparation for a more vigorous conduct of the war. He was aided by the fact that the A ustrians now were distracted by the war with the French in the west. In 1690 M ustafa began his counteroffensive. The Austrians by this time had advanced from Belgrade through Serbia and deep into M acedonia. Some twenty thousand Serbs and Albanians joined the Hapsburg armies with the encouragem ent of their church leaders. Despite this defection M ustafa successfully drove the enemy out of the Bal kans. He recovered in quick succession Nish, Smederevo, Vidin, and Bel grade, thus forcing the Austrians back across the Danube. The Austrian set back left the native insurgents in an impossible position. A bout thirty thousand Serbs followed the retreating Austrians into southern Hungary. We shall note in Chapter 14 that they settled there, establishing a flourishing community that was to make im portant contributions to the Serbian national renaissance in the T urkish lands. M ustafa’s success, however, proved short-lived. T he follow ing year he advanced north of the Danube but was badly defeated in the battle of Salem Kemen, in which he was killed while trying desperately to turn the tide. During the next several years the war subsided to minor and incon clusive engagements. The A ustrians were becoming more deeply involved in the war with France, and the Turks gratefully welcomed the respite. The only significant event was the outburst of Russian activity under the new tsar, Peter the Great. Instead of attempting another attack on the Crimea, Peter turned eastward against the Turkish fortress at Azov commanding the mouth of the Don. His first assault in 1695 failed because he was unable to prevent the Turkish fleet from bringing in reinforcements. W ith typical persistence and energy, Peter built that winter a powerful flotilla at Voronezh, far up the Don, beyond the reach of the Tatars and near good forest supplies. Thanks to his new warships and to the aid of A ustrian engineers, he captured Azov in 1696. Peter followed up his victory by founding a naval base near Azov and launching an ambitious building program under the supervision of W est ern experts. In fact, one of the m ain purposes of P e te r’s journey through


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 175
W estern E urope in 1697-1698 was to find shipwrights and seamen for his Azov fleet. In this respect his trip was successful. By 1699 he had a strong fleet on the Azov Sea. He planned to use it to force his way through the Strait of Kerch and out into the Black Sea. But he was forestalled by decisive developments in the main theater of war. The Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 had ended the W ar of the League of Augsburg. The Austrian army, now under the command of Prince Eugene of Savoy, one of the ablest generals of his time, returned to the Eastern front. Meanwhile, a new sultan, M ustafa II, had ascended the throne in Constanti nople. Recognizing that the incapacity and slothfulness of his predecessors had contributed to the military disasters, he resolved to lead his armies in person after the manner of the early sultans. In 1697 he advanced north ward from Belgrade toward the river Theiss. Eugene overtook M ustafa as he was crossing the river at Senta. Only two hours of daylight remained, but Eugene ordered an immediate attack. The vigor of the assault carried all before it. The Turks were so disorganized that a large body of janissaries m utinied on the field of battle and began to massacre their officers. By the time the sun had set, the O ttom an army had been annihilated. An immense booty fell to the victors, including all the O ttom an artillery and the sultan’s treasure chest. This overwhelming disaster, together with the French deser tion at Ryswick and the disturbing activities of T sar Peter, decided the sultan to seek a peace settlement.
T R E A T Y O F K A R L O W IT Z : 1699
The allies were divided on the question of the Turkish peace bid. Both the Russians and the Poles wished to continue the war, hoping thereby to win their respective objectives in the Black Sea and in the U kraine. Some of E m peror Leopold’s advisers, including Prince Eugene, also urged the con tinuation of the war until at least Belgrade might be recovered. The emperor, however, inclined toward peace, particularly because he correctly foresaw an early war with Louis X IV over the question of the Spanish succession. Both Britain and Holland also pressed strongly for peace, partly because their Levant trade had suffered severely during the war years and also because they were very anxious that A ustria should be available as an ally in the approaching war with France. The final decision rested with the em peror. Despite bitter Russian protests he decided to accept the mediation proposal of the British and Dutch diplomats. Late in 1698 the belligerents sent envoys to a congress held at Karlowitz (Sremski K arlovci), a village slightly to the north of Belgrade. After seventy-two days of negotiation, the momentous Treaty of Karlowitz was signed on January 26, 1699, at an hour fixed for astrological reasons by the Turks. With certain exceptions it was based on the status quo prevailing when hostilities ceased. A ustria received Transylvania, Croatia, Slavonia, and all of Hungary except the B anat of Tem esvar. Venice obtained the Pelo ponnesus and most of Dalmatia. Poland recovered the province of Podolia


176


Defeat by Austria: Recession to the Danube: 1566-1699 177
lost in the previous war. The Russians, still determ ined to win Kerch, signed only a two-year truce by which they rem ained in occupation of Azov. The following year Peter willingly signed the Treaty of Constantinople in order to be free for the coming war with Sweden. The treaty formally ceded Azov to the Russians, granted them the right to perm anent diplomatic representa tion at C onstantinople, and acknow ledged P eter’s refusal to continue the an nual tribute hitherto paid to the Crimean Tatars. The Karlowitz settlement marks a turning point in the history of Southeastern Europe. Never before had the Turks surrendered such vast territories without any compensation. A ustria had benefited the most, as be fitted her prim ary role in the war. W hile Louis X IV was struggling to win a few square miles along the Rhine, she had conquered vast provinces and extended her borders to the summits of the Carpathians. She was now the dom inant power in C entral E urope and she overshadow ed the Balkan Penin sula. Her frontiers parallcd the Ottom an along the Drava, Sava, and Danube rivers. The Turkish tide unmistakably had begun to ebb. Never again was Europe threatened by the power which for almost three centuries had m enaced its security. Instead Europe henceforth faced precisely the opposite problem— the so-called Eastern Question created by the recession of O ttom an power. This recession produced a vacuum in the N ear E ast, and one of the basic problem s of E uropean diplom acy until the end of W orld W ar I was how to fill this vacuum.


I
1 1 . D e fe a t b y R u ssia : R e c e ssio n to th e D n ie ste r:
1699-1792
T ,I
JLh e O t t o m a n E m p i r e enjoyed eleven years of peace after the Karlowitz Treaty. Then followed three decades of interm ittent war culminating in the Belgrade Treaty of 1739. Thanks to great-pow er rivalries the empire survived this ordeal without territorial losses. Next came three decades of peace, during which Christian Europe was engrossed in the W ar of A ustrian Succession and the Seven Y ears’ Wair. T he accession of C ath erine the G reat of Russia spelled the end of peace and the beginning of an other series of wars (17 6 9 -1 7 9 2 ) that were to prove as disastrous as those against the Holy League in the preceding century. Ruinous defeats followed one upon the other for a quarter of a century. W hen peace finally was re stored by the Treaty of Jassy in 1792 the em pire had lost the entire northern shore of the Black Sea. For the first time in centuries there was not only talk of expelling the Turk from Europe but also a distinct possibility that this goal might be realized. The reason for this great setback was that the balance between T ur key and Russia had swung steeply in favor of the latter. Russia possessed a matchless instrum ent of military power in the brilliant M arshal Suvorov, and she also possessed a diplomat of consummate skill in her new sovereign, Catherine the Great. In an age that boasted such masters of the art of diplo macy as Empress M aria Theresa, Prince Kaunitz, and Frederick the Great, the new tsarina m ore than held her own. It is true that she appeared on the scene at an unusually propitious moment. A ustria and Prussia were ex hausted by the Seven Years’ W ar; France under Louis XV and XVI was on the downgrade; and England was facing the revolt of the Thirteen Colonies. Y et it was C atherine’s perception and resolute will th at enabled her to ex-· ploit these advantages and to dower her adopted country, as she proudly boasted, “with Azov, the Crimea, and the U kraine.”
178


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 179
DEFEAT OF PETER THE GREAT
The exhaustion of the O ttom an Em pire and the unwarlike ch aracter of Ahm ed III explain the period of peace following the Karlowitz settlem ent. The Turks made no attem pt to take advantage of the W ar of the Spanish Succession or the N orthern W ar to try to recover the territories lost in the recent war. This policy of nonintervention saved Russia from serious tro u b le when she was invaded by Charles X II of Sweden in 1708. It also enabled Tsar Peter to defeat Charles at the battle of Poltava on July 8, 1709. T h e following year hostilities broke out again between Turkey and R ussia. O ddly enough, it was Ahmed who declared war and Peter who tried to avoid it. W hatever his ultim ate designs in the south m ight have been, Peter at this point wished to preserve peace with the O ttom an Em pire. His failure was due not to lack of effort on his part but rather to the trium ph of a w ar party in Constantinople. Charles X II had fled to the O ttom an capital following his defeat in the Ukraine. Naturally he made every effort to enlist the T urks in his struggle against Peter. He had the active support of the French, who w ere unalterably opposed to Russian aggrandizement at the expense of their tra ditional anti-H apsburg allies— Sweden, Poland, and Turkey. Perhaps m ost influential was the prow ar attitude of the Crimean Tatars, who resented the cessation of Russian tribute following the 1700 Treaty of C onstantinople. Also, they were alarmed by the Russian conquest of Azov and by the building of Russian forts on the lower Dnieper. These forts especially were thorns in their side. They ham pered their raids, threatened their grazing and hunting grounds, and menaced their land communications with the Turkish fortresses on the Dnieper and with the T atar tribes between the Bug and D niester rivers. For these reasons the Crim ean khan used his powerful influence in Constantinople for a campaign to beat back the advancing Russians. O n Novem ber 16, 1710, the British m inister in Constantinople reported to London: “The T artar H an, who hath been all along bent upon a rupture [with Russia], displayed all his Eloquence to persuade the M inisters, the m en of the Law, and the Soldiery of the Necessity thereof. . . Four days later the minister reported that the sultan had declared war, and added, “This great T urn of Affairs is wholly the W ork of the T a rta r H a n .” 1 Peter postponed a formal declaration of war until M arch 11, 1711, in the hope of persuading the sultan to reconsider his decision. W hen it be came clear that hostilities were unavoidable, he issued a proclam ation to the Balkan peoples to arise against the Turks and to fight with the R ussians “for faith and fatherland, for your honor and glory, for the freedom and liberty of yourself and your descendants.” Thus would “the descendants of the heathen M oham med be driven out into their old fatherland, the A rabian sands and steppes.” 2 Peter marched at the head of his army through the Polish U kraine and into M oldavia, where he captured the capital, Jassy. For the first time


180 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
since the days of Prince Sviatoslav, seven centuries earlier, Russian cavalry men w atered their horses in the D anube. But P eter’s boldness proved his undoing. His army lost heavily from disease and lack of food. The Balkan Christians failed to give effective aid. The Turks crossed the D anube sooner than expected, and, reinforced by a large contingent of Tatars, they trapped Peter in a vulnerable position on the right bank of the Pruth. In order to save his army, Peter accepted the humiliating Treaty of Pruth (July 21, 1711). He surrendered all that he had gained in the previous war— Azov, Taganrog, the Dnieper forts, and the privilege of diplomatic representation in Constantinople. The grand vizir, Baltadji, was dismissed a few m onths later on the charge of having neglected the opportunity of destroying or capturing the Russian army and the tsar himself. He was also accused of having accepted a huge bribe to conclude the treaty. This charge, which has been widely ac cepted, appears to be highly dubious. Baltadji was convinced, and with much justification, that in refusing to press the war further he was serving the in terests of the sultan, if not those of the T a ta r khan and the Swedish king. In fact, the British minister reported that the sultan had “no regard” for the interests of Charles of Sweden, and wished only to drive the Russians from the Black Sea “without any thoughts or even desire of extending his T erri tories far towards Muscovy.” Thus the sultan, according to this well-informed envoy, was “exceedingly pleased with the Peace, and readily gave his rati fication. . . . ” 3 A significant feature of this campaign was the failure of the Balkan C hristians to respond effectively to P eter’s appeal. Sporadic revolts did flare up in the m ountainous areas of the western Balkans, particularly in M onte negro and in southern Herzegovina. The Montenegrin prince-bishop, Daniel Petrovich, concluded a treaty with a Russian agent in April, 1712. But there was no possibility of linking up with the Russians in distant M oldavia, and Peter’s defeat doom ed the uprisings to failure. Only the Rum anians of the Principalities were in a position to cooperate with the R ussians. T he hospodar of M oldavia, Demetrius Cantem ir, secretly allied himself with Peter. He was unable, however, to give substantial aid, having only recently assumed his post and being at daggers drawn with the W allachian hospodar, Constantine Brancoveanu. The latter had a sizable army and abundant supplies, and had maintained secret relations with Peter for some years. Yet he refused to commit himself during the crucial early days, and later, when the Turks crossed the D anube in force, he subm itted to their dem ands. The basic difficulty was that an effective Balkan uprising was im practical without a Russian invasion in force, and the latter in turn was im practical so long as Peter placed the Baltic first and the Balkans second. Russia was not yet strong enough to wage a two-front war. This had to wait until the time of Catherine at the end of the century. Hence it was A ustria rather than Russia that had the commanding position during this period. A ustrian rath er than R ussian generals assum ed the role of liberators in the


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 181
northern Balkans in 1690 and in 17 1 6 -1 7 1 8 . N evertheless, P eter’s cam paign did have certain repercussions in the Balkans. It initiated close relations be tween M ontenegro and Russia that were to continue for the next two cen turies. It also led to the appointm ent of Greek adm inistrators, known as Phanariotes, to the hospodarships of the Danubian Principalities. These men took the place of the Rum anian nobles who hitherto had filled the positions but who were now distrusted because of the defection of Cantem ir and the vacillation of B rancoveanu. Phanariote rule in the Principalities continued until the Greek revolution of 1821 and, as we shall note in C hapter 13, con tributed greatly to the ascendancy of Greek influence in the O ttom an Em pire during the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
RECONQUEST OF THE PELOPONNESUS
W ith the signing of the Pruth T reaty a struggle ensued in C onstanti nople between those who favored the formation of a Turkish-Swedish-Polish league in order to renew the war against Russia, and those who urged instead a w ar against Venice in order to recover the Peloponnesus lost in the K arlo witz settlement. The latter group prevailed because campaigns beyond the lower D anube were never popular in T urkey. Even if they ended successfully they did not bring many real advantages to compensate for the hardships and losses incurred in fighting in distant lands. Accordingly, the T urks con solidated their peace with Russia by concluding on June 27, 1713, the A drianople Treaty reaffirming the terms of the Pruth Treaty. The Turks then launched their long-planned war against Venice. In the summer of 1715 they sent an army under G rand Vizir D am ad Ali to con quer the Peloponnesus. Everything favored the invaders. They outnum bered the eight thousand Venetian defenders several times. Their leader proved to be an energetic and skillful com m ander. They met with no resistance from the native Greeks, who were thoroughly dissatisfied after sixteen years of Venetian rule. Dam ad skillfully exploited this anti-Venetian sentiment by giving strict orders to his soldiers to respect the persons and property of the Greek peasants. The latter responded by welcoming the Turks and providing them with abundant provisions for which they received liberal compensation. These circumstances enabled Damad to overrun the entire peninsula in one hundred days. First C orinth fell after a three-week siege. Then the T urks advanced southw ard in two divisions. N o pitched battles were fought. The campaign consisted of a series of successful sieges until all the Venetian fortresses had been reduced. M eanwhile the O ttom an fleet, reinforced by ships from Egypt and the Barbary States, was driving the Venetians out of the Aegean Islands that they held. Before the end of the year Damad was preparing to follow up his success by attacking the Ionian Islands on the west coast of Greece and then proceeding against the Venetian possessions in Dalmatia. A t this point Austria intervened by concluding an alliance with


182 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
Venice early in 1716. The Divan in Constantinople debated whether the action should be considered a casus belli. M any Turks rem embered the dis asters of the previous Austrian war and counseled peace. But Damad, in spired by his victories and encouraged by his astrologers, persuaded the Divan to declare for war. In the summer of 1716 Damad marched north from Belgrade toward Peterwardein (Petrovaradin), where nemesis awaited him in the person of the Hapsburg general, Prince Eugene of Savoy.
WAR W ITH AUSTRIA (PA SSAROW ITZ
t r e a t y : 1718)
Since his great victories over the Turks in the previous war Prince Eugene had won many battles against the French and had earned a reputa tion equaled only by that of his com panion-at-arm s, the Duke of M arlbor ough. In the forthcoming campaign his brilliant generalship together with the superiority of his troops in training and arm am ents caused the Turks to suffer another series of disastrous defeats. The first engagement was fought before the Peterwardein fortress in August, 1716. Despite the numerical preponderance of the O ttom an army, Prince Eugene routed it and captured all its artillery. G rand Vizir Dam ad was killed in a desperate effort to turn the tide. Twenty days later Eugene was before Temesvar, the last great T urkish stronghold in H ungary. Its garrison capitulated after a siege of five weeks. This completed the campaign of 1716. The following year Eugene took the initiative by besieging Belgrade. A fter three weeks a Turkish relief army appeared under the new Grand Vizir Khalil. Eugene was in a critical position. The Belgrade garrison was in front of him and K halil’s arm y, double the num ber of his own, threatened his rear. Eugene boldly attacked the Turkish army and again won a brilliant victory, inflicting twenty thousand casualties and suffering only two thousand of his own. T he following day B elgrade’s garrison of thirty thousand m en sur rendered. Eugene followed up his victory by advancing southward from Bel grade and occupying a large part of Serbia and of western W allachia. The Austrians appealed to the Serbians to join their armies as they had done dur ing the previous W ar of the Holy League. B ut this time the response was negligible. The Serbians rem em bered the tragic fate of thousands of their compatriots who had taken up arms against the Turks and then were forced to flee their country following the K arlow itz T reaty. T he passiveness of the Serbians did not affect the outcome of the war. By this time the Turks were ready to cease hostilities. The peace negotiations that followed resemble closely those at the end of the W ar of the Holy League. Britain and Holland again pressed for peace because of the disruption of their Levant commerce. Venice favored the continuation of the war, as Poland and Russia had in the earlier conllict. T he V enetians had beaten off a T urkish attack on C orfu in 1716. T hey had


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 183
also received naval reinforcements from Spain, Portugal, and various Italian states, and were now in a position to recover some of the territories they had lost in the first year of the war. But Em peror Charles VI, like his predecessor, Leopold I, decided in favor of peace. A nd the reason again was a complica tion in the west— this time a Spanish attack upon Sardinia. Accordingly the em peror accepted the Treaty of Passarowitz (Pozarevac), July 21, 1718, based on the status quo at the end of hostilities. He gained the rem ainder of Hungary, most of Serbia, and part of W allachia and Bosnia. The republic of Venice, in whose behalf Austria ostensibly had em barked on the war, fared badly by the treaty. It surrendered the Peloponnesus but retained the Ionian Islands and made a few gains in Dalm atia. This treaty raised H apsburg pres tige in the Balkans to new heights, in contrast to the sad decline of Venice and the military humiliation of the Ottom an Empire.
W AR W ITH AUSTRIA AND RUSSIA
(BELGRADE TREATY: 1739)
During the years following the Passarowitz Treaty the Turks were engaged in the east where, together with the Russians, they were annexing whole provinces at the expense of a weak and anarchical Persia. In 1723 Peter the Great acquired the entire western and southern seaboard of the Caspian Sea, and the following year the Turks gained the western provinces of Persia, including the cities of Tabriz, Ham adan, and Erivan. But neither the Russians nor the Turks were to keep their booty for long. There now appeared in Persia a great leader, N adir Kuli, who organized a national re vival and forced both Turkey and Russia by 1735 to return the lost provinces. Russia had been willing to withdraw from the Caspian region in order to prepare for a move toward the Black Sea. The latter was more valuable both economically and strategically. Possession of the northern shore of the Black Sea offered Russia dazzling opportunities. It would finally rid her of the dreadful T atar raids that had cost her so much in treasure and in hum an lives. It would open up vast new areas for settlem ent and exploita tion. It would give her the great Crim ean Peninsula which dom inated the entire B lack Sea. A nd it would enable her to control the outlets of five m ajor rivers that drained her plains— the Dniester, the Bug, the Dnieper, the Don, and the Kuban. All these prizes appeared at this time to be within the reach of Russian military power and diplomacy. Ivan Neplinev, the well-informed Russian ambassador at Constantinople, was reporting to his government that the Turkish defeats in Persia had left the O ttom an Empire ripe for plucking. The time has come, he urged, “to fall upon these barbarians.” This advice is significant. F o r the first tim e R ussia was in a position to consider seriously a drive to the B lack Sea. P eter’s expedition to the P ru th had n o t been p art of a calculated offensive against the O ttom an Em pire. His resources had not been sufficient to allow him to fight both the Turks and the Swedes, so he


184 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
had concentrated against the latter. But Em press A nne now was in a more favorable situation. The Swedes had been subdued and the Poles had been forced to accept a pro-Russian king as a result of the W ar of the Polish Suc cession (1 7 3 3 -1 7 3 5 ). Russia could turn to the south and engage the Tatars and the Turks without fear of diversion. Thus the Russo-Turkish W ar of 1 7 3 6 -1 7 3 9 may be regarded as the beginning of R ussia’s system atic struggle to reach the Black Sea, a bloody and severe struggle that persisted until Catherine brought it to a successful conclusion at the end of the century. The Turks were not averse to a break with the Russians. They had been deeply disturbed by Russian aggression in Poland during the W ar of the Polish Succession. The French am bassador at Constantinople, M arquis de Villeneuve, had made every effort at that time to induce the sultan to declare war against the Russian empress. But his intrigues were neutralized by the crush ing defeats that N adir Kuli was then inflicting upon the Turks. Now, how ever, both the Turks and the Russians had concluded their Persian commit ments, and having done so, they drifted almost inevitably to war, aided by the enthusiastic prodding of Villeneuve. Two Russian armies advanced southward, one under M arshal Munnich against the Crimean Peninsula and the other under Marshal Lacy against the Turkish fortress of Azov. M unnich stormed and broke through the forttified lines stretching across the Isthm us of Perekop linking the peninsula to the mainland. He pressed forward, capturing the Crimean capital, Bakhchi sarai, and overrunning and devastating the whole peninsula. His men, how ever, suffered so severely from disease and exhaustion that they revolted and compelled him to withdraw to the Ukraine before the winter. M ean while Lacy had met with obstinate resistance at Azov. The Turkish garrison had inflicted such heavy casualties that Lacy allowed it to march out with all the honors of war. Then, on hearing that M unnich had retreated to the Ukraine, he followed his example and abandoned the fortress. This campaign of 1736 had cost the Russians dearly. Munnich alone had lost no less than thirty thousand of his fifty-seven thousand men, of which only two thousand had fallen in action. Em press A nne was encour aged, however, by the readiness of the Austrians to enter the w ar in order to garner a few more Turkish provinces. A secret treaty signed in January, 1737, provided that the two powers should wage war in concert against the O ttom an Empire. But the Austrians no longer had the incomparable Prince Eugene, while the Turkish forces showed some improvement in discipline and in maneuvering. Consequently the campaigns in 1737 and 1738 did not prove as decisive as expected. The Austrians barely held their own in the Balkans while the Russians overran the Crim ea twice but were forced to withdraw each time because they could not support themselves in the devas tated country. T he only outstanding success was M unnich’s capture of the Turkish fortress Ochakov, near the mouth of the Bug River. Negotiations for peace had been held intermittently during the course of the war. A new attem pt to end hostilities was made during the winter of


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 185
1738-1739. It failed, partly because the Turks were more demanding after their successes against the Austrians, and also because M arshal Munnich won the tsarin a’s support for his grandiose “O riental project.” M unnich proposed to cross the Danube, conquer the Danubian Principalities, and strike for C onstantinople itself. He assured the tsarina that “all the Greeks regarded . . . [her] as their legitimate Sovereign . . . that it was desirable to seize this first moment of their hope and enthusiasm , and to m arch to Constantinople; and that such a frame of mind might never again be found.” 4 M unnich’s optim ism appeared to be justified. W hile his agents worked in Epirus and Thessaly for a Christian uprising, he advanced rapidly southw ard at the head of his army. Profiting from his experience in the pre vious campaign, he avoided the difficult country along the Black Sea coast and instead entered M oldavia through the Polish province of Podolia. On August 18, 1739, he routed a Turkish arm y before the fortress of Khotin, and a few days later captured the fortress itself. Then he entered the M ol davian capital, Jassy, without opposition, and thence wheeled into Bessarabia, intending to reduce the Turkish forts in that province before pushing on to ward Constantinople. At this point M unnich received the “miserable and crushing” news of the separate peace that the Austrians had concluded with the Turks. The O ttom an generals had followed a strategy that proved completely successful. They had concentrated their forces on the Danube, so that the Austrian gen erals found themselves outnum bered almost four to one. They suffered a decisive defeat in the open field and fell back upon Belgrade. This reverse was all the m ore serious in view of the R ussian successes in the Principalities. The A ustrians had no desire to continue a war that seemed likely to intro duce a rival great power in the Balkans. This consideration— a recurring feature of Balkan politics to the present day— decided the Austrians to accept the m ediation of Villeneuve and to sign the Treaty of Belgrade (Septem ber 18, 1739). They surrendered all that they had gained at Passarow itzBosnia, W allachia, and Serbia, including the city of Belgrade. The A ustrian defection produced dismay and indignation in the Russian camp. But the consequences were unavoidable. M unnich could not continue his advance with a victorious Turkish army ready to fall on his llank. Reluctantly the Russians decided to conclude a peace on the best terms they could. By the Nissa Treaty of October 3, 1739, they surrendered their gains in M oldavia and in the C rim ea, retaining only Azov on the condition that its fortifications be demolished and no fleet be m aintained in its waters. The Russians did win the right to trade on the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea, provided, however, that their goods be carried in Turkish vessels. The peace settlement was a humiliation for Austria, a success for the Turks, a triumph for the French, and a disappointment for the Russians. The latter, however, gained more benefits than appear to be the case at first glance. They had given the Crimean Tatars a taste of their own medicine and no longer had to suffer their devastating raids. The Russians also had raised


greatly their military prestige in Europe, particularly in view of the contrast between the success of their armies and the failure of the Austrian. Indeed, the chief significance of the w ar is th at it dem onstrated R ussia’s growing strength and presaged what could be expected in the future. In 1711 Peter had suffered military defeat. A quarter of a century later Anne triumphed militarily but failed diplomatically. In another three decades Catherine was to win both the military and diplomatic battles, and to gain for Russia the long-coveted shores of the Black Sea.
THREE DECADES OF PE A C E :1739-1768
The Ottoman Em pire enjoyed three decades of peace following the Belgrade and N issa treaties. Persia was too exhausted after N ad ir’s ceaseless wars to cause any trouble along the eastern frontier. Austria and Russia were fully committed in the W ar of the A ustrian Succession (1 7 4 0 -1 7 4 8 ) and the Seven Y ears’ W ar (1756-1763) and had no desire for further complications on another front. The Turks, on their part, did not wish to take advantage of the great European conflicts to attem pt the recovery of their lost dominions north of the Danube. Sultan M ahm ud preferred to keep the peace, and this policy was continued by his successors, O thm an III (1 7 5 4 -1 7 5 7 ) and M us tafa III (1757-1773). It is notew orthy th at Prussia em erged in the 1750’s as an active participant in N ear E astern affairs. T he explanation is to be found in F red erick the G rea t’s search for allies against the enemies th a t surrounded him. His position had become perilous when the Austrian chancellor, Prince Kaunitz, engineered the famous Diplomatic Revolution and secured alliances with France and Russia. W hen the Seven Y ears’ W ar began in 1756, Fred erick faced this form idable com bination without a single ally on the Conti nent. In anticipation of this encirclement he had sent an envoy to Constanti nople in 1755 with a proposal for a com m ercial treaty and a military alliance. The Turks rejected this overture, deciding that it was to their advantage to rem ain neutral while the Austrians and the Russians weakened themselves fighting the Prussians. Frederick persisted in his efforts. For several years he bom barded Sultan M ustafa with messages emphasizing the perils of neutrality and the possibilities of intervention. On three occasions the sultan and his ministers were influenced to the point of seriously considering intervention. But some incident always occurred to frustrate F red erick’s design. In 1760 it was the refusal of the British government to sponsor the proposed Turkish-Prussian alliance. The following year it was the decision of Tsar Peter III to withdraw Russia from the war. Finally, the accession of Catherine the G reat in 1762 led the Turks to hold back until the foreign policy of the new tsarina could be ascertained. In 1764 the O ttom an governm ent received disquieting reports of a Russian-Prussian agreem ent for intervention in Polish affairs. An envoy was sent to Berlin to protest against foreign interference in the selection of
186 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 187
the new Polish king. The reception accorded the envoy was an ominous por tent of what was to come. Frederick affirmed his intention to intervene to gether with Catherine, and blandly asserted that the intervention would restore peace in Poland and would, therefore, be to the interest of all neigh boring countries, including the O ttoman Empire. This represented the beginning of a new era in Eastern European diplomacy. Russia and Prussia now took the place of Sweden, Poland, and Turkey as the leading powers of E astern Europe. This shift set off a chain reaction that soon transform ed the m ap of Europe between the Baltic and the Black seas. The intervention of Frederick and Catherine in Poland led to war between Russia and Turkey in 1768 and hence to the linking of the Polish and Turkish questions. By the end of the century Poland had ceased to exist as a nation while Turkey had lost the Crimean Peninsula and the whole of the Ukraine.
C a t h e r i n e ’s f i r s t T u r k i s h w a r : 1 768 -1 7 7 4
T he prim ary factor behind C atherine’s and F rederick’s intervention in Poland was the sad decline of that country during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. For various reasons Poland had sunk to the point where foreign powers intervened openly in the election of her kings. W hen King Augustus III died in August, 1763, Catherine decided that his successor should be Stanislas Poniatowski, a Polish nobleman who formerly had been her param our and who could be depended upon to do her bidding. To ensure his election Catherine signed a treaty with Frederick the G reat in April, 1764, for common action in Poland. They agreed to secure the election of Poniatowski, to protect the religious rights of the Dissenters (O rthodox and Protestant Polish su b jects), and to support each other if either were attacked. This diplomatic preparation, together with the judicious expenditure of money and the mobilization of Russian troops, persuaded the Polish Diet to vote as desired. But when Catherine continued to intervene blatantly in domestic Polish affairs, a group of Polish patriots formed the Confederation of B ar (in Podolia) to fight “for religion and for liberty.” A bloody struggle ensued between these Confederates and the Russians. France and Austria cordially supported the Confederates. They sent money, arms, and a few officers to their aid. In Constantinople the French ambassador pursued the customary strategy: goading the Turks to make a diversion on R ussia’s flank. T he T urks were not loath to do so. They were alarmed by the increasing numbers of Russian agents operating throughout the Balkans. Indeed, a small insurrection had broken out in M ontenegro in 1767 and threatened to spread to neighboring areas. The Crimean Tatars also favored w ar against Russia and exerted pressure in Constantinople to ward that end. The breaking point came when Russian troops, pursuing a band of Confederates, violated the O ttom an frontier and burned a Turkish town. This act so inflamed Turkish public opinion that the Constantinople


188 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
government was virtually forced to declare war suddenly in October, 1768. Catherine promptly appealed to Europe against “the common enemy of the Christian nam e.” The Turks, not to be outdone, issued a manifesto declaring the Dissenters traitors to their church and religion. The war began on this comic note, the deist tsarina posing as the champion of Orthodoxy and Protestantism, and the Moslem sultan as the defender of Catholicism. The superiority of the Russian armies was evident from the outset. But Frederick the G reat was not impressed by their victories. W ith his cus tom ary tartness he rem arked that the Russians were “ignorant of fortifica tions and tactics” and that “to form a clear idea of this war, one must imagine one-eyed men who have given blind men a thorough beating, and gained a com plete ascendancy over them .” 5 F rederick’s observation was not altogether unjustified, but Catherine showed more sense of historical perspec tive in her reply to a similar disparagement by another critic: “Ignorance with the R ussians is the ignorance of earliest youth; with the T urks it is th at of dotage.” B Catherine began the war with her custom ary energy. She mobilized five arm ies, some to rem ain on the defensive in R ussia and Poland, and others to take the offensive in the Balkans and the Caucasus. Prince Golitsyn on the Balkan front was the most successful. In the spring of 1769 he reached the Dniester River, defeated a Turkish army on its banks, and went on to occupy, first Jassy, the capital of M oldavia, and then Bucharest, the capital of W allachia. This was startling to Europe, but the following year unfolded still more unexpected events. The most dram atic was the appearance for the first time of a Russian fleet in the M editerranean. Catherine had conceived the daring project of sending part of her Baltic fleet around E urope to the waters of the Levant. The objective was twofold: to foment a revolt in Greece, and to destroy the O ttom an fleet. In view of later developm ents it is w orth noting that Britain not only tolerated but actively assisted this expedition. Both strategic and econom ic considerations explain this policy. B ritain’s great im perial rival at this time was France rather than Russia. Britain feared a French comeback in India where Clive had defeated Dupleix only seven years earlier. In contrast, she welcomed R ussia’s success over Sweden in the Baltic because it established an equilibrium in that area, and she also favored a R ussian victory over F ran ce’s ally T urkey because it w ould indirectly strengthen her own position in the M editerranean. Finally, B ritain faced stiff French commercial competition in the Levant, whereas Russia was an im portant m arket for her m anufactured goods and an essential source of ijaval stores. According to an official French estim ate, the total foreign trade (both imports and exports) of the O ttom an Em pire in 1783 am ounted to 110 million livres, of .which trade with France accounted for 60 million. On the other hand, in the last quarter of the eighteenth century, no more than 27 British ships went to the Levant in any one year, against an average of 600 to 700 ships that went to Russia.7 These considerations explain why Britain


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 189
allowed the Russian fleet to stop for supplies and repairs at Hull, G ibraltar, and Port M ahon. They also explain why the British government repeatedly warned Paris and M adrid against taking any hostile action against the R us sian fleet. Advance units of the Russian expedition arrived olf the western coast of Greece in February, 1770. From the first everything went wrong. W ithin a few m onths the Russian com m ander, Alexei Orlov, was reporting to Catherine, “The natives here are sycophantic, deceitful, impudent, fickle and cowardly, completely given over to money and to plunder.” 8 The diffi culty arose from mutual misunderstanding. Russian agents had sent glowing but exaggerated reports of a nation ready to spring to arms. In fact, the more sober Greek leaders had warned that large quantities of arms and at least ten thousand Russian troops were essential for a successful uprising. But now they saw only four ships, a few hundred soldiers, and forty boxes of arms. The Greeks naturally were disillusioned and held back, causing the Russians in turn to feel betrayed. With the appearance of more Russian ships several thousand Greeks finally took up arms. But they were unable to coordinate their operations, either among themselves or with the Russians·. The only notable success was the capture of N avarino in A pril, 1770. O ther sieges failed because neither the Russians nor the Greeks possessed the necessary equipm ent and skills. Meanwhile, the local O ttom an governor had collected an overwhelming force of Albanians and was closing in on the Russians and their Greek allies. Orlov decided to abandon the ill-fated venture and sailed away in June. The unruly Albanians then ran wild, massacring the Greeks and pillaging the country side until expelled forcefully by a Turkish army in 1779. The Russians failed on land, but they won a resounding victory at sea. In this case F red erick ’s analogy of the one-eyed and the blind was fully justified. W hen a part of the Russian fleet put into English ports en route south, the British were astounded by the clumsiness and poor construction of the ships and by the inexperience of the crews— a fact which further ex plains why the British accepted so indifferently Russian intrusion in the M editerranean. But the O ttom an fleet was worse. A fter thirty years of peace it was fit only to carry out its custom ary duty of collecting the revenue in the Aegean area. The first engagem ent was fought in July, 1770, off the island of Chios n ear the coast of A sia M inor. O rlov, aided by som e luck, and still more by the English officers under his command, won a decisive victory. The Turks fled to the nearby harbor of Chesme. There a British lieutenant, under the cover of darkness, steered a flreship into the midst of the cooped-up O ttom an fleet. Night becam e day as the entire fleet went up in flames amid the ear-splitting roars of exploding magazines. The British officer, Adm iral Elphinstone, favored an immediate attack upon Constantinople, but Orlov vetoed the project. T o this day there is sharp conflict of opinion concerning the wisdom of O rlov’s decision. Some authorities m aintain th at the veto was


190 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
justified given the poor condition of the Russian ships and the almost com plete lack of landing forces. Others claim that the Turks were so demoralized that an immediate attack upon Constantinople in all probability would have succeeded. In any case, Orlov spent the summer months occupying eighteen Aegean islands, which gave him control of the Levant waters until the end of the war. Meanwhile, the Russians had been equally successful on land. A large army of Turkish soldiers and T atar irregulars invaded Moldavia. They were decisively defeated at K arkal in August, 1770. The Turks fell back south of the Danube while the T atars attem pted to hold the line of fortresses in Bessa rabia and the Dobruja. But one after another they fell to the victorious Rus sians— Kilia, Ackerman, Ismail, Bendery, and Braila. By the end of the year all the fortresses on the lower D anube were in Russian hands. Two years earlier, when Choiseul, the French foreign minister, in structed Vergennes in Constantinople to incite the Turks against the Russians, he added cynically, “The rottenness of the Turks in every departm ent might make this trial of strength fatal to them; that matters little to us, provided the object of an immediate explosion be attained.” 9 Choiseul proved to be correct in his appraisal of the Turks, but not on the outcome of the war. The Turks lost the battles, but it was the Poles who lost their independence. The reason is to be found in the chain of events set off by the linking of the Polish and Eastern Questions. The overwhelming Russian victories caused alarm both in Vienna and in Berlin. T he A ustrians regarded R ussia’s penetration to the D anube as a threat to their security. The more the Russians advanced the more likely the Austrians were to intervene and thus to precipitate a general European war. Frederick of Prussia was also unhappy about Russian aggrandizement at the expense of Turkey because it offered him no compensating gain. But he was equally unhappy at the prospect of a Russian-Austrian war because he would be involved and again with little likelihood of gain. The problem was to find some basis for a peaceful settlem ent acceptable to all three powers. Poland offered the way out. Since Poland had caused the RussoTurkish war, Frederick remarked, she should also pay the “damages.” Cath erine could help herself in eastern Poland in return for renouncing her conquests on the Danube. Austria and Prussia could also find ample com pensation in other parts of Poland. In this m anner O ttom an intervention in behalf of Poland culm inated paradoxically in the eventual disappearance of Poland. Catherine was willing to end hostilities on the basis proposed by Frederick, particularly because of increasing difficulties at hom e. M aria Theresa, the Hapsburg empress, was far from enthusiastic, but the alternative she faced was a war in support of Turkey. This was out of the question, so M aria Theresa gave way and proceeded to bargain vigorously for her share of the booty. On August 5, 1772, the three powers signed, “in the Name of the Very Holy Trinity,” the partition treaties by which Poland lost approxi


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 191
mately one third of her territory and one half of her population. The follow ing spring, Russian bayonets prodded the treaties through the Polish Diet and the partition became official. The partition treaties provided that Austria should use her “good offices” to bring about peace between Russia and Turkey. Negotiations were conducted in Bucharest for several months. The Russians made reasonable demands, considering their military successes and their territorial conquests. The sultan and his ministers favored acceptance of the terms, but they were unable to win over the influential religious leaders. The war continued an other two years. The 1773 campaign was inconclusive. The Russians won several victories in the open field but failed to capture the three Turkish for tresses south of the Danube— Varna, Silistria, and Shumla. The following year the genius of Alexander Suvorov, the Russian marshal, forced the Turks to accept the terms they had previously rejected. Suvorov ranks with the great military captains of history. A slight, frail, and eccentric man, he was an accomplished scholar and linguist as well as a mas terful strategist and a born leader of men. He was to win his most notable victories against the Turks in the next w ar a decade later. A t this time he was stationed on the Danube where the grand vizir approached him with the main Turkish army. In accordance with his maxim of never allowing the enemy to strike first, Suvorov m arched south and won a crushing victory at Kostliji. T he T urks fell back upon Shum la, which Suvorov prom ptly surrounded and cut off from Constantinople. The grand vizir asked for an armistice. Suvorov refused but offered to discuss peace terms. The Divan in Constantinople ac cepted the offer. On July 16, 1774, after only seven hours of discussion, the plenipotentiaries signed the Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji (The Little Fountain) in an obscure Bulgarian village of that name. The treaty was suprisingly m oderate in its territorial provisions. Yet it ranks with the Karlowitz pact in its significance for the future. The earlier treaty delivered Christian provinces from Turkish rule and marked the end of O ttom an expansion westward. The later treaty for the first time tore a Moslem province from the O ttom an Empire and, more important, established the diplomatic basis for future foreign intervention in the internal affairs of the empire. Thus a distinguished jurist has asserted that all the treaties ex ecuted by Turkey and Russia during the following half century were but commentaries on the Kuchuk Kainarji text. For the sake of convenience the provisions of the treaty may be di vided into three categories, territorial, commercial, and religious. The Rus sians won several strategic enclaves along the north shore of the Black Sea. To the east they gained the port of Azov, a part of the province of Kuban, and the Kerch Peninsula commanding the strait between the Azov and Black seas. To the west the Russians kept the great estuary formed by the Dnieper and Bug as they enter the sea, including the Kinburn fortress at the mouth of the form er river. The Turks also surrendered the territories of the Crimean Khan, but these were to form an independent state. Both signatories agreed


192 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
not to “interfere, under any pretext whatever, with the election of the said Khan, or in the domestic, political, civil, and internal affairs of the same. . . Finally, Russia restored the remaining territories she had conquered, includ ing the D anubian Principalities. But in return Turkey guaranteed religious freedom and “hum ane and generous government for the future,” and also agreed that “according as the circumstances of these two Principalities may require, the Ministers of the Imperial Court of Russia resident at Constanti nople may rem onstrate in their favor. . . The commercial clauses of the treaty gave Russia the right to appoint consuls anywhere in the O ttom an lands, and allowed her subjects to navigate freely in the Black Sea and to trade in the O ttom an Em pire “by land as well as by water and upon the Danube . . . with the same privileges and advan tages as are enjoyed . . . by the most friendly nations, whom the Sublime Porte favors most in trade, such as the French and English. . . .” Finally, the provisions pertaining to religion gave to Russia a prefer ential right to protect O ttom an Christians not conceded to any other foreign power. The crucial clause provided: “The Sublime Porte promises to protect constantly the Christian religion and its churches, and it also allows the M in isters of the Im perial C o u rt of R ussia to m ake representations. . . .” 10 The results and implications of this treaty were far-reaching. Turkey had lost her form er undisputed control of the Black Sea. H er frontier in the northeast was now the Bug River. It is true th at the Russians had won only scattered outlets to the sea but these were all strategically im portant and pro vided a springboard for future advances. They also surrounded the new and nominally independent Crim ean state which obviously could continue to exist only on Russian sufferance. M ore significant were the other provisions which made Russia the guarantor of M oldavian and W allachian privileges and of the religious freedoms of the O ttom an Christians. These clauses gave C ath erine and her successors a standing pretext for diplomatic intervention or for m ilitary aggression. It is not surprising th at B aron T hugutt, the A ustrian en voy in C onstantinople, appraised the treaty as “a model of skill on the part of the Russian diplomatists, and a rare example of imbecility on the part of the Turkish negotiators.” He added that “the Ottoman Empire becomes henceforth a kind of Russian province” and he warned his government that “events now passing in this empire will in the future exercise the greatest in fluence on the policy of all the other States, and will give rise to endless troubles.” 11
C A T H E R IN E ’S SECO N D T U R K IS H w a r : 1 7 8 7 - 1 7 9 2
t
W ithin a few years the course of events fully justified the b aro n ’s gloomy prediction. The Turks were far from satisfied with the peace terms, resenting particularly the loss of the Crimean territories. M ore im portant was the attitude of Catherine. She regarded the settlement as the beginning rather than the consum m ation of Russian progress in Southeastern Europe. Under the inllucncc of the m asterful Prince Potemkin, who served her well as soldier,


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 193
statesman, and lover, Catherine reverted to the “Oriental project” propounded half a century earlier by M arshal M unnich. Both she and her consort dreamed of expelling the T urks from C onstantinople and of establishing in their place a revived G reek em pire, oriented, naturally, tow ard St. Petersburg. It is not without significance that her second grandson, born in 1779, was christened Constantine, and that the medal struck to com m em orate his birth showed on the one side the church of St. Sophia in C onstantinople and on the other the Black Sea with a rising star above. Catherine realized that she could not reach her goal without the sup port of another great power. She also realized that Prussia would never be that power. Frederick had made it clear during the preceding war that he had no intention of helping Catherine to expand in a region where he himself had no hope of compensation. Catherine therefore turned to Austria, encouraged by the death in 1780 of the old em press, M aria T heresa. T he following year Catherine concluded an alliance with the new Hapsburg ruler, Joseph II. They agreed to aid one another in case of war and they also agreed that if either signatory acquired territory the other was entitled to corresponding co m pensation. D uring the year 1782 C atherine set forth in her letters to Joseph the details of her “G rand Plan” against the Turks. Joseph was am enable, less out of enthusiasm for the plan than out of a compelling need to have Russia by his side against Prussia. Just as M aria Theresa had agreed reluctantly to the partition of Poland, so Joseph now reluctantly agreed to the partition of Turkey. By the end of the year the two rulers had settled the main points of their extraordinary project. Russia was to acquire the western Caucasus, the Crimea, and the lands to the Dniester River. Moldavia and W allachia were to form the independent state of Dacia, designed to serve as a buffer between Russia and Austria. Joseph was to round out his empire by obtaining parts of W allachia, Serbia, Bosnia, Herzegovina, and the Venetian provinces of Istria and Dalm atia. The rem aining territory in the Balkans— that is, Bul garia, M acedonia, and Greece— was to constitute the revived G reek empire with C onstantinople as its capital and with C atherine’s grandson C onstantine as its emperor. To reassure Joseph, C atherine agreed that Constantine “should renounce all pretensions to the throne of Russia since the two crowns must not and should not be allow ed to be placed on the same h ead .” 12 Fortified by the Austrian alliance, Catherine proceeded toward the realization of the G rand Plan. She began in the Crim ea where, in complete violation of her pledges at Kuchuk Kainarji, she applied the same tactics that had proved successful in Poland. She encouraged a revolt against the reign ing khan and installed in his place a pretender who faithfully executed her orders. W hen the T atar population rose in protest she proclaim ed the annexa tion of the country with professions of acting only to deliver its people from misgovernment. This highhanded robbery excited the greatest indignation in Constantinople. But the Turks received no support from any quarter. Even France advised acceptance of the fait accompli. The inevitable outcome was


194 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
the Treaty of Constantinople (1783) ceding to Russia the Crimean Penin sula with the neighboring Kuban area and the Tam an Peninsula. Catherine appointed Potem kin the governor of the newly acquired territories. With an energy and vision reminiscent of Peter the Great, he threw himself into the task of colonization and fortification. He subdued the wilder elements among the Cossacks and Tatars and then brought in settlers from Germ any and A ustria as well as from the rest of Russia. W ith the assistance of numerous foreign experts, he founded cities, established industries, and built the great naval bases, Sebastopol and Nikolaev. By 1787 he was ready to display to his mistress and to the rest of the world the results of his work. Accompanied by a magnificent court, including the envoys of France, Eng land, and A ustria, Catherine em barked on the Dnieper. A fleet of galleys escorted her to Kherson, at the mouth, where she passed under a triumphal arch bearing the inscription “The Way to Byzantium.” The climax came at Sebastopol when Catherine and Em peror Joseph were dining in a splendid new palace. A t a signal from Potemkin the curtains were pulled back from the windows, revealing a magnificent view of the bay with a fleet of forty m en-of-war in battle form ation firing a roaring salute to Catherine. The meaning of this display was not lost on the Turks. Sebastopol was within two days’ sail of Constantinople. Russian agents were busy stir ring up discontent throughout the Balkans and even in distant Egypt. The last straw was a new Russian ultimatum demanding the surrender of Georgia and Bessarabia and the appointm ent of hereditary governors in M oldavia and W allachia. By this time the W estern powers had abandoned their former indifference. With the encouragement of England and Prussia, the sultan pre sented a counterultimatum for the restitution of the Crimea and the evacua tion of Georgia. O n C atherine’s refusal he declared w ar on A ugust 15, 1787. Early the following year Joseph entered the w ar in accordance with his treaty obligation. The allies had plannned to coordinate a Russian invasion of M ol davia with an Austrian offensive down the Danube. But an unexpected Swe dish attack in the north prevented Catherine from fulfilling her engagement. A t the same time Em peror Joseph foolishly assumed personal com m and of his army and proved so incom petent that he suffered a crushing defeat in 1788. T he only notable allied victory th a t year was Suvorov’s successful as sault upon Ochakov, the key Turkish fortress near the m outh of the Bug River. In 1789 the allies finally hit their stride. A rejuvenated A ustrian army under a new commander overran most of Bosnia and Serbia. Suvorov was equally successful in the Danubian Principalities. W ith some A ustrian sup port he defeated two large Turkish armies in quick succession. Panic reigned in Constantinople. The Austrians were ready to cross the D anube into Bulgaria.


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 195
TREATY OF s i s t o v a : 1791
The diplomatic situation at this point resembled that of 1771, when the Russian victories aroused the hostility of Austria and Prussia and cul m inated in the first Polish partition. The combined A ustrian-Russian victories now caused equal apprehension in certain European capitals. France was unexpectedly indifferent. H er foreign minister, Vergennes, was so determined to aid commerce and to avoid war that he rationalized to his satisfaction the abondonm ent of the “Turkish barbarians.” But Prussia still opposed Turkish partition as resolutely as in the time of Frederick the G reat, and for the same reason. Partition would strengthen Russia and Austria enormously without compensation for herself. In 1788 Prussia joined Britain and Hol land in a Triple Alliance which aimed primarily to keep France out of Bel gium but which also sought to check Russia and A ustria in the Balkans. Such was the international situation when Joseph II died in Febru ary, 1790. His brother and successor, Leopold II, had no desire to continue the w ar against Turkey. He did not trust Catherine; he faced a revolt in H ungary; and he feared a Prussian attack if his armies advanced closer to Constantinople. Accordingly, he concluded the Convention of Reichenbach with Prussia (July 27, 1790) by which he agreed to accept a peace with Turkey based on the prew ar status quo. The peace was formalized a year later with the signing of the Treaty of Sistova on August 4, 1791. These de velopments had far-reaching consequences for Europe as well as for the Bal kans. They not only eased the pressure on Turkey but they also ended the Austrian-Russian alliance and prepared the way for a new European coali tion directed against Revolutionary France.
t r e a t y o f j a s s y : 1792
The desertion of Austria was a serious blow for Catherine. She was left alone to carry on the war against Turkey and Sweden and to face the diplomatic maneuvering of the hostile Triple Alliance. Catherine rose to the occasion with courage and resourcefulness. First she persuaded Gustavus III of Sweden to accept the Wereloe Treaty (August 15, 1790) restoring the prew ar frontiers. Then she turned full force against the Turks to win a de cision before the other powers could intervene. M arshal Suvorov, as usual, presented her with the most telling arguments of diplomacy. In December, 1790, he successfully stormed Ismail, the strong Turkish fortress near the m outh of the Danube. A t the same time the Greeks made a considerable di version on the Turkish rear despite their unfortunate experience with Orlov during the previous war. They organized scattered revolts in the mountainous areas of their country and they also outfitted a fleet of privateers which op erated actively in the Aegean throughout the war. Fortified by these successes, Catherine haughtily ignored the demand •of the T riple A lliance pow ers th at she follow the exam ple of Leopold and re store her conquests to the Turks. Instead, she informed the king of Prussia


196 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
that she would make war and peace as she pleased and that she would not tolerate any interference in the conduct of her affairs. She also let it be known, however, that she would accept a settlem ent that left her in possession of the territory to the Dniester River. This offer precipitated a significant and revealing debate in the B rit ish Parliam ent. D uring C atherine’s first w ar with Turkey, B ritain supported Russia because of certain economic and strategic factors already noted. Now the younger Pitt was in office, and he was the first British statesm an to per ceive and to state publicly that continued Russian expansion at the expense of Turkey was contrary to British interests. In order to check Catherine he proposed to cooperate closely with Prussia and to turn to Poland for the grain and timber supplies hitherto obtained from Russia. On March 27, 1791, he sent to Berlin the draft of a joint ultimatum to be presented to Catherine and demanding the restoration of the conquered territories. The following day he subm itted to Parliam ent a bill for “some further augm entation” of the naval forces in view of the failure to “effect a pacification between Russia and the Porte.” The bill passed both Houses by substantial majorities. But more significant was the tone of the debate and the reaction of public opinion. The arguments presented on both sides were to be heard again and again throughout the nineteenth century as the clash of British and Russian imperial interests assumed world-wide proportions. Edmund Burke fore shadowed Gladstone in denouncing a policy that allied England with the “destructive savages” who had condemned “those charming countries which bord er upon the D anube, to devastation and pestilence.” 13 O ther speakers w arned, in the m anner of Disraeli, that the fall of C onstantinople would be followed by that of Egypt, and “where [Russian] victories would afterwards end G od alone could tell.” 14 T he debates, both in Parliam ent and in the country, indicated that public opinion was not prepared to sacrifice the flour ishing Russian trade and to em bark upon a hazardous war for the sake of a distant and dubious danger. Pitt wisely decided that an aggressive foreign policy was im practical with the country so divided. He sent a special messenger to Berlin to forestall the presentation of the ultimatum. The sequel followed naturally and quickly. W ithout prospect of assistance from any quarter, the Turks were ready to come to terms. Catherine, on her part, was equally willing, especially since Poland required her attention. By the Treaty of Jassy (January 9, 1792) she retained the territory to the Dniester River and surrendered her conquests farther to the west. It is not irrelevant to add that im m ediately after this settlem ent C ath erine turned upon the unfortunate Poles. They had taken advantage!- of the Turkish war to conclude an anti-Russian pact with Prussia and to launch an impressive reform program for the rejuvenation of their country. But the course of international events doomed their efforts to failure. With the T urk ish w ar ended and with the French Revolution engaging the attention of the other powers, Catherine was able to reassert her authority. The second and


Defeat by Russia: Recession to the Dniester: 1699-1792 197
third partitions of 1793 and 1795 spelled the end of Poland as an independ ent state.
JASSY AND THE BALKANS
The Treaty of Jassy is a turning point in N ear Eastern history. It marks the advent of Russia as a great Near Eastern power. When Catherine cam e to the throne the Black Sea was a T urkish lake. Before she died it had become a Russian-dom inated lake. Its northern shore was ringed by great naval arsenals— Sebastopol, Kherson, and Nikolaev. Hitherto the issue had been whether Russia should enter the Black Sea. Henceforth it was whether she should advance to the M editerranean. T he T reaty of Jassy is also a turning point in B alkan history. It sig nified that the Balkans were not to become another Poland. This assuredly would have been their fate if C atherine and Joseph had carried through their Grand Plan. Just as the three partitions divided Poland among Prussia, Rus sia, and A ustria, so the G rand Plan would have divided the Balkan Peninsula between Russia and Austria. V arious factors explain C atherine’s failure in the Balkans in contrast to her success in Poland. One was the role of geography. Russia and her allies could march directly and without hindrance into the heart of Poland. But in the case of Turkey they first had to overrun a vast and strongly forti fied interm ediate area— the Crim ea, the southern U kraine, and the D anubian Principalities— before reaching the Balkan ranges protecting Constantinople. A nother factor was diplomatic. The partition of Poland was favored usually by Prussia and Russia and accepted by Austria. The partition of Turkey was favored usually by Russia alone and rarely accepted by either Austria or Prussia. These factors help to explain the failure of the G rand Plan. The fact that it did fail determ ined the course of future Balkan history. Instead of facing the combined might of the Hapsburg and Tsarist empires, the Balkan peoples suffered only an ineffective and weakening O ttom an rule. One after another they won their independence during the nineteenth century, while the Poles rem ained shackled until W orld W ar I.


1 2 . T h e B a lk a n s, th e F ren ch R e v o lu tio n ,
a n d N a p o le o n : 1 7 9 2 -1 8 1 5
T
J . H E t u r k s enjoyed six years of peace after their wars with Catherine. Russia and the other powers were too involved in the Polish partitions and in the problem s created by the F rench Revolution to under take new ventures in Southeastern Europe. This respite was fully appreciated by the harassed T urks. T he following entry in the journal of Sultan Selim’s privy secretary reflects the attitude of O ttom an officials at this time tow ard the turbulent events in Europe: “M ay God cause the upheaval in France to spread like syphilis to the enemies of the Em pire, hurl them into prolonged conflict with one another, and thus accomplish results beneficial to the Em pire, am en.” 1 The upheaval in France did spread as the Turks wished, but in the process they themselves were involved as well as their Balkan subjects. As early as 1797, by the Treaty of Campo Form io, the French acquired the Ionian Islands from Venice while the remaining V enetian possessions along the Adriatic coast went to Austria. This transfer of Balkan territory did not involve the Turks directly. But next year, in July, 1798, news arrived in C onstantinople of N apoleon’s descent upon Egypt. N ow the period of peace was over. During the following years the Turks floundered around in a great side-eddy which changed according to the direction of the main current of the Continental wars. From 1798 until 1802 the Turks were allied with Eng land and Russia against France. In the process the Russians replaced the French in the Ionian Islands and also gained a foothold in the Danubian Principalities. After 1802 the Turks enjoyed another four years of peace until N apoleon induced them to turn against their form er allies. From 1806 until 1812 the Turks waged a desultory war against the English and the Russians. The Balkans now were affected directly because most of the fighting was conducted in the peninsula and in the Ionian Islands. W hen peace finally was restored by the 1812 Bucharest Treaty and by the 1815 Vienna settlement,
198


The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792-1815 199
the great powers acquired certain outlying border territories. Dalmatia went to Austria, Bessarabia to Russia, and the Ionian Islands to Britain. M ore im portant than the territorial change was the political and ideological impact of the French Revolution and of Napoleon upon the Bal kans. The precise nature and extent of this impact cannot be measured, but there is no doubt th a t French R evolutionary ideology, the stirring events of the Revolution itself, the magnetic personality and tradition-shattering ca reer of Napoleon, and the experiences of a considerable num ber of Balkan soldiers serving in foreign armies during these years— all these left a definite imprint upon the Balkan scene. Certainly the Balkan Peninsula of 1815 was quite different from that which had existed only a generation earlier when the Russian wars ended.
FREN CH RULE IN THE IONIAN ISLANDS
The first concrete im pact of the French Revolution upon the Bal kans came with the signing of the Cam po Form io Treaty (17 9 7 ) following N apoleon’s Italian cam paign. France and A ustria divided the V enetian pos sessions, Austria obtaining Dalmatia, and France the Ionian Islands with the adjoining mainland. The French held the islands for only a few years— from 1797 to 1799 and then again from 1807 to 1814. Yet their rule had a con vulsive effect upon the ancien régime type of society that prevailed. As we saw in C hapter 7, the Ionian Islands differed from the other G reek lands in that they did not fall under Turkish rule. Instead, they belonged to Venice for over four centuries, from 1386 to 1797. During this period they enjoyed a considerable degree of autonomy. Venice contented itself with the exercise of general control through its appointed agents: a governor general'w ith a three-year term, a governor for each of the islands, a grand judge, and three “inquisitors” sent out periodically to investigate conditions and report on the conduct of all public officials. The actual rulers of the islands were the native aristocracy, whose lands and privileges had been recognized by Venice and who in turn supported Venetian rule. Thus Ionian society, unlike that of the Greek mainland, was highly stratified. In fact, the aristocratic families were registered in a Golden Book like that in which their counterparts in Venice were registered. The French undermined this regime by introducing sweeping reforms in their custom ary m anner. They burned the Golden Book, decreed the aboli tion of feudalism, democratized government, freed the peasantry from com pulsory lab o r in the governm ent salt works, reorganized civil and crim inal justice, and extended educational facilities. T he im pact of these m easures is reflected in the following report of the local English consul following the expulsion of the French:
I cannot but mention that the attempts of the French to poison the ’minds of the Peasants of Corfu, were not altogether unsuccessful. Indeed, so multifarious were the arts of the republicans, so great was the encouragement


200 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
they gave to the description of people in question, that one cannot but feel that the Peasants must previously have had the strongest aversion to the French, not to have totally yielded to their seduction. . . . It affords me particular satisfaction to be able to close this account with a few words on the subject of the attachment of the highest orders of the inhabitants of all these Islands, to the English Nation. This attachment is the result of observation and enquiry; it is the more particularly flattering, as it is the more vigorous in the most wealthy, the most judicious, and the best informed.2
N APOLEON INVADES EGYPT:
BALKAN REPERCUSSIONS
French rule in the Ionian Islands ended paradoxically as a conse quence of N apoleon’s invasion of Egypt. T he D irectory in Paris decided to strike at Egypt after deciding that a cross-channel invasion of Britain was too risky. It instructed Napoleon to take possession of Egypt, drive the English out of the Levant, cut a canal through the Isthmus of Suez, and at the same time m aintain friendly relations with the Turks. T he fate of the expedition is well known. N apoleon set sail from Toulon, eluded N elson’s fleet through sheer luck, and landed at A lexandria late in June, 1798. A few weeks later he routed the M ameluke rulers of Egypt at the Battle of the Pyramids. But on August 1 Nelson discovered and destroyed the French lleet at Aboukir Bay. The expedition was doomed, re gardless of how many victories Napoleon might win on land. To make m at ters worse, the O ttom an sultan, Selim 111, the nom inal sovereign of Egypt, was em boldened by N elson’s victory to declare w ar against France on Sep tem ber 1. N apoleon replied with custom ary audacity by invading Syria. He took by assault E l A rish, G aza, and Jaffa, and laid siege to A cre in M arch, 1799. With the assistance of an English fleet the defenders repulsed the French attacks. Napoleon reluctantly gave up his plan of taking C onstanti nople from the east and retreated to Egypt. There he defeated a Turkish army that had been transported by English ships. The victory was unavail ing. So long as N elson controlled the M ed iterranean the F rench rem ained prisoners in Egypt. News from France convinced N apoleon that his future lay in Paris rath er than in the land of the Nile. W ith great secrecy he left A lexandria in a small sloop and successfully ran the English blockade, landing at Frejus on October 9, 1799. Precisely a m onth later he was the first consul of France. A nd two years later the army that he had left behind in Egypt surrendered to the English. N apoleon’s expedition h ad lasting effects throughout the N e ir E ast despite its ultim ate failure. In Egypt it w eakened the position of the arro gant M ameluke warriors, who hitherto had mercilessly exploited the country. In their place appeared M ehemet Ali, an unscrupulous but extraordinarily capable Albanian adventurer. After making himself absolute master of Egypt he proceeded to extend his authority to the Sudan, Arabia, Crete, and Syria.


He built up his military establishm ent to the point where it far surpassed that of his nominal overlord in Constantinople. During the eighteen thirties, as we shall note in C hapter 16, M ehemet Ali was the central figure in a series of crises that convulsed the Near East and almost precipitated a general European war. The Egyptian expedition also had repercussions in the Balkans. It enabled the Russians to strengthen their position in two strategic regions, the Ionian Islands and the Danubian Principalities. When Selim declared war on France in 1798, the Russians, together with the English, rallied to his sup port. The Russians first persuaded the sultan to sign the Treaty of C onstanti nople (January 3, 1799), permitting passage of their warships through the Straits. Then they sent a part of their Black Sea fleet to join the British at A lexandria, while the rem ainder proceeded with the Turkish fleet against the French-held Ionian Islands. By M arch, 1799, all these islands had passed under Russian-Turkish control, while the mainland dependencies, which had been lightly garrisoned by the French, had fallen to the attacks of the Al banian chieftain, Ali Pasha. The Russian invaders were aided by the fact that the French occu pation had lost its glam our with the local population. This was due partly to the anti-French propaganda of the aristocratic elements, which were aided in their efforts by the church. Also, it had become apparent that the French were more concerned with their own strategic interests than with the free dom of the islanders. These interests were stressed by N apoleon in a letter to the Directory: “The islands of Corfu, Zante and Cephalonia,” he wrote, “are of m ore im portance for us than all of Italy. . . . T he Turkish E m pire is crum bling day by day. The possession of the islands will enable us to sup port it [the Em pire] as long as that proves possible, or to take our part of it.” 3 With the expulsion of the French, the Russians and the Turks signed a convention providing that the dependencies be ceded to Turkey and that the Ionian Islands proper be organized as the Septinsular Republic. This re public constituted the first autonom ous G reek state of m odern times. The transition from French to Russian rule was not without its complications. On O ctober 3, 1799, the local British consul reported:
A disturbance lately took place at Zante in consequence of a change made in the internal Government of the Country by a Russian Officer who has been charged to organize the affairs of these Islands. The change in question was in favour of the nobility, who, since the expulsion of the French, had only had an equal share in the Government with those of the inferior Classes. As, then, this change throws all the Government into the hands of the nobility, those of the other Classes became tumultuous, but nothing material happened, and tran quillity was perfectly restored, by the imprisonment of three or four of the Leaders, one of whom has been sentenced to be shot.4
W hen the Russian troops departed, the islanders proceeded to draft a constitution that reflected the egalitarian impact of the few years of French
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792—1815 201


202 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
rule. This constitution of 1801 proclaim ed in its preamble that natural rights confer “perfect equality,” and hence “equal right” to participate in prepar ing a “social contract” and electing representatives. The provisions of the constitution were somewhat less daring, apparently being designed to mollify the aristocracy. Universal suffrage was combined with indirect election, and eligibility to the Executive Council was restricted to the aristoi or landowners who had reached their thirtieth year. These concessions failed to win the cooperation of the aristocracy, with the result that the constitution remained a dead letter. A more conservative constitution was adopted in 1803. By vari ous devices it lim ited participation and representation in governm ent to a small percentage of the population. The oligarchical features of the Venetian regime were to a great extent revived, with the difference that privilege now was based on property rather than on birth qualifications. The constitution rem ained the law of the land until the French reoccupied the islands in 1807 in accordance with the terms of the Tilsit Agreement between Napoleon and T sar A lexander. It is notew orthy th at John C apodistrias, who later won fame as foreign minister of Russia and president of the new Greek state, played a prom inent role in the drafting of this constitution. Meanwhile, the Russians had also exploited their new friendship with the sultan to win im portant concessions in the D anubian Principalities. The Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji (1774) had given the Russian am bassador in C onstantinople the right to “ rem onstrate” in behalf of the R um anian inhabit ants of the Principalities. Now in 1802 the sultan granted more specific con cessions. Henceforth no hospodar might be dispossessed without the express consent of Russia, and no Turks, unless they were m erchants, which was extrem ely rare, were to be allowed to en ter either principality. It is not sur prising that future hospodars showed as much deference to the tsar as to their sultan. Russian infience rem ained predom inant in the Principalities dur ing the next half century until it was smashed by force of arms during the Crimean War.
SELIM JO IN S NAPOLEON:
BALKAN REPERCUSSIONS
The next development that affected the Balkans in the great Conti nental struggle was the form ation of the Third Coalition against Napoleon and the entry of Turkey into the war on the side of Napoleon. Britain and France had signed the Peace of Amiens in M arch, 1802, but hostilities be tween the two powers broke out again in May, 1803. Two years later Russia and A ustria joined England to form the T hird Coalition. The w ar flow be came continental in scope and the danger of Turkish involvement increased correspondingly. The neutrality of the O ttom an Em pire was menaced not only by the spreading conflict between Napoleon and the Third Coalition but also by a serious revolt among the Serbians of the Belgrade pashalik. Under the leader


ship of their formidable Karageorge or Black George, the Serbians rose in protest against the local janissaries, who insolently defied the sultan’s author ity and ruthlessly exploited Christians and Moslems alike. This Serbian revolt is of prim e im portance in the history of the South Slavs and of the entire Balkan Peninsula, and will be considered in detail in C hapter 14. A t this point, however, we shall refer to it only insofar as it affected the international position of the O ttom an Empire. During the course of their struggle the Serbian rebels appealed to A ustria and to Russia for assistance. The two powers reacted according to the exigencies of the great war against Napoleon. Austria favored a speedy settlement of the Serbian insurrection because she was exhausted after the disastrous defeats at Ulm and Austerlitz (O ctober and December, 1805) and dared not risk another war. England also opposed any assistance to the Serbian rebels for fear th at it might drive the T urks into N apoleon’s cam p. She wished above all else to preserve the Russian-Turkish-British bloc that had proved successful against Napoleon when he invaded Egypt a few years earlier. Russia also favored the continuation of this bloc, but she had to take into account her interests in the Balkans that pulled her in the opposite direction. If she ignored the Serbian appeals for the sake of Turkish friend ship she ran the risk of alienating the Serbians and forcing them to turn to N apoleon. This contradiction in R ussia’s position explains her am bivalent policy. She did not oppose the insurrection but neither did she support it outright. Instead, she secretly gave a little financial assistance and at the same time she urged the O ttom an government to reach some settlement with the Serbs. This diplomatic situation changed drastically in the second half of 1806 under the im pact of N apoleon’s victories in C entral E urope and his diplomatic offensive in Constantinople. After Ulm and Austerlitz, Napoleon compelled A ustria to sign the Treaty of Pressburg (D ecem ber 26, 1805), giving him Venetia, Istria, and Dalm atia. W ith these cessions N apoleon gained mastery of the A driatic and a foothold in the Balkans. The next year he forced Prussia out of the war, following his victories at Jena and Auerstadt. Only England and Russia remained, and as a part of his campaign against them he set out to win Turkey to his side. In the summer of 1806 he sent the capable and persuasive General Sebastiani to Constantinople with instructions to persuade the sultan to cancel the treaties granting special privileges to the Russians. The most im portant were the 1799 treaty permitting the Russians to send their warships through the Straits, and the 1802 treaty giving Russia a voice in the tenure of the D anubian hospodars. Napoleon also sent flattering personal letters to the sultan, addressing him as the “very high, very excellent, very powerful, very magnanimous, and invincible Prince, great Em peror of the Moslems, Sultan Selim.” He assured the sultan that nothing was closer to his heart than the glory and the well-being of the Ottom an Em pire. “I have the will to save it, and 1 put my victories at our common disposal.” 5
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792-1815 203


204 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
Selim was impressed by the dazzling prospect pictured by N apoleon and Sébastiani. A lready N apoleon had undone part of C atherine’s w ork by driving the Russians out of Poland. Might not the Ukraine and the Crimea also be recovered by victorious French and Turkish armies fighting side by side? W ith this vision before him Selim proceeded on the course urged by his new friends. H e dismissed the pro-R ussian hospodars in the D anubian P rin cipalities; he reasserted his sovereignty over the Ionian Islands; and he closed the Straits to foreign warships— all these measures violating specific treaty obligations. Russia replied in November, 1806, by sending an army into the D anubian Principalities. The next month Selim declared war on Russia “to avenge the outraged national honor.” At the same time he dispatched an emissary to Napoleon with instructions to conclude an alliance guaranteeing the recovery of the northern shore of the Black Sea. The alliance was never signed. During the following months the Turks learned to their cost the un reliability of great powers engaged in great wars. Sultan Selim’s decision to enter the w ar on the side of N apoleon pro duced an im m ediate reaction on the p art of every great power involved in the Near East. Britain assaulted the O ttom an Em pire from the south by sea, Russia attacked from the north by land, while N apoleon’s envoys in C on stantinople worked feverishly to bolster the decrepit Turkish defenses. Britain used her navy to launch a two-pronged offensive— one against the vital Dardanelles passageway leading to Constantinople and the other against Egypt. This Dardanelles expedition of 1807 had many resemblances to that of 1915. Both expeditions were designed to aid the Russian ally and both eventually failed after coming within a hairbreadth of success. An im portant factor in the failure of this early expedition was the division of au thority between the naval commander, Vice-Admiral Sir John Duckworth, and the diplomatic representative, Ambassador Charles Arbuthnot. On Feb ruary 20, 1807, Duckworth appeared before Constantinople after fighting his way through the Dardanelles. The defenses of the city were in ruinous condition and the panicky Turks were disposed to accept almost any de mands. But Duckworth had instructions to refer political questions to Am bassador A rbuthnot. The latter was in poor health and allowed the Turks to drag out the negotiations while French engineers under the direction of General Sébastiani hastily strengthened the defenses of the capital. W ithin a fortnight D uckw orth’s position h ad becom e m ilitarily untenable. T he sur rounding Turkish fortifications increasingly threatened his ships and he lacked an adequate landing force to take decisive retaliatory action. Duckworth had no alternative but to withdraw. After sustaining considerable losses he re passed the Dardanelles on M arch 3, 1807. A few weeks later General Mackenzie Frazer landed a force in Egypt and occupied the port of Alexandria. But Egypt was now in the capable hands of M ehem et Ali. By a com bination of threats and promises he successfully kept in check the Mameluke chieftains, who inclined toward the English in


vaders. Frazer found himself isolated in Alexandria with his original small contingent of British troops. He failed twice to take nearby Rosetta, where he had hoped to find much-needed provisions. With supplies running short and with Turkish reinforcements pouring into Egypt, Frazer evacuated Alex andria in September, 1807, after considerable loss of both men and reputa tion. From then on the British-Turkish war remained unfought. Meanwhile the Russians in the north had been preparing land opera tions. Their strategy was to organize an anti-Turkish front stretching from the Danubian Principalities to the Ionian Islands, both of which areas they still occupied. The vital link necessary to join the two extremities could be provided only by the Serbians, who already were in the field under Karageorge. Accordingly the Russians now became warmly cordial to the Serbians and proposed close military cooperation. But at the same time the Turks also began to woo the Serbs in order to keep them out of the Russian cam p. L ate in 1806 the Ottom an government announced that it was willing to concede political autonom y to its Serbian subjects. Karageorge now had to choose between autonomy under the sultan and cooperation with the tsar. The latter alternative did not please him alto gether. Certain aspects of the Russian offer smacked more of incorporation than cooperation. In the end, Karageorge sided with the Russians, partly be cause he feared a Franco-Turkish attack from Bosnia and partly because he suspected that his rival, Milosh Obrenovich, would welcome the Russians if he failed to do so. A form al agreem ent was signed on July 10, 1807. A c cording to its term s the Serbian people solicited the protection of the tsar, who was to appoint a governor and certain high officials to organize an ad m inistrative system in the country. Russian garrisons were to occupy local fortresses, and Serbian troops were to be incorporated in the Russian armies and were to be used not only for local defense but also for operations against the T urks and the French in the Balkans. In return the Russians undertook to provide the Serbs with money, munitions, artillery, a medical staff, and a military mission. The sultan countered the Russian strategy by seeking to enlist and to coordinate the forces of the powerful and virtually independent Balkan pashas— Ali in A lbania, Krousseref M ehem et in Bosnia, and O sm an PasvanOglu, and M ustafa in northern Bulgaria. Napoleon aided the sultan by send ing special agents and military advisers to each of these local potentates and by dispatching a force of five hundred artillerym en from D alm atia to C on stantinople. The pashas were willing to cooperate, not out of loyalty to the sultan, but rather because they saw possibilities of personal aggrandizement. Ali attacked the Russians in the Ionian Islands while Krousseref harassed the Serbians from the west. The regular Turkish army, supported by M ustafa, delivered the main attack against the Russians in the Principalities. The latter operation proceeded with considerable success. By June, 1807, the Russians 'had retreated to B ucharest and were preparing for a siege.
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792—1815 205


206 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566—1815
A month later news arrived that a revolution had broken out in Con stantinople and that Sultan Selim III had been deposed.* This immediately paralyzed operations. The janissaries refused to continue the campaign. M us tafa and the other pashas were anxious about their relations with the new regime and retired to their respective domains. Thus the Turks abandoned the campaign at the m om ent when they appeared likely to drive the Russians out of the Principalities. In the same month— July, 1807— another event occurred that was to have even greater repercussions than the revolution in Constantinople. Napoleon met Tsar Alexander at Tilsit and concluded an agreement that left the unfortunate Turks alone against the Russians.
FRENCH IN DALMATIA
Before considering the Tilsit agreement we turn to the Adriatic Coast, where French occupation was making a significant impression. Venice had been the dom inant power in D alm atia since the beginning of the fifteenth century, gaining possession of all the coastal cities except Ragusa or D ubrov nik. T he latter city becam e V enice’s chief com petitor in the A driatic and the Balkans. The Dalmatian hinterland was held at various times by Serbian, Bosnian, Croatian, and later H ungaro-Croatian rulers. A new era began with the Turkish conquest of Dalm atia, completed in 1537. In return for paying tribute, Ragusa remained unmolested during this period of Turkish rule. With the defeat of the Turks at the hands of the Holy League, Dalmatia passed to Venice by the terms of the Karlowitz Treaty of 1699. Dalmatia re mained under Venice until Napoleon destroyed the Italian republic and di vided its possessions with A ustria (C am po Form io Treaty 1797). D alm atia thus came under Hapsburg rule, which lasted until Napoleon intervened and established himself along the Adriatic Coast. By the Treaties of Pressburg (1804) and Schoenbrunn (1 809 ), Napoleon acquired first D alm atia (in cluding the Ragusan R epublic), and then Slovenia, Istria, and Trieste, and parts of Croatia. These territories were combined to form the Illyrian Provinces, which were incorporated as an integral part of the French Empire. French policy was as revolutionary in the Illyrian Provinces as in the Ionian Islands, particularly since there was the same background of aristo cratic Venetian rule in the two regions. The French administrators, headed by M arshal M arm ont and V. Dandolo, freed the serfs and gave them the land that they had tilled. They introduced the Code N apoléon in place of the outworn medieval codes. They undertook reafforestation, land reclamation, and various public health measures. Also, they built splendid roads, reformed the old guild system, and enforced strict decrees against usury. “T here is not a city,” declared M arm ont, “not a village which I have not visited, not a m ountain whose name I do not know.” 0
* F or domestic developments under Selim, see C hapter 13.


Despite these reforms, there was much dissatisfaction with French rule in the later years. One reason was the sweeping conscription measures that the French applied in order to obtain manpower for their armies. Also, the highly centralized adm inistration antagonized the Dalm atians, who re sented being managed from Paris as though they were Norm ans or Bretons. Finally, the trade of the area, which was vital for its well-being, suffered severely from the British cruisers during the long years of Anglo-French war fare. Thus there appears to have been little sorrow when Austrian troops in 1814 drove the French out of the Provinces. It is w orth noting th at the ancient Republic of R agusa disappeared during the French regime, its existence was formally ended by French decree in January, 1808; thereafter Ragusa was first a part of the Illyrian Provinces and then passed, with the rest of Dalm atia, under Hapsburg rule. As im por tant as the extinction of the republic was the inexorable and fatal decline of its trade. The departure of the French did not revive commerce, and Ragusa never recovered her form er prosperity. The basic reason was that Balkan trade routes now were shifting, and leaving all the D alm atian towns stranded on the periphery. Before the nineteenth century much of the trade between the Balkans and Central Europe flowed through the Dalm atian ports. But during the course of the nineteenth century new routes were opened with the building of roads, railroads, and river boats in the Balkan countries. Now goods could be transported back and forth along the new channels more eco nomically and expeditiously than by sending them over the mountains to the Dalmatian Coast. Thus Dalm atia entered a period of decline that has persisted to the present day.
TILSIT, BUCHAREST, VIENNA
Meanwhile, the balance in the Balkans and throughout Europe had been drastically affected by the agreement reached by Napoleon and Alex ander at Tilsit. Napoleon had persuaded Sultan Selim to come to his side only a few months earlier. But the French em peror from the outset had regarded his Turkish ally as a convenient and expendable pawn. A Turkish attack on the Russian rear might prove a useful diversion while he himself delivered the main thrust across the Polish plains. W hen he defeated the Russians de cisively at Friedland on June 14, 1807, the Turks applauded enthusiastically. They imagined that the day was drawing close when the star and the crescent once m ore would be flying over the northern shores of the Black Sea. In reality N apoleon’s victory at F riedland was a disaster for the Turks. N ap o leon no longer had need for a diversion and hence no longer had need for the Turks. Tsar A lexander now was willing to negotiate for peace and N apo leon also was agreeable. If the tsar would abandon his English alliance the two emperors could divide the Continent between them. This was the essence of the treaty they concluded at Tilsit on July 7, 1807. The provisions referring to the N ear East stipulated that France should recover the Ionian Islands and the adjacent territory on the mainland.
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792—1815 207


208 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566—1815
This was immediately implemented, so that the French returned to the Ionian Islands in the summer of 1807. But this second French regime proved as brief as the first. British naval units captured five of the seven islands, leaving only tw o th at rem ained French until the collapse of N apoleon’s em pire in 1814. The Tilsit pact also provided that France was to mediate a peace set tlem ent between Russia and Turkey, and Russia likewise was to serve as mediator between France and England. If either or both of these projected mediations failed, the signatories were to render reciprocal military assist ance. Finally, the treaty provided that if the R usso-Turkish w ar continued “ the tw o powers will com e to an arrangem ent with each other to detach from the yoke and vexations of the Turks all the provinces of the O ttom an E m pire in Europe, the city of Constantinople and the province of Rum elia excepted.” 7 The reference to O ttom an partition was purposefully vague. Alex ander urged a more precise commitment but Napoleon categorically refused. O ne reason th at he gave was that if the em pire were partitioned in tim e of war England would be free to seize a much larger share of the spoils than in time of peace. A nother reason, and the one that probably weighed more heavily with Napoleon, was the problem of what to do with Constantinople. Alexander had aspirations to the O ttom an capital but Napoleon was unwill ing to concede th at prize. This is m ade clear in the testim ony of De M eneval, one of N apoleon’s private secretaries who participated in the conference. According to his account, the tsar and the em peror on one occasion returned from a walk still deeply engaged in conversation. N apoleon asked for a map of Turkey and then put his finger on Constantinople. As if in reply to a demand, and heedless of the fact that De Meneval was listening, he shouted heatedly to A lexander: “C onstantinople, C onstantinople, never! T h a t is the empire of the world.” 8 The Tilsit Treaty strikingly resembles the 1939 German-Russian Nonagression Pact. Both agreements were aimed primarily against Britain; both divided the Continent between the signatories; and both proved to be of short duration. One of the principal factors contributing to the breakdown of the Tilsit Agreement was the problem of Ottoman partition. Napoleon sent Caulaincourt as am bassador to St. Petersburg with explicit instructions that French interests required “that the O ttom an Em pire retain its existing integrity. . . .” !) A lexander rem inded C aulaincourt th at the Tilsit T reaty in cluded a reference to the liberation of the Balkans “from the yoke and vexa tions of the Turks.” Caulaincourt refused to be drawn into a discussion of this m atter. The basic difficulty was that the two em perors had quite different objectives in mind. Napoleon was interested primarily in obtaining Russian support against Britain. Alexander, in contrast, wanted N apoleon to approve and to support the partitioning of the O ttom an Empire. At one point N apoleon concocted a rather fantastic scheme in an effort to work out a common plan of action. He authorized Caulaincourt to discuss O ttom an partition if A lexander would agree to a joint Franco-R ussian


expedition against the British in India. In a personal letter to the tsar, dated February 2, 1808, Napoleon painted a glowing picture of the possibilities of the proposed expedition. With the Russians on the Danube and the French in Dalmatia, a combined army could reach the Bosphorus in a month. And by the time it arrived at the Euphrates, he prophesied, “ England would be trem bling and on its knees before the contin en t.” He adm itted th at the ex pedition was intended more to scare “the London m erchants” to accept peace than actually to occupy India.” 10 A lexander accepted N apoleon’s proposal, but when the division of the O ttom an lands was considered in detail, the conflicting views on the control of the Straits proved irreconcilable. Caulaincourt suggested a com promise. Russia could take Constantinople and the Bosphorus, but France must hold the Dardanelles entrance to the M editerranean. The Russians re fused this proposal. They demanded possession of both ends of the Straits, pointing out, logically enough, th at “O ne w ithout the other is nothing.” 11 In October, 1808, Napoleon and Alexander met at Erfurt and re newed the Tilsit alliance, with certain modifications necessitated by the ac tualities of the day. Alexander agreed to support French policy in the Germ anies while N apoleon sanctioned R ussia’s annexation of F inland from Sweden. Napoleon also conceded W allachia and M oldavia to Russia, and even recognized the transfer as taking effect “from this m om ent.” For the sake of preserving French prestige at Constantinople, Alexander agreed to try to gain the Principalities first by diplomatic means. The effects of the E rfurt Agreem ent were far-reaching. The A ustrians were particularly alarmed by the prospect of Russian expansion to the D anube. The only oth er great power interested in forestalling this eventuality was Britain. Accordingly the Austrians used their influence to end the nomi nal state of war that still prevailed between Britain and Turkey. This was accomplished with the signing of the Treaty of Dardanelles on January 5, 1809, a treaty of particular interest in N ear Eastern history because it con tains the first formal assertion and acceptance of the principle that the Straits were to be closed to warships of foreign powers in time of peace. Britain undertook to respect “that ancient rule of the O ttom an E m pire,” and in so doing she anticipated the 1841 Straits C onvention which com m itted also the other m ajor powers to this rule. Meanwhile the Russians had formally demanded the Danubian Prin cipalities and had been indignantly rejected. In the war that ensued, the prospect for successful Turkish resistance appeared remote. Sebastiani had reported to Paris that the Russian army on the Danube would reach Con stantinople in eighteen days. The estimate seemed reasonable. Anarchy had continued unabated in the O ttom an Em pire since the deposition of Selim the previous year. Robert Adair, the British diplomat who had negotiated the D ardanelles Treaty, reported that disorders were ram pant in the provinces; that the janissaries were the masters of Constantinople; and that “the O tto m an E m pire may be said to be w ithout a governm ent.” 12
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792-1815 209


210 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
Despite these wretched conditions, the Turks withstood the Russian attacks surprisingly well. One reason was the inefficiency and unprepared ness of the Russian generals. Another was the deterioration of Franco-Russian relations, which forced Alexander to keep his best divisions along the western frontier. Thus the fighting swirled around the fortresses in the Danube Valley rather than in the Balkan mountains or in the environs of Constanti nople. The British government now sought to take advantage of the worsen ing Franco-Russian relations to prom ote peace between Russia and Turkey. The opportune moment arrived in the early months of 1812. By that time both belligerents were inclining toward peace. Russia was becoming increas ingly apprehensive of N apoleon’s designs, while T urkey was in no con dition, financially or militarily, to pursue the war further. This situation afforded Stratford Canning, the young and daring successor to Adair at Con stantinople, the first trium ph of his long diplom atic career. It was Canning who established contact between sultan and tsar, and gradually overcame their mutual suspicions. Napoleon frantically attem pted to prevent the rap prochement. He wrote to his am bassador in Constantinople: “If Sultan M ahm ud will take the field with one-hundred thousand m en, 1 will prom ise him M oldavia, W allachia, and even the C rim ea.” 13 But the T urks, not as im pressed by N apoleon’s prom ises as they had been a few years earlier, ac cepted a compromise settlement with the Russians and signed the Treaty of Bucharest on May 28, 1812. By this treaty the Russians gave up their claims to M oldavia and W allachia but retained the province of Bessarabia. They also made a ges ture in behalf of their Serbian allies by inserting a clause providing for amnesty and autonomy. But the Serbian fortresses were to be surrendered to the sultan and were to be occupied again by Turkish garrisons. This latter provision was the decisive one. The Serbs, for all practical purposes, had been left to their fate. We shall see in a later chapter that the Turks ignored their commitments and soon resumed their form er practices in the Serbian lands. The O ttom an Em pire had no part in the stirring dram a that unfolded during the years following the conclusion of the Bucharest Treaty. The dis astrous invasion of Russia, the war of Germ an liberation, the H undred Days — none of these directly affected Southeastern Europe. Likewise, the diplo mats at the Congress of Vienna concerned themselves with the problems of Poland, the Germanies, the Italian states, but scarcely at all with those of the N ear E ast. T he sultan did try to recover B essarabia through the, good offices of A ustria, but he was inform ed that such a retrocession was out of the question. Likewise, Castlereagh proposed that the great powers sign a Treaty of G uarantee that would apply not only to the settlement in Central and W estern Europe but also to the status quo in the N ear East. Alexander replied that he did not consider the provisions of the Treaty of Bucharest as final. He had been willing to sign the treaty in 1812 under the threat of


N apoleon’s invasion. B ut now th at R ussia was the dom inant m ilitary pow er on the Continent he demanded additional concessions designed to establish Russian hegemony over the Black Sea and the Caspian. The sultan rejected a guarantee under such conditions, and C astlereagh’s proposal was dropped. Thus Balkan frontiers were not as much affected by the Vienna set tlem ent as might have been expected after so many years of war and revolu tionary upheaval. The Russians remained in Bessarabia, the A ustrians ac quired the original Venetian possessions along the Adriatic coast, while the Ionian Islands were to form, under British protection, an independent state to be known as “the United States of the Ionian Islands.” The Russians and the Austrians retained their newly won Balkan provinces until W orld W ar I, but the British in 1863 ceded the Ionian Islands to the Greek kingdom es tablished in the interval.
BALKAN AFTERMATH
M ore im portant than the shift in frontiers were the psychological and ideological impacts of the French Revolution and of Napoleon upon the Balkans. Despite the relative isolation of the peninsula, revolutionary ideas and literature did seep in through various channels. M erchants and mariners, steadily increasing in numbers during these years, were quick to absorb rev olutionary doctrines while abroad, and usually spread their new ideas with zeal and enthusiasm among their discontented countrymen. Students were beginning to enroll in W estern universities, and as a rule they returned home ardent admirers of W estern institutions and ideologies. Im portant also were the French merchants, adventurers, secretaries, and tutors who were begin ning to appear in appreciable numbers, especially in the D anubian Principal ities. Finally, there was the systematic propaganda directed from Paris with the aim of undermining O ttom an authority. This was particularly intensive during the years of Franco-Turkish hostility. Needless to say, this propaganda was designed to utilize the local populations as pawns of French diplomacy. In the spring of 1797 N apoleon instructed his com m ander in the Ionian Isles to “flatter the inhabitants . . . and to speak of the Greece of Athens and of Sparta in the various proclam ations w hich you will issue.” 14 W hatever the motives and the means of propagation, there can be no doubt about the very real influence of French Revolutionary ideology upon certain sections of the Balkan people. M asonic lodges and other secret organizations were established in the principal towns. Newspapers were founded dedicated to the spreading of revolutionary principles and to the overthrow of Turkish domination. The revolutionary ideology may not have been transferred intact from W est to East, and the concepts of liberty, equality, and fraternity may have been but barely comprehended. Yet the uprisings in Paris and the exploits of Napoleon made the subject Balkan peoples more restless, more independent, and more determined to win their freedom. A contem porary Greek revolutionary testified: “The French Rev olution in general aw akened the m inds of all men. . . . All the C hristians of
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792-1815 211


212 Age of Ottoman Decline: 1566-1815
the N ear East prayed to G od that France should wage war against the Turks, and they believed that they would be freed. . . . But when Napoleon made no m ove, they began to take m easures for freeing them selves.” 15 Similar is the testimony of another Greek revolutionary, the colorful Theodore Kolokotrones, who after being a klepht in the Peloponnesus, served under the British in the Ionian Islands and then assumed a leading role in the G reek W ar of Independence:
According to my judgement, the French Revolution and the doings of Napoleon opened the eyes of the world. The nations knew nothing before, and the people thought that kings were gods upon the earth and that they were bound to say that whatever they did was well done. Through this present change it is more difficult to rule the people.10
The influence of France varied greatly from one Balkan region to another. It was quite m arked in the A driatic lands where French rule pre vailed the longest. In fact, the creation of the Illyrian Provinces stimulated a few decades later an Illyrian or Yugoslav national movement of some im portance. One reason for this development was that the French had encour aged the cultural as well as the economic developm ent of the Provinces. They built a network of secondary, commercial, and agricultural schools. The na tional language was used in these schools and in the new spapers which now appeared. The French also subsidized the publication of grammars and dic tionaries and encouraged the organization of a national theater. Thus al though the nam e “ Illyria” had no national m eaning to N apoleon, it did possess th at connotation in the Provinces. In a proclam ation of M arch 10, 1810, Colonel Mangin announced to the people, “You are now a part of a large nation, confederated with a great and powerful empire; you have be come Illyrians and you must make yourselves worthy of the protection of N apoleon, the savior of your coun try .” 17 It is notew orthy th at French influence extended across the frontier am ong the South Slavs under A ustrian and O ttom an rule.· The leader of the Serbian revolt, K arageorge, sent a letter dated A ugust 16, 1809, to Ledouix, French vice-consul at Bucharest, asking for the
powerful protection of the Great Napoleon. . . . The Serbians assure his Imperial and Royal Majesty that their compatriots, the inhabitants of Bosnia and of the duchy of Herzegovina, and those who live in the kingdom of Hungary, not ex cepting the Bulgarians who derive, so to speak, from the same branch, will follow their example at the first move which is made.18
The significance of the French interlude in the A driatic is that for the first time it united Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, and stimulated 'among them the idea of Illyrian or Yugoslav unity and independence. It was still only an idea. It could not be called a movement. It did not stir the masses. But it did provide a beginning— a tradition for the powerful Illyrian move m ent of the 1830’s and 1840’s, to be discussed in C hapter 14. This m ove ment was to develop under the stimulus of Hapsburg repression after 1815


and of the writings of South Slav writers and scholars. In 1847 a French so ciologist who had journeyed through the Balkans reported that, in creating the Illyrian Provinces, Napoleon “had truly touched the national fiber of the neighboring peoples of the A driatic.” They believed, he wrote, that having freed them from the Austrian yoke, Napoleon had planned to disrupt the O ttom an E m pire and unify all Y ugoslavs: “ Even today it is still like a happy dream which their poets write about, and one cannot persuade them that the Illyria of the future never existed in N apoleon’s m ind.” 19 Finally it should be noted that during this period all the pow ers in volved in the Balkans enrolled in their respective armies a considerable num ber of recruits from the local populations. This military service was quite significant, opening new horizons for the recruits as well as instructing them in military techniques. Before this time a considerable num ber of Serbians had served in the A ustrian arm ies, and these veterans, K arageorge being prom inent am ong them , played an im portant role in the 1804 Serbian up rising. Now, during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic years, both Serbian and R um anian recruits served in the R ussian forces. It is note worthy that Tudor Vladimirescu, who was to lead the Rumanian peasants in 1821, had fought with the Russians against the T urks in 1806 and had risen to the rank of lieutenant. The Greeks also enrolled in foreign armies, many klephts crossing over from the mainland to the Ionian Islands for that purpose. The French organized these w arlike recruits into the “C hausseurs d ’O rien t” ; the Russians formed several companies with native comm anders; and Sir Richard Church, a British officer, organized a regim ent of the Duke of Y ork’s G reek Light Infantry. He reported on November 12, 1811, that he had been able to transform his men “from the most lawless of mankind, not only into good soldiers, but also into praiseworthy members of civilized society. . . . The num ber of recruits that flock to me from all parts of G reece is really ex trao r dinary. . . . Should governm ent wish for men, I will answer from my character alone in this country to raise 6000 or 8000 men in as m any m onths.” 20 With the end of the war the British government disbanded the Greek units, to the disgust of Sir Richard, who was an ardent philhellene and who saw the leaders of a future national uprising in the Greek soldiers he was train ing. His hopes were not in vain. The Greeks who served under him, as well as under the French and the Russians, provided much of the leadership in the G reek W ar of Independence that broke out only six years after the Vienna settlem ent.
The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon: 1792-1815 213




1815 1878
Pari IV. Agi; nf Nationalism
1 3. D y n a m ic s o f B a lk a n P o litics: 1 8 1 5 - 1 8 7 8
II
.MMa v i n g r e a c h e d t h e t h r e s h o l d of the nineteenth
century we enter a new epoch of Balkan history. We call this the Age of N ationalism , and the reason for doing so is th at during the course of the nineteenth century the burgeoning national consciousness of the Balkan peo ples exploded into a series of revolutionary movements against Turkish rule. This national awakening, and the successful uprisings that followed, were re sponsible for the striking difference between the Balkan Peninsula of 1815 and that of 1878: the one ruled in its entirety by the O ttom an power and the other including three independent Balkan states and a fourth that was fully autonom ous. It does not follow th at nationalism was the only force at w ork in the Balkan world between 1815 and 1878. Indeed, the dynamics of Balkan politics during these decades may be defined as the interplay of three factors: the continued decline of the O ttom an Em pire, the awakening of the subject nationalities, and the expanding interests and increasing rivalries of the vari ous great powers. In this chapter we shall consider each of those factors in turn.
CONTINUED OTTOM AN DECLINE
From the purely territorial viewpoint the O ttom an Em pire in the early nineteenth century was still a great world power. One of the largest states in Europe, it also sprawled over vast areas in Asia and Africa. In the latter continent it extended from Algiers to Egypt; in Asia it embraced A rabia, the Levant states, M esopotam ia, and Anatolia; in Europe it stretched from the Pruth River in the east to the Dalmatian coast in the west and to the tip of Greece in the south. This façade of empire was impressive, but the substance behind the façade was very different. In earlier chapters we considered the causes and manifestations of O ttom an decline— the disintegration of the unique admin istrative system, the dem oralization of the armed forces, and the heedless
215


216


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815—1878 111
exploitation of the peasantry. This downward trend continued unabated after the sixteenth century, with the exception of brief periods of superficial recov ery. By the nineteenth century the results of this decline were plainly evident throughout the imperial structure. The empire was divided into twenty-six provinces or eyalets, of which five were in the Balkan Peninsula. T he bureaucracy that governed these te r ritories bore little resemblance to the splendid organization of early times. The original slave adm inistrator with his superb training and strict merit system of advancement had given way to the officeholder who normally bought his position and who regarded it as a private investment that should be made to yield as high a return as possible. This officeholder frequently was indebted to a wealthy Armenian or Greek banker who loaned the original capital and who added his exaction to that of the titular official. The same principle applied in taxation as in adm inistration. A hierarchy of tax farm ers bought and sold the tax collection concessions, each vendor pocketing a sub stantial profit. The net result was a system that combined maximum exploita tion of subject with minimum benefit for government. The one redeeming feature was that the sultan was unable to enforce this misgovernment throughout the empire. Most of the provinces had long since passed out of his control. T he Barbary States of N orth A frica nom inally recognized his suzerainty but, in fact, had been independent for centuries. In Egypt the im perial standard was perm itted to fly over C airo, but the real m asters of that rich province were the Mameluke chieftains and, later, Mehemet Ali. Likewise, the governors of the great provinces of Syria and Meso potam ia ruled their domains with little or no regard for Constantinople. In the Arabian Peninsula not even the semblance of imperial authority remained. In that original home of Islam the fundamentalist W ahabite sect had arisen in protest against the corruption of the religion of the Prophet and had driven the Turks completely out of the peninsula. Even in Anatolia, the province closest to Constantinople, only two eyalets remained under the sul ta n ’s control. T urning to the Balkan provinces of the em pire, we find the situation basically similar. The fact that the population here was predominantly Chris tian was of no p articular significance. Class distinctions in the O ttom an E m pire were, in certain respects, more meaningful than those of religion. The ruling oligarchy in C onstantinople included C hristians and Jews as well as Moslems. Likewise, the peasant in the provinces was not exempt from ex ploitation simply because he happened to be a Moslem. Sometimes he was worse off than his Christian neighbor, who was more likely to have some measure of autonom y. On m ore than one occasion in the nineteenth century, Christians and Turks living in the Balkan provinces combined to rid them selves of the intolerable oppression of tyrannical pashas or of undisciplined janissaries. O ttom an adm inistration in the B alkan provinces was as chaotic as


216


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815—1878 217
exploitation of the peasantry. This downward trend continued unabated after the sixteenth century, with the exception of brief periods of superficial recov ery. By the nineteenth century the results of this decline were plainly evident throughout the imperial structure. The empire was divided into twenty-six provinces or eyalets, of which five were in the B alkan Peninsula. T he bureaucracy that governed these te r ritories bore little resemblance to the splendid organization of early times. The original slave adm inistrator with his superb training and strict merit system of advancem ent had given way to the officeholder who normally bought his position and who regarded it as a private investm ent th at should be made to yield as high a return as possible. This officeholder frequently was indebted to a wealthy Armenian or Greek banker who loaned the original capital and who added his exaction to that of the titular official. The same principle applied in taxation as in adm inistration. A hierarchy of tax farm ers bought and sold the tax collection concessions, each vendor pocketing a sub stantial profit. The net result was a system that combined maximum exploita tion of subject with minimum benefit for government. The one redeeming feature was that the sultan was unable to enforce this misgovernment throughout the empire. Most of the provinces had long since passed out of his control. The Barbary States of North Africa nominally recognized his suzerainty but, in fact, had been independent for centuries. In Egypt the im perial standard was perm itted to fly over C airo, but the real masters of that rich province were the Mameluke chieftains and, later, Mehemet Ali. Likewise, the governors of the great provinces of Syria and Meso potam ia ruled their dom ains with little or no regard for Constantinople. In the Arabian Peninsula not even the semblance of imperial authority remained. In that original home of Islam the fundam entalist W ahabite sect had arisen in protest against the corruption of the religion of the Prophet and had driven the T urks com pletely out of the peninsula. Even in A natolia, the province closest to Constantinople, only two eyalets remained under the sul tan ’s control. Turning to the Balkan provinces of the empire, we find the situation basically similar. The fact that the population here was predominantly Chris tian was of no p articular significance. Class distinctions in the O ttom an E m pire were, in certain respects, more meaningful than those of religion. The ruling oligarchy in Constantinople included Christians and Jews as well as M oslem s. Likewise, the peasant in the provinces was not exem pt from ex ploitation simply because he happened to be a Moslem. Sometimes he was worse off than his Christian neighbor, who was more likely to have some m easure of autonom y. O n m ore th an one occasion in the nineteenth century, Christians and Turks living in the Balkan provinces combined to rid them selves of the intolerable oppression of tyrannical pashas or of undisciplined janissaries. O ttom an adm inistration in the B alkan provinces was as chaotic as


218 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
in the rest of the empire. Beginning with the islands, we find Crete full of janissaries who usually were able to defy the local pasha. Their depredations were so devastating th at the island’s trade and prosperity suffered severely. The Ionian Islands on the west coast of Greece had passed under British protection following the Napoleonic W ars. To the north of the Danube the M oldavian and W allachian Principalities had an autonomous administration under hospodars or governors selected from the leading Greek phanariote families of Constantinople. Furtherm ore, Russia possessed special treaty con cessions in the Principalities in regard to the establishm ent of consulates and the protection of all G reek O rthodox inhabitants. The O ttom an government also found it necessary to accept the de facto independence of certain m oun tainous and inaccessible parts of the peninsula— northern Albania, M onte negro, and a few regions in Greece. Finally, the Serbians of the Belgrade pashalik were in open revolt against janissary abuse from 1804 onward. Shortly after the conclusion of the Napoleonic W ars they were to win an autonomous status within the O ttom an Empire. Two of the most prom inent personalities in the Balkan Peninsula in the early nineteenth century were Ali Pasha and Osm an Pasvan-Oglu, the de facto rulers of southern Albania and northern Bulgaria, respectively. In broad outline, their careers and policies were similar, and they are of sig nificance for us in that they reflect the nature of O ttom an rule in the penin sula. Both men began their careers in areas where chaotic conditions prevailed and where the populace suffered from the depredations of bandits, local chieftains, and tax collectors. Both started out as brigands and gradually carved out personal domains by a combination of complete ruthlessness and unscrupulous exploitation of every opportunity. In both cases the imperial government attem pted to check these powerful potentates but, finding this to be beyond its resources, ended by recognizing their authority. Both men were able to assert and retain their authority because they satisfied local needs and won the support of the local population. It is true that they made liberal use of force and of outright terrorism. Such procedures as the m urder of invited guests and the roasting of enemies on the spit were employed frequently and effectively by Ali and Pasvan-Oglu. But they are remem bered not because of such lurid practices, which were common and accepted at the time, but rather because they were able to restore order, to protect the poor from the extortions of the beys and the tax collectors, and to provide security for their Christian subjects. O n this point the testim ony of contem porary observers is em phatic and revealing. A n English traveler, for exam ple, reported th a t Pasvan-O glu’s capital, Vidin, “owes its rise chiefly to the em igration of poor families from W allachia and M oldavia, who pass over the D anube, and take refuge in Bul garia, to avoid the tyranny and extortion practised by Greek tax-gatherers, and their native boyars. . . . ” 1 Likewise a British envoy in 1803 dispatched to his governm ent the following appraisal of Ali and his adm inistration.


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815-1878 2 1 9
H e [Ali] is prom pt in his measures, full of energy, and professes a very quick and nice discernment of Individual Character; but his want of education, and a life spent in arms, have rendered him in his G overnm ent cruel and despotic, because he found it to his advantage. H e has however established the most per fect tranquility, and security of Persons and Property throughout his dominions, whose Inhabitants, Greeks and Turks, are richer, happier, more contented than in any other part of European Turkey.2
In conclusion, it is ap parent that the O ttom an governm ent in the early nineteenth century was a government in little more than name. M ost of the em pire it could not govern; the rem ainder it misgoverned. T he need was still the same as it had been for over two centuries— a wholesale reor ganization of the imperial structure with the aim of establishing the authority of the central government and also of improving the quality of its adm inis tration. At the turn of the century a sultan came to the throne with sufficient wit and sense of responsibility to appreciate this need. Selim III ascended the O ttom an throne in 1789— a symbolically ap propriate year, given the revolutionary nature of his ideas and aspirations. Selim was not the first sultan to recognize the need for reform in the empire. But he was the first to realize that the refortn measures must look forward ra th e r than backw ard. He was the first to consider reform in term s of bor rowing from the W est rather than returning to the days of Suleiman. His plans included the reorganization of administration, the revamping of educa tion, and even the emancipation of women. But the prerequisite for these and other reforms was the abolition or the complete transformation of the janis sary corps. This body had become a degenerate and insubordinate Praetorian G uard, feared only by the people it was designed to defend. Its utter w orth lessness had become apparent during the wars with Russia. Regiments showed up at the front with a total of five or six men. A t the sight of the enemy the janissaries were likely to break and run, pausing only to plunder their own camp. Several sultans had attem pted in the past to curb or destroy this per nicious body. They all failed because the ulema had sided with the janissaries to form a powerful coalition of religious and military vested interests. Also, im portant economic interests supported the status quo because of the revenue derived from speculation in janissary pay tickets. Each janissary had a docu ment or sealed pay ticket which served as a passbook to receive pay. In 1740 permission was granted to buy and sell these pay tickets. They quickly be came a type of stock certificate, eagerly bought up by officials and stock speculators in no way connected with the janissary corps. The scramble for tickets led inevitably to wholesale padding of the rolls. The names of dead janissaries were kept on the rolls and their tickets were bought and sold. M us tafa III attem pted to abolish this glaring abuse in 1768. The janissary com m ander informed him that only half of the money paid out by the treasury actually reached the soldiers. And when he added that the other half found


220 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
its way to the ulema, the palace officials, and the ministers of state, M ustafa discreetly decided to drop his plan. Selim was more persistent than M ustafa, but in the end the com bina tion of religious, military, and economic interests overwhelmed him. At the outset he was able to make some headway because of the popular revulsion against the scandalous showing of the janissaries during the wars with Russia. W ith the aid of a small group of like-minded ministers Selim began with peripheral measures designed to improve the imperial defenses. The Straits fortifications were repaired, new warships built, output of gunpowder in creased, engineering and navigation schools reorganized under foreign direc tion, and V au b an ’s classic treatise, The Assault and Defense of Fortified Positions, was translated and published. In 1793 Selim took the decisive step of establishing the Nizarnidjedid or New Regulations Army. This was to be a W estern type of army with common uniforms, specified enlistment and recruitm ent procedures, Euro pean methods of training, and modern arm am ents including the latest types of artillery, and the bayonet in place of the traditional scimitar. The plans called for an initial recruitm ent of 1,600 men and a gradual increase to 12,000. From the beginning the nizam i dem onstrated their worth. In 1798 they distinguished themselves at the siege of Acre, where they successfully held out against the great Napoleon himself. Likewise, in 1803 and 1804 they dispersed brigand bands that were ravaging the province of Rum elia in the Balkans. Encouraged by this showing, Selim made three successive attempts, in 1805, 1806, and 1807, to bring the New Arm y up to full strength. On each occasion he was checked by the opposition of the janissaries and their allies. Finally, in M ay, 1808, he was forced to abdicate in favor of his nephew, M ustafa IV. The latter ruled less than three m onths before being ousted by the pash a of R uschuk in B ulgaria. This local potentate, popularly known as B airaktar, or Standard-B earer, espoused Sclim ’s reform program , largely be cause of the influence of an interesting group known as the Ruschuk Friends. The Friends were mostly form er ministers of Selim who, following the abdication of their master, had looked for support in order to resume their reform program. They turned to Bairaktar because he was known to be dissatisfied with the new regime in Constantinople and furtherm ore he had a standing army of thirty thousand men to do his bidding. Accordingly these reform ers gathered in Ruschuk, where they made plans to overthrow Sultan M ustafa and restore Selim. They apparently enjoyed widespread support from patriotic elements because the very existence of European Turkey was now in jeopardy following the Tilsit Agreement between Napoleon and Tsar'A lexander, discussed in C hapter 12. In mid-July, 1808, Bairaktar m arched upon Constantinople and seized the capital, but the unfortunate Selim was strangled before his rescuers could reach the palace. B airaktar thereupon put on the throne M ahmud II, a nephew and also a pupil of Selim. B airaktar assumed the posts of grand


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815—1878 221
vizir and minister of war, while various members of the Ruschuk Friends com prised the cabinet. Having gained control of the empire, Bairaktar and his ministers dealt ruthlessly with the opposition and especially with the janis saries. They also proceeded to apply their reform program with more firmness and energy than Selim had ever displayed. The janissaries and their supporters, as might be expected, were un alterably opposed to the new regime. Their opportunity came when Bairaktar was forced to send most of his men to Ruschuk to meet the attack of a neigh boring pasha. The janissaries prom ptly rose in revolt on N ovem ber 14, 1808, murdered Bairaktar, and for several days roamed the streets, hunting down the Ruschuk Friends and their supporters. Some five thousand homes were burned and eight to ten thousand persons were killed during the reign of terror. Sultan M ahmud managed to survive the carnage. He had taken the precaution of strangling M ustafa a few days earlier and, because he was the last surviving member of the O ttom an house, the janissaries had no choice but to accept him. They did, however, compel M ahmud to renounce all that Selim and Bairaktar had tried to achieve. By the end of 1808 the O ttom an Empire seemed as unchanging as ever. The combination of economic, mili tary, and religious vested interests appeared invincible. Selim and Bairaktar had tried to do what Peter the G reat of Russia had accom plished a century earlier. T hey failed in their attem pt for various reasons. In the case of Selim, personal weakness and vacillation were in volved. Certainly he lacked the vigor and firmness of Peter. But personal failings do not alone explain the course of events in C onstantinople. B airak tar gave abundant evidence of courage and decisiveness, but he also was ground down. It is necessary to take into account other factors, including the continued foreign wars which distracted Selim and B airaktar and enabled their opponents to seize the initiative. Also, it should be recognized that the forces of reaction that Selim and Bairaktar had to cope with were much stronger than those that opposed Peter. The janissaries had a broader base in O ttom an society than the Streltzi in the Russian. Likewise, the M oslem ulema was more form idable than the O rthodox Russian clergy. It was firmly entrenched in the theocratic O ttom an Em pire and usually could count on the unquestioning support of the devout population. It was a com bination, then, of personal factors, foreign distractions, and the domestic balance of power that explains the doom of the first outstanding O ttom an reformers, Selim and Bairaktar. The failure to reform the empire was of the utm ost significance for the Balkan peoples. It assured the successful culmination of their national movements. W ith the trium ph of the janissaries it became apparent that na tional aspirations could not be satisfied within the imperial framework. Henceforth the Balkan peoples could expect no relief from misgovernment, and they could presume some chance for victory if they made a bid for inde pendence.


222 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
REVOLUTIONARY BALKAN NATIONALISM
The Balkan world during the early O ttom an period was static and theocratic. The Orthodox Church dominated education, written literature, and intellectual life in general. In the realm of politics, also, the leadership of the church was unchallenged. National policies and national objectives were virtually nonexistent. The Balkan world during these early centuries was a nonnational O rthodox world, and Balkan politics were conceived of and expressed in nonnational O rthodox terms. This O rthodox hegemony, as we noted in C hapter 9, was underm ined by certain new forces that made their appearance long before the nineteenth century: the Age of Theocracy super seded by the Age of Nationalism as a result of the decline of the O ttom an Em pire with the accompanying military and administrative deterioration; the rise of chifliks, which produced in certain regions a land-hungry and revolu tionary peasantry; the growth of commerce and industry, which introduced to the Balkan scene new social elements with new ideas; and the great increase in the num ber of contacts with the rest of Europe, which led to a correspond ing increase in the influence of foreign ideologies. These new forces bore fruit when the various Balkan peoples during the course of the nineteenth century took up arms for liberation from O tto man rule. We shall see in the following chapters that these nationalist move ments were molded by varying combinations of the new forces. It does not follow, however, that Balkan nationalism was homogeneous or coordinated. The awakening of the Balkan peoples did not culminate in a united penin sular revolution against O ttom an rule. Instead, there occurred a series of independent uprisings spread over the whole of the nineteenth century. And in place of comm on effort there was continual rivalry and occasional open conflict. One reason for this dissension was that the tempo of national re vival varied greatly from people to people. The Greeks came first because of certain favorable circumstances: their numerous contacts with the West; their glorious classical heritage, which stimulated national pride; and their Greek O rthodox Church, which embodied and preserved national consciousness. After the Greeks came the Serbs. They led the other South Slavs because of the high degree of local self-government and because of the stimulating in fluence of the large Serbian settlements in southern Hungary. These advan tages enjoyed by the Greeks and the Serbs suggest the reasons for the slower rate of national revival among the other Balkan peoples. The Bulgars had no direct ties with the West and were located near the O ttom an capital and the solid Turkish settlements in Thrace and eastern M acedonia. The Rum anians suffered from a sharp social stratification which was unique in the Balkan Peninsula and which produced a cultivated upper class and an inert peasant mass. Finally, the A lbanians were the worst off with their primitive tribal organization and their division among three creeds, Orthodoxy, Catholicism, and Islam.


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815-1878 223
These factors explain why in place of a common Balkan revolution there occurred separate uprisings ranging from the early nineteenth century to the early twentieth. Another factor that contributed to Balkan disunity was an underlying and persistent hostility between the Greeks on the one hand and the Slavs and the Rum anians on the other. One reason for this hostility was the G reek dom ination of the O rthodox ecclesiastical machinery in the Balkans. We saw in Chapter 7 that the abolition of the Serbian Patriarchate of Ipek (P ec) in 1766, and of the Bulgarian Archbishopric of O hrid in the following year, placed both Serbians and Bulgarians under the direct juris diction of the G reek patriarchs in Constantinople. This arrangem ent con tinued until 1831 when the Patriarchate recognized the autonom y of the Ser bian church, and until 1870 when the Bulgarians obtained a firman from the sultan establishing their church as independent of the Ecumenical Patriar chate.* During the intervening decades G reek prelates filled virtually all the top church posts in the northern Balkans, while the Greek language was used in the church services and in the church schools. This situation led to charges that the Greeks were conducting a de liberate Hellenization and denationalization campaign against the South Slavs. In actual fact, Greek cultural and ecclesiastical hegemony was more the prod uct of historical tradition and contem porary reality. N either the South Slavs nor the Rum anians had at the tim e the trained personnel necessary to fill ecclesiastical posts, or the literary languages and national literatures needed for educational purposes. The Rum anian historian Nicholas Iorga em pha sized this point as follows:
For many years a struggle has been conducted in my country against w hat is called “the G reek oppression.” F or forty years I have opposed this m ani festly erroneous viewpoint. . . . If there was a G reek school [in R um ania], it was not a national school of contem porary Hellenism; it was for the whole world, like the Latin schools in the West. It provided a com m on bond with its use of one language and its propagation of one body of thought. . . . Com mon life under the Ottoman Empire, cooperation within the context of a civilization and one of the great languages of antiquity, made possible continual rapport [among the Balkan Christians].3
The fact remains, however, that with the first signs of national con sciousness, the northern Balkan peoples naturally turned against the cultural and ecclesiastical domination of the Patriarchate. It did not m atter that the G reek nationalists also found themselves at odds with the essentially anti national church hierarchy, to be discussed in C hapter 15. The South Slavs and the Rum anians understandably identified the Greek-dom inated church with the Greek nationality, and became generally anti-Greek. The northern Balkan peoples also had economic grievances against the Greeks. They heartily disliked the Greek financiers, who frequently were the local tax farmers and moneylenders. Underlying these specific considera
* See C hapter 19.


224 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
tions were the traditional antipathy and distrust of the peasant for the man from the city. The overwhelming majority of the Greeks at this time were engaged in agriculture. B ut the type of G reek that the R um anian and Slav peasants had dealings with was likely to be a m erchant, a governm ent official, a moneylender, a tax farm er, or an ecclesiastic. Hence the popular conception of the Greek as being well educated and intelligent, but also cunning, avari cious, and unscrupulous. A Serbian leader stated in 1810 that the Byzantine em perors had called in the Turks to destroy the Serbian empire, and that “from that period to the present day there has persisted, despite the religious tie, national enmity between the Serbians and the G reeks.” 4 Likewise, a com m on saying of the R um anian peasants is, “The G reek is a pernicious dis ease who penetrates to the bone.” 6 The Greeks naturally reciprocated in kind. They tended to look down upon the other Balkan peoples as dull and ignorant country bumpkins. A contemporary observer relates:
The Greeks despise the Sclavonians, calling them barbarians and “kondrokephalai” (w ooden-heads), as they did even in the time of Michael Palaeologus, 1261: on the other hand the astute and wily spirit of the G reeks is utterly repugnant to the Sclavonians, who regard them with jealousy and distrust.“
The B alkan peoples were divided within themselves as well as among themselves. M erchants, mariners, and land-hungry peasants were likely to be dissatisfied with the imperial status quo. But the Balkan peoples had certain religious and secular leaders who were closely associated with the O ttom an im perial structure and who, therefore, were not so ready to turn against it. This was the case with the higher clergy who, as we saw in C hapter 9, op posed revolutionary agitation because of its rationalism , secularism, and W estern origin, and also because it was a threat to their privileged position and their vested interests within the O ttom an framework. A nother im portant group that was lukewarm to change was the class of primates, known to the Greeks as kodjabashi, to the Bulgarians as chorbaji, and to the Serbs as knezes. The typical prim ate was a com bination landowner, adm inistrative agent, and tax collector. He collected taxes, tried civil cases, served as intermediary between the Turkish overlord and the Christian sub ject, and, in the more enlightened regions, concerned himself with public health, welfare, and education. He was elected by the local Christian popu lation, yet he and his fellow prim ates constituted in most cases a self-perpetuating and all-powerful oligarchy. The average peasant, voting by show of hand, was practically forced to accept the leadership of the local landowners, who dom inated the community by virtue of their wealth, their influence' with the O ttom an authorities;, and their power as tax collectors. In m ost regions the primates form ed a provincial aristocracy with an almost exclusive and hereditary control over local government. A t best these primates strove to wrest concessions from the Turkish officials, to dissuade them from undesir able actions, and to raise the health and educational standards of their con


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815—1878 225
stitucnts. At worst they used their authority to exploit their fellow Christians, who bitterly referred to them as “Christian Turks.” In either case the primates, by virtue of their function as interm edi aries between rulers and ruled, had no choice but to m aintain good relations with the Turkish officials. Their very existence as a class required acceptance and, if necessary, support of O ttom an rule. T hus the prim ates throughout the peninsula usually were opposed to revolution unless they could see their way clear to a successful outcome and to the preservation of their position and interests. Contemporary travelers frequently reported that the Balkan peasants complained openly that they suffered more from the exactions of their own prim ates and clergy than of the Turkish officials. One English traveler, for example, relates that he encountered “a saying common among the Greeks, that the country labours under three curses, the priests, the cogia bashis and the T urks; always placing the plagues in this ord er.” 7 This point should not be exaggerated, but neither should it be ignored. O ttom an administration, with its extrem e decentralization, created certain native vested interests th at inevitably were committed to the status quo. Lord Broughton was so im pressed by this factor when he journeyed through the Greek lands in 1810 that he concluded that a national uprising was out of the question.
Any general revolution of the G reeks, independent of foreign aid, is quite im practicable; for notw ithstanding the great mass of the people, as is the case in all insurrections, has feeling and spirit enough to make the attem pt, yet most of the higher classes, and all the clergy . . . are apparently willing to acquiesce in their present condition. The Patriarch and Princess of the Fanal [Phanariotes] are at the devotion of the Porte. The primates of the towns and the richer merchants would be cau tious not to move, unless they might be certain of benefiting by the change; and of this backw ardness in the chiefs of their nation, the G reeks are by no means insensible. T hey talk of it publicly, and make it the subject of their satire, reveng ing themselves, as is their constant practice by a song. . . . “We have found a M etropolitan, and a Bey of W allachia, and a M erchant and a Prim ate, all friends to tyranny.” 8
L ord B roughton’s pessimistic conclusion concerning the likelihood of a Greek revolt was not borne out by the course of events. Nevertheless, his observations, like those of other contem porary travelers, suggest why the Balkan nationalist awakening took the varying forms that it did. Their evi dence indicates that Balkan nationalism was a complex movement with cen trifugal as well as centripetal forces operating within and among the various peoples.
IN T E R V E N T IO N BY T H E G REA T P O W E R S
Balkan history during the nineteenth century was determined not only by continued O ttom an decline and by burgeoning nationalisms, but also by the increasing intervention of the great powers. This intervention rep


226 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
resents the final phase in the history of the relations between the O ttom an Em pire and the rest of Europe. A t first it was the Turks who intervened in Europe. It was they who crossed the Straits, conquered the Balkans, overran Hungary, and, on two occasions, threatened Vienna and the whole of Cen tral Europe. C hristendom ’s first reaction to this T urkish onslaught was fairly consistently hostile. The Turk was an infidel as well as an invader. Hence the futile crusades of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. By the sixteenth century C hristendom ’s unity against the T u rk had ended. It was not by chance that Pope Pius II died brokenhearted in 1464 waiting at Ancona for a Christian army that never materialized. By this time Christian diplomacy had become too secularized to allow for crusades. The new nation-states placed dynastic and commercial considerations before re ligious ones. The outstanding example of this new attitude was the Turkish alliance concluded in 1536 by the “most C hristian” king of France against “the apostolic majesty” Charles V of the Holy Rom an Empire. The early sixteenth century marked the transition from uncom prom ising enmity to realistic accom m odation in the relations between the O tto man Em pire and Europe. Two centuries later we come to another turning point. The Treaty of Karlowitz of 1699 represented the end of the Turkish offensive and the beginning of the European counteroffensive. Never again was Europe threatened by the power which for almost three centuries had m enaced its security. Instead, E urope now faced precisely the opposite prob lem. O ttom an power receded so rapidly that a political vacuum was created in the N ear East. One of the basic problems of European diplomacy hence forth was how to fill this vacuum . It is significant th at at the tim e of the Karlowitz Treaty the French am bassador in Constantinople wrote to Louis X IV, “Providence probably has decided the end of the Turks in Europe.” The am bassador went on to warn his m aster that he “could not dispense with taking measures . . . to avoid being a mere spectator to the division which the other powers made among them of the debris of that [Ottoman] Em pire.” 9 Thus the powers were confronted with the so-called N ear Eastern Q uestion— a question that was to run through European diplomacy like a red thread until the end of W orld W ar I. Austria and Russia were the first powers to take advantage of the O ttom an decline. By the end of the eighteenth century they had conquered the vast territories across the Danube and along the northern shore of the Black Sea. A t this time Britain viewed the Russian advance with equanimity. Britain was then in the midst of her prolonged struggle with France and could give little attention to the possible im plications of Russian expansion. Furtherm ore, Britain had vital commercial interests in Russia. Following the 1734 Anglo-Russian commercial treaty, trade between the two countries had increased to the point where the British controlled 52 per cent of the total volume of commerce at St. Petersburg. Also, Em press C atherine had issued a ukase perm itting British merchants in Russia to tap the Persian m ar ket. And Russian tim ber was essential to British naval power, particularly


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1815-1878 227
after the loss of the Am erican colonies. These considerations explain why B ritain in 1769 not only perm itted C atherine’s fleet to enter the M editer ranean but even notified Paris and M adrid that any action against this fleet would be considered a hostile act against herself. In the early nineteenth century this commercial and political situa tion changed and British policy changed with it. Anglo-Russian trade suffered from various artificial restrictions. Britain curtailed her imports from Russia when she adopted the Corn Law in 1815 and granted heavy preference to im perial tim ber. M eanwhile, the English Levant Com pany was expanding its commercial operations in the Near East by leaps and bounds. The only Turkish levies on foreign trade were a small anchorage fee and a 3 per cent ad valorem duty on imports. Also, French commercial competition in the L evant had become negligible because of the effects of the Revolutionary w ars and N apoleon’s C ontinental System. M ore im portant was the growing industrial supremacy of England as a result of the Industrial Revolution. By the late eighteenth century English cotton goods were flooding the markets of the entire world. T he effect upon the com m erce of the Levant is evident in the following figures on the value of British exports to the O ttom an E m pire: 1783— £ 8 8 ,0 6 5 ; 1816— £ 2 5 6 ,8 0 2 ;. 1825— £ 1,079,671; 1835£ 2 ,7 0 6 ,5 9 1 ; 1845— £ 7 ,6 2 0 ,1 4 0 . By 1850 Turkey was a better customer of the U nited Kingdom than Italy, France, Russia, or A u stria.10 At the same time that the commercial relations between England and Russia declined in relative im portance, the political relations between the two countries becam e increasingly strained. Various conflicts developed in the process of the readjustm ent of power relationships following the defeat of Napoleon. The most serious was the crisis over the fate of Poland: A ppre hension also began to be felt in E ngland concerning R ussia’s designs upon Turkey, Persia, and India. Articles and books appeared depicting the Turks in a more favorable light and raising the bogy of the Russian colossus. T his com bination of econom ic and political factors explains B ritain’s shift from a pro-R ussian to a pro-Turkish policy. The Foreign Office came to regard further Russian expansion in the N ear East as incompatible with British imperial interests. Specifically it feared that Russian control of the Straits w ould endanger B ritain’s L evantine trade, her naval pow er in the M editerranean, and her position in India. It might even upset the balance of power in the whole of Europe. Thus British diplomacy throughout the nineteenth century worked unceasingly to preserve the integrity of the O tto man Empire. B ritain ’s status quo policy conflicted with the m ore dynam ic aims of three other great powers that were particularly interested in the Balkans and the N ear East in the early nineteenth century: Russia, France, and Austria. Of these three, Russia was the most persistent opponent of Britain. After her spectacular territorial gains under Catherine and Alexander, Russia was not likely to halt her advance abruptly at the Dniester. She made this clear in a note that she circularized at the Vienna Congress in February, 1815. The


228 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
note, after calling attention to the Turkish atrocities in Serbia, stated that the em peror of Russia was “the natural protector of the O rthodox Greek Chris tians und er O ttom an dom ination,” 11 in the sam e m anner th at the A ustrian and French sovereigns were natural protectors of the Catholic Christians. C onsequently, the note concluded, T sar A lexander is obliged by his religion and by the voice of conscience to go to the aid of the oppressed Serbian people. The significance of this note is obvious. It gave R ussia grounds for intervention in O ttom an affairs whenever she so wished. But when she did try to intervene she met the resolute opposition of Britain. It is an oversim plification, however, to assert that Russia invariably strove to dismember the sultan’s dom ains. W e shall see th at in 1829 she halted her arm ies outside Constantinople and deliberately decided to accept the existence of the mori bund O ttom an Empire. Likewise, in the eighteen thirties she cooperated with Britain in supporting the sultan against the overly am bitious M chem ct Ali of Egypt. Despite these exceptions it remains true that Russian diplomacy was generally anti-Turkish while British diplomacy was usually pro-Turkish. Hence the frequent crises and periodic wars of the nineteenth century. France also was vitally interested in Balkan and N ear Eastern affairs. A t one time her influence in the O ttom an court had been unrivaled. In 1536 she was the first Christian power to conclude an alliance and a commercial agreement with the Turks. From then on her diplomats worked unceasingly to bolster the O ttom an Em pire because it was to the advantage of France to have a strong T urkish ally on A ustria’s rear. N apoleon’s erratic diplom acy, however, underm ined French influence in Constantinople. Furtherm ore, de feated France was forced to yield both M alta and the Ionian Islands to B ritain. T hus F ran ce’s position in the N ear E ast in 1815 was at an all-tim e low. It is not surprising th at in the eighteen thirties she sought to advance her position by supporting the insurgent M ehemet Ali of Egypt against the Constantinople government. But this strategy failed in the face of combined Anglo-Russian opposition. During the following decades France usually ranged herself on the side of Britain. T he explanation is not th at the two powers had no differences. R ather it was that they had an overriding com m on interest in blocking Russian expansion. Thus Britain and France fought together against Russia during the Crimean W ar and continued to cooperate on most crucial issues until W orld W ar I. The other m ajor power interested in the Balkans in the early nine teenth century was Austria. After her great triumph in the Karlowitz settle ment she alternated between two contradictory policies toward the ancient Turkish foe. Sometimes she attacked him as a weak neighbor ripe for parti tion. A t other times she supported him as a useful bulwark against the menacing advance of Russia. During the eighteenth century Austria followed both these policies at various times. T hen in 1815 she acquired D alm atia and other form er V enetian possessions, which m ade her the dom inant pow er in the Adriatic and in the western Balkans. During the rest of the nineteenth


Dynamics oj Balkan Politics: 1815-1878 229
century A ustria usually was on the side of Britain supporting the status quo in the N ear East. She feared that a m ajor rearrangem ent would strengthen primarily Russia, whom she considered particularly dangerous because of the m any Slavic subjects in the H apsburg E m pire who might be attracted by Russian national and religious propaganda. Jn conclusion, these four powers— Britain, Russia, France, and A us tria— were the m ost involved in Balkan affairs in the early nineteenth cen tury. They determined to a considerable degree the course of events through out the N ear Eastern world. Their conflicting interests and policies explain in large p art why the m oribund O ttom an Em pire was able to survive until W orld W ar I despite its miserable showing against the G reek revolutionaries and M ehem et Ali in the opening decades of the nineteenth century.


14. The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs
to 1878
U n t i l r e c e n t t i m e s the South Slavs have been the forgotten people of Europe. As late as the first quarter of the nineteenth cen tury ethnographic maps of the Balkans depicted the peninsula as being in habited predominantly by Greeks or Turks. The Slavs were either ignored altogether or else confused with the Illyrians of antiquity. This obscurity arose in part from the location of the Slavs in the interior of the Balkans, where they lacked the contacts and the opportunities enjoyed by the Greeks to the south. An equally im portant factor was the lack of unity among the South Slavs from the time of their first appearance in the Balkans in the sixth cen tury to W orld W ar I in the twentieth century. This disunity prevented the Slavs from assuming a role com m ensurate with their numerical predom inance in the peninsula. In the medieval period Stephen Dushan failed to incorporate in his em pire all the Serbian people, let alone the other South Slavs. The Turks overran most of the Slavic territories in the Balkans, but they were finally checked by the Hapsburgs and were unable to extend their frontiers to include Slovenia and western Croatia. During the following centuries the South Slavs were divided between the H apsburg and O ttom an empires, with the Hapsburg portion becoming increasingly larger as the Turks progressively weakened. The South Slavs were divided in cultural as well as political m atters. The Croatians and the Slovenes belonged to the W estern world, being Catholics and under the influence of the Germans and the Italians. The Ser bians and the Bulgarians, on the other hand, belonged to the Eastern'w orld because of their Orthodox faith and their Byzantine-Ottoman background. This cultural and political heterogeneity of the Balkan Slavs explains in large part why they lagged behind the other Slavic peoples of Europe in the tem po of their national awakening. It also explains why their awakening, once it began, was a many^stranded affair. There was no common nationalist move
230


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 231
ment or common uprising for independence. Instead, the various South Slav peoples went their several ways, reacting individually to the various environ ments in which they lived. The Serbs of the Belgrade region were the first to win autonom y be cause of a favorable combination of circumstances. In order to place their movement in its proper perspective we will first survey the position of the other South Slavs— Slovenes, Croatians, and Serbians— who lived under H apsburg and T urkish rule. T he Bulgarians will not be considered in this chapter because to the present day they have developed along sufficiently distinct lines to require separate treatm ent.
SOUTH SLAVS UNDER FOREIGN RULE
As noted in C hapter 2, the Slavs appeared in the Balkan Peninsula in the sixth and seventh centuries of the C hristian E ra and settled in a fairly solid belt from the A driatic to the Black seas. This wide geographic dispersal brought them under a variety of foreign influences, so that gradually they evolved into four distinct peoples, Slovenes, Croatians, Serbians, and Bul garians. At the beginning of the nineteenth century they were all under for eign domination, with the exception of a handful of m ountaineers in M onte negro and a few m erchants and mariners in the Dalm atian city-republic of Ragusa or Dubrovnik. Slovenia. The westernmost of the South Slavs are the Slovenes who settled at the head of the Adriatic in a great arc around the city of Trieste. This location explains the distinctive character of the Slovenian language which is related both to the Serbo-C roatian spoken further east and to the Slovak spoken in the north. Thus the Slovenian language constitutes a con necting link between the southern and northern Slavic languages, and the sam e may be said of Slovenian culture in general. The location of the Slovenes also affected their religious development. Unlike the other South Slavs, they were profoundly affected by the Reformation. But the Counterreform ation brought them back to the fold of the Catholic Church, so that the Slovenes today are overwhelmingly Catholic. Finally, the location of the Slovenes brought them into conflict with the Germ ans who surrounded them in the north and west. Conflict was inevitable because the Slovenes occupied stra tegic territory which denied the great G erm an ethnic bloc access to the M edi terranean. Thus the Slovenes soon fell under Germ an dom ination and for many centuries were subjected to a strong process of Germanization. The Slovenes first appeared in their present hom eland in the sixth century. A fter waging a long struggle against the Avars they succumbed to the Germans at the end of the eighth century. In the course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries they came under Hapsburg domination. Thus the Slovenes were never able to establish an independent state organization, liv ing continuously under foreign domination until the creation of Yugoslavia at the end of W orld W ar I. But Germ an rule was not altogether negative. It


232 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
presented the constant danger of assimilation, but it also conferred very real benefits. G erm an rule was responsible for the fact that the Slovenes were far ahead of the other South Slavs in cultural development, technological skills, and economic progress. Also, the Slovenes enjoyed com parative security, never experiencing the devastation and wholesale depopulation suffered by the other South Slavs. It is significant th a t alm ost all villages in Slovenia are centuries old, whereas in the other South Slav lands many of the villages are of recent origin and numerous traces may be found of destroyed or deserted villages. The social structure in Slovenia, as in the rest of the Hapsburg E m pire, was of a feudal nature before 1848. The native ruling class had been eliminated as early as the tenth century, so the nobility was German. Slovenia, like other countries of Central Europe, experienced a series of peasant revolts between the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries. It should be noted, however, that feudalism in Slovenia was not as onerous as in the other South Slav regions. An im portant reason for this was the m ountainous character of the land, which did not m ake large estates as profitable as in the plains areas. It is also notew orthy that until the middle of the nineteenth century the urban population was predom inantly Germ an while the countryside was almost ex clusively Slovenian. Croatia. To the southeast of the Slovenes are the Croatians. T hey profess the same C atholic faith but their language is quite different, being identical with that of the Serbians. Linguists refer to a common SerboC roatian language, though the Croatians, it should be noted, use the Latin alphabet whereas the more easterly Serbians use the Cyrillic. T he C roatians differ from the Slovenes not only in language b u t also in historical background. The Slovenes never established an independent state, whereas the Croatians developed in the medieval period an extensive and pow erful kingdom . F o r some tim e after their arrival in the Balkans in the seventh century the Croatians were loosely organized on a tribal basis. In the ninth century they were subjected for brief periods to the Frankish and By zantine em pires but early in the tenth century they succeeded in establishing an independent state. By the following century this state had grown to be a form idable power, extending from the Drava River in the north to the A dri atic Sea in the south and including most of the D alm atian coast line. In 1089 King Zvonimir died without leaving heirs, and the country then passed under the control of Ladislaus I of Hungary, whose sister had m arried into the Croatian royal family. The establishment of Hungarian rule had im portant economic and political consequences. The Croatian nobles, who had invited Hungarian intervention, were allowed to keep their'lands and feudal privileges, including tax exemption. Thus the native nobility sur vived under foreign rule in contrast to the other South Slav peoples, who lost their respective ruling classes and eventually emerged as exclusively peasant nations. The Catholic Church was also a powerful feudal force with its vast estates and its bishops holding high state offices. C roatia was thus ruled by a


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 233
com bination of tem poral and spiritual lords who also exercised all the pre rogatives of the state over their serfs. C ro atia’s relationship with H ungary was th at of a dependency. A u tonom y was granted in domestic affairs, but the H ungarian m onarch exercised control over foreign affairs and war, and also appointed a governor or ban to represent him in the C roatian capital of Agram or Zagreb. This union lasted to 1918, though with continual changes in the constitutional relations as each party strove to im prove its position. The Hungarians were not always able to protect their Croatian de pendency from foreign invaders. As a result, important Croatian lands were lost to neighboring powers. Venice, for example, coveted the Dalmatian Coast and gradually acquired it by conquest and by purchase. D alam atia rem ained a V enetian possession until V enice herself fell victim to N apoleon in 1797. M ore serious was the loss of C roatian territory to the Turks. The latter won m ost of H ungary following their great victory at M ohacs in 1526. The following year the Croatian nobility swore allegiance to the Hapsburg ruler, Ferdinand I, who had been elected king of Hungary. This did not deter the Turks, who rapidly overran C roatia until only the western tip of the country remained to the Hapsburgs. Thus most of Croatia passed under Turkish rule and remained there until the treaties of Karlowitz (1699) and Passarowitz (Pozarevac) (1718) established Hapsburg sovereignty over the country. This Turkish interlude of almost two centuries had im portant reper cussions. Croatia was left devastated and depopulated because it had served as a buffer zone into which the Turks had conducted raids and from which the Hapsburgs had defended the rem ainder of their empire. Also, the com position of the noble class changed following the Turkish occupation. The H apsburgs granted the recovered Croatian lands mostly to foreign noblesAustrians, Hungarians, and others. Hence Croatia was ruled from the seven teenth century onward by a predom inantly foreign nobility and by the princes of the church. The overw helm ing mass of the C roatian people rem ained in servitude to this ruling group, though not without periodic outbursts. A series of peasant revolts wracked C roatia as well as other countries of Central E urope in the sixteenth century. The most serious was the uprising led by M athias Gubec in 1573. It affected Slovenia as well as Croatia, and the dem ands in cluded freedom and equality for all classes and a just apportionm ent of taxes and of military service. Gubec wished to establish a governm ent in Zagreb responsible directly to the Hapsburg emperor, whom the peasants regarded as their protector against the feudal lords. The uprising was speedily and ruthlessly crushed, over six thousand serfs being killed and many villages destroyed. But other revolts broke out periodically, attesting to the deepseated discontent of the peasants and to the impact that Gubec had made upon their minds. In popular legend Gubec had not died. Instead, he and his followers had been saved by the mountains which had closed over them


234 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
to shield them from their enemies. A nd now they sat behind a stone table and d ran k red wine and would continue to do so until G ubec’s beard grew long enough to wind nine times around the table. Then the mountains would open once more and Gubec would march forth with his army to free the serfs from their oppressors. An attempt to improve the lot of the serfs was made by M aria Theresa (1740-1780) and her son Joseph II (1 780-1790), the Hapsburg rulers who were influenced by the ideas of the Enlightenment. A decree issued in 1785 proclaimed the serfs personally free and allowed them to move when they wished, to marry without the permission of the lord, to go to school, and to dispose freely of their movable property. A lthough this decree did not give the land to the serfs, it was still too much for the feudal lords to accept. And since they wielded enormous power they were able in large part to ignore this reform and others. A certain improvement in the position of the serfs did occur in the second half of the eighteenth century. But the fact remains that at the beginning of the nineteenth century the Croatian people were living under far from enviable conditions. A predom inantly alien nobility held them in feudal bondage while a foreign power kept their country in a dependent status. The Voivodina. The Slovenes and Croatians were almost all under H apsburg rule, but the Serbians were much more divided. Some Serbians lived under the scepter of the Hapsburgs in southern Hungary. Others were in Bosnia-Herzegovina, where they were subject to the Turks until 1878, when these two provinces passed under H apsburg control. Still others were to be found in the independent M ontenegrin enclave within the O ttom an Empire. The rem ainder lived under direct Turkish rule to the south of the Danube. Each of these groups will be considered in turn. The Serbs of southern Hungary lived between the Theiss and the Danube rivers, an area known as the Voivodina or Duchy. M ost of them migrated to this region after the Hapsburgs recovered it during the campaigns of the late seventeenth century. Em peror Leopold 1 found the countryside almost depopulated by the years of warfare and adopted a systematic coloni zation policy. He preferred to keep the intractable Hungarians out of this strategic frontier territory, so he sent, instead, many Germ an colonists who laid the basis for the large Germ an minority that was to be found there until W orld W ar II. Leopold also encouraged the Serbians under Turkish rule to cross the Danube and some thirty thousand did migrate in 1690 under their patriarch. Leopold issued imperial charters on August 21, 1690, and August 20, 1691, assuring the immigrants full recognition as a nation and granting them freedom to practice their religion and customs 'and to control their own administration. These privileges were not respected for long. The Jesuits were illdisposed toward the O rthodox Serbs and used their influence at the imperial court against them. Also, the Magyars gradually gained control over the Voivodina and utilized their authority to try to Magyarize the Serbians. In


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 235
the end, L eopold’s charters becam e virtually dead letters and the Serbs were left with only an autonom ous church organization. The Serbs counterbalanced this setback with notable economic gains in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. Commerce expanded rapidly during those decades and the Serbs took advantage of the opportunity to gain control of most of the trade of southern Hungary. A new class of merchants appeared who had the same dynamic effect upon Serbian society as the Greek m erchants at the same time were exercising in the G reek world. The city of Karlowitz (Sremski Karlovci) in the Voivodina became the true center of Serbian culture, extending its influence across the Danube to the lands still subject to the Turks. The first Serbian books and newspapers came from the wealthy and progressive Serbian communities in Karlowitz, Buda, and Vienna. W hen the Serbs of the Belgrade area rose in revolt in 1804 they received vital assistance from their brethren in the Voivodina, including money, volunteers, and trained officers and adm inistrators. The significance of the V oivodina for the Serbian people is well sum m arized in a popular saying: “M ontenegro with its doughty warriors saved the Serbians from despair; the Voivodina with its schools and presses saved them from ignorance.” Bosnia-Herzegovina. The distinguishing characteristic of BosniaH erzegovina, or Bosnia, as it is com m only called for convenience, is th at it is a bord er area. Ju st as A lsace-L orraine is the transition zone betw een the G erm an and F rench ethnic blocs, so Bosnia is the transition zone betw een the Serbian and C roatian peoples and the Orthodox and Catholic religions. In addition, there is present a strong infusion of Islam dating from the period of the Turkish conquest. This ethnic and religious diversity explains much of the stormy history of the area, corresponding to the turbulent past of AlsaceLorraine. Bosnia began its independent statehood in the second half of the twelfth century. It expanded rapidly, acquiring lands from both the Serbians in the east and the Croatians in the west. Despite its imposing size, Bosnia from the beginning was afflicted with fatal weaknesses. One was the centri fugal effect of the turbulent nobility, who wielded inordinate power and left the central authority helpless and ineffectual. A nother weakness was the lack of a common faith to bind the state together. Instead, there were the rival O rthodox and Catholic churches as well as the widespread Bogomil heresy. The latter emerged as a protest against the worldliness of the two churches and against the social injustices of the period. The political influence of Bogomilism was definitely disruptive, partly because of its uncom prom ising feud with the two churches and also because of its loose hierarchical organization, its otherworldliness, and its pacifism. Thus Bogomilism, as we noted in C hap ter 4, contributed substantially to the collapse of the Bosnian state before the Turkish invaders in the fifteenth century. M any Bosnian Bogomils, both nobles and serfs, became Moslems after the Turkish conquest. They had been persecuted by the O rthodox and


236 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
Catholic hierarchies and not unnaturally they now embraced Islam. Also, there were practical considerations. The feudal lord who became Moslem could keep at least some of his former lands and privileges, while the serf who accepted Islam became a free peasant. Thus the Moslem conquerors made m ore converts in Bosnia than in any other part of the Balkans. The population remains today almost one-third Moslem. The beginning of the nineteenth century found Bosnia in the grip of a small group of Moslem feudal lords or beys. These proud nobles tolerated no interference from Constantinople. They did not permit the Turkish gov ernor to reside in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, forcing him instead to live in the little town of Travnik. All the Christian peasants and a few of the Moslem ones were serfs, completely at the mercy of the beys. This feudal system represented a degeneration of the original arrangem ents made by the Turkish conquerors in the fifteenth century. A t that tim e fiefs were granted in return for stipulated service of a military or administrative character. The fiefs w ere not hereditary and reverted to the central governm ent if the re quired service was not forthcom ing. Also, the peasants on the fiefs were pro tected by law. Their obligations were carefully defined and they had heredi tary use of their plots so long as they tilled them and paid the stipulated dues. This system worked well so long as the central governm ent was able and willing to enforce it. From the seventeenth century onward the govern ment was too weak to do so. The result was a complete transform ation of Bosnian feudalism. A largely new nobility appeared, consisting of powerful officials, tax farmers, or miscellaneous adventurers, many of them form er janissaries or spahis who had been chased out of Hungary and Croatia by the advancing Hapsburg armies. These individuals took advantage of the governm ental breakdow n in Bosnia to acquire fiefs in one m anner or an other. M ore im portant, they converted the form er fiefs into private estates or agaliks, which m eant that the peasants lost their former security and protec tion. The new beys increased the dues at will, m altreated their peasants if they wished, and even ousted them from the land which they had cultivated for generations. In short, the peasants had sunk to the status of serfs. This development was not peculiar to Bosnia. We shall see that, with local variations, the same trend occurred in Serbia, Bulgaria, and Greece. In the latter areas the new private estates that were form ed were known as chifliks rather than agaliks. A more significant difference was that the chiflik owners in the rest of the Balkans were mostly Moslem Turks, whereas the beys of Bosnia were mostly M oslem Slavs. This division of the Bosnian Slavs into a ruling M oslem class and a subject Christian mass explains in large part the slow development of a national movement in Bosnia. Another im portant factor was the division between the O rthodox Serbs and the C ath olic Croats, the form er outnum bering the latter by two to one. The Bosnian beys were able to rule their province for centuries with out serious challenge. They had the active support of the predominantly free Moslem peasantry, which constituted almost a third of the total population.


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 237
They could also count on religious-national rivalries to keep the remaining two thirds of the population divided. It was not until the masterful Sultan M ahm ud 11 came to the throne th at the beys finally were brought to order in the 1830’s. A nd the beginning of the end becam e apparent at the tu rn of the century when Serbs and Croats began to identify themselves with the concept of an all-embracing Yugoslav nationalism. Montenegro. The Montenegrins are a Serbian people whose coun try form ed a part of the medieval Serbian Empire. W hen that empire fell to the T urks in 1389 the M ontenegrins thereafter went their own way. In 1499 the Turks overran much of their country, retaining control of the towns, plains, and comm unication lines. At the same time the Venetians pressed in from the coast line, occupying the K otor (o r C attaro ) inlet and cutting off M ontenegro from the sea. T he M ontenegrins now were hem m ed in in their mountain fastnesses, where they were left pretty much to their own devices. Their country was so hopelessly poor that it was not worth while for the Turks to make the effort necessary to establish and m aintain effective control. In 1515 the bishop of Cetinje, under the title prince-bishop, estab lished a theocracy which lasted over three centuries. The prince-bishop was elected from among the monks of the Cetinje monastery by the clergy and the populace. During the reign of D anilo Petrovich in the early eighteenth century the princely office was made hereditary in his family. This arrange ment of a hereditary prince-bishop was continued until 1851, when the in cum bent established himself as a secular ruler with the title Prince D anilo I. In the meantime an im portant treaty was concluded with Sultan Selim III in 1799 establishing the full independence of M ontenegro. Behind this façade of political and diplomatic developments M onte negro remained a loose association of tribes organized along patriarchal lines. The economy was utterly primitive. According to a rough census taken in 1855 the population was 80,000 and the arable land am ounted to only one fourth of one hectare per person. The “national wealth” consisted mostly of livestock: 315,780 head of sheep and goats, 37,730 head of cattle, 6,000 pigs, 3,200 horses, and 19,300 beehives. The chief occupation, naturally, was animal husbandry. In fact, it was beneath the dignity of a M ontenegrin male to do anything else than tend to his flocks and bear arms. The latter he did with relish and with skill born of constant practice. O ther Serbians ac knowledged that it was the M ontenegrins that kept them from despair during the centuries of subjugation by keeping alight the lire of resistance. Even after the winning of independence M ontenegro was in the forefront during the nineteenth-century wars against the O ttom an Empire. The role of M onte negro in South Slav and general Balkan affairs has been quite out of propor tion to her ridiculously meager material resources. Serbia. The Serbians living in M ontenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and the Voivodina represented the fringe of the Serbian ethnic bloc. The main body of the Serbian people was to be found in Serbia proper, the area to the south of the D anube and between M ontenegro and Bosnia in the west


238 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
and Bulgaria in the east. All this territory was an integral part of the O ttom an Em pire and had been so since the fourteenth century. Turkish rule had long since become inefficient and corrupt, a heavy drag on any progress. This ex plains in part the fact that the Serbs to the south of the D anube lagged far behind their brothers under Hapsburg rule in cultural and economic at tainments. On the other hand, they did enjoy certain advantages. The Turks were decadent but they were also feeble. A revolt against them had some chance for success. Against the more progressive and more efficient H apsburgs there was no hope whatsoever. Thus it was the comparatively back ward Turkish-ruled Serbs who first gained their freedom and who developed the nucleus for the Yugoslav state of the future. W e will now consider the position of these Serbs in the O ttom an administrative system and the circum stances leading to their insurrection in 1804.
BELGRADE PASHALIK UNDER TURKISH RULE
The Belgrade pashalik, which was to become the core of the future Serbian state, comprised roughly the area bounded by the Danube and Sava rivers in the north, the Drina River in the west, and Bulgaria in the east. Its inhabitants were engaged mostly in raising livestock, particularly pigs, which grazed freely in the vast oak forests that covered much of the country. The livestock was m arketed “on the hoof” across the Danube in the Hapsburg Em pire. The pig trade alone brought about 130,000 pounds annually during the years around 1800. It is interesting to note th at the tw o outstanding lead ers of the Serbian revolution, Karageorge and Milosh Obrenovich, were both engaged in this trade. If an upper class may be said to have existed in the pashalik at this time it consisted of these enterprising pig dealers. Agriculture was definitely subsidiary to animal husbandry. Maize and wheat were grown in small clearings in the forest, but only enough to satisfy local needs. In fact, in some years grain had to be im ported from the Hungarian plains. The social organization of the Serbian peasantry was based on the zadruga or extended family group. This has been well defined by Professor Philip E. Mosely as “ a household composed of two or more biological or small families closely related by blood or adoption, owning its means of pro duction communally, producing and consum ing its means of livelihood jointly, and regulating the control of its property, labor, and livelihood com m u nally.” 1 The zadruga flourished during these years for various reasons. It made possible more efficient production through division of labor. It afforded greater personal and economic security in turbulent periods. Also, it could meet with a minimum of disruption the frequent demands for labor from landlords and public officials. Thus the zadruga was an ideal form of social organization for an economic order in which the m arket and the use of money were of incidental importance. We shall see that it became an anach ronism in later years when independence had been won, when order and


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 239
security had been established, and when a money economy had replaced the earlier natural economy. T urkish adm inistration in the pashalik was headed by the su ltan’s representative, the pasha, who sat in Belgrade. Moslem judges or cadis resided in the towns and ruled on legal issues involving M oslem disputants. Janissary detachments were stationed in fortified places to defend the pashalik, which was situated on the northern frontier of the empire. Finally, there were about nine hundred spahis or feudal cavalrymen who held most of the arable land in the form of fiefs. The spahis did not actually own the land but were authorized to collect certain specified revenues from their fiefs. The obligations of the Serbian peasant to his Turkish overlords were not onerous. To the spahi he paid one tenth of his grain crop, certain labor services, a head tax for each adult male in the family, and miscellaneous levies on watermills, orchards, vineyards, beehives, and the like. These revenues were collected by the spahi’s agent, since the spahi alm ost invariably lived in Belgrade or some other town. The peasant also paid taxes to the sultan’s treasury, the m ost im portant being the harach, a small levy on all male non-M oslems between seven and sixty years of age. This and other imperial taxes were collected with minimum fiiction by local village headmen, who transmitted the proceeds to the Turkish authorities. The Turkish administrative system was based on the principle of in direct rule. In norm al times it functioned, satisfactorily. There was very little contact between the Serbian subjects and the Turkish officials. The towns were the centers of alien authority and consisted mostly of officials and sol diers who were Turks, and m erchants and craftsmen who were mostly Turks, Greeks, and Jews. The countryside was purely Serbian and it had a welldeveloped system of local self-government. Each village elected a knez or lord, and each district an oborknez or grand knez. These leaders assessed and collected government taxes and exercised police and judicial functions of a local nature. The relations between the spahis and the peasants were normally harmonious. The dues that could be collected were regulated by law. Furtherm ore, the peasants were free to move so that the spahis found it expedient to treat them fairly. Turkish rule as described above was far from burdensome. The Ser bian peasants accepted it for centuries without serious questioning or oppo sition. W hen they rose in revolt in 1804 they did so not because of this governmental system but rather because of its disintegration. The imperial government had become so ineffectual that it was unable to supervise the administration of distant provinces, and anarchy and terrorism spread through the Belgrade pashalik. A t the same time certain intellectual develop ments were broadening the horizon of at least a few Serbian leaders and making them disaffected with the deteriorating status quo. We shall now consider in turn the intellectual aw akening and the adm inistrative disinte gration.


240 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
IN TELLECTU A L AWAKENING
During the eighteenth century the Serbian world was transformed from an essentially theocratic community to one motivated by secular con siderations and guided by secular leaders. The roots of this change go back to an earlier period when church and state were synonymous. In 1459 the Turks destroyed the medieval Serbian Em pire and abolished the Serbian patriarchate located at Ipek (P ec). A lm ost a century later, in 1557, the famous grand vizir, M oham m ed Sokolovich (Sokolli), a Serb by birth, used his influence to restore the patriarchate. During the following centuries this institution assumed the functions of the form er Serbian government. It had its own law courts and adm inistrative system. W hen the occasion arose, it conducted foreign policy and even provided military leadership. This was the case at the end of the seventeenth century when the Hapsburg armies had penetrated deeply into the Balkans. The Serbian patriarch, Arsenije III, responded by calling on all Christians to rise against the Moslem overlord. W hen the A ustrians finally were defeated the same patriarch led his people in mass migration across the Danube. Until the beginning of the eighteenth century the Serbian church was in fact the Serbian state. But by the end of the century it had lost its posi tion of prim acy. T he explanation is to be found partly in certain divisive rivalries within the church and partly in the im pact of W estern secular thought upon Serbian intellectuals. Two Serbian ecclesiastical centers existed following the migration to southern Hungary. One was the patriarchate whose seat still rem ained at Ipek (Pec) and the other was the metropolitanate, which was established at K arlow itz in 1713. Both of these centers declined in prestige and effectiveness during the course of the century. The Ipek patriarchate was abolished by the sultan in 1766 upon the urging of the P atriarch of C onstantinople. The latter assumed direct jurisdiction over the Serbian dioceses and replaced the Ser bian hierarchy with a predom inantly Greek one. The change was strongly disliked by the Serbs, and the church thus lost its position as the accepted and unchallenged representative of the nation. Meanwhile, the Karlowitz m etropolitanate had also fallen upon evil days. Factions within the institu tion fought bitterly against each other, and corruption and immorality were all too evident. A t the same time that the Serbian church was decaying the ideas of the Enlightenment were spreading among the Serbs of Austria. Students were beginning to turn away from the O rthodox schools of Russia and the Catholic institutions of A ustria and to go instead to Protestant schools in Hungary and Germany. M ost of them returned with the conviction that the future of their people rested with rationalism and the W est rather than Orthodoxy and the East. They pointed to the imperfections of the Serbian church on both sides of the Danube to support their contention that national interest re


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 241
quired the end of church domination and eventually the separation of church and state. The outstanding exponents of this new secularism were Dimitrije Obradovich and Vuk Karajich, the two great leaders of the Serbian intellec tual and literary renaissance. O bradovich was born in 1743 in the part of the B anat of Tem esvar that is now R um anian. As a boy he had a passion for reading, but he could find nothing w ritten in his own language. A t this time the Serbians had no newspapers and no literature of any sort in their spoken language. Only ecclesiastical literature in the artificial Church Slavonic was available. Obradovich devoured all that he could find, particularly the color ful lives of saints. These had the same effect upon him as dime novels had on American boys in the nineteenth century. Just as American lads ran away from home to fight Indians so Obradovich decided to becom e a saint like the heroes in his storybooks. He ran off to a m onastery where he becam e a monk and stayed for three years. By the end of th at tim e he had read and reread the m onastery’s m eager stock of books. He bccam e restless and in 1760 he set forth on travels that were to take him to all parts of Europe. O bradovich lived m any years in G erm any and traveled widely in England, France, Russia and the Balkans. His observations and experiences turned him away from his earlier clerical ideals. From a Serbian monk with an intellectual outlook that was essentially Byzantine he became a man of the world and an enthusiastic champion of the current rationalism and enlighten ment. He now found it intolerable that his own Serbian people should have no literature in their own language. So he proceeded to meet the need by creating both a modern Serbian literary language and a modern Serbian lit erature. His great contribution to the Serbian renaissance is th at he was the first to write on secular topics in the unaffected spoken language of his countrym en. He narrated his own adventures, he expounded his new secular ideas, and he translated and adapted works from other languages. His pur pose at all times was didactic. “ Being a rational m an,” he w rote, “ I have a God-given and natural authority to com m unicate my thoughts to my fellow m en and to tell them whatever good and sensible things 1 have heard and learned from others.” 2 The following passages from his works show that what Obradovich considered to be “good and sensible” was in reality intel lectual dynamite for the clerical world from which he had originally emerged.
I have learned to think and pass judgm ent in a better and more rational m anner on my religious beliefs and my faith. The books of learned men have given me the means to distinguish orthodoxy from superstition and the pure teaching of the Gospels from all m anner of hum an traditions and additions. . . . I am no longer deceived by any gay colors, by gilding and by external glitter: I recognize w hat is true and internal reverence and piety and w hat are external customs, ritual and ceremonies. . . . You ask me why I have rebelled against fasts, long prayers, and the great number of holidays; and wherein they offend me and make me take up arms against them. Read the Holy Gospel and you will see th at the same things


242 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
offended our Savior, so that he cried out against them and on that account re buked the Pharisees, saying: “Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites who by fasting m ake pale and sad your faces and pray in the streets and byways, that men may see you.” The abuses that were com mitted in those times by those acts are com m itted also today; and whoever receives, recognizes, and loves the teaching of Christ must hate all that Christ hated and against which he cried out. I have spent twenty-five years with various peoples of our faith in Greece, A l bania, Bosnia, Herzegovina, Moldavia, and other regions: practically the entire population are conscious of being Christians of the Eastern Church only through its fasts and its holidays. And how do they fast? Ah, my brethren, G od sees and hears all things: we must tell the truth! N o one fasts except such as are extremely poor, people who live on sterile soil and who during several months of the year would think that they sat at royal tables if they merely had bread of wheat or of maize. These poor people fast the greater part of their lives, but by grim necessity. But those who have various fasting foods, as we term them , including olive oil and wine, never fast at any time whatever. (You should know that I do not regard it as fasting when a man has no dinner but at supper eats enough for both dinner and supper, nor when a man eats no meat but stuffs himself with beans and sauerkraut till his belly rumbles and sweat comes out on his brow. . . . Let us cast a brief glance at the enlightened nations of all Europe. At the present tim e every one of those nations is striving to perfect its own dialect. This is a very useful object, seeing that w hen learned men write their thoughts in the general language of the whole nation, then the enlightenment of the intellect and the light of learning are not confined to persons who understand the old literary language, but are spread abroad and reach even the villagers, being taught to the humblest peasants and to the shepherds, provided only that they know how to read. A nd how easy it is to teach a child how to read his own language. . . . I am aw are that som eone may reply to me that if we begin to write in the com mon dialect the old language will be neglected and will gradually disappear. I answer: “W hat profit have we from a language which, taking our nation as a whole, not one person in ten thousand understands properly and which is foreign to my mother and my sisters?” . . . “Then let them learn it!” you may object. T hat is easier said than done. H ow many people have the tim e and means to learn the old literary language? Very few! But everybody knows the general, com mon dialect; and in it all who can read may enlighten their minds, improve their hearts, and adorn their manners. A language derives its value from the good that it does. And what language can do more good than the general language of the whole nation? The French and the Italians had no fears that the Latin lan guage would perish if they began to write their own languages, and indeed it has not perished. N or will our old language perish because the learned men of our nation will always know it. . . .3
Vuk Karajich continued the work begun by Obradovich. He was born in 1787 in a small Serbian village near the Bosnian frontier. He was able to get some education, and during the revolution that began in 1804 he served as secretary to the illiterate Serbian com m ander of his district. When the Turks tem porarily reconquered the country he lied to Vienna. There he met the young Slovene scholar Bartolomeus K opitar, who encouraged him to


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 243
collect and study Serbian popular poetry and stories. His first collection published in 1814 was received enthusiastically in the West, where the Rom antic m ovem ent then was at its height. Ten years later Karajich published a greatly enlarged edition in four volumes. The purity of language and classic turn of phrase which Karajich found in the songs of the people impressed him profoundly. By this time he was an accomplished linguist, so he resolved to use his training to elevate the vernacular to the position of a literary language in place of the artificial ecclesiastical language. To this end he introduced phonetic reforms into the old Cyrillic alphabet, published his famous Serbian dictionary and grammar, selected the Herzegovinian dialect as the purest form of the Serbo-Croat language, and molded that dialect into the literary language of the SerboC roat people. His reforms, like those of Obradovich, were violently opposed by the church leaders, who feared that they endangered the national culture and religious character of the Serbian people. For some time his orthography was actually forbidden in Serbia and his works were not allowed to circulate. But before his death in 1864 he had won the support of the younger gen eration and his ideas had completely trium phed. Today, thanks to Karajich, the literary language of the Serbo-C roats probably is as close to the popular speech as th at of any people in the world. Obradovich and Karajich by no means thought alike. Obradovich was a rationalist and a cosm opolitan who wished to civilize his nation by spreading the ideas of the Enlightenment. Karajich was a Romantic and a nationalist who was interested prim arily in the custom s and folk literature of his people and who wished Serbia to develop independently of the West. Yet both were opposed to the church domination of the past. Both were on the same side on the basic issue of theocracy or secular nationalism. In fact, Karajich contributed enormously to the eventual political union of the Ser bian and Croatian people by creating an acceptable Serbo-Croat literary lan guage. And Obradovich specifically rejected religious distinctions for the con cept of not merely Serbian but Yugoslav nationalism.
W ho is ignorant of the fact that the inhabitants of M ontenegro, D alm atia, Herzegovina, Bosnia, Serbia, Croatia, Slavonia, Srem, Backa, and the Banat (ex cept for Rum anians), all speak the same language? W hen I w rite of these peoples who live in these kingdom s and provinces, I mean the members both of the Greek and of the Latin Church, and do not exclude even the Turks [Moslems] of Bosnia and Herzegovina, inasmuch as reli gion and faith can be changed, but race and language can never be. . . . My book will be intended for every person who understands our language and who with a pure and honest heart desires to enlighten his mind and to improve his character. I shall pay no heed w hatever to w hat religion and faith any man belongs, nor is that a m atter for consideration in the present enlightened age.4


244 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
ROOTS OF REVOLT
The intellectual revolution among the Serbs was confined largely to those who lived in the H apsburg Em pire. F o r example, O bradovich was born in the Banat, and K arajich, although born in Serbia, spent most of his life in V ienna, where he won international fam e as a scholar. H ow ever, K arajich’s relatives had little appreciation of what he was accomplishing. The gulf be tw een the Serbians on the two sides of the D anube is reflected in a letter which Karajich received in 1816 from his home village. He was informed that freedom from the Turks had brought economic prosperity and that one could make a com fortable living running a store or a tavern. “O ur O brad has come far selling liquor— you should look into his pocketbook! A nd Am idja wants to do the same as soon as he finishes the house. And you left for gay Vienna to waste your time. See that you finish those books as soon as you can. People are asking about them. And then come here to live.” 5 Nevertheless, it was these Serbs with such a limited horizon who first won freedom from foreign rule. And the reason was that they were driven to revolt by the breakdown of Ottoman administration. One manifestation of this breakdow n was the rise of chifliks o r private estates in place of the form er fiefs. As im perial authority w eakened, the spahis began to treat their fiefs as chilliks or to acquire chifliks in various illegal ways. As in the case of the agaliks in Bosnia, these chifliks worsened drastically the position of the C hristian peasantry. N o longer did they have the right to till a hereditary plot so long as they paid a defined and customary tithe. Now their obliga tions were sharply and arbitrarily increased and they had no choice but to pay or surrender their plots. Thus a m ajor grievance of the Serbian peasantry was this chillik system, which became particularly widespread in the late eighteenth century. A nother grievance which also derived from the declinc of imperial authority was the lawlessness of the janissaries. These undisciplined troops were a curse for everyone in the pashalik, Serbs and Turks alike. They de fied the pasha and victimized even the spahis, forcefully seizing their fiefs and converting them into personal chifliks. Partly because of this abuse many Serbs joined the Austrians when they penetrated into the Balkans during the w ar that began in 1788. But domestic com plications and the specter of rev olution in France caused the Austrians to accept the Sistova Treaty in 1791 and to withdraw beyond the Danube. The treaty did contain two provisions designed to protect the Serbians from reprisals. The janissaries were to be expelled from the Belgrade pashalik and the Serbian rebels were to be granted a general amnesty. These term s were strictly observed. The sultan w'as the reform er Selim III, who was continually at odds with the janissaries and who appointed enlightened pashas with instructions to enforce the treaty pro visions. One of these pashas, Hadji M ustafa, governed the pashalik so rea sonably and benevolently that he was called “ M other of the Serbs.” But his


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 245
ultim ate fate is revealing of the conditions then prevailing in the O ttom an E m pire. M ustafa’s predecessor had expelled the janissaries from the pashalik, forcing them to seek asylum with Pasvan-Oglu, the rebellious and separatistminded pasha of Vidin. From there they conducted periodic forays against the Belgrade pashalik. M ustafa boldly arm ed the Serbians, allowed them to form voluntary corps under their own leaders, and with their support de feated Pasvan-Oglu and the janissaries in 1798. The spectacle of Christians routing Moslems with the approval of an Ottom an pasha shocked many Turks. M ustafa was ordered the following year to allow the janissaries to return to his pashalik. This proved to be the beginning of the end for Mustafa, whose ef forts to keep the janissaries in check were w ithout success. In 1801 he was forced to send his Serbian levies once more against Pasvan-Oglu. The janis saries took advantage of their absence to attack M ustafa in the citadel and slay him before the Serbians could return. To Constantinople they reported, “ Hadji Mustafa was a dog who sided with the rayas against true believers. He has received his just rew ard.” w The janissaries now were the masters of the pashalik. They instituted a reign of terror, plundering T urkish spahis its mercilessly as Serbian peas ants. The spahis finally took up arms but they received little support from the Serbs and were brutally suppressed. The Serbians in desperation appealed to the sultan for relief. Selim responded by sending a sharp rebuke to the janissaries and warning them that he might send against them “an army not of your faith.” The janissaries concluded that the threat referred to the Serbian levies used so effectively by M ustafa. So they began a preventive massacre of Serbian leaders or knezes. W ithin a few days the heads of seventy-two victims graced the citadel walls at Belgrade. One of the knezes who was able to escape the roving bands of assassins was George Petrovich, known as Karageorge or Black George because of his swarthy complexion. A gigantic man, utterly fearless, and an outstanding leader, he quickly became the head of a desperate struggle for survival. As a prosperous hog dealer he appealed to the propertied elements, and as a former haiduk he attracted the traditionally anti-Turkish outlaws. Also, he had fought for the Austrians in the preceding war and had gained valuable experience which, com bined with his great natural talents, made him a military com m ander of the first order. T he uprising was to prevail not only because of the qualities of its leader but also because it was supported by all segments of the Serbian pop ulation. The peasants wished to be rid of the oppressive chiflik system, while the m ore substantial elements-—the priests, the knezes, and the pig dealerswere goaded on by the intolerable excesses of the janissaries. None of these groups was m otivated at the outset by abstract ideals of independence and national unity. None took up arms against the rule of the sultan in Con stantinople. Rather, they fought against those troublemakers who were flout ing the sultan’s authority and spreading disorder in the im perial adm inistra


246 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
tion. The Serbs wanted not a new order but a return to the old order of Hadji M ustafa. In this sense the Serbian insurrection of 1804 began as a fundamentally different movement from the Greek W ar of Independence of 1821.
COURSE OF THE r e v o l t : 1804-1813
The Serbian revolt was characterized by unity in aim and diversity in m ethod. H aiduk chiefs, village knezes, and warlike priests led their indi vidual bands and pursued their own local objects. Karageorge operated in the central and wealthy Shumadia district. He had more followers and dis posed of more money and arms than the other leaders. This advantage, to gether with his forceful personality and initial victories, enabled him to pull together what was essentially a scattered guerrilla movement. The fighting began in February, 1804. Karageorge and the other leaders first attacked and overran small Turkish outposts. By the end of April they had forced the enemy into A few strong fortresses and begun reg ular siege operations. The surprised and outnum bered janissaries now sought a settlement and asked for the mediation of the Austrian commander at the frontier. A conference was held on May 10, 1804, in the Austrian border town of Semlin (Z em un). The Serbians professed their loyalty to the sultan but they also rejected mere promises of better treatm ent in the future. They insisted on guarantees, demanding that they should retain their arms and that the janissaries should be permanently expelled. These conditions were not acceptable and the conference broke up. The Serbians had been receiving appreciable aid from the outside, particularly from their brothers across the Danube. At Semlin sixty workers were busy turning out m unitions for the cause. T he Serbian bLshop of Novi Sad in south Hungary contributed a small cannon which proved very effec tive against the fortresses. Also, Serbian officers in the A ustrian army de serted their posts and returned to their hom eland in droves. It was on the advice of one of these officers that a delegation was sent to St. Petersburg in September, 1804, to secure Russian aid. The Serbian deputies found Tsar Alexander ambivalent because of the conflicting pressures of the international situation. He had no dispute with Turkey at this time; instead, he was concerned about the danger of French expansion from Italy to the Balkans. Accordingly, he preferred that the sul tan should not be weakened and that the Serbs should be reconciled to their sovereign as soon as possible. On the other hand, the tsar feared that if he rejected the Serbs altogether they might turn to France or Austria. This ex plains the equivocal advice that the Serbians received. They were warned to be “discreet and prudent” and to reach a peaceful settlement because Russian intervention was most im probable. But they were offered arms and officers and were promised diplomatic support in Constantinople. Karageorge responded by sending a mission to the O ttom an capital.


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 247
It proved abortive because the sultan had already decided against conces sions. He had tolerated the Serbian uprising so long as it was directed ex clusively against the janissaries. But now the Serbians were demanding virtual autonomy and this the sultan refused to consider. The mufti in Constanti nople issued a fetva proclaiming the, Serbians enemies of all Moslems and a veritable Holy W ar was declared, a During the critical campaigns that followed, Karageorge dem on strated his talent as a strategist as well as a guerrilla leader. He depended on the local chiefs to harass the enemy on the advanced borders while he kept a strong reserve force in the center of Shumadia under his personal command. Thus he was able to reinforce any threatened point and to main tain a general control over operations. In 1805 he repulsed a Turkish army advancing up the M orava Valley from Nish. The next year he dispersed three armies attacking from the south, east, and west. In December, 1806, he cap tured Belgrade itself and by June, 1807, the last Turkish fortress in northern Serbia had fallen. Meanwhile the international situation had changed drastically and had affected directly the Serbian cause. Sultan Selim had decided late in 1806 to throw in his lot with N apoleon. Im m ediately he was attacked on land by Russia and on sea by Britain. Selim naturally wished to be rid of the Serbian distraction, especially since the campaign had gone so badly. He offered to meet the Serbian demands, amounting to virtual autonomy for the principal ity. But at the same time the Russians also made advances to the Serbs, offer ing them money, arms, and close cooperation if they would continue fighting against the Turks. Thus the Serbian revolt became part and parcel of the great diplomatic and military struggle between Napoleon and the Allies for the control of Europe. Karageorge had to choose between autonomy under the sultan and cooperation with the tsar. He chose the latter and signed an alliance with Russia on July 10, 1807. Serbian troops were to fight with the Russians, and in return Karageorge was to receive money, arms, and military, medical, and administrative missions.* This decision proved to be a turning point in the course of the Serbian revolt. By rejecting the offer of autonom y and con cluding an alliance with Russia, the Serbs had converted w hat had begun as a protest against janissary oppression into a full-fledged war for independence. The Russian alliance was a turning point for another reason. International developments led T sar Alexander to reverse his diplomatic policy and to desert his new Serbian allies, with ultimately disastrous results for them. In fact, three days before the Serbian-Russian alliance was signed Alexander had executed a sudden about-face and concluded the Tilsit Treaty, which tem porarily resolved his differences with Napoleon. The tsar then withdrew his troops from Serbia and reached an armistice with Turkey on August 24,
* See Chapter 12.


248 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
1807. He attem pted to include Serbia in the armistice agreement but the Turks flatly refused. Thus the Serbs were left alone to face the Turks, whose sizable armies were freed from the Russian front. Karageorge desperately sought assistance from other quarters. He even went so far as to offer incorporation of the Belgrade pashalik into the H apsburg Em pire in return for A ustrian aid. But the Vienna governm ent was too greatly committed elsewhere to risk such involvement in the Balkan Peninsula. K arageorge also sent a letter to Paris on A ugust 16, 1809, asking for the “powerful protection of the G reat Napoleon” and assuring him that all the South Slavs were ready to follow his lead.7 But Napoleon refused to make any move that might endanger his relations with Turkey. Fortunately for the Serbians, the Turkish-Russian armistice did not lead to peace. The Turks refused to accept the Russian territorial demands and the war was renewed. But finally on M ay 28, 1812, the tsar hastily signed the Bucharest Treaty with the sultan in order to face the impending invasion by N apoleon’s G rand A rm y. T he tsar again m ade a gesture in behalf of his Serbian allies by inserting a clause calling for autonom y and “full amnesty.” But these paper provisions proved worthless. While the Russians were engrossed in their great struggle against the French invaders, the Turks concentrated their armies in a three-pronged attack against the Serbians. This time Karageorge failed to rise to the occasion. A t the height of the campaign he suddenly left his com rades and lied over the Danube. A ppar ently the strain of years of fighting together with the prospect of ultimate dis aster proved too much even for his spirit. By the close of 1813 the Turks had reoccupied Belgrade and gained control of the entire country. In a war lasting nine years the Serbs had won their freedom and then lost it— though, as it turned out, only temporarily.
W INNING OF AUTONOM Y: 181 3 - 1 8 3 0
A little more than a year after their defeat the Serbians again took up arms. The hero of this second uprising was a prominent knez, Milosh Obrenovich. He had not been one of the top leaders of the first revolt, per haps because of his hatred for Karageorge, whom he believed to have pois oned his half brother. W hen Karageorge and other chiefs fled in 1813 Milosh chose to rem ain behind. T he pasha in Belgrade, im pressed by M ilosh’s local experience and by his enmity for Karageorge, decided to use him as an in strum ent to get the Serbians to submit. He appointed Milosh grand knez of three districts, thereby giving him control of most of the central Shumadia region. Milosh was a much more complex character than Karageorge. He was an astute and inscrutable man, adept at hiding his feelings, capable of analyzing a situation objectively, willing to wait for developments to mature, and skillful in playing off one party or person against another. He did not altogether lack K arageorge’s ability to deliver a hard blow in the field, but


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 249
diplomacy came more naturally to him. It was as a diplom at rather than as soldier that he made his greatest contributions to his country. Milosh at first made every effort to persuade his countrym en to sub mit to the Turks. Presumably he hoped that retribution might thereby be re duced to a minimum. But the returning Turks indulged in wholesale massacres and spoliation. They claimed and seized land and wealth which they had never before possessed. They systematically terrorized the countryside by planting garrisons of janissaries and wild Albanians in the fortresses and even in remote rural areas. In 1814 a revolt broke out in one of the districts as signed to Milosh. He dispersed some of the rebels and induced the rest to submit on a promise of amnesty from the pasha. The promise was broken and about two hundred rebels were executed, some impaled, the more for tunate beheaded. Finally, Milosh himself decided that collaboration was not feasible. On Palm Sunday, 1815, he unfurled the banner of revolt and the second insurrection began. Milosh had better fortune than his predecessor. A t first he had to fight hard against strong Turkish forces and he won four victories in quick succession. These established the insurrectionary movement as something m ore than a flash in the pan and served to attract tim id souls that hitherto had been undecided. Thereafter Milosh never had to face the odds over which Karageorge several times had trium phed. The reason was partly the favorable international situation and partly M ilosh’s skillful diplom acy. By June, 1815, Napoleon had suffered final defeat at W aterloo and had been safely removed to St. Helena. Now Russia was not engaged in the W est and was free to turn to the Balkans. The Turks therefore preferred a quick com prom ise with the Serbs to a protracted war that might end in Russian inter vention. Milosh, on his part, was ready to accept minimal concessions and to wait patiently for opportunities to extract more. A n imperial decree in December, 1815, recognized Milosh as su prem e knez of the pashalik and allowed the Serbs to retain their arms and to hold a national assembly or skupshtina. But pashas and spahis and Turkish garrisons were to rem ain as before, and taxes and tribute were to continue to be sent to Constantinople. This compromise arrangement represented the beginning of an eighteen-year struggle for self-government, at the end of which Milosh finally won for his country recognition as an autonom ous prin cipality. M ilosh had some solid basis for his diplomatic campaign. The Turks had troops in the country but he had his arm ed Serbs who would not be pushed around w ith im punity. M ilosh also had a strong legal argum ent in Article V III of the Treaty of Bucharest. It had been ignored hitherto by the Turks, but its stipulation was clear. It recognized Milosh as “ Prince of the Serbian N ation” and authorized him “to adm inister the internal affairs of the country and to settle them in concert with the Council and Assembly of the Chiefs and Elders of the N ation.” 8 Finally, M ilosh had as his trum p card the T urks’ fear of Russia. He played this card discreetly, knowing full


250 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
well that Russia would not move a finger unless it were to her own interest to do so. For this reason Milosh refused to entangle himself in anti-Turkish plots with neighboring peoples. In fact, it was over this issue that M ilosh had his final and fatal difference with Karageorge. The latter returned to Serbia in 1817 with plans to arouse the country for a combined Serbian-Greek revr olution against O ttom an rule. Milosh opposed him adamantly, being con vinced that it was a foolish and ruinous move. Personal considerations also were undoubtedly involved, for Karageorge was a dangerous rival. In any case Milosh allowed, and perhaps inspired, a band of assassins to m urder Karageorge in his sleep and to deliver his head to the pasha. This terrible and tragic ending of the life of a great patriot precipi tated the feud between the Karageorge and Obrenovich dynasties that was to wrack Serbian politics for a century and a half. Of the nine Serbian rulers between 1804 and 1945 four were assassinated and four were exiled. Sup porters of Milosh could perhaps argue that in his case personal and national interest were one. For he did finally win autonom y for his country, and with out further war and devastation. The outbreak of the Greek W ar of Independence in 1821 gave Milosh an opportunity to extract concessions peacefully. Russian-Turkish relations were strained throughout the Greek war, so Milosh corresponded w ith the R ussians, rem inding them of Serbia’s aspirations. But he refused to be drawn into the struggle despite G reek appeals for aid. On October 7, 1828, Tsar Nicholas forced the sultan to sign the Convention of Ackerm an requiring the Turks to carry out immediately all provisions of the Bucharest Treaty, and specifically Article V III pertaining to Serbia. The convention proved to be valueless. The Turks refused to honor it and finally the tsar declared war in the spring of 1828. The Treaty of Adrianople (September 29, 1829) which ended the w ar required the Turks to fulfill all the stipulations of the A ckerm an Con vention. So far as Serbia was concerned, this was actually done the following year (August 28, 1830) when the sultan issued a decree recognizing Milosh as hereditary prince and granting autonomy to Serbia. Taxes henceforth were to be paid in a lump sum with the annual tribute; the spahis were to sur render their estates and their indemnity was to be included in the tribute pay ment; and the Turkish garrisons were to be restricted to the frontier fortresses. T here rem ained only the problem of delim iting Serbia’s boundaries. The question had been raised in 1820 and again in 1826. M ilosh claimed all the territory that had been occupied by Karageorge, but the Turks con tinued to hold certain outlying areas. M ilosh characteristically bided his time. The Bosnian revolt of 1831 spread into the disputed areas and Milosh promptly occupied them “to restore order.” Two years later, on May 25, 1833, the Turkish government, under pressure from Russia, acknowledged Serbia’s jurisdiction. T hus M ilosh at last reached his final goal. Serbia was an autonom ous principality with definite boundaries and he was its recognized and hereditary ruler.


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 251
SERBIA UNDER M ILOSH
W hen the famous French writer Alphonse Lam artine visited the Serbian principality in 1833 he found himself surrounded by an “ocean of forests” and he imagined that he was in the midst of the North American woodlands. His analogy was apt because Serbia in the early nineteenth cen tury did in fact resemble an American frontier community of the same pe riod. T he winning of autonom y did not transform M ilosh’s Serbia into a m odern state of the W estern variety. R ather, it rem ained a poor and primitive pashalik with the physical appearance of an American frontier region and with cultural characteristics reflecting the past centuries of O ttom an rule. The few roads that were cut through the forests could be traversed only on foot, on horseback, or by oxcart. Two roads alone were fit for carriage traveling, but this did not cause hardship because only two people boasted carriages, the pasha in Belgrade and Prince M ilosh himself. The Ser bian peasants regarded the surrounding forests as a nuisance to be rid of as soon as possible, and, like the A m erican frontiersm en, they set fire to vast stands in order to scatter corn seed between the charred stumps. Also, the m anner of everyday life in the M orava Valley closely resembled that in the Ohio Valley— the same log cabins, home-made furniture and clothes, plain food but plenty of it, plum brandy in place of rum, books and schools con spicuous by their scarcity, and an abundance of m alaria and other diseases which were treated by a combination of home remedies, barbers, and quacks. In short, M ilosh’s Serbia was a typical, egalitarian, rough-and-ready frontier society knowing neither poor men nor rich. Foreign observers reacted to the Serbian peasants in very much the same way as they did to the frontiersmen in the New W orld. “They are a nation of shepherds and swineherds,” re ported the British consul from Belgrade, “and have no desire apparently to be anything else. . . . They prefer a life of sloth and intem perance in their native forests to the civilisation which might result from improved industry and intelligence.” 6 In the field of government the past centuries had left a deep imprint. M ilosh remained essentially a pasha, albeit a Serbian one, and he ruled the principality as though it were his personal domain. The British consul sent to his superiors a description of M ilosh’s adm inistration which reveals the degree to which the principality remained a pashalik.
N o constitution exists in this country nor even any description of estab lished laws, civil or criminal; the country is governed by the absolute will of the Prince: no contract is binding except by his power; no marriage can take place without his approval; no transfer of property can be effected except by his sanc tion, and no will of a deceased person is valid without the Prince’s examination and approval. Again, criminals are tried by him and punishment awarded ac cording to his decision, which in some instances is extremely rigorous. . . . The peasantry are forced to leave their own agricultural pursuits, and often at several days’ distance from their home are assembled to work for the Prince, whose es


252 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
tates are cultivated in this manner: no sort of recompense . . . nor even any food or refreshment.11· 1
V
M any foreigners and an increasing number of Serbians criticized M ilosh for his autocratic administration. But his highhandedness was not due solely to his personal predilection for one-man rule. Existing conditions and historical traditions were such that personal freedoms and the W estern type of representative institutions were out of the question. The war against the Turks had been fought by individual local chieftains, or voivodes, each of whom had his band of personal followers. These voivodes naturally tried to retain control over the areas which they had liberated. Only by arbitrary and ruthless measures was Milosh able to halt this trend toward a new and law less military feudalism. Also, the Serbian peasants had a long tradition of village self-government, and they were unwilling to assume the obligations and burdens required by independent statehood. They imagined that having got rid of the Turks they would be free to sit under the shade of the village trees and drink plum brandy without any interference from the outside world. Again Milosh had to resort to forceful methods to com bat this anarchi cal self-centeredness of the peasants, which was as dangerous as the disrup tive aspirations of the voivodes. Thus a strong central authority was essential if the centrifugal forces th at threatened Serbia’s very existence w ere to be overcome. T hese circum stances, together with M ilosh’s natural authoritarian tendencies, explain the extremely arbitrary rule described by the British con sul. A skupshtina or national assembly did exist, but it met only when M ilosh sum m oned it. M ilosh retained full executive power, appointed all officials, and intervened in local affairs whenever he wished. This paternalism was tolerable so long as the Turks were at the gate. But after the RussoTurkish W ar and the Treaty of Adrianople of 1829 the Serbians felt com paratively safe and refused to bow their heads any longer. A n opposition group gradually crystallized, basing its dem ands upon the sultan’s decree of 1830, the third clause of which stipulated that the prince should “administer the domestic affairs of the country in accord with the assembly of Serbian notables.” 11 M ilosh paid no attention to this provision and continued with his one-m an rule. The extent of the opposition that developed is reflected in the following letter addressed to Milosh on April 18, 1832, by the famous Serbian linguist, Vuk Karajich.
No one is satisfied with you; some complain that there is no security for property or life; others accuse you of thinking more of yourself than of the public welfare. . . . You are capricious; even your confidants say that it is dangerous to live by your side. Merchants complain that you have ruined them; people of sub stance say that Karageorge treated them better. Even in your family there are dis affected— your brother Jevrem, your wife Ljubica. . . . You must make changes: give security to officials, end the corvée, train good officials, stop meddling in trade, buy no more property abroad, improve your private life, tolerate criticism


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 253
of your acts. Otherwise there will be a revolt and no one will lift a finger for you. . . ,12
K arajich’s w arning proved prophetic. A disturbance broke out in 1835 and Milosh hurriedly ordered his secretary to prepare a constitution to calm the agitation. The constitution was adopted but it was far too demo cratic for M ilosh’s liking. W ith the support of Turkey and Russia he abro gated it and returned to his old ways. This cleavage w ithin Serbia led to the intervention of the European powers. Britain, oddly enough, supported Milosh while Russia demanded that he accept a constitutional regime. The explanation is not th at the R ussians had been won over to constitutional government but rather that they hoped thereby to secure a means of exerting influence in Serbia. So long as Milosh was the absolute autocrat he was likely to continue on his independent course. But if his authority were bal anced by that of a senate, a constitutional conflict was likely to follow and the Russian consul then would have an opportunity to intervene decisively, “T he intention of R ussia,” reported the British consul, “ is to im pose on Milosh a Senate or Council of her own agents in order to secure for herself ascendancy in Serbia. . . . The individuals thus attem pted to be forced into the councils of the Prince M ilosh are as despotic in their principles and as tyrannic in their dispositions as the Prince himself can possibly b e.” 13 The final decision regarding constitutional arrangem ents in the prin cipality lay with the sultan, who had issued in 1830 the original decree grant ing autonom ous governm ent. O n D ecem ber 24, 1838, the sultan decided in favor of the Russian position. He proclaimed a constitution which provided for a council of seventeen senators with very extensive rights, the most im portant being that they could not be removed without due cause. Milosh was compelled to appoint senators who were either openly or secretly hostile to him. These individuals promptly demanded that Milosh abdicate or face trial on various charges. Milosh chose to step down and on June 15, 1839, he crossed the Sava River to exile. If Milosh had commanded widespread support within the country he might have been able to withstand the pressure of his political opponents even though they were backed by Russia. But his covetousness and irascibil ity had antagonized so many that his great contributions to his country were forgotten and his departure was generally applauded. N ot many years were to elapse, however, before people were harking back to the good old days of Prince Milosh. And- in the end he was called back to the throne in his seventy-eighth year amid popular acclaim and rejoicing.
ALEXANDER KARAGEORGEVICH: 1842-1858
Milosh abdicated in favor of his oldest son, Milan. The latter was m ortally ill and died w ithout being conscious of his elevation. His brother Michael succeeded him on July 8, 1839, but rem ained on the throne only


254 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
three years. He was seventeen at the time of his accession; hence the Senate appointed regents to rule the country. The men selected were hostile to the Obrenovich dynasty. Furtherm ore, they had the backing of the Turkish and Russian governments. The odds were too great for the youthful Michael, and in August, 1842, he was forced to llee the country after a vain attem pt to assert his independence. The Skupshtina elected in his place Alexander Karageorgevich, a son of the great Karageorge. The new ruler was an upright and well-intentioned person but unfortunately he proved too weak to guide Serbia through the stormy waters that lay ahead. During the sixteen years of his reign the senators were the real rulers of the country. Their administration was marked by factionalism and corruption. Nevertheless, Serbia did progress appreciably beyond the primitive standards prevailing at the beginning of the century. By the end of the reign, 352 elementary schools were in operation, though alm ost all of these were located in the towns and cities. A n A cadem y of Science was established in 1841 and the University of Belgrade in 1844. Foreign trade increased rapidly, particularly with the Hapsburg Empire. W estern influences for the first time began to make an im pression on the country. This process was hastened by the senators, who were mostly mer chants and bureaucrats and who had little sympathy for the traditional paternalistic society of the past. The result, in broad terms, was the spread of a money and credit economy and the growth of a W estern type of state apparatus. Leaving the economic changes for later consideration and turning to the administrative innovations we find that, although they were generally necessary and inevi table, the immediate effects were frequently both unfortunate and unpopular. The governm ent adopted in 1844 a civil code which was based on that of A ustria and which hastened the spread of individualistic ideas and practices. Also, an elaborate judicial system was established, though it functioned poorly because of the shortage of trained personnel. Many of the judges were barely able to decipher the code, and the clerks were often incapable of keeping accurate records. Bribery was common and taken for granted. The police were popularly considered to be venal and brutal. A law in 1850 granted them authority to inflict fines, prison sentences, and even corporal punishment. Local self-government institutions which had flourished for cen turies under the Turks now began to wither with the appearance of appointed officials. The latter frequently were A ustrian Serbs, they being m ore likely to have the requisite education and training. But these prechani, as they were called (literally, “over the river” ), were generally unpopular. They brought with them the autocratic attitudes and practices of the H apsburg bureauc racy. These were foreign to the Serbian mentality, so that the average peasant regarded the prechani not as fellow Serbs but as Serbian-speaking Germans. These manifold changes were unavoidable manifestations of the breakup of the static and self-contained society of the past. But to the average peasant


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 255
they were unsettling and uncom fortable, and he naturally looked back with nostalgia to the days of the “Old L ord” Milosh. In foreign affairs the government was cautious and conservative. This was evident in 1848, when a series of revolutions swept over the Continent. The South Slavs under Hapsburg rule were directly affected by the upheaval. We shall note later in this chapter that both the Serbians and the Croatians took up arms against the intolerant Hungarian nationalists and that a strong movem ent developed for the unity and the independence of all South Slavs. The Serbian principality could not escape the repercussions of these stirring events across the Danube. Alexander and his chief minister, Ilya Garashanin, sym pathized with the objectives of the insurgent Hapsburg Slavs. A few years earlier G arashanin had prepared a m em orandum on foreign policy in which he declared that “the unification of Serbia w ith all the other subject peoples m ust be considered a fundam ental law of the state.” 14 T his objective ap peared to be within the realm of possibility with the outbreak of the 1848 revolutions. The A ustrian consul in Belgrade reported much excitement, in cluding the formation of “a club of pan-Slav and democratic tendencies.” On the night of M arch 24, 1848, according to the consul, the club issued a proclam ation calling on all South Slavs “to· liberate themselves com pletely from the O ttom an E m pire and to create, since A ustria is in agony, a Y ugo slav Kingdom under the banner of Prince Alexander Karageorgevich, con sisting of Serbia, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Slavonia* Syrmia, Dalm atia and Southern H ungary.” 15 But both Russia and Turkey were unalterably opposed to Serbian intervention in the revolutionary movement. Alexander and his ministers de cided to remain safely neutral rather than risk the hazards of defying the two neighboring empires. Arms and volunteers continued to pour across the river to the em battled H apsburg Slavs, but the Serbian government remained officially neutral. This policy cost A lexander much popularity. M any of his subjects believed that their unredeemed brothers under foreign yoke should have been helped regardless of the risk. A lexander’s position was not strength ened when the Russian and Austrian governments sent him decorations for remaining neutral during the crisis. T he Crim ean W ar furth er underm ined A lexander’s standing. P opular sentiment in Serbia was on the side of Russia, but A lexander again felt con strained to keep his people in check. So great was the clamor for joining Russia that A lexander adm itted to the British consul that he dared not call the Skupshtina because of the “dynastic danger.” But with A ustrian and Turkish armies poised on his frontiers Alexander had no real alternative to neutrality. The Treaty of Paris, which ended the war in 1856, stipulated that “the rights and immunities of Serbia” be placed “under the collective guar antee of the signatory powers.” This meant that henceforth no Turkish de cision concerning Serbia would be valid without the concurrence of the signatory powers. To put it positively, Serbia now had a legal basis for ap pealing to the powers.


256 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
The average Serb did not appreciate this advantageous provision. He believed only that Alexander had deserted Russia during the war just as he had deserted the H apsburg Slavs during the 1848 revolts. He also dis liked the senators, regarding them with much justification as corrupt and self-seeking. A popular dem and arose for a Skupshtina to settle existing grievances. W hen it met in December, 1858, it showed itself hostile to both Alexander and the Senate. It drew up a list of grievances and appointed a commission of seventeen members to “see to the welfare of the State.” The commission at once called on Alexander to abdicate. Alexander refused at first, but since he was unwilling to call out the army he was finally forced to surrender the throne. Meanwhile, the Skupshtina had recalled the “Old Lord” Milosh with the enthusiastic endorsem ent of the people.
TH E OBRENOVICHES TO 1 8 7 8
Despite his age, Milosh showed the same energy, self-confidence, and highhandedness that had always distinguished him. He began by throwing into prison his old enemies who had forced his abdication years before. Then he successfully defied A ustria when that power tried to interfere with the shipment of arms to Serbia. Finally, he sent a deputation to Constantinople with two dem ands: that the Turkish governm ent should recognize his title as hereditary and th at all Turks within Serbia should reside within the fortress bounds. Both these dem ands already had been granted in the sultan’s edict of 1830 but they had not been respected in late years. Now the Turks responded to Milosh by resorting to their usual delaying tactics. Milosh set tled the m atter quickly by announcing to the Skupshtina on August 22, 1860, that, regardless of the sultan’s suzerainty, the Serbian people thenceforth would consider the two disputed points as settled in their favor and having the force of law. The assembly approved this bold move enthusiastically. A m onth later the old patriarch, now in his eightieth year, was dead. His son and successor, Prince Michael Obrenovich, proved to be the most successful ruler in the history of m odern Serbia. Tall and gaunt, with a swarthy complexion and a heavy beard, M ichael was a striking figure de spite his frail health. Some contem poraries attributed his achievements to good fortune and to experienced advisers rather than to his own abilities. But all are agreed that he was strong-willed and upright, and that he had lofty ambitions for his country. Also, he was m uch better prepared for his duties than his illiterate father had been. H e was highly educated and had visited the chief capitals of Europe. He realized that Serbia no longer could be governed in patriarchal fashion as a private dom ain. “T he law is the suprem e authority in Serbia”— his m otto in government— M ilosh would have found intolerable, and perhaps rightly so in his time. M ichael’s goal was tw ofold: to com plete the em ancipation of Serbia by securing the withdrawal of Turkish troops from the fortresses, and to restore the ancient Serbian kingdom by bringing under his scepter the unre


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 257
deemed brothers under Turkish rule. To reach this goal he first had to re organize his adm inistration and strengthen his armed forces. In 1861 he prom ulgated a new constitution which increased his prerogatives at the ex pense of the Skupshtina and especially of the Senate. Michael no longer was com pelled to choose his m inisters from the Senate or to share with it the direction of foreign affairs. He now was free to act quickly and authorita tively when the occasion arose. At the same time Michael built up the first regular Serbian army. Hitherto local chieftains had shown up with their per sonal followers in times of em ergency and had not hesitated to depart when they so desired. Now Michael secured the services of a French officer, Lieutenant-Colonel M ondain, who organized a standing army of over fifty thou sand men. This was supplem ented by a Military Academy to train officers, a conscription act to provide recruits, and an income tax to furnish the neces sary funds. An opportunity to raise the question of the Turkish garrisons offered itself on June 15, 1862, when a T urkish officer killed a Serbian youth at a public function in Belgrade. Serbian police who intervened were fired upon by Turkish soldiers and killed. The Serbian population thereupon attacked the guardhouses and drove Turkish soldiers and civilians alike into the citadel. The next day, while feeling still ran high, the T urkish com m ander suddenly opened fire with his cannon and bom barded the open city for five hours. This insensate act proved a godsend for Michael. Although the damage was slight, he was able to dem and a conference of the powers in order to end so intolerable a situation. T he conference was held in C onstantinople and on Septem ber 4 it was agreed that the T urks should evacuate all fortresses except those in Belgrade and three other cities. Also, all the Turkish civilians who still resided in Serbia were to leave, the Serbian governm ent undertak ing to compensate those who left property behind. In 1866 Michael grasped another opportunity to complete the evacu ation of the fortresses. The defeat of A ustria by Prussia in that year weak ened temporarily the power that was the most consistent champion of the status quo in the Balkans. In the same year a formidable revolt broke out in Crete, and Turkey found herself on the brink of war with Greece. M ichael took this favorable occasion to suggest courteously that the sultan might surrender the perfectly nugatory right of maintaining garrisons in Serbia. Diplom atic pressure by friendly powers induced the sultan to give his con sent. Early in 1867 the last Turkish soldiers left Serbian soil. No token remained of O ttom an suzerainty except the yearly tribute and the Turkish star and crescent waving over the Belgrade citadel beside the Serbian tricolor. A t the same time that he was winning these concessions M ichael had been negotiating a series of agreements and alliances with neighboring Balkan countries. His aim was to create a Balkan League, drive the Turks back to Asia M inor, and unite under his rule the liberated South Slavs. His negotia tions and pacts constitute an im portant chapter of Balkan diplomatic history and will be considered in C hap ter 21. Suffice it to note here th at M ichael


258 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
organized the first Balkan League between 1865 and 1868. But by the latter year the European diplomatic situation had changed so drastically that a combined assault upon Turkey no longer was feasible. Before another favorable occasion could materialize Michael was assassinated on June 10, 1868. Public opinion accused the Karageorgevich family, though the responsibility for the crime remains a mystery to this day. For Serbia the m urder represented a tragic and irreparable loss. A n able leader was cut down at the height of his constructive activity and his suc cessor proved utterly incapable of continuing his work. If the assassins who murdered M ichael hoped to secure the return of Karageorgevich they were speedily disillusioned. The ministry and the Senate met prom ptly in Belgrade, form ed a provisional government, and sum m oned the Skupshtina. T he latter body elected to the princely post M ichael’s cousin, Milan Obrenovich. Since M ilan was only fourteen years old the Skupshtina appointed three regents to rule the country. Milan had much to recommend him: a handsome appearance, out standing intellectual ability, quick wit, ready eloquence, and a genial m anner which endeared him to many of his subjects and made “M ilan” so common a Christian nam e in Serbia. But these fine qualities were blighted by an un fortunate boyhood. A child of divorced parents, Milan grew up in Paris without affection or discipline. Brought to Belgrade in his adolescence, he was left isolated in the palace without brothers, sisters, or playmates. He was assigned a tutor who took his position to be a sinecure and allowed Milan to go his own way. The regents’ contribution to the young prince’s education was to provide him w ith a mistress while he was still in his teens. It is not surprising that Milan grew up to be utterly unfitted for his position. He was bored by the intrigues and squabbles of Serbian politics and he regarded existence in Belgrade as an intolerable exile from the gay life of Paris and Vienna. During a visit to the Austrian capital he referred to Serbia as “that dam ned country” which caused him nothing but grief. An English diplomat sized up M ilan as a “third-class sovereign.” But Milan in turn was not alto gether unjustified when on one occasion he pointed to his regents and minis ters and said “W hatever I am you are responsible.” D uring M ilan ’s m inority the regents prom ulgated a new constitu tion. This document, adopted on July 11, 1869, gave the illusion of provid ing dem ocratic governm ent but in reality it did not do so. The Skupshtina was elected on a liberal franchise but its pow ers were extrem ely limited, ll did not have the right of initiative and it could not modify governm ent bills, which were to be accepted or rejected en bloc. In the latter case the govern ment could legislate provisionally without the Skupshtina and could even promulgate the budget by decree. Thus true ministerial responsibility was out of the question, and the Skupshtina came to be known as the “Chamber of Echoes.” A fter the adoption of the constitution the most im portant problem


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 259
was foreign policy. Russia had strongly supported Prince M ichael, providing equipm ent for his new army and giving diplomatic backing for his Balkan League. Upon his assassination Russia wished to see Prince Nicholas of M ontenegro succeed to the Serbian throne. In view of the outstanding leader ship qualities of Nicholas and his rem arkable success as ruler of M ontenegro betw een 1860 and 1918 there is little doubt th at the selection of M ilan was not the best choice. Furtherm ore, it antagonized the Russians, who turned their favors to the M ontenegrins and the Bulgarians. In fact, the regents adopted the liberal-appearing constitution in the hope of winning popular support to withstand the Russian pressure. W ith the same end in mind the regents established close and cordial relations with A ustria. A bout 1870 relations between Serbia and Austria cooled, largely be cause of conflicting am bitions in the T urkish-held province of Bosnia-H erzegovina. Indicative of the new situation was M ilan’s visit to the R ussian em peror in the fall of 1871. But M ilan was not able to win Russian backing for Serbian territorial aspirations. The truth was that neither Austria nor Russia was willing to support or even tolerate any Serbian move that might jeopar dize the status quo in the Balkans. The two powers, together with Germany, had concluded in 1872 the well-known Dreikaiserbund or Three E m perors’ League.* By the terms of this pact Russia and Austria undertook to refrain from intervention in the B alkan Peninsula and to cooperate in maintaining existing frontiers. M ilan was perfectly willing to accept the status quo in return for A ustro-R ussian support for his dynasty. By this time his conduct and his extravagance had made him so unpopular that he needed outside support to assure his position on the throne. But the difficulty was that a status quo policy was unacceptable to most Serbians. They wanted their country to play the same role in the Balkan Peninsula that Piedm ont had played in the Italian. They failed to see why Serbia should not be the nucleus of a new, unified, and independent South Slav state. The Liberal party, led by Jovan Ristich, favored such expansionism and for that reason enjoyed wide popular support. Milan, therefore, had to by-pass the Liberals and depend upon the Conservatives. Unfortunately for him the Liberals won a substantial majority in the Skupshtina in both the 1874 and 1875 elections. The outcome inevi tably was friction between M ilan and the Liberals. Such was the situation in Serbia when a general E uropean diplom atic crisis was precipitated by the outbreak of a revolt in Bosnia-Herzegovina in July, 1875. A t once a clamor arose in Serbia for assistance to the embattled brethren across the border. M ilan strove desperately to preserve neutrality in accordance with the wishes of R ussia and A ustria. M ost Serbians regarded neutrality as almost treasonable at a time when fellow Serbians were fighting for their freedom. Agitation mounted to the point where Milan was faced with the alternative of war against the Turks or revolution at home. He
* See C hapter 21.


260 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
naturally chose the former and on June 30, 1876, Serbia declared war on Turkey. Serbian history now merged with that of Europe during the years of crisis and w ar that culm inated in the Treaty of Berlin of July 13, 1878. The details of the stirring events of those years are related in C hapter 21. So far as Serbia was concerned, she suffered quick defeat at the hands of the Turks. But the outcome was precisely what Ristich had expected and counted on. Russia could not stand by and accept the defeat of the Balkan Slavs. The pressure of public opinion forced her to intervene, and in the ensuing war the Turks were beaten back almost to Constantinople. Thus Serbia obtained considerable concessions at the peace conference despite her initial setback. The Berlin Treaty awarded her two hundred square miles of territory, in cluding the strategic city of Nish, and also granted her recognition as a fully independent state. Thus the struggle begun by Karageorge in 1804 finally attained its fulfillment three quarters of a century later. The star and the crescent no longer flew over the fortress at Belgrade.
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT TO 1878
The most im portant economic change resulting from the Serbian rev olution was in the system of land tenure. This was settled on the basis of the principle “The land belongs to those who till it.” The peasants traditionally had clung to this notion even though they had been compelled to pay feudal dues to their spahi overlords. When the dues were increased arbitrarily with the spread of the chifliks the peasants reacted strongly. One of the main reasons they took up arms in 1804 was to rid themselves of landlord ex ploitation. It was by no means a foregone conclusion that a successful revolt would mean deliverance from landlords. The wealthy peasants and livestock traders were more than ready to take the place of the spahis and the chiflik ow ners. T he fact that they did not do so was due in large part to Milosh, who chose to base his rule on a free peasantry rather than on a landlord class. In 1815 Milosh abolished all chifliks, thus removing a m ajor source of peas ant grievance. The spahis continued to hold their fiefs and to collect their dues until in 1830 the Turkish governm ent, under Russian pressure, abolished the spahlik system. For compensation the spahis were to receive a little over a third of the annual tribute received in Constantinople from Belgrade. This was a favorable arrangement for the peasants because they were not required to pay directly for the land, to which they now acquired full legal title. In directly, of course, they did pay. The tenth formerly collected by the spahis now went to the state as a regular tax. The proceeds were used to defray the expenses of the new state apparatus and also to provide for the tribute to Constantinople, which included the indemnity to the former spahis. Milosh not only ended the feudal bondage of the peasants but also took positive measures to repair the depredations of the war and of Turkish


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 261
misrule. The country was largely depopulated, and extensive areas lay un cultivated. Milosh attracted new settlers by offering free land, tem porary tax exemption, and security for life and property. A veritable land rush ensued, and, as usual, the most wealthy and influential obtained the choicest land. But in 1820 Milosh decreed that anyone possessing more land than he could work must surrender it for redistribution. It should be added that Milosh and a few of his cronies evaded the law by using forced labor on their estates. B ut with this exception, which is understandable in the Serbia of th at period, the land settlement was definitely favorable for the peasantry. The peasants were not always able to keep the land that they had obtained. In Serbia, as in other Balkan countries, the nineteenth century w itnessed the growth of a m oney and credit econom y with its m anifold con comitants— the appearance of the village m erchant and usurer, increasing economic differentiation and peasant indebtedness, and eventually the dis possession of peasant families. This trend induced legislation designed to prevent the pauperization of the Serbian peasantry. In 1836 Milosh decreed that a house, a certain amount of land, two oxen, and a cow were essential for every peasant family and could not be foreclosed for the payment of debts. This legal protection was not included in the civil code of 1844 and peasant indebtedness mounted rapidly. The economic crisis following the Crim ean W ar worsened the situation drastically and aroused much popular agitation. Political freedom was declared a sham if the peasants were allowed to fall into the bondage of a new and m ore evil spahi, the usurer, who claim ed not merely the tenth but the p easant’s whole property. This outcry produced new legislation for the protection of the peas ant. Laws in 1860 and 1861 prohibited the foreclosure of certain farm implements, draft animals, and roughly one hectare of land. In 1873 an im portant bill increased the coverage generously to include enough land, buildings, livestock, and farm equipm ent to provide a reasonable living for a peasant family. The bill went further and forbade the peasant to sell his protected minimum of land and farm property, or to use it as collateral for credit. A n exception was m ade only if the peasant abandoned farm ing for another profession. Supplementary laws prohibited foreclosure for nonpay m ent of taxes and also forbade the opening of commercial stores in rural areas. This well-meaning legislation proved to be far from effective. One reason was that the government failed to provide adequate agricultural credit. The peasants consequently had to forgo legitimate loans, in which case their production was ham pered, or else had to resort to various artifices in order to borrow from loansharks. N o less than fourteen dodges were employed by both usurers and peasants to evade the laws. Also, the natural process of the evolution of an underdeveloped country could not be stopped by legal measures or by pious adm onitions to preserve the traditional way of life. I inally, the rapid growth of population in the nineteenth century accelerated Ilie trend tow ard the fragm entation of peasant property. All these factors


/ti;r o f NdlloililliM It IN l.l IN 7fi
combined to make Serbia a country of predominantly dwarf farms. The process was well on its way by 1878. It had becom e a serious problem by the end of the century and it rem ained serious and unsolved at the time of World War II. The change in the land tenure system did not affect farming tech niques. The peasants lacked the knowledge, the means, and the incentive to try new methods. For decades they continued to till the soil in the same m anner as they had during the preceding centuries under the Turks. The growth of population created a need for more cropland. The peasants com monly met the need by burning down the forests. In the early years they farm ed the cleared land for a while and then moved on to repeat the waste ful process after the manner of the American frontiersmen. The government did not adopt effective measures for conserving the forests until 1867. The peasants commonly grew corn to feed themselves and their pigs, the latter being the most im portant “cash crop” until the end of the century. Each plot also had a few plum trees which the peasant needed to replenish his stock of shlivovitsa, a fiery plum brandy. Potato culture was new and not popular. Hoping to destroy the prejudice against them, Milosh decreed that each peasant should grow a patch of potatoes. But even by 1900 they had not become as populuar in Serbia as to the east in Bulgaria. The practice of letting some land lie fallow was universal. Such rotation of crops as occurred was unscientific, and few peasants used m anure as fertilizer. Sheep, not pigs, were the most common domestic livestock. Their meat, milk, and wool made them valuable for the peasants but there was no export market. The winning of autonomy had little effect on Serbian commerce. Exports were shipped up the Danube to the markets of the Hapsburg Em pire and consisted prim arly of swine, cattle, and leeches. The latter were widely used for medical purposes at this time and were shipped as far as Paris. Imports included Austrian hardware, sugar, and cloth; Russian ec clesiastical articles; salt from W allachia; and Turkish coffee. The important pig trade with Austria resulted in a favorable balance for Serbia and helped M ilosh to pay the tribute to the sultan in cash. Milosh ham pered Serbian trade because of his monopolistic prac tices. Despite his many great contributions to his country he always regarded it as his pashalik. True, he was a Serbian rather than a Turkish pasha, and he certainly had the interest of his people at heart. Nevertheless, a pasha he remained to the end. He kept for his own use the former personal lands of the sultan. He used his authority and power to monopolize the salt imports from W allachia and to control most of the pig trade with Austria. He made no distinction between the state treasury and his private purse, investing the Serbian treasury in Viennese banks in his own- name. Part of his vast for tune he used to buy large estates in W allachia as a hedge in case of future political setbacks. W hen Milosh abdicated in 1839 the bureaucrats and m erchants took over the direction of the state. They abolished the form er monopolies and


encouraged commerce and closer economic ties with the West. In 1844 they instituted a civil code based on the Austrian code which in turn followed the ( 'ode Napoléon. The new code paid little heed to Serbian customs and helped to spread individualistic ideas and to break up the traditional pater nalistic society. The tem po of economic activity accelerated appreciably. Foreign trade increased from 13.5 million francs in 1842 to 68 m illion in 1868 and 86 million in 1879. But the national economy still remained com paratively primitive, as is illustrated by the fact that only foreign coins circu lated in the country before 1868. In that year the first Serbian copper coins were minted, and in 1873 the first silver coins. Both, it should be added, were minted in Vienna. Factory industry scarcely existed in Serbia before 1878. Various factors explain this, including the small domestic market, inadequate trans portation, dearth of capital, ■lack of independent tariff authority, and the apathy of Serbian statesmen. Handicrafts flourished. The most prominent craftsmen were the smiths, tanners, furriers, shoemakers, masons, saddlers, and potters. According to the 1866 census they num bered 21,751, or 1.8 per cent of the total population. Shortly afterward they began to feel the competition of foreign products as imports increased. Also, a shift from Turkish to Western social customs affected Serbian artisans. Those who had made Turkish sofas or fezzes, for example, could not shift easily to a W estern type of furniture or hats. Nor could they compete with the Austrian factories producing these W estern commodities on a mass scale. Yet Serbian crafts men did not disappear or even decline in num bers. By 1900 they had in creased to 54,007, a rise proportionate to the growth of population. Certain types of craftsmen did suffer, generally those facing foreign competition or producing commodities which were becoming unfashionable. But others prospered and increased, particularly the building and service trades, which could fit into a m ore urban and W esternized society. Social institutions also underwent change during the nineteenth cen tury. The general trend of economic, political, and intellectual development underm ined the traditional zadruga form of social organization. The revolu tionary war took men away from their homes and exposed them to new ideas and customs. Also, the establishm ent of the Serbian state assured personal security and thus eliminated one of the reasons for the existence of the zadruga. The 1844 civil code was little more than a translation of the A us trian code, and as a result the zadruga appeared in it as an exceptional rath er than an integral feature of Serbian society. In. fact, the code prescribed the method by which the zadrugas might be dissolved. Finally, the spread of a money and m arket economy weakened the zadrugas. M ore specifically, the peasants were needing more money to pay the mounting state taxes and to buy the new commodities that were now available to them, such as textiles, clothing, footwear, jewelry, and household furniture and utensils. As a rule, the zadrugas were unable to increase production sufficiently and to market enough produce to meet the demand for more money. The members then
The Serbian R evolution and the South Slavs to lN7ft 263


264 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
were likely to agitate for the dissolution of the zadruga in the belief that thereby some of their economic problems might be solved. Thus by 1878 the zadrugas were on the way out and by 1914 they no longer were an important factor in the economy and the social life of the country.
HAPSBURG SLAVS TO 1 8 7 8
Having traced the evolution of the Serbian principality from its origins under the Turks to the winning of full independence in 1878, we turn now to consider those South Slavs who were living under H apsburg rule. The first m ajor development to affect the H apsburg Slavs was the establish m ent of N apoleon’s Illyrian state in 1809. In C hapter 12 we saw th at the administrative, economic, and cultural reforms of the French awakened the local population and provided a basis for the Illyrian movement of the 1830’s and 1840’s. T he H apsburgs, who inherited the Illyrian Provinces after N apoleon’s dow nfall, stim ulated the Illyrian m ovem ent by their repressive measures. Immediately they erased, as with a great sponge, the reforms insti tuted during the French regime. Priests once more became schoolmasters and nobles again assumed their old titles and privileges. This restoration of a discredited past naturally led to the glorification of the brief Illyrian inter lude. People forgot the conscription and the heavy taxes imposed by the French. They remembered only the prosperity and creative activity and free cultural expression. And with the passage of time they attributed these gains not to enlightened French rule but rather to the fact that under Napoleon they had been united for the first time in centuries. Thus the idea became deeply rooted that their fortunes in the future depended on their unification in a new Illyrian state. A nd the more reaction set in under the H apsburgs the stronger became this Illyrian legend. The legend was reinforced by the work of South Slav scholars and writers. Outstanding among these was Bartolomeus Kopitar, author of Slovene grammars and linguistic studies and creator of the Slovene literary language. K opitar stimulated V uk Karajich to undertake his studies which contributed so much to the creation of a uniform Serbo-Croatian literary lan guage. Ljudevit G aj, a C roatian, was not so distinguished as a scholar but he was much more effective as a journalist. He published a num ber of political and literary periodicals with such titles as Croatian Gazette, Illyrian Gazette, and National Journal. In these he carried on continual propaganda in favor of South Slav unity. How this unity was to be attained he was not certain. Sometimes he looked to Austria and at other times to Russia. In any case Gaj contributed greatly to an Illyrian movement which grew steadily in the eighteen thirties and forties. Such was the situation among the H apsburg Slavs when news arrived of the February, 1848 revolution in Paris. Repercussions were immediate and far-reaching, the most im portant being the abolition of serfdom in the


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 265
H apsburg provinces in April, 1848. The step was taken with little hesitation because serfdom by this time had become economically and politically out moded. Even the comparatively backw ard South Slav lands of the Hapsburg Em pire had shifted from a predom inantly natural economy to a money econ omy producing for the market. In such a milieu agriculture had to become m ore productive and com petitive, but it could not do so on the basis of serf labor. Also, the serfs were becoming increasingly unmanageable. With the news of the Paris revolt they simply refused to provide any longer the labor and other dues of the past. Thus the proclamation for the liberation of the serfs represented little more than official recognition of an accomplished fact. Liberation did not m ean distribution of all the land. The peasants kept the plots they formerly had tilled for themselves. The gentry received compensation from the state for these plots and they also kept all the re m aining land as well as most of the forest property. Thus the large estates and the political power of the landed aristocracy survived the 1848 revolu tion. In fact, they survived in C roatia and the V oivodina until the Yugoslav agrarian reform of 1919, and in H ungary proper until the end of W orld W ar II. The political developments among the' H apsburg Slavs in 1848 were spectacular and attracted wide attention. The Slavs tried to take advantage of the revolutionary upheavals to gain autonomy and unity. But they were forced finally by intolerant H ungarian nationalism to stand with the H apsburgs on the side of reaction. W hen the Hungarian parliam ent passed laws in M arch, 1848, establishing a constitutional regime, it ignored com pletely the existence of C roats, Serbs, and all other non-M agyar people. Likewise, when the H ungarians proclaim ed their independence on April 14 they over looked the political aspirations of the Yugoslavs, even though they had been made abundantly clear by this time. Both the Serbians and the Croatians reacted violently against this uncompromising pressure. Representatives of the Voivodina Serbs appeared before the Hungarian Diet in Pressburg (Bratislava) on April 8 and pre sented their demands. They expressed sympathy with the Hungarian struggle for freedom but insisted on recognition of their own national rights. Louis Kossuth, the famous Hungarian orator and leader, replied that the Magyars would do their best to respect Serbian rights but insisted that only the M agyar language could bind the different nationalities together. “Then,” the Serbs answered, “we must look for recognition elsewhere than at Pressburg.” “In that case,” replied Kossuth, “the sword must decide.” “The Serbs,” re torted one of the deputation, “were never afraid of th a t.” 1U The following month, on May 13, 1848, the Serbians convened a national assembly at Karlowitz (Sremski K arlovci). It developed into a great dem onstration of Yugoslav unity. Over fifteen thousand delegates gathered, including not only Serbs but also Croats, Bulgarians, and even Czechs and Poles. The original charters issued by L eopold I in 1690—1691 prom ising full autonom y to the Serbs were solem nly read aloud before the assembled


266 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
crowd. The assembly passed a series of resolutions declaring the Serbian na tion “politically free and autonomous under the House of Austria and the Crown of H ungary.” The occasion was marked throughout by close SerboCroat cooperation. “Byzantium and Rom e,” declared a Croatian spokesman, “succeeded in separating the Serbs and the Croats, but the fraternal tie which unites them is so strong th at henceforth nothing in the world will be able to sever it.” 17 Meanwhile, the Croatians were equally aggressive under the leader ship of Baron Joseph Jellachich, who had been appointed governor of Croatia by the em peror on M arch 23. The appointm ent proved to be of decisive im portance because the baron rallied the South Slavs behind the Hapsburg m onarchy and thereby cut off the M agyars from the sea and from direct in tercourse with liberal Europe. Jellachich immediately summoned a Croatian assembly which met in Agram (Z agreb) in June, 1848. He welcomed the delegates with an impassioned harangue. “The fraternal union of 800 years [with Hungary] promises us a friendly solution of the prevailing dispute. But should the Magyars assume the role of oppressors against us . . . we shall prove to them with w eapons in our hands, th at the tim e is long past when one nation can rule over another. Away, then, with the Magyar regime of compulsion— we did not recognize it even before M arch 15, but after the M arch Revolution we broke and annihilated it.” 18 A Serbian deputation at tended the meeting and both Jellachich and Gaj supported proposals for Serbo-Croat unity. “We are only one nation,” declared Gaj, “there are no longer either Serbs or C roats.” 19 T he assembly declared all decisions of the H ungarian government to be null and void insofar as they were at variance with the rights of Croatia. Jellachich met later with Hungarian representatives but no compromise could be reached. By this time the imperial armies had crushed the revolution in Italy and the Hapsburgs felt strong enough to take the offensive against the M ag yars. In doing so they counted heavily on the H ungarian-South Slav rift. On Septem ber 1, 1848, the H apsburgs revoked the earlier concessions th at they had made to the Magyars. At the same time Jellachich crossed the Drava and attacked the Hungarians at the head of a South Slav army. But now he was fighting for Hapsburg interests rather than for Yugoslav unity and inde pendence. Vienna had succeeded in turning the force of Serbo-Croat nation alism against the Hungarian revolution. The Voivodina Serbs were likewise used for the preservation of the Hapsburg Empire. Some of their younger and more radical leaders caused a little difficulty because they wished to be rid of A ustrian as well as Hungarian rule. But Patriarch Rajachich, who was old and conservative, insisted on keeping the Serbian movement within the imperial framework. W ith the sup port of Jellachich he was able to oust the young Serbian leaders from the top posts and to replace them with A ustrian officers. Thus the Serbs, like the Croatians, fought for the defense of the empire. The 1848 revolutions greatly stim ulated the H apsburg Slavs and


The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs to 1878 267
evoked a popular Yugoslav movement. But powerful forces combined to prevent any significant modification of the status quo. Tsarist Russia was as opposed to disruption of the Hapsburg Em pire by the South Slavs as she was to its disruption by the M agyars. As noted earlier in this chapter, the Serbian government was forced to remain neutral under Russian and Turkish pres sure. Also, the intolerant nationalism of the Magyars blocked united action by the subject peoples that might have had some chance against the Hapsburgs. These factors, together with the conservative tendencies of Baron Jellachich and Patriarch Rajachich, induced these leaders to bring the power ful force of South Slav nationalism squarely on the side of the emperor. A Their decision contributed substantially to the final trium ph of the Hapsburgs in 1849. But their reward was reversion to the prerevolutionary status quo, at least in regard to political arrangem ents. H ungarian rule in Croatia was ended only to be replaced by Austrian. Having suppressed the M agyar revolution, the Hapsburg ministers were unwilling to tolerate Croa tian nationalism, which could become obstreperous in the future. So they violated without compunction the promises they had made to the Croats dur ing the revolutionary period. They were not as apprehensive about the Voivodina Serbs, so they issued a decree on Novem ber 18, 1849, separating the Duchy from Hungary and granting it autonomy. But the concession was hol low because the autonom y was extremely restricted and the boundaries of the Duchy were so drawn as to include large numbers of Rumanians and Magyars as well as Serbs. The purpose, of course, was to employ the traditional H aps burg tactic of divide and rule. The next great development affecting the Hapsburg Slavs after the 1848 revolution was the Austro-Hungarian Ausgleich or Compromise of 1867. Defeats in Italy and G erm any led the Vienna statesm en to seek a set tlement with the most articulate and dangerous of the minorities. The result was the Ausgleich, which transform ed the Hapsburg monarchy into the Austro-Hungarian or Dual Monarchy. The terms of the Compromise re stored both Croatia and the Voivodina to Hungarian rule while Dalmatia rem ained under Austrian rule. The South Slavs naturally refused to accept this joint Austro-Hungarian domination. During the period from 1867 to 1914 they waged a steadily mounting campaign for autonomy. But the cam paign was not coordinated. The various South Slav groups fought individual struggles which varied according to local conditions. The Slovenes were the most conservative and unspectacular. They had remained quiet during the 1848 disturbances and they continued to be restrained during the following decades. One reason for this was that they had always been under Austrian dom ination rather than Hungarian, which was more intolerant and provocative. A nother reason was that Slovenian politics were com pletely dom inated by the Slovene People’s party, a conservative Catholic organization which preferred peaceful tactics and piecemeal con cessions to sweeping proclam ations and revolutionary methods. In the Hungarian part of the empire relations between the ruling


268 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
Magyars and the subject Serbs and Croatians became steadily worse. The Voivodina Serbs were left only with church autonomy and they steadily lost ground to the H ungarian and Germ an elements in the Duchy. They also de clined in importance in the Serbian world as a whole. At the beginning of the century Karlowitz (Sremski Karlovci) and Novi Sad were the great Serbian cultural centers, but in later decades these cities gave way to Belgrade and Sarajevo. The Magyars were able to thw art the comparatively isolated V oi vodina Serbs, but they had much more difficulty with the Croats. As soon as the Ausgleich was arranged, elections were held in December, 1867, for the Croatian Diet. The Magyars made liberal use of “oats and the whip” and se cured a majority of unionist deputies who were amenable to Hungarian rule. This Diet accepted in 1868 a constitutional arrangem ent known as the N agodba or Compromise, which defined the relations between Croatia and Hungary. It allowed for a considerable degree of self-government, more than was permitted in the Yugoslav state after W orld W ar I. Nevertheless, Croatia was an integral part of the Hungarian kingdom and this antagonized the nationalist leaders, who wanted either an independent Croatia or an inde pendent Yugoslav state. In the elections of 1871 the antiunionists won a large m ajority and they went so far as to declare the N agodba null and void. In the same year a minor insurrection broke out which had to be put down by military force. This opposition increased still more following the Hapsburg occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1878. By the end of the century the situation became alarming as Serbs and Croats joined forces and became increasingly militant in their struggle— a struggle that was to contribute sub stantially to the eventual dissolution of the Hapsburg Empire and to the establishment of the new state of Yugoslavia.


15. Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood
to 1878
T
J.HU r e v o l t o f t h e G r e e k s in 1821 followed that of the Serbs in time but not in im portance. The Greek revolution was a much more significant affair for Europe as well as for the Balkan Peninsula. The Serbian revolution involved simply the control of a Balkan pashalik. But the Greek revolution, because of the strategic location of the Greek lands, raised basic questions of N ear Eastern strategy and brought the great powers into sharp and open conflict. Likewise, the Serbian uprising was essentially a local m ovement with little effect on the rest of the empire. But the G reek insur rection had widespread and lasting repercussions, the reason being that the G reeks had played a m uch m ore im portant role in im perial affairs than had the Serbs. It is true that the great m ajority of the G reeks, like the other rayas, were simple peasants. But there was also a small minority that was so ex traordinarily active and highly placed that it might well be considered to have been alm ost as influential in the Turkish Em pire as the T urks themselves. This minority controlled the larger part of the commerce of the Balkan Pen insula; dominated completely the O rthodox Church to which most of the Balkan Christians belonged; enjoyed a monopoly of educational and cultural institutions in the Balkan lands; and also filled some of the highest adminis trative and diplomatic posts in the O ttom an bureaucracy. It follows that the Greek revolution was a complex movement in volving m ore than an outbreak of desperate peasants. In order to grasp its com plexity it is necessary to realize that, in effect, two G reek worlds existed within the O ttom an Em pire— the one an imperial world of Phanariote admin istrators and Orthodox prelates with its headquarters in Constantinople, and the other a peasant w orld of illiterate and poverty-stricken rustics living in the Greek provinces. We shall now consider each of these worlds in turn.
269


270 Age oj Nationalism: 1815-1878
GREEK IM PERIAL WORLD
The Greek Phanariote administrators and Orthodox prelates were at the height of their power in the eighteenth century. A t that time they were by far the most influential of the various subject peoples of the empire. But this had not always been the case. In the sixteenth century the South Slavs rather than the Greeks had been especially prom inent in imperial affairs. One reason for this was the Turkish conquest of Hungary (1 5 2 6 ), which finally persuaded the South Slavs that Turkish rule was durable and that they had better accommodate themselves to it. A nother reason was that, whereas few Greeks accepted Islam, a large proportion of the Slavic inhabitants of BosniaHerzegovina turned Moslem and thereby became eligible for high office. A large number did, in fact, attain the highest ranks. It was at this time that Sokolovich (Sokolli) became grand vizir and used his influence to secure the establishment of the Serbian patriarchate in 1557. Serbian troops were ex tensively used by the Turks to man the northern frontier, and the Serbian language was a common medium for diplomatic correspondence. In fact, a sixteenth-century observer wrote: “In our period the O ttom an rulers esteem so highly the Dalmatians that they appoint them Pashas of provinces and fleets and armies, and also G rand Vizirs who govern the whole Em pire, and they give to them for wives the daughters, the sisters and the nieces of the G rand Turk [the Sultan], . . . The Slavic nation rules the Ottom an Em pire.” 1 If the Slavs ruled the empire in the sixteenth century, the Greeks had taken their place by the eighteenth. One reason for this was that the Slavs discredited themselves by supporting the H apsburg armies whenever they crossed the Danube. Another reason was that from the mid-seventeenth cen tury onward the Turks began to encounter formidable complications in the conduct of their foreign relations. No longer were they able to dictate terms to their neighbors. For the first time they had to carry on protracted and in volved diplomatic negotiations. But they were not equipped to do this be cause hitherto they had regarded W estern languages and cultures as being unworthy of their attention. Thus they found it necessary now to employ the services of those who had knowledge of foreign countries and foreign lan guages. It was under these circumstances that the so-called Phanariotes came to be attached as secretaries and interpreters to the staffs of O ttom an officials and officers. T he term “P h an ario te” is derived from the extrem e northw estern corner of Constantinople— the lighthouse or Phanar district. The Patriarch had established his headquarters there in 1601 after several moves following the loss of St. Sophia to the Turks. G radually the district became the pre serve of G reek m erchants as well as of G reek clergy. These m erchants, or Phanariotes, as they came to be called, prospered greatly. They became im perial tax farmers, they rented the salt monopoly, undertook contract works, became purveyors to the court, and gained control of the Black Sea wheat trade. These activities brought them into frequent contact with the Western


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 271
world, and they acquired a firsthand knowledge of W estern customs and languages. Entering the Ottom an bureaucracy at the lower levels, they gradually rose to the topmost ranks. A certain Panayiotakis Nikousis was appointed the first G rand Dragom an of the Porte, a title that literally means Chief Inter preter but which, in practice, involved the functions of an under secretary for foreign affairs. Nikousis was succeeded by his protégé, A lexander M avrokordatos, who was to win fame as the negotiator of the 1699 Karlowitz Treaty. A nother high office regularly entrusted to the Phanariotes was that of Dragoman of the Fleet, or Under Secretary for the Navy. From 1711 onward the Phanariotes also served as governors of the M oldavian and W allachian Principalities with the title of hospodars or princes. Before this date the Principalities had paid tribute to the sultan in return for recognition of their complete autonomy, including the right of the Rum anian boyars or nobles to elect their own hospodars. This arrangement prevailed until Tsar Peter the G reat invaded M oldavia, and the reigning hospodar, Demetrius Cantem ir, went over to his side. This incident led the O ttom an government to strengthen its control over the Principalities, which were now assuming a new strategic importance as bulwarks against the ex panding Russian and Hapsburg empires. Accordingly, Phanariote adminis trators were appointed regularly as hospodars of the Principalities from 1711 until the outbreak of the G reek revolution in 1821. The Phanariotes not only controlled high and lucrative positions in the Ottom an bureaucracy but also infiltrated and to a large degree dominated the Constantinople Patriarchate itself. During the Byzantine period church offices, with almost no exception, had been closed to laymen. But now these offices were eagerly sought after by the wealthy Greek families of C onstanti nople because, under the conditions of O ttom an subjection, they offered the only means for attaining social status and a measure of security. In fact, the origin and development of the Phanariote aristocracy may be traced in part to its early associations with the Patriarchate. But having gained a foothold, the Phanariotes soon were able, with their wealth and government connec tions, to dominate the entire ecclesiastical structure. By the end of the seventeenth century these laym en filled all the im portant adm inistrative offices of the church, which meant that they managed church properties and rev enues, supervised the monasteries, safeguarded the valuable liturgical objects, and so forth. Having gained control of the church administration, the Phanariote laymen then proceeded to intervene in the election of bishops, archbishops, and even patriarchs. By exerting pressure upon the Church Synod, which elected the Patriarch of Constantinople, they were able to influence de cisively the selection of the head of the church. They were able to do this easily and effectively because of their commanding position within the church and their wealth and influence without. A contem porary observer rem arked bitterly that the Phanariotes “who ought to aspire for the good of the Church,


272 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
want to deprive it of the income of a see! and, moreover, in order to satisfy their conceit, they threaten to bring about the fall of the Patriarch. . . . Strange and reprehensible conduct against the spirit of Christianity; however, it is a fact now and will be repeated in the future. May God have mercy on all of us and on you.” 2 In self-defense against this Phanariote intervention the clergy secured a firman from the sultan in 1741 providing that the selection of the Patriarch be subject to the approval and recom m endation of five specified m etropoli tans. This arrangement was adopted and continued to prevail until the sec ond half of the nineteenth century. Thus the clergy curbed Phanariote en croachm ent by concentrating authority in a small body— the so-called System of the Elders. Patriarch Cyril V, the reforming churchm an of the mid-eight eenth century, attem pted to achieve the same end by establishing a “Com mittee of the Public,” consisting of representatives of the Greek professional guilds of Constantinople and entrusted with the material affairs of the church. His strategy was to check the Phanariotes by democratizing the church ad ministration. This was far too radical for the times and Cyril was eventually deposed and executed. It should not be assumed that clear-cut issues ranged all the clergy against all the Phanariotes. In actual practice, most of the clergy had inti mate connections with one or another of the Phanariote families, which prob ably explains C yril’s radical m easure. Likewise, the Phanariotes were con tinually feuding among themselves, so that we find one or more of them actually supporting Cyril. In the end, a rough balance was reached whereby the clergy retained control of the strictly ecclesiastical affairs while the Phanariotes were left in charge of church administration. W hatever the balance between the Phanariotes and the clergy may have been at given periods, the im portant point to note here is that by the beginning of the nineteenth century both groups occupied important posi tions in the O ttom an E m pire and fulfilled essential functions. It is perhaps an exaggeration to state, as does A rnold Toynbee, that they were “the senior partners in the O ttom an firm ,” 8 but it is indisputable that they constituted one of the principal pillars of the O ttom an imperial structure.
GREEK PEASANT WORLD
We enter an entirely different world when we turn from Greek Phanariotes and churchmen to Greek peasants. During the years immediately following the Turkish conquest these peasants fared tolerably well under their new m asters. O ttom an adm inistration at th at tim e was simple, efficient, anil easy to bear. The conquerors divided the G reek lands into six sanjaks, lain increased to ten when the T urks added Crete and the Aegean Islands to then possessions. The most desirable plains lands were distributed among deserv ing T urkish w arriors in the form of large fiefs or ziam ets and sm aller liel's <u tim ars. T he spahis who held these fiefs were required in time of w ar to prcM iil


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 273
themselves for military service together with a num ber of armed retainers proportionate to the size of their fiefs. In the m id-seventeenth century the six mainland sanjaks m entioned above encompassed a total of 267 ziamets and 1,625 timars, which together furnished a force of 7,255 horsemen. Crete, after its conquest, was sim ilarly parceled out into 17 ziam ets and 2,550 timars, which produced 5,350 cavalrymen. We noted in C hapter 7 that the G reek peasants living under this form of Ottom an feudalism were better olf than their brothers under Vene tian rule. Their church was allowed to function freely, their taxes were light, and they enjoyed a large degree of autonom y in a decentralized adm inistra tive system. Some villages and districts had more self-government than others. Certain towns, such as Yanina, received at the time of their conquest charters guaranteeing special administrative privileges. Many islands were left taxfree and unm olested in return for a specified num ber of recruits each year for the imperial navy. Also, certain regions designated perm anent appanages of members of the royal family, of governm ent officials, or of religious foun dations were not subject to the common imperial administration and normally were left to their own devices. Finally, there were certain mountainous regions that were never completely subdued and were left unmolested so long as they paid a general tribute. The only generalization that can be made about such a chaotic ad m inistrative system is that it allowed a large proportion of the G reek peasants to lead their lives without interference from Turkish authority. A part from some areas in T hrace and M acedonia, where a large num ber of T urks actually settled and tilled the soil, the Greek population normally was free to select its own officials. These were variously designated as “elders,” “archons,” “prim ates,” and “ kodjabashis.” In som e com m unities they were elected in a democratic m anner but in others they constituted a self-perpetuating oligarchy. With the passage of time the O ttom an imperial structure deteriorated and the position of the subject Greeks worsened correspondingly. Embezzle ment, corruption, and military defeats led inevitably to an increased tax bur den. M ore serious was the transition from m ilitary fiefs to hereditary chiiliks. The spahis originally had been granted only the right to collect certain speci fied revenues from their fiefs, and this right was revokable if they failed to perform their stipulated military duties. During the seventeenth and eight eenth centuries, however, the decline of central authority enabled the spahis to disregard their obligations and to become de facto hereditary owners of their fiefs. These fiefs were thus transform ed in character and were know n in G reece, as in the other B alkan lands, as chiiliks. T he tenants working on these chiiliks no longer were protected by custom and law as they had been in the past. T heir m asters now were free to im pose new burdens and dues, with the result that the position of the Greek tenants steadily deteriorated, l iven the G reeks who lived in the free m ountain areas were affected indirectly


274 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
because the flight of population from the plains to the m ountains produced overpopulation and economic distress in the latter regions. The Greek population suffered also from the disruption of commerce during the O ttom an wars with Venice and Austria. Trade with Venice ceased from 1645 to 1699, and with A ustria from 1663 to 1699. This ruined a rising class of Greek m erchants, who had developed a profitable commerce by transporting Balkan raw materials to Central Europe and to Aegean and Adriatic ports, and then returning with sundry manufactured articles for which there was a strong demand. The Greek merchants were also adversely affected by the appearance of French, British, Dutch, and other W estern merchants, who installed themselves in ports such as Saloniki, Patras, and Arta, and proceeded to funnel the import-export trade through their estab lishments. Their competition was particularly severe because, unlike the na tive G reek m erchants, they enjoyed relative security and freedom from ex tortion. The Greek people were hard hit also by the ravages of the TurkishVenetian wars, which dragged on from 1645 to 1715. The Peloponnesus changed hands twice during the course of the fighting, and the local popula tion suffered severely from property destruction, forced labor, and the other accompaniments of war. It was at this time that a considerable num ber of Greeks sought refuge by emigrating overseas, particularly to Italy and Corsica. In fact, the lowest point in the fortunes of the G reek people in m odern times was reached during these decades in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. When the Venetians acquired the Peloponnesus by the Karlowitz Treaty in 1699 they found less than 90,000 inhabitants, a num ber smaller than that of any other period since prehistoric times. The dire plight of the Greek peasantry during these years stands out in m arked contrast to the power and affluence of Greek imperial circles in Constantinople. The Greek peasant world was waging a bitter struggle for survival at a time when Phanariote hospodars and m erchant princes were at the height of their fortune. But during the course of the eighteenth century important changes occurred. The peasant world was gradually transformed by a combination of foreign and domestic forces that generated a remarkable revival in both the economic and cultural spheres. The final outcome was a national awakening or renaissance. This inevitably created cleavages and ten sions within and between the two G reek worlds. But it also produced a heightened sense of national consciousness and a new feeling of power and confidence that were to culminate in 1821 in the beginning of the war for independence.
ECONOM IC REVIVAL
A fortunate combination of circumstances explains the great economic revival that transform ed the Greek lands during the eighteenth century. The conclusion of the Karlowitz Treaty in 1699 made possible the resumption of trade with Venice and the A ustrian Em pire. Also, the British-French wars


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 275
of the eighteenth century aided the Greeks by disrupting the operations of the W estern merchants established in Saloniki, Patras, and other ports. The Greeks seized the opportunity to transport to Central Europe Balkan raw materials such as cereals, wool, cotton, and leather. In return they brought back various m anufactured articles which hitherto had been imported di rectly by the W estern m erchants in the port cities. Before the end of the eighteenth century prosperous G reek trading communities had grown up in Vienna, Buda, Bucharest, Trieste, Venice, and other foreign cities. The Greek economy was stimulated also by certain provisions of the Russo-Turkish treaties of Kuchuk Kainarji (1774) and Jassy (1792). They stipulated that the Black Sea and the Straits be opened to Russian and Aus trian com m erce, and that the G reek subjects of the sultan be allowed to fly the Russian flag on their ships. These provisions opened vast new fields to the energetic and commercially minded Greeks, who found a large and ex panding m arket in the new provinces of southern Russia for such Greek products as fruit, wine, soap, and olive oil. They also reaped profits serving as the carriers of the rapidly growing Russian wheat trade. Since they now could fly the Russian flag they were able to sail back and forth through the Straits without fear of the customary Turkish extortions and restrictions. Thus the G reek m erchant marine quickly rose to first place in Black Sea commerce and held that position for many years. A t the same time, Greek communities were established and were soon flourishing in Russian ports such as Odessa, the Chersonese, and Taganrog. Russian historians have rec ognized the fact that “the Greeks were the chief middlemen in the whole of the southern trade . . . and that the success of the southern Russian trade depended to a very great degree on the freedom and safety of Greek naviga tion.” 4 The final and most spectacular factor in the G reek econom ic revival was the French Revolution and the Anglo-French wars that followed. During the course of these wars the British and the French virtually destroyed each oth er’s m erchant m arine in the M editerranean. Since they had previously controlled most of the carrying trade, an acute shipping shortage now pre vailed. The Greeks at once seized the golden opportunity. W herever profits were to be made, Greek m ariners and m erchants were present. They defied N apoleon’s C ontinental blockade, ran the B ritish blockade to Spanish and French ports, and sent caravans overland to France and to Germany to buy m anufactured goods and colonial products. The m erchants made vast profits while the shipowners m ultipled their fleets many times during these years. By 1813 the Greek m erchant m arine had increased to the phenom enal figure of 615 ships totaling 153,580 tons, equipped with 5,878 cannon, and manned by 37,526 seamen. The cannon, which were to prove useful in 1821, were standard equipm ent for m erchant ships in the M editerranean because of the ravages of the N orth African pirates. The French Revolution not only stimulated the Greek merchant marine but also enabled Greek merchants to drive the W estern merchants,


276 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
and particularly the French, from the dom inant position that they had hitherto held in Greek ports. On June 12, 1807, the Marseilles Cham ber of Commerce informed the Minister of Interior: “We would be happy, Monseigneur, if we could, as you ask, send Y o u r Excellency each m onth a bulle tin on the state of French commerce in the Levant, but this commerce does not exist.” 5 This meant, of course, that the wars with Britain had disrupted the commerce of Marseilles and had left the French m erchants throughout the Levant stranded. O ther European m erchants in the eastern M editerranean experienced the same misfortune to a greater or lesser degree. This naturally strengthened the position of the local Greek m erchants. An English official reported that they were now able “to drive the Frank [Western] merchants from the fairs of Greece, to obtain a great part of the internal maritime commerce of Turkey, and at length to share very largely in the exchange of the corn, oil, silk and other products of Greece for the m anufactured goods and colonial produce of the European nations.” u These commercial developments had their effect on Greek agricul ture. They increased the dem and and, therefore, the price of wheat, silk, cot ton, grain, oil, and other Greek products. One authority has estimated that the general price level of Peloponnesian products increased between 1794 and 1815 in the proportion of 1 to 3.2.7 It should be noted, however, that the rise in prices profited mostly the large Turkish landowners and those Greeks who also had big estates. The bulk of the Greek peasantry, which consisted of small farmers, tenants, and landless laborers, derived virtually no benefits. On the other hand, many Greeks profited from the rapid expansion of handicraft industries, which they controlled almost exclusively. Their enterprises were located in the towns and in certain m ountainous areas in Epirus, Thessaly, and western M acedonia. The latter regions produced woolen and cotton thread, stockings, cloths, ready-made clothes, carpets, silks, and furs. M ost of these products were sold within the empire, but there was also an appreciable export to neighboring European countries. As a rule the domestic system prevailed, the goods being made in the homes of the craftsmen. In some areas the craftsmen organized cooperatives, of which the outstanding example was the A m belakia enterprise on M ount Ossa in Thessaly. This was famous for its dyed yarns, which it m arketed throughout Central Europe, competing successfully even with British-made products. One branch of the cooperative directed agricultural production while a second controlled the manufacturing, including the supply of raw materials and the marketing of the finished products. The cooperative distributed free corn to its poor members, and m aintained schools, a hospital, and a relief fund. It was founded in 1795 with a capitalization of 100,000 francs, which had multiplied by 1810 to 20 million francs. Such were the origins and the nature of the Greek economic revival in the eighteenth century. Its repercussions were far-reaching and varied. It created a new intellectual atmosphere and it generated new political forces that were to lead directly to the revolutionary outbreak of 1821.


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 277
NATIONAL AWAKENING
One of the significant results of the economic revival was the ap pearance of a new middle class, both in the Greek lands and in the Greek mercantile communities abroad. The emigrants to the overseas communities m aintained close relations with their homeland. This was noted by Dr. Henry H olland, an English traveler who associated mostly with m erchants while traveling in Greece in 1812:
The active spirit of the Greeks, deprived in great measure of political or national objects, has taken a general direction towards commerce. But, fet tered in this respect also, by their condition on the continent of Greece, they emigrate in considerable numbers to the adjacent countries, where their activity can have more scope. . . . Some branches of the migrating families, however, are always left in Turkey, cither from necessity, for the possession of property in the country, or from the convenience to both parties in a commercial point of view. Thus by far the greater part of the exterior trade of Turkey, in the exchange of commodities, is carried on by Greek houses, which have residents at home, and branches in various cities of Europe, mutually aiding each other, extending their concerns much more variously than could be done in Turkey alone.8
Dr. Holland also observed that there was interaction between the hom eland and the overseas com m unities in cultural m atters as well as in economic. When he visited the city of Yanina, in northwestern Greece, he was impressed by its flourishing schools and lively intellectual atmosphere.
The literature of this place is intimately connected with, and depending upon its commercial character. The wealth acquired by many of the inhabitants gives them the means of adopting such pursuits themselves, or encouraging them in others. Their connections in Germany and Italy, and frequent residence in these countries, tend further to create habits of this kind, and at the same time furnish those materials for literary progress, which would be wanting in their own country.9
T he significance of D r. H olland’s observations is apparent. The Greek world had expanded. It had acquired a new dimension. It had estab lished outposts in Vienna, in Venice, in Trieste and Odessa, and in many other European cities. The resulting interchange and interaction had a deep effect upon the homeland. This was particularly true because of the revolutionary tem per and outlook of the new class of merchants and intellec tuals. During their years of residence abroad they had become familiar with E uropean countries and institutions. They had been im pressed by the size and wealth of the great cities, by the unheard-of progress in science and learning, and, above all, by the rule of law and the safeguarding of individual rights. A t home, under Turkish rule, everything was different. The progress that had been made during the past century had been made in spite of, rather than because of, O ttom an suzerainty. The merchant at home had no roads for the transportation of his goods. He lacked security and carried on his


278 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
operations under the constant threat of extortion and outright confiscation. A t times the weakness of the central government led to wholesale disaster. In 1769 the M oslem A lbanians were perm itted to wipe out completely the prosperous town of Moschopolis with a population of sixty thousand Greeks and Vlachs. The contrast between the dazzling world of Europe and the wretched conditions at home naturally pointed to the conclusion that Turkish rule was an incubus that must be cast off as soon as possible. This explains why it was the merchants who organized the Philike Hetairia revolutionary society, who comprised the greater part of its membership, and who took the initiative in the conspiratorial work preparatory to the revolutionary outbreak. The Greek national awakening was stimulated also by the exciting in fluence of the French Revolution and of Napoleon. As noted in C hapter 12, this influence, which was felt throughout the peninsula, was especially marked in the Greek lands. In January, 1798, the Austrian M inistry of Foreign Affairs complained that “the secret intrigues and exhortations of the French agents have turned the heads of the inhabitants of M orea and of Greece. . . . Thus the G reeks imagine that the m om ent is propitious for throwing off the T urkish yoke and recovering their form er freedom .” 10 As will be recalled from C hapter 9, the two outstanding examples of the new intellectual climate in the G reek world were Rhigas Pheraios and A dam antios Korai's. T he latter was an educator who spent m ost of his life in Paris and became a disciple of the Enlightenm ent and the French Revolu tion. He contributed to the Greek cause most effectively by publishing the G reek classics with lengthy introductions written in a refined vernacular. These introductions served a twofold purpose. They provided a vehicle for thinly veiled political propaganda and they also contributed greatly to the movement for linguistic reform. Such reform was essential for the rejuvena tion of the G reek people. Korai's was distressed by the gap that existed be tween the vulgar patois of his illiterate countrymen and the language of ancient Greece. The latter was, for all practical purposes, a dead tongue, and so long as it remained so the Greeks would be unable to draw upon the splendid intellectual heritage of their greater past. Korai's therefore set him self the task of reconstructing for his countrym en a literary language which should combine, as far as possible, the best elements of both the ancient and the m odern tongues. His plan was to base his language on the common tongue but to remove from it all foreign accretions and restore all such an cient form s as had not becom e wholly obsolete. W hat L u th er’s Bible had done for G erm any, Korai's’s editions of the classics, with their prefaces in modern Greek, were to do for Greece. Rhigas was a very different person from Korai's. He was a fiery and active revolutionary rather than a contemplative scholar. Entering the service of the Phanariote princes, he traveled throughout Central and Southeastern Europe and learned several European and N ear Eastern languages. At the same time he absorbed the current revolutionary nationalist theories and,


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 279
being the person that he was, promptly attem pted to put them into practice. He joined secret lodges, organized new ones, and wrote and distributed various revolutionary tracts. His career was hectic but tragically brief. In 1796 Rhigas moved to Vienna where certain members of the large Greek community helped him to organize a conspiracy for the overthrow of the Turkish regime. The following year he left for his enslaved hom eland but he was arrested by the A ustrian police in Trieste, extradited to the Turkish authorities, and executed in Belgrade in June, 1798. To the revolution which swept Greece twenty-three years later Rhigas bequeathed not only the m em ory of a m artyr’s death but also a collection of immensely popular national songs. Outstanding was his famous “W ar Hym n” ( “T hourios” ), still one of the most celebrated works of m odern G reek lit erature. Its opening lines ring out its revolutionary message.
How long, my heroes, shall we live in bondage, alone like lions on ridges, on peaks? Living in caves, seeing our children turned from the land to bitter enslavement? Losing our land, brothers, and parents, our friends, our children and all our relations? Better an hour of life that is free than forty years in slavery!11
Rhigas blazoned forth this call to arm s in the true language of the people rather than in the m ore refined but less comprehensible language of Korai's. Very quickly the “W ar H ym n” becam e virtually a national anthem. “In a very short tim e,” one contem porary relates, “Rhigas’ song has spread throughout the entire country. Old and young, even women, sing it at ban quets and meetings of all kinds. A t first it was sung for pleasure, simply as a pleasant song, but little by little ‘T ho u rio s’ has influenced their souls.” 12
EVE OF REVOLT
We cannot conclude from the above that by the early nineteenth century all Greeks were in a revolutionary frenzy and were waiting im pa tiently for an opportunity to rise. As a m atter of fact, the opposite was the case. Greek society was deeply divided. Various groups had different and conflicting interests, and their attitudes and actions differed correspondingly. Certainly it cannot be said that the Greek revolution was a clear-cut bourgeois or class affair. In reality it was a much more complex movement. Perhaps the wealthiest element in the new middle class consisted of the shipowning families of Hydra and the other islands. But precisely because they had so much to lose, these families hesitated to support the revolution even after it had started on the mainland. They refused to move until they were forced to do so by rioting sailors led by revolutionary agitators. Likewise, it is difficult to ascribe the revolution in the Peloponnesus to the m iddle class


280 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
because in that part of the country the landowners also controlled most of the trade. D espite these reservations there is no doubt th at the m erchants and the intellectuals were more consistently opposed to the status quo than was any other group. Alongside them should be placed the peasantry, which could not provide leadership but did provide mass support. In the Pelopon nesus, where the revolution was fought and won, the peasants were goaded to action by sheer land hunger as well as by less tangible yet very potent considerations of faith and nationality. It is estim ated th at the 40,000 T urks who lived in the Peloponnesus ow ned three million strem m ata of good land (a strem m a being roughly equal to a quarter of an acre), while the 360,000 Greeks were left with only one and a half million strem m ata. Thus, on a per capita basis, the Turks had eighteen times as much land as the Greeks. Furtherm ore, most of the land left to the Greeks was in the hands of a small group of primates. Thus the bulk of the peasantry had the choice of working as laborers for either Greek or Turkish landowners. Under the circumstances many peasants supported the revolution as a means of getting land. The primates, by contrast, were relatively ambivalent toward the revolution because they already enjoyed power, wealth, and status under Turkish rule. The increase in self-government during the eighteenth century had enhanced the authority of the prim ates who headed the local bodies. In the Peloponnesus, for example, each community elected two elders to a provincial body; then each of the twenty-four provincial bodies elected one delegate to a general Peloponnesian assembly, which in turn elected a twom an com m ittee from its m em bers. T he general assembly and its com m ittee had very extensive powers. They supervised the collection of taxes, and their consent had to be obtained before new taxes could be imposed. They repre sented the entire Christian population before the Turkish authorities, and they had the right to appeal directly to the sultan over the head of the Turkish governor. This system of local governm ent was aristocratic in character. As a rule, the members of the outstanding prim ate families were elected to the local and provincial offices. This was so because the prim ates were elected in their own districts where pressure was easy to exert and difficult to resist. Furtherm ore, in some cases the franchise was limited, and in others the prim ates were elected indirectly through electors. Thus a Greek ruling class existed which dom inated local government, controlled the tax-collection ap paratus, and owned most of the Christian-held land. The members of this class were regarded with a jaundiced eye by less prosperous G reeks, who referred to them as “uncircumcized Turks.” Some primates deserved this epithet. Others, however, used their in fluence to extract concessions from the Turkish authorities and to dissuade them from undesirable actions. A p art from individual cases it is apparent that the prim ates as a group were in a very different position from that of the merchants or the peasants. F ar from being oppressed or financially ruined


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 281
by Turkish rule, the prim ates owed to it their authority and their wealth. In fact, they themselves were an integral part of the O ttom an administrative system, and for this reason they were not likely to turn against it without much hesitation and rellection. W hen the agents of the Philike Hetairia be gan to prod for commitments and action, most primates refused to move unless they were certain that Russia was behind them and that they would be able to direct and maintain control of the revolution. The Phanariotes were in som ewhat the same position as the prim ates. They were also an integral part of the Ottoman administration and they also stood to lose rather than gain if they supported a revolution. Indeed, the Phanariotes were in a more precarious position than the primates because they lived not in the m idst of the G reek population but rather in C onstanti nople and other adm inistrative centers. It is not surprising th at when the revolution began, the Phanariotes were sharply divided. Some turned their backs on their countrym en and rem ained loyal to the sultan. O thers were convinced that the uprising was foolish and hopeless and believed that the only hope for deliverance lay with the great powers. A num ber of Phanariotes, however, supported the revolution and made important contributions both during the struggle and after the establishm ent of the independent Greek state. The leaders of the Orthodox Church were perhaps the most skeptical about revolutionary ideology and revolutionary organizations. We saw in C hapter 9 that the top clergy generally believed that a revolution led by dis ciples of the Enlightenment would mean not only the destruction of an im perial structure in which the church had a definite place, but also the de struction of the intellectual foundations of Balkan Orthodoxy. On the other hand, the village priests as a rule had a very different attitude. Mostly illit erate, they lived on intimate terms with their congregations and tended to identify themselves with local aspirations and movements. This became ap parent after 1821, when more than one village priest distinguished himself with rifle and sword. Indeed, one of the folk heroes of the revolution is A thanasios Diakos (the D ea co n ), who, in the popular poem , fought for three hours together with eighteen comrades against eighteen thousand Turks. He was finally taken prisoner, and when his captors pressed him to abandon his faith and become a Moslem, he replied scornfully in words that every Greek schoolboy knows:
Go you and your faith, you filth, to hell with you! I was born a Greek, a Greek will I die.
The G reek people in the early nineteenth century were rent by deep cleavages, the product of revolutionary ideology from abroad and of eco nomic and social differentiation at home. Despite those cleavages they were in a much stronger position than they had been a century earlier. They had increased in num bers to approxim ately three millions com pared to half that num ber in 1715. T hey also had gained im m easurably in m ilitary strength.


282 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
They now possessed a large, well-armed, and skillfully manned merchant marine which was to give them com m and of the sea when the revolutionary struggle began. Likewise, on land they now had several thousand trained veterans who had gained experience fighting as m ercenaries in Italy, in Egypt under Napoleon, and in the Ionian Islands under British, French and Russian auspices. Furtherm ore, the Greeks now commanded the capital resources nec essary for a revolution, the chief sources being the shipowners of the islands and the merchants and bankers abroad. Finally, and most im portant of all, the Greeks were intellectually and psychologically prepared for revolution. The experiences of the past century had broadened their horizon im measurably. No longer did they live in a world consisting only of Turkish officials, O rthodox prelates, and local pri mates. No longer did they accept O ttom an rule as irresistible, nor did they consider deliverance to be feasible only if the Christian powers of Europe intervened in their behalf. Instead, the G reek rayas for the first time had enough self-confidence to think in terms of winning their independence by their own efforts. A decade before the outbreak of revolution Dr. Holland sensed this process of change that was taking place.
Of late years the Greeks, considering them in their whole extent as a people, have been making progress in population, in commerce, in education, and literature; and above all, as it would seem, in that independent consciousness of power which is necessary as a step to their future liberation.13
REVOLUTION AND STALEM ATE: 1 8 2 1 - 1 8 2 4
The Greek revolution was planned by a secret organization that sought to disguise its true character by adopting the name “Philike H etairia” or Society of Friends. T o this day little reliable inform ation is available con cerning this body. We know that it was founded in 1814 at Odessa by Greek merchants. For the first three years of its existence it made little progress. Then it appears to have grown rapidly, though estimates as to its mem bership vary widely. The same cleavage between radical and conservative elements existed within the Philike H etairia as in the G reek community as a whole. The conservatives prevailed in the m atter of selecting a leader. They offered the post first to Count Capodistrias, a native of Corfu who had entered the Russian service and risen to the position of foreign minister. Capodistrias rejected their offer, so they turned next to Alexander Ypsilantis, who ac cepted it. Ypsilantis was of a well-known Phanariote family, and, like C a podistrias, had sought his fortune in Russia and had become a m ajor general in the Russian army. On the timing of the revolution the conservative Hetairists favored delay and careful preparation. B ut on this issue the radicals had their way. They insisted on immediate action, pointing out that the Turks were dis tracted by disturbances in Asia Minor, by friction with Persia, and by the


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 283
revolt of Ali Pasha in Albania, and that the European powers also were faced with revolts in Spain and Italy. The radical Hetairists cleverly exploited Ypsilantis’ Russian connections by claiming that the Russian government se cretly supported them. This claim was quite unjustified, but it did serve the purpose of winning over certain vacillating primates in the Peloponnesus. The revolt began in the spring of 1821 after Ypsilantis hastily improvised plans for a diversionary blow in the Danubian Principalities and for a gen eral uprising in the Peloponnesus and the islands. The uprising in the Principalities was ill-fated from the outset. Ypsi lantis had hoped for support from Russia, but Tsar Alexander immediately repudiated him and struck his nam e off the army list. Ypsilantis had also counted on some assistance from the Rum anian population of the Principal ities, but again he was disappointed. The Rum anians knew the Greeks only as hospodars, tax collectors, and usurers. Consequently, liberation for them at this time m eant liberation from the Greeks rather than from the Turks, with whom they had virtually no contact. F ar from rising in behalf of Ypsilantis, the Rumanian peasants took up arms against “the reigning princes and the Greek and Rumanian boyars . . . who have robbed and pillaged us until there is left to us only o u r souls.” 14 Under the circum stances Ypsilantis did not have a chance even if he had been a capable military and political leader, which he was not. On M arch 6, 1821, he crossed the Pruth River into M oldavia at the head of the “Sacred Battalion,” composed of young Greek patriots of the middle and upper classes. Three months later the battalion was cut to pieces by the Turks at D ragashani. Ypsilantis fled with two of his brothers to A ustrian territory, but his followers fought on against overwhelming odds. At the end of June, less than four m onths after the beginning of the revolt, a few survivors of the “Sacred B attalion” swam across the Pruth back to Russian soil. We shall see in C hap ter 18 th a t although Y psilantis’ cam paign had little bearing on the Greek revolution, it did affect the Principalities decisively. It led to the abolition of G reek Phanariote rule in the two provinces and to the réintro duction of native Rum anian boyar princes. Less than three weeks after Ypsilantis crossed the Pruth, the Greek revolution proper began in the Peloponnesus. The proclam ation of independ ence cam e after a winter of tension and apprehension. The revolt of Ali Pasha and the increasing num ber of individual attacks upon Turks height ened the feeling of an impending outbreak. In February, 1821, the Pelopon nesian prim ates met to discuss the explosive situation. They decided to post pone decision until they could determine how true were the rumors of Russian support. In M arch the Turkish authorities summoned the primates to Tripolitsa, the administrative center of the Peloponnesus. Guessing that the Turks’ intention was to seize them as hostages, the prim ates resolved to ignore the summons. Instead, they went to the historic monastery of Aghia Lavra where, on M arch 25 (April 6 ), Bishop Germanos raised the standard of the cross as a signal of revolt.


284 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
The campaigns that followed were largely isolated and uncoordi nated. One reason was the lack of unity among the Greeks. The revolution was by no means a national crusade in which all Greeks fought side by side for country and for faith. It was rather a complex movement in the course of which the Greeks fought not only against the Turks but also among them selves. Sectional differences ranged Peloponnesians against continentals, and islanders against both; ideological differences set cosmopolitan Phanariotes against guerrilla chieftains and high prelates against village priests; conllicting class interests separated wealthy shipowners from unemployed sailors and powerful primates from landless peasants. The sporadic character of the war arose also from the mountainous terrain which divides the country into isolated compartments. This factor, however, operated against the Turks as well as the Greeks. Once the revolu tionaries had gained control of the Peloponnesus, the Turks found it exceed ingly difficult to plan a campaign for its reconquest. The sea approach was out of the question because of the Greek navy. The alternative was invasion from the north. But the only routes available were long, parallel, and vulnera ble lines running down each side of the Pindus Range. Also, the winters in the m ountainous interior were rigorous and long, so that open ground could not be held from early December to the end of March. This explains the re peated failure of the Turkish armies from the north. Each spring they set forth from their northern bases and marched down the parallel routes. Some times they were able to cross the Isthmus of Corinth and penetrate into the Peloponnesus itself. But they were not able to capture, within the time limit of one campaign season, the cities or forts necessary for winter quarters. So at the beginning of each winter the Turks trailed back north again, their mission uncompleted. The deadlock continued until 1825, when Mehemet Ali invaded the Peloponnesus by sea and almost snuffed out the uprising. Turning from over-all strategy to individual campaigns, we find that during the first year the Greeks won control of the Peloponnesus and of num erous Aegean islands, the most im portant being the great maritime and naval centers— Hydra, Spetsai, and Psara. The Greek successes were stained by large-scale massacres of defenseless Turks— an inevitable accompaniment, perhaps, of a struggle that pitted, at one and the same time, G reek subjects against Turkish overlords, Greek peasants against Turkish landowners, and Greek Christians against Turkish Moslems. By the summer of 1822 the revolutionaries had extended their rule north of the Isthmus of Corinth, capturing Missolonghi, Athens, and Thebes. But now the insurrection found its limits. To the north the Turks had speedily overwhelmed outbreaks in Thessaly, M acedonia, and M t. Athos. In Constan tinople they hanged the Patriarch, Gregory V, despite the fact that he had issued an encyclical condemning the revolution. On the island of Chios the Turks wreaked the most savage reprisals, m assacring or selling into slavery most of the extensive population. The T urks were able to stam p out the em bers in the northern Balkans


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 2 8 5
and in the islands, but the Greeks on their part were able to consolidate their position in the Peloponnesus. A fter defeating Ali Pasha in February, 1822, the Turks invaded the Peloponnesus with an army of 30,000 men. They failed to take the key fortress of Missolonghi, so they were obliged to retreat with the coming of winter. The campaigns the following year were essentially the same. Two Turkish armies advanced down the east and west flanks of the Pindus Range. Because neither one was able to cross the Corinth Gulf, before the end of the year both withdrew northw ard to their winter quarters. The Greeks were unable to exploit their successes, owing to dissen sions that were becoming increasingly acute and open. In January, 1822, a National Assembly had met at Epidauros and proclaimed “before God and man, the political existence and independence of the G reek nation.” The rep resentatives adopted an elaborate constitution and elected a Phanariote, Alex ander M avrokordatos, the first president of the Hellenic Republic. In ac tuality the new governm ent was one in name only. No one with authority was willing to relinquish a particle of it, so that real power rem ained with T heodore K olokotrones and the guerrillas, with A ndrew Zai'mes and the prim ates, and with the Koundouriotes brothers and their fellow shipowners. W hen the second National Assembly met in December, 1822, K o lokotrones was the virtual master of the country. He had just captured the port of Nauplion, but he refused to allow the Assembly to meet there even though it had been designated the national capital. T he Assem bly then gath ered at nearby Astros, where it voted to deprive Kolokotrones of the supreme military com m and and to vest the office in a com m ittee of three. K olokotrones prom ptly retaliated by forcibly carrying off certain members of the govern m ent to N auplion. T he rem ainder fled to the island of H ydra, where they formed a new government headed by the wealthy shipowner, George K oun douriotes. Two governments now existed, one on the mainland dominated by Kolokotrones and the other at Hydra led by Koundouriotes and including the Phanariote M avrokordatos. O pen civil w ar prevailed in 1824, when Kolokotrones was forced to surrender Nauplion and recognize the Koun douriotes government. Before the end of the year a second civil war had broken out. This time the Peloponnesians combined against a government which they considered to be unduly dominated by the islanders. K oun douriotes again prevailed, not because of his ability, which was mediocre, but because of an English loan, which he used to attract Rumeliote guerrillas to his side. We may conclude that by the beginning of 1825 a stalemate had been reached in the G reco-Turkish war. The Turks had behind them an ex tensive empire and considerable resources, but they were unable to utilize them effectively because of corruption and inefficiency. O n the other hand, the Greeks failed to take advantage of the Turkish weakness because of their meager resources and continual feuds. Liberated Peloponnesus was unable to


286 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
carry the revolution further, but the Turks likewise were unable to reconquer the Peloponnesus.
FOREIGN IN TERVENTION TO NAVARINO:
1825-1827
The balance between the Greeks and the Turks was ended in 1825 by outside intervention, first by the Egyptians, who tipped the scales in favor of the Turks, and then by the European powers, who rescued the Greeks from their perilous plight and finally won for them complete independence. M ehemet Ali of Egypt intervened in the G reek war only after Sultan M ahm ud had accepted his conditions. He was to receive the pashalik of Crete, and his son Ibrahim was to become governor of the reconquered Pel oponnesus. The Egyptians had little trouble suppressing the Greek revolu tionaries on the island of Crete, thanks to the dissensions that divided the Cretans fully as much as the mainland Greeks. Similarly, it was the indisci pline of the Greek sailors that enabled Ibrahim to ferry his army across the stretch of water to the Peloponnesus. Their pay being a month or two in arrears, the seamen insisted on returning to their islands. Thus on February 24, 1825, Ibrahim reached without interference the southern tip of the Pelo ponnesus with an army of 4,000 regular infantry and 500 cavalry. The trans ports went back to Crete and returned, again without opposition, with a sec ond force of 6,000 infantry and 500 cavalry. The stalemate in the war was about to end. The Greeks had paid little attention to the landing of the Egyptians, assuming that they could be scattered as easily as the Turks. Ibrahim soon dispelled this illusion. First he captured N avarino (P ylos), which became his naval base and supply center. Then he advanced through the Peloponnesus, “harrying, devastating, and slaughtering in all directions.” The G reek forces, which had remained a conglomeration of virtually independent guerrilla bands, proved no m atch for Ib rah im ’s trained and disciplined veterans. In engagement after engagement the Greek guerrillas broke and lied before the unfaltering charges of bayonet-wielding Egyptian regulars. While Ibrahim ad vanced from the southwest, the Turks under Reshid Pasha renewed their at tacks in the northwest. The two forces converged on Missolonghi, the key fortress guarding the entrance to the Gulf of Corinth. It was finally taken in A pril, 1826, after a full y ear’s heroic defense. Ibrahim then returned to ravage the Peloponnesus while Reshid m arched to Athens, where he forced the Greek garrison on the Acropolis to surrender on June 5, 1827. A t this point, when the revolution appeared to be doomed, the situation changed overnight with the intervention of the European powers. When the news of the Greek uprising was first received in the spring of 1821 the reaction of the European statesmen was uniformly hostile, for they faced a basic dilemma. They recognized the degeneration of the Ottoman Em pire, but they could not answ er the question of what should take its place.


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 287
This is the essence of w hat cam e to be know n as “ the E astern Q uestion.” Countless books and articles were written on this question during the nine teenth century, and innumerable plans were advanced by way of solution. The difficulty was that the T urks ruled an empire so vast and strategic that the E uropean balance of pow er would have been upset if their em pire had been appropriated by any one of the powers. Likewise, the partition of the empire among several powers raised complications so dangerous that it was feared that a European war would almost inevitably ensue. Was there no solution, then, that could reconcile Turkish disintegra tion with the requirements of European diplomacy? Today the answer seems obvious: liberate the subject peoples of the empire and erect a num ber of independent states on the ruins of the im perial structure. B ut this is viewing the past through the spectacles of the present, a practice th at is as misleading as it is com m on. T he fact is th at m ost of the subject peoples of the O ttom an Empire were not nationally conscious to the point where independent exist ence would have been feasible. Also, the European statesm en were not then prepared to consider such a solution. It simply did not occur to them that free B alkan states might take the place of E uro p ean T urkey. It is true th at the Serbs already had won de facto independence, but they were little known in W estern Europe. The inhabitants of the Danubian Principalities were not thought of as constituting a separate nationality. Even the Greeks, the de scendants of a well-known and much-admired people of ancient times, were to a large degree forgotten. Koraïs describes an incident that occurred during the French Revolution when he applied for a carte de securité in Paris and identified himself as a Greek. Immediately, he relates, “the eyes of everyone present were fixed upon me, some approached me as if to convince themselves th a t a G reek was the sam e as any oth er h um an.” 15 Given this background it becomes understandable why the statesmen of E urope thought in term s of only tw o alternatives— the continued existence of the Ottom an Empire or else its partitioning among the great powers. And since the latter involved so many perils, the statesmen naturally preferred to prop up the Turk, decrepit and undeserving though he might be. It was not until decades later th at there could be serious consideration of G ladstone’s strategy of a barrier of free men against Russia. Tsar Alexander shared this view concerning the necessity of preserv ing the status quo and the peace of Europe. For this reason he disapproved in principle of the Greek revolution. But in actual practice Alexander had to take into account certain special factors which placed him in an ambivalent position. He was the protector of the Orthodox Church and the hereditary en emy of the sultan. His subjects were deeply moved by the hanging of the Patriarch and the unhappy plight of their coreligionists. Furtherm ore, the Turks had continued to adm inister the D anubian Principalities by m artial law in defiance of treaty obligations, and they had also interfered with Russian shipping in the Straits. The latter point was not insignificant, for it affected seriously the trade of the Russian Black Sea ports. W heat exports from south


288 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
Russian ports in 1821 were 30 per cent less in quantity than those of 1820, and in 1822 they were 47 per cent below the 1820 level. These factors explain why the tsar, after denouncing the Greek revo lution, dispatched an ultimatum to Constantinople on July 27, 1821. His de mands were concerned mostly with the protection of the Christian churches, freedom of Christian worship, and pacification of the Danubian Principalities. The Turks rejected the ultimatum and the Russians severed diplomatic rela tions. The prospect of war alarmed the European capitals. Lord Castlereagh and Prince M etternich persuaded the sultan to make certain concessions to the tsar. The danger of war passed for the moment, and M etternich happily expected that the bothersom e revolt would, as he expressed it, “burn itself out beyond the pale of civilization.” Instead of burning out, the insurrection blazed on, and the longer it did so the m ore difficult it becam e to ignore it. Popular sentim ent throughout Europe was rallying to the side of the Greeks. Philhellenic organizations in every country collected money and supplies and brought pressure to bear on their respective governments. Wide segments of the population that opposed revolution on principle supported the Greeks enthusiastically because they viewed them not as ordinary revolutionaries but rather as Christians fighting Moslems and as the descendants of Pericles and Aristotle struggling to free themselves from Turkish barbarism. Public opinion was particularly outraged by the rum or th at Ibrahim planned to carry off into slavery all the Greeks whom he did not exterm inate, and then to repeople the Peloponnesus with Egyptian fellaheen. A London newspaper wrote indignantly: “We would pre fer Greece Russian to beholding a whole Christian people swept to the grave to m ake room for sanguinary hordes of M oham m edan negroes.” 1(1 This mounting popular agitation influenced George Canning, who had succeeded Castlereagh as British foreign m inister in August, 1822. A l though not a philhellene, he was convinced that a settlement could be post poned no longer. He feared especially that Russia might undertake unilateral action against Turkey. The Russians were at least as aroused as the Western Europeans, having the additional incitement of the O rthodox religious bond with the Greeks. W hen the vigorous T sar Nicholas succeeded A lexander in December, 1825, Canning decided that immediate action was necessary. He sent the Duke of Wellington to Russia, and the outcom e was the St. Peters burg Protocol of April 4, 1826. The two powers agreed to mediate between the Turks and the Greeks on the basis of complete autonomy for Greece under Turkish suzerainty. This was an im portant step toward the settlement of the Greek ques tion, but it did nothing to resolve the many outstanding questions between Turkey and Russia. In fact, the tsar already had sent an ultimatum to Con stantinople (M arch 17, 1826) before he met with Wellington. The ultimatum demanded that the Principalities be evacuated immediately and that pleni potentiaries be sent to Russia to settle outstanding issues. Sultan M ahmud was not in a position to reject these dem ands because he was now making


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 289
preparations for the exterm ination of his mutinous and useless janissariesa long overdue project that he finally executed in June, 1826. M ahm ud re luctantly agreed to send the plenipotentiaries and on October 7 signed the Convention of A ckerm an, in which he accepted Russian dem ands concerning Serbia and the Principalities. M eanwhile the fighting in Greece had been dragging on. The Greeks had form ally applied for the m ediation envisaged in the Petersburg Protocol. The Turks and Egyptians naturally were loath to stop with victory in sight. Canning therefore prepared for action by negotiating the Treaty of London (July 6, 1827) with France and Russia. This provided that the Allies should again offer m ediation, and if the sultan rejected it they would “exert all the means which circumstances may suggest” to force the cessation of hostilities. In August, 1827, the three powers offered mediation to the bellig erents. The Greeks accepted and the Turks refused. The Allied fleets in the L evant were instructed to intercept supplies destined for Ibrahim ’s forces. In the process of doing so they sailed into Navarino Bay, where a squadron of Turkish and Egyptian ships was anchored. No hostilities were intended “ unless the Turks should begin.” Under the circumstances somebody was bound to begin. A shot was fired. O thers weie fired in reply. The battle be came general, and before the day of O ctober 20 was over the Turko-Egyptian fleet lay at the bottom of the bay. The news of Navarino was received by most Europeans with unre strained delight. The sultan denounced the affair as a “revolting outrage” and dem anded com pensation and apologies. C ertain circles in E urope sym pathized with him but the damage could not be undone. Navarino was as much a turn ing in the Greek revolution as the landing of Ibrahim had been two years earlier. The question henceforth was not whether the Greeks should be free, but rather, what precisely should be the extent of their freedom.
NAVARINO TO IN D EPEN D EN CE
George Canning had died unexpectedly two months before Navarino. H ad he lived he probably would have cocrced the O ttom an government into granting Greek independence and would thus have forestalled the Russian declaration of w ar on Turkey. But his successor, the Duke of W ellington, followed precisely the opposite course. He publicly deplored Navarino as an “untow ard event” and made clear his intention of bolstering Turkey against Russia. His aim was to preserve the independence and integrity of the O tto m an Empire. But no other course could have been more nicely calculated to defeat this object. Sultan M ahm ud was em boldened by W ellington’s support to continue hostilities in Greece and even to provoke Russia by denouncing the Convention of Ackerm an. Russia responded in April, 1828, with a declaration of war. This was the denouem ent that the skillful Canning had been able to avoid but which W ellington had precipitated in a few months of blundering diplomacy.


290 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
The Russian army crossed the Danube but was stalled unexpectedly by the Turkish fortresses on the southern bank— Shumla, Silistria, and Varna. Britain and France took advantage of the respite to conclude an agreement with M ehemet Ali (August 9, 1828) providing for the evacuation of the Egyptian forces from Greece. This was carried out by a French expe ditionary force under General Maison during the winter 1828-1829. The following spring the three Allied Powers concluded the London Protocol (M arch 28, 1829) by which Greece was to be an autonomous but tributary state, governed by a prince selected by the Allies. M eanwhile the Russians had been able to break through the Danube barrier. They crossed the Balkan M ountains, marking the first time that a Russian army had advanced so far south. In August, 1829, the key city of A drianople fell without firing a shot. The Russian cannon could be heard in Constantinople. The O ttom an Em pire appeared to be approaching its end. In fact, the French foreign minister, Count Polignac, now brought forward a plan for a Franco-Russian alliance to effect the complete partition of the O ttom an Empire and to redraw most of the boundaries of Europe. A t this critical moment Tsar Nicholas appointed a “Special Commit tee on the Problems of Turkey” with instructions to consider the political complications arising from the war with Turkey. This committee made a de cision of far-reaching significance. It concluded that a partition of the O tto m an Em pire was contrary to Russian interests. One reason was that partition would create a “labyrinth of difficulties and com plications” with the other great powers. Another was that partition would enable the other powers to seize various parts of the Balkan Peninsula and thus Russia “would be called on to meet dangerous enemies in southern Europe instead of indifferent T urks.” These considerations led the Committee to agree unanimously
that the advantages of the maintenance of the Ottoman Empire in Europe are superior to the disadvantages which it presents; that its fall henceforth would be contrary to the true interests of Russia; that as a consequence it would be wise to try to prevent it, taking advantage of all opportunities which might yet present themselves to conclude an honourable peace.17
A week after this decision was reached, the news arrived in St. Petersburg that General Diebitsch had signed the Treaty of A drianople with the Turks and that the terms, fortunately, were moderate and in keeping with the recommendations of the committee. Thus the work of the committee did not affect the peace settlem ent but it did determ ine R ussia’s N ear E astern policy during the following decades. In the following chapter we shall note th a t Russia consistently supported the sultan against the challenge of E gypt’s M ehem et Ali. This policy is understandable only in the light of this com m it tee’s recom m endations, which T sar N icholas unhesitatingly accepted. By the Adrianople Treaty of September 14, 1829, Russia relinquished her conquests in the Balkans but advanced her frontier from the northern to the southern mouth of the Danube. She was to occupy the Danubian Princi


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 291
palities pending the payment of an indemnity of fifteen million ducats; the hospodars of M oldavia and W allachia were to be appointed for life; and the Turks were to withdraw all M oslems and raze all fortresses in the two provinces. Thus the Principalities received practical autonomy under Russian protection. Finally, the T urks recognized R ussia’s title to G eorgia and other Caucasian territories, and also agreed to accept the Treaty of London with respect to Greece. The actual settlement of the affairs of Greece was relegated to a conference in London which concluded a new London Protocol (February 3, 1830), declaring Greece to be an independent and monarchical state under the guarantee of the three A llied Pow ers. W ellington’s policy at this time was to protect the O ttom an Em pire by restricting the area of the new G reek state as much as possible. Its northern frontier was pushed down al most to the Gulf of Corinth, leaving little more than the Peloponnesus and the Cyclades Islands. The Greek question still was not quite settled. The powers offered the Greek crown to Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, but he declined it on the grounds that the frontiers of the hew state were inadequate. The Greeks themselves rejected the London Protocol because of the same frontier issue. Meanwhile the Greeks had elected, as President, Count John Capodistrias, a native of Corfu and at one time foreign minister of Russia. Unlike other Greek leaders of this period Capodistrias was incorruptible and patriotic. He suppressed piracy, organized a state apparatus, made provisions for public education, founded the first agricultural school, advocated the distribution of state lands among the war veterans, and disciplined the unruly primates, who were virtually independent potentates in the provinces. These statesmanlike measures won him many enemies. These included not only vested interests that were threatened by his measures but also other elements that were alienated by his sharp tongue and self-righteousness. The intellectuals he called “fools,” the military chieftains “brigands,” and the primates “Turks masquerading under Christian names.” Thus he estranged the most power ful and articulate segments of the population. Furtherm ore, the British and French ministers discreetly encouraged the opposition groups because Capo distrias followed a pro-Russian foreign policy. The end came suddenly on O ctober 9, 1831, when Capodistrias was assassinated by two members of the powerful M avromichalis clan, which he had tried to subject to his authority. The country now lapsed into utter anarchy. M eanwhile the three Allied Powers had offered the Greek crown to Prince Otho, a younger son of the king of Bavaria. By May, 1832, satisfac tory terms had been arranged, including the extension of the frontier slightly northw ard to the V olo-A rta line. In July, 1832, the sultan recognized the independence of Greece in return for a cash indemnity. Finally, on February 6, 1833, Otho arrived in Athens and Greece began her existence as an in dependent state under a Bavarian dynasty. Before considering the developm ent of the new G reek state it should


292 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
be noted that its establishment underm ined the unique position that the Greeks had enjoyed in O ttom an bureaucratic and financial circles. A large num ber of Greeks still rem ained under Turkish rule, many more than were to be found in independent Greece. But after 1821 the Phanariote hospodars in the Danubian Principalities gave way to native Rum anian rulers. In Con stantinople the Arm enians took advantage of the difficult position of the Greeks to buy their property at reduced rates. During the following years the Arm enians prospered to the point where they became an im portant ele ment in banking. Likewise, the Bulgarians now took the place of the Greeks in government contracting, particularly in army equipm ent and provisions. The Greeks were far from being entirely excluded. They rem ained active in Ottom an economic affairs to the last days of the empire. But never again did they attain the position they had reached in the eighteenth century. The revo lution ended their junior partnership in the O ttom an Empire.
POLITICAL DEVELOPM ENTS TO 1878
The new Greece was born with more than its share of problems. A part from those of an economic nature, which we shall consider in the fol lowing section, the foremost problem in the popular mind was irredentism. T he n orthern frontier ran from the G ulf of A rta in the west to the G ulf of Volo in the cast. This m eant a population of about 800,000 in the new king dom as against three times that num ber in the Turkish provinces and in the British-held Ionian Islands. Thus, thanks to the requirements of the European balance of power, Greece was born a rum p state. During the following cen tury— to the 1923 Lausanne Treaty— G reek energies were spent in pursuit of the Megale Idea, or G reat Idea, the redemption of the enslaved compa triots abroad. A nother serious problem was the disruptive influence of the great powers. Their conflicting interests and policies, so apparent during the revo lutionary war, continued unabated following the peacc. Athens became the diplomatic cockpit of the three Allied Powers, and, inevitably, there appeared “French,” “Russian,” and “English” parties under the leadership of Kolettes, Kolokotrones, and M avrokordatos respectively. Under these circumstances Greece, like other small states, was independent only in a nom inal sense. A British minister in Athens once declared, with more frankness than discre tion, th a t “ a really independent G reece is an absurdity. G reece is either Russian or English and since she must not be Russian she must be Eng lish.” 18 The final problem was political. The decision of the three powers in favor of a m onarchical regime ran contrary to the country’s political trad i tion. The contending forces in the past had been the democrats versus the oligarchs. The latter had enjoyed both adm inistrative and economic power in the autonomous communities of the Turkish period. Now their pre-eminence was challenged by the new monarchy, which was unrestrained by a constitu


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 293
tion and which began its first proclam ation with the words, “O tho, by the grace of God King of G reece.” Thus it was the oligarchs who were in the forefront of the opposition movement that finally compelled Otho in 1843 to accept a constitution. T he political conflict was intensified by the unfitness of O tho’s B a varian regents for the task that faced them. Since Otho was only seventeen at the time of his accession, he was accompanied by three regents: Count von Armansperg, General von Heideck, and Dr. M aurer. Heedless of the actual conditions prevailing in the new Greece, these men devised an elaborate na tional system of education practicable only on paper, adopted a judicial code far too complicated for a primitive Balkan country, and imposed a highly centralized W estern bureaucracy in the place of the ancient local institutions that had flourished under O ttom an rule. Their most serious error was in treat ing the Greeks as though they were primitive natives unfit to participate in their own government. A Council of Secretaries composed of G reek officials did exist, but these officials were only heads of departm ents. All im portant decisions were m ade by the B avarian regents, whose attitude is revealed in the m anner in which they organized a national arm y. They disbanded all G reek troops and im ported in their place 'B av arian volunteers, who were handsomely paid. Less than two thousand Greeks were allowed to enroll in the new army and gendarmerie. This arbitrary procedure left ten thousand uprooted Greek veterans without any means of support. Many of them turned to brigandage, which remained for decades an urgent problem. Even the justifiable measures of the regents aroused the opposition of one faction or another. In 1833 they decreed the establishm ent of a na tional O rthodox Church independent of the Patriarchate. They also national ized the lands of some of the superabundant monasteries. These measures were necessary for national and for economic reasons. Yet a clamor was raised by the Patriarch, by the dispossessed monks, and by the pro-Russian party, which objected to the king because he was Roman Catholic. O tho, who had attained his m ajority in 1835, m ade a concession to public opinion by retaining only one B avarian in his cabinet. U nfortunately, the king neutralized the effect of this gesture by acting as his own prime m inister and presiding over the cabinet meetings. Thus popular criticism, which in the past had been directed against the regents, henceforth was focused on the person of the king. A series of untoward events in the follow ing years added to the general discontent and culm inated in the revolt of 1843. . The revolt was largely the work of the “English” and “Russian” parties. They were united in their desire to be rid of the king, though for different reasons. The British wanted the king to be constitutional and the Russians wanted him to be Orthodox. Both believed that he would abdicate rather than accept a constitution. But both were proved wrong. A t midnight, on Septem ber 14, 1843, a certain C olonel Kallerges m arched his troops to the palace and raised the cry “ Long live the C onstitution.” A fter some vacil


294 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
lation Otho signed a proclam ation dismissing from his service all foreigners except the old philhellenes who had fought in the Greek revolution, and undertaking to summon within thirty days a National Constituent Assembly. Thus the Bavarian Protectorate came to an end and Greece took her place among the constitutional states of Europe. On M arch 30, 1844, King Otho took the oath to the constitution providing for a popularly elected Chamber and an appointed Senate. This step changed neither the king’s views n o r his policies. H e soon rid himself of M etaxas and M avrokordatos, the two politicians who had led the constitu tional movement, and turned to Kolettes, the head of the “French” party. Kolettes organized a political machine similar to that which functioned in France at the time under Guizot. “The System,” as it was popularly called, was based upon the highly centralized hierarchy of prefects, subprefects, demarchs, gendarmes, tax collectors, and judges. In every election the king nom inated his own candidates and “The System” ensured their return. Despite the corruption of this regime it did not provoke a wide spread revolutionary movement, not even in 1848, when ancient dynasties were tottering. T he reason was that the G overnm ent party, th at is, K olettes’s “French party,” was the very one the masses supported. This party had genuine democratic traditions dating back to the prerevolutionary period when those who were influenced by French Revolutionary ideology founded pro-French democratic groups. Kolettes held this popular following by the atrical protestations of love for the people and demagogic speeches on irredentism or the Megale Idea. K olette’s tactics explain the paradoxical situation of an anticonsti tutional regime supported by the masses and an opposition consisting of the naturally conservative sections of the population. It also explains the failure of a few local insurrections in 1847 led by rebels within the “French” party. These outbreaks reflected the grievances of the peasants; yet the government was never seriously threatened. This was due to the lack of a clear and con sistent program and also to the fear of the conservative opposition parties that the revolts might get out of control. In other words, the “English” and “Russian” parties were opposed to the dynasty but were not willing to sup port a revolutionary movement for fear that it might go too far and threaten the existing order. K olettes’s expansionist dream s, which were shared by O tho, led to repeated clashes with the British Foreign Office. L ord Palm erston had little patience with the tiny state that aspired to annex Turkish provinces and thus to disturb the balance of power in the N ear East. “I am obliged to own,” he declared on one occasion, “that one of the worst things I ever did was to consent to O tto ’s election and by that consent to place him on the th ro n e.” 19 In 1850 Palmerston ordered a blockade of Piraeus in order to force the Greek government to satisfy the claims of a certain Don Pacifico and several other British subjects. Anglo-Greek relations were further strained during the Crim ean W ar, when Greek sympathies were on the side of Russia and against


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 295
the Western powers supporting Turkey. Guerrilla bands invaded the Turkish provinces, Thessaly and Epirus, but their efforts were doomed from the out set. Britain and France could not tolerate disturbances on their rear and prom ptly sent a fleet which occupied Piraeus from M ay, 1854, to February, 1857. The Greeks had no choice but to recall their bands and forgo their territorial claims. Otho reached the height of his popularity during the Crimean W ar by identifying himself with the nationalist aspirations. Six years later he was driven from the country and few regretted his departure. One reason for his expulsion was the Italian W ar of 1859, during which O tho openly favored A ustria while the Greek people naturally sympathized with the Italians fighting for their freedom. A nother reason was the problem of the succession. O tho was childless and no other Bavarian prince was eligible for the throne, since the 1844 Constitution provided that the successor “must profess the religion of the Orthodox Eastern C hurch.” Otho was forced out also because there had appeared by this time a new and more democratic generation of political leaders who were the first products of the national university and whose political ambitions brought them into conflict with the king and his supporters. Finally, the three powers were indifferent, or worse, to the fate of the dynasty. Britain, especially, was cool to the king, who persisted in a foreign policy that ran contrary to imperial interests in the M editerranean. The revolution broke out in October, 1862, while Otho was on a tour of the Peloponnesus. Before he could return to A thens a provisional government was formed which proclaimed the deposition of the dynasty. On the advice of the foreign diplomats O tho accepted the fait accompli and em barked on board a British ship for the return to Bavaria. The problem now was to find a new ruler acceptable to the various great powers. This proved to be an almost impossible task, and Palmerston was at his wit’s end when he recalled “Prince (w hatever his nam e is) of D enm ark.” He was referring to Prince William George of the Danish Gliicksberg dynasty. Queen Victoria thought poorly of the proposal— “poor foolish boy W illy”— “ a good but not overbright and very plain youth.” 20 But the fact rem ained that he was the last resort. So Willy arrived in Athens on O ctober 30, 1863, as ‘‘G eorge I, King of the H ellenes.” H e brought with him , as his dynasty’s dowry, the Ionian Islands, granted by B ritain with the expectation that he would not encourage future insurrections against Turkey. A year after his arrival George took the oath to the new constitution adopted by the National Assembly. It was a dem ocratic document, provid ing for a unicam eral parliam ent elected by manhood suffrage, and for strict limitations upon the royal prerogatives. Willingness to abide by these limita tions explains why the new seventeen-year-old ruler remained on the throne to witness the great trium phs in the B alkan W ars of 1912-1913.


296 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENTS TO 1878
T he revolution of the 1820’s h ad left the G reek land in a state of utter devastation. Over 200,000 people had lost their lives. Vineyards and olive orchards had been destroyed wholesale. Except for N auplion it was rare to find a house with roof and walls intact. To add to the misery, many of the guerrillas at the end of the revolution took to brigandage for want of anything better to do. The coming of O tho and his Bavarian bureaucrats restored neither order nor prosperity. T en years after the king’s arrival an eyewitness reported that the peasants “distrust the population of the towns, and look on Bavarians, Fanariotes, and governm ent officers, as a tribe of enemies embodying different degrees of rapacity under various names. They have as yet derived little benefit from the government of King Otho, for their taxes are greater now than they were u nder the T urks. . . 21 This descrip tion of the plight of the Greek peasants explains why travelers through out the nineteenth century reported considerable emigration from the new kingdom to the O ttom an provinces. One traveler noted that “during the three years from 1834 to 1836, nearly 60,000 individuals quitted their fatherland to take up their abode in Turkey.” U pon inquiry as to the reasons for the exodus he was told that “ in the C hristian villages of T urkey we find a greater am ount of prosperity and com fort than in those of G reece.” 22 Independence did improve the position of the peasants in one im portant respect by making possible a more equitable distribution of land. We noted earlier in this chapter that before the revolution the Turks in the Peloponnesus owned eighteen times as much land per capita as did the Greeks. The disposition of their estates became a crucial issue following the winning of independence. During the course of the revolutionary struggle legislation had been passed converting Turkish property into national domain. This was of little significance because the national governments lacked au thority to enforce their decrees. Instead, the primates, being the most power ful, helped themselves to the choicest Turkish estates. Thus the new state was born with a serious land problem. M uch of the land that belonged the oretically to the public domain had actually passed into private hands. Titles and tenures were insecure and only one peasant in six had land of his own. By the end of the century most of the land had been distributed and the great majority of the peasants had enough land to support their families. The process of distribution appears to have been gradual and largely un planned. Legislation in the 1830’s and 1840’s provided for land grants to veterans and to settlers on the public domain. M ore effective was the ap propriation of land through legal recognition of squatters’ rights. Any person could gain title to land if he cultivated it w ithout interruption for a period that varied from region to region from one to fifteen years. This appears to have been a widespread practice during the early years, when population was sparse and much of the land uncultivated. As late as 1861 an observer re ported that “a landlord must walk over his estate daily like a gam ekeeper


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 297
in order to protect it from sq u atters.” 23 A lthough this procedure gave rise to “interminable litigation and to deeds of fearful violence,” it did eifect a thor oughgoing distribution of land. By 1870 the average peasant owned a plot of thirteen to twenty-five acres, though the holdings were much smaller in the islands and in the overpopulated m ountain areas. Land distribution unfortunately was not accompanied by an im provem ent in agricultural techniques. The Greek peasant still used the wooden plow of ancient times. He rarely used manure as fertilizer and he scattered his seed wastefully by hand. H e knew nothing about crop rotation, so that much of his land lay fallow each year. His livestock, lacking forage, were small and scrawny, with disproportionately low draft power. Various factors explain this backwardness, which persisted through most of the country. One was the lack of adequate transportation facilities. Peasants had to'lim it their production to the needs of their own families and of their immediate neighbors. Coastal cities, such as Argos, imported their grain from Trieste and Alexandria while the fertile Tripolitsa region, only six miles away, had surplus supplies which were rotting because of the lack of roads. A nother reason for the agricultural backwardness was the unfortunate m anner in which the tithe was collected. The grain had to be carried from the fields to the threshing floor, where the tax farm er inspected the crop and collected his tenth. Since the peasants harvested at the same time the tax farm er was in great dem and at this critical period. This offered an oppor tunity for extortion, which was almost invariably practiced. Peasants paid an extra 3 to 5 per cent rather than allow their grain to rem ain piled up on the threshing floor at least three m onths awaiting the tax farmer. After this transaction the grain needed for fodder had to be carried back to the fields. This naturally involved a great loss of grain and labor, as contem porary trav elers invariably remarked.
The sheaves are trailed along (he road on the backs of donkeys, which display unwanted gambols, and scatter the grain along the road, in order to steal from one another a mouthful. Innumerable birds of the air gather to the feast; the fowls and the pigeons of the whole district assemble, at the threshing floor; the ox that treadelh out the, grain is not muzzled; and the peasant who ought to keep him to his work sleeps during the heat of the day. The rats emigrate from the houses, and form colonies in the stacks of wheat, which remain piled up often for weeks until the farmers of the land-tax, who are more destructive than the rats, give the unfortunate peasant the permission to thresh out, measure, and house his crop.24
A third reason for the retarded state of Greek agriculture was the heavy burden of peasant indebtedness. The interest rate on mortgage loans ranged from 20 to 24 per cent, and on personal loans from 36 to 50 per cent. The government did little .to aid the peasant by easing his debt load or by any other means. An authority on Greek agriculture has described its state in the early nineteenth ccntury as follows;


298 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
Though the majority of the population depend for its existence upon the returns of the soil, nothing had been done by the state for the security, promotion, and development of agriculture. Communications with rural communities . . . agricultural credit and the clearing up of rural property titles were never accom plished. . . . Agricultural education was totally lacking and taxation was empirical, heavy, unjust. . . . Animal husbandry was neglected . . . and the communal lands were continually being reduced by state encroachment. In general the agrarian population had been entirely abandoned to its own fate. The vital powers of the state were consumed by internal factional strife in disputes between an autocratic ruler and political parties that owed allegiance to one person, in intrigues in stigated by the powers, and in vain attempts at promoting an irredentist policy without military or economic strength.25
The most common crops were of the intensive variety which required much labor and little land— grapes, currants, olives, citrus fruits, and tobacco. Cereals were grown where the land perm itted, but never in sufficient quan tity to meet domestic needs. In fact, the basic problem of Greek agriculture to the present day has been to produce some exportable product in sufficient quantities to pay for the necessary grain imports. The problem was solved in the nineteenth century by the Corinth grape or currant, which literally paid for the bread of Greece. Even before the revolution most of the Patras Plain was planted in currants for the British market. After the middle of the cen tury, production rose sharply as new markets were found in France, Italy, Austria and other Continental countries. W hen the phylloxera blight ruined French vineyards in 1878 Greek currant production shot up to meet the demands of French wine manufacturers. Thus currant exports mounted stead ily through the years: 1821— 6,000 tons; 1841— 10,000 tons; 1861— 42,800 tons; 1871— 81,374 tons; 1878— 100,700 tons. The currant trade became the cornerstone of the entire Greek econ omy. The flourishing port of Patras was occupied solely with the export of currants and the im port of cereals and m anufactured goods. In 1887 it ex ported 18.3 million francs w orth of goods, of which 17.8 millions were in currants. So long as the currant m arket held, the G reek economy was safe. We shall see later that before the end of the century the market collapsed, setting off a chain reaction in Greece, including governm ent bankruptcy and mass m igration to the New W orld. Precisely the sam e pattern is observable in G reek economic development in the twentieth century, but with tobacco taking the place of the currant. The industrial development of Greece remained in the embryonic stage before 1878. We noted earlier in this chapter that various cooperative handicraft enterprises had flourished before the revolution. The one at Ambelakia, which m anufactured and distributed dyed cotton thread, was the best known and the m ost prosperous. But as early as 1800 an English trav eler, after describing enthusiastically the success and affluence of this coop erative, went on to predict an uncertain future because of English machine competition.


A Janissary (Bildarchiv der Nationalbiblio thek, Vienna).
A Spahi (Bildarchiv der Nationalbibliothek, Vienna).
Murad IV. Portrait by an unknown seven teenth-century European artist.
Mohammed II. Portrait by Gentile Bellini, 1480.


Travnik in Bosnia reflects the Turkish influence on Balkan architecture (Yugoslav Inform ation C e n te r). Below is a Divan meeting, showing a Turkish interior (M . d ’Ohsson, Tableau G en eral de l’E m pire O th om an , Paris, 1787-1790).


T he title page of the first Bulgarian book, the Kiriakodrom ion, by Sofronii, Bishop of Bratsa. Printed in Rim nik, W allachia, 1806 (Harvard College Library).
Below is a facsimile of the last page of the rules of the Serbian secret society “Union or Death,” com monly known as the “Black H and,” which flourished a little over a century after the printing of the book shown above.


Karageorge Petrovich (Yugoslav Inform a tion C enter).
Rhigas Pheraios inciting fellow-Greeks to revolt (Peter von Hess, Munich M useum ).
A thanasios Diakos, painted by Photis Kontoglow, contem porary painter who blends folk patterns with the Byzantine tradition.


Charles I of Rumania, 1881-1914. Ferdinand 1 of Bulgaria, 1908-1918.
M ustafa Kemal A taturk (GeneralDirecto- Paul I of Greece (G reece, Royal Greek rate of Publications, Propaganda, and Tour- Embassy Inform ation Service, Washingism, A nkara). ton, D .C .).


Tito and Pijade jailed in Lepoglava Prison before World War II for Commu nist activities (Yugoslav Information Center).
(Above) German poster offering reward of 100,000 Reichmarks for the capture of Tito, dead or alive (Yugoslav Information Center).
(Right) Stevan Filipovic, Unit Commander of Valjevo Partisan Detachment, calling on the people to resist the occupation troops before being hanged (Yugoslav Information C en ter).


(Left) Outstanding Greek resistance leader, Ares Velouchiotes, and (right) Gen eral Stephanos Saraphis, commander of ELAS resistance forces in Greece (D. Megalides, Leykoma tou Agona, Athens, 1946).
This Greek family was forced to make its home in a pigsty. Such abject poverty persisted in Greece long after the war (Courtesy of Foster Parents’ Plan, Inc.).


T he Stalin D am in Bulgaria, providing electric power and irrigating the Sofia plain, contrasts m arkedly with the rose-picking in the Valley of Roses (both pictures from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Bulgarian Peoples Republic).


Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood to 1878 299
A bout this time the merchants of Ampelakia began to feel the effect of the preference given to English cotton-thread in the G erm an m arkets; and it was a subject of their complaint. “They foresaw,” they said, “that the superior skill of the English manufacturers, and their being enabled to undersell every other com petitor upon the Continent, would ultimately prove the ruin of their estab lishm ent.” This no doubt is owing to the im provem ent adopted in G reat Britain of spinning cotton-thread in mills, by m eans of engines th at are worked by steam, which has caused such a considerable reduction in its price;— all the thread made at A m pelakia being spun by m anual labour.20
This gloomy forecast proved entirely justified. Those enterprises that survived the ravages of the revolutionary war petered out in almost every case during the following decades. The one exception was the shipping in dustry. Traditionally it had operated along cooperative lines, with carpenters, lumber merchants, seamen, and captains pooling their resources and sharing the profits. A large proportion of the ships were destroyed during the revolu tion, but island shipyards soon made up the losses. The rapid development of southern Russia proved a boon to Greek shipowners, who were particularly active in the Black Sea trade. T he G reek m erchant m arine soon held first place in the eastern M editerranean. But, as in the case of the currant indus try, a crisis developed tow ard the end of the century. The reason, in this in stance, was the competition of the new steam-powered ships which the Greek islanders could neither build nor afford to purchase. We shall see later that the problem was solved by the purchase and operation, though no longer along cooperative lines, of old steamships discarded by W estern firms. Industry proper cannot be said to have started in Greece before the abdication of O tho and the accession of George 1 in 1862. By 1878 a small num ber of modest enterprises existed in a few coastal towns, such as Patras, Syra, and Piraeus-Athens. These enterprises confined themselves exclusively to the production of consum ers’ goods, especially flour, textiles, olive oil, leather products, glass, and soap. By 1877 Greece had 136 plants employing 7,342 workers. It may be concluded that Greek industry did not really begin to develop until the advent of the Trikoupes adm inistration in 1882. Prem ier Trikoupes was the first to undertake the systematic development of transpor tation facilities, the lack of which had hitherto shackled industrial growth. We may conclude that the Greek economy in 1878 remained largely unaffected by the W est’s industrial dynam ism . A p art from the cu rran t growers of the Patras region and the Ionian Islands, the typical Greek peasant prac ticed subsistence farming. He could, in any case, produce only a small sur plus on his tiny and crudely cultivated plot. This surplus sufficed for the purchase of the few commodities that he and his family could not grow or fabricate. The simplest of these commodities were supplied by the infant domestic industry and the rem ainder were imported from W estern Europe.


1 6 . O tto m a n R e fo r m a n d N e a r E a stern C rises:
1 8 3 1 -1 8 5 2
T
-I he years following the Greek revolution are of criti cal im portance in N ear E astern history in two respects. In the first place, this was the period when the T urkish reform m ovem ent got under way in a posi tive sense. Selim had attem pted reform at the turn of the century but without success. M ahm ud, as we shall see, was to succeed where Selim had failed. He exterminated the janissaries, who hitherto had blocked reform, and as serted the authority of the central government to a degree unprecedented since the seventeenth century. In doing so, M ahm ud paved the way for the positive reform measures of an outstanding minister, Reshid M ustafa Pasha, during the 1840’s. W ith this beginning the reform m ovem ent was to continue its uneven course, sometimes appearing on the surface, at other times sub merged by reaction, only to appear again, as it did most spectacularly with the Young Turk revolution of 1908 and the Kemalist revolution following W orld W ar I. This was also the period when the so-called Eastern Question crys tallized. The catalytic agent in this respect was the master of Egypt, M ehemet Ali. Twice he brought the O ttom an Em pire to the verge of dissolution, and in doing so he forced the great powers to re-examine their N ear Eastern policies and to take sides. The result was the crises of 1831 to 1833, and 1839 to 1841. These crises involved all the European powers and ended with treaty engagements to which they all subscribed. Henceforth the Eastern Question was to remain an ever-present factor in European diplomacy, and not infrequently the most im portant one.
M A H M U D AND THE JA N ISSA RIES
M ahm ud II ascended the throne at one of the gravest m om ents in O ttom an history. As will be recalled from C hapter 13, he was the third sul tan to reign w ithin fourteen m onths. B loodshed and terror prevailed in
300


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 301
Constantinople to a degree unprecedented in that turbulant capital. The re action of the E uropean pow ers is suggested by the fact th at they considered at least twelve specific plans for O ttom an partition during the first twentyfive years of M ahm ud’s reign. M ahmud himself was young, untried, and unim pressive in appear ance at the time of his accession in 1808. But he soon dem onstrated that he was made of sterner stuff than his unfortunate predecessor, Selim III. He was not as attractive a personality as Selim. He was brutal, ruthless, and avaricious. His custom ary m anner of replenishing his finances was to execute his wealthy subjects and confiscate their property. Y et his harshness was not capricious or senseless. “A drastic disease,” he often said, “needs a drastic rem edy.” Furtherm ore, his aims were progressive and constructive. He stands out as one of the great reforming sultans of his dynasty. M ahm ud was con vinced that his empire must reform or perish, and he was aware that the janissaries were the principal obstacle to reform. The janissaries were too strongly entrenched to be challenged at once, so M ahm ud began by asserting his authority in the provinces. Im perial disintegration had reached the point where Mahmud effectively controlled only two provinces in Asia M inor at the tim e of his accession. D uring the following years he re-established imperial unity to a surprising degree. He did not hesitate to use both fair means and foul. His agents lured one of the great Smyrna notables onto a boat and poisoned him. In the case of the feudal chiefs of eastern Asia Minor, M ahm ud dispatched an energetic pasha who built a road and brought up heavy artillery to sm ash the feudal castlcs. Likewise, the independent pasha of Baghdad was brought to term s by raising the Bedouin desert tribes against him. W here possible M ahm ud used more diplom atic methods to gain his ends. He lured the sons of hereditary chief tains by offering them attractive posts elsewhere in the em pire and then he placed his own men in the places of the chieftains when they died. M ahm ud encountered more serious resistance in the Balkans, where the octogenarian Ali Pasha had consolidated his position in northern Greece and Albania. For all practical purposes, Ali was an independent ruler with foreign consular representatives accredited to his fortified capital at Yanina. H e overreached himself, however, when he sent agents to assassinate an enemy in Constantinople itself. The plot miscarried and one of the assassins was arrested and forced to confess. M ahm ud deposed and outlawed Ali in M arch, 1820, and sent an arm y to destroy him. Ali, who was not called “the L ion” for nothing, resisted fiercely. Before his head was delivered to M ahm ud in February, 1822, the Greeks had taken advantage of the opportunity to begin their war for independence. The Greek revolution dem onstrated once more the utter uselessness of the janissaries as a fighting force. They had been untried since their earlier fiasco during the Russian wars at the turn of the century. Now they proved incapable of putting down the uprising of a comparative handful of Greek guerrillas. At this point M ahmud decided to entrust the suppression of the


302 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
Greeks to his powerful Egyptian vassal, M ehem et Ali, while he made prep arations to cut out the cancer that was threatening the life of the empire. M ahm ud was to prevail over the janissaries where Selim had failed. One reason was the difference between the two men. Selim allowed himself to be surrounded by untrustworthy advisers who feigned support while plot ting against him. M ahmud, by contrast, selected his ministers carefully and placed dependable men in key positions. Typical was his appointm ent of a ferocious ex-janissary, Hussein the Black, as commander of the troops on the Asiatic side of the Straits. W hen the moment came, Hussein carried out M ah m u d ’s orders and butchered his form er com rades w ithout qualm or mercy. M ahm ud also carefully won over the ulem a by prom otions and favors. The grand mufti, or head of the learned jurists, issued a fetva testifying to all believers not only th a t M ahm ud’s proposed reform of the janissary corps was in accord with Islamic doctrine but also that its application was a sacred duty for all Moslems. Finally, M ahm ud was fearless and decisive when the crisis came, in contrast to Selim, who repeatedly drew back and yielded be fore janissary threats. M ahm ud first presented his plan for the reorganization of the janis saries before an assembly of religious, military, and administrative leaders. The plan provided that about one third of the janissaries should be selected for training along W estern lines. Discipline and morale were to be fostered by common uniforms, higher pay, improved rations, careful selection of officers, and elim ination of bribery and favoritism. The assembly approved the plan and steps were taken to put it prom ptly into effect. M ahmud now faced the same storm of protest and violence as did his ill-fated predecessors. The chief grievance appears to have been not the strange military drill or the new tight-fitting uniforms or any religious prej udice against imitating the infidel West. Rather, it was the threat to the sub stantial economic interests that manipulated the janissary pay tickets. We noted in C hapter 13 th at these tickets were acquired in large num bers by wealthy individuals, who then drew the pay of janissaries theoretically in the service but usually long since deceased. By this time more than 135,000 pay tickets were extant and were being regularly honored by the treasury, though it is doubtful that even 5 per cent of this num ber represented live and active janissaries. Thus many im portant people were vitally interested in thwarting M ahm ud and they now resorted to their customary intimidation and mob violence. On the night of June 13-14, 1826, the janissaries overturned their soup kettles, the customary signal of revolt. But this time they met their master. M ahmud summoned Hussein the Black to cross the Bosphorus to Constantinople with a large body of troops and artillerymen. This show of force won the populace to M ahm ud’s side. The isolated janissaries had no cannon to defend them selves against H ussein’s shell fire. W ithin a m atter of hours their barracks were tum bling about their heads in blazing ruins. The British ambassador, who watched the smoke curling up from the wreckage,


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 303
reported that 6,000 were killed in the holocaust and that another 18,000 were exiled to the Asiatic provinces during the following fortnight. Janissary garrisons in the provincial cities either subm itted or were crushed with little difficulty. In this anticlim atic fashion disappeared a proud institution with half a millenium of history behind it. M ahm ud at last was the unchallenged master of his realm. Now he was free to build as he wished upon the ruins of the old. First and foremost he wished to organize a new and powerful army. He participated personally and enthusiastically in this task. He wore the new uniform , pored over drill books, and took part in maneuvers. Progress was slow in the face of innum er able difficulties— popular resistance to conscription, indolent and illiterate officers, and lack of adequate military academies. M ost serious was the dis traction of continual war, first with Russia in 1828-1829 and then with M ehmet Ali in 1832-1833 and 1839. M ahmud was not able to build up a firstclass military machine com parable to that of the European powers or even of M ehem et Ali. But he did leave the Turkish army stronger than he had found it, although not strong enough to stand up to Ibrahim and his Egyptians. It is often stated th at M ahm ud was not a true reform er and th a t his sole concern was to strengthen his arm y in· order to subdue his enemies. T here is some truth to this contention, in the sense th at M ahm ud was not a doctrinaire liberal like Selim. On the other hand, his interests ranged far beyond the military realm. Indeed, he attem pted to change his subjects and his em pire with a zeal reminiscent of Peter the G reat. Just as the tsar had warred on beards and gowns, so M ahm ud enveighed against turbans and slippers. M ore constructively, he built bridges and lighthouses, opened the D anube to steam er navigation, instituted the first official newspaper, the Moniteur Ottomane, and imposed sanitary measures to com bat the plague despite the religious prejudices of his subjects. He also tried to improve ad ministration and finances by raising salaries and paying them promptly, reg ularizing his diplomatic service, and adopting a new tariff in 1838 that elim inated an injurious system of monopolies in articles of commerce. Finally, w hat was the significance of M ahm ud’s reform s for the Bal kans? T he answ er is th at his reform s had m uch less effect upon th at region th an might be im agined. M ahm ud’s great accom plishm ent had to do with imperial authority, which he asserted by crushing the janissaries and the semi-independent local potentates. This achievement did help the Balkan peoples ,by eliminating the open terrorism and anarchy that had driven the Serbs to revolt in 1804. Furtherm ore, M ahm ud strove to improve specifically the position of his Christian subjects. Sometimes he was guilty of harsh meas ures, such as the hanging of the G reek Patriarch in 1821, but his motive al ways was political expediency rather than religious fanaticism. Thus in 1830 he ordered the release of all Greeks taken slaves during the G reek revolution, and compelled their masters to bear the expense of repatriating them to Circccc. On his frequent tours he took specific measures to improve the lot of


304 Age oj Nationalism: 1815-1878
the Christians, and issued orders that “Turks and rayas be treated alike with out distinction.” Despite these efforts the fact remains that the position of the Balkan C hristians rem ained basically the same so far as everyday life was concerned. Janissary terrorism was gone, but the O ttom an officials rem ained, and they were as inefficient and corrupt as before. A ppointm ents to provincial posts were still dependent on favoritism and bribery, and the salaries were still discouragingly low. Thus im perial adm inistration rem ained a scourge for M os lem and Christian subjects alike. In fact, contem porary travelers frequently reported that conditions worsened when the bureaucrat from Constantinople replaced the form er local lord. The latter had had a selfish interest in caring for the welfare of his subjects, whose prosperity would contribute to his own wealth and that of his successors. The governm ent officials, by contrast, usu ally had paid for their appointm ents and thus found it necessary to exploit the citizenry to the limit before they were transferred. Despite these qualifications, M ahmud stands out as one of the great constructive figures of O ttom an history. By destroying the janissaries and asserting the authority of the central government, he made possible the re form movement of the following decades.
NEAR EASTERN c r i s i s : 1831-1833
M ah m u d ’s life was to end tragically in the m idst of defeat and hu miliation. The person responsible for this misfortune was Mehemct Ali, the pasha of Egypt. F or a full decade he kept the N ear E ast in turm oil and re peatedly brought the European powers to the brink of war. Those who have studied the career of the masterful M ehem et Ali are not agreed as to his basic aim. Some believe that he sought to supplant the sultan and found a new dynasty in Constantinople. Others are of the opinion that he wished to gain control only of the A rab provinces and that he would have been content to share the empire on this basis. W hether he coveted the whole or only the part is not too im portant. E ither objective was bound to lead to war, espe cially with the resolute M ahm ud in Constantinople. Mehemet Ali nominally was the governor of Egypt under the suze rainty of the sultan. But even before the G reek revolution M ehemet Ali had added the Sudan and a part of the A rabian Peninsula to his domains. Then he intervened against the Greek rebels after M ahmud had promised to hand over the pashaliks of Crete and the Peloponnesus. A t N avarino M ehem et Ali lost his fleet, though he did gain Crete as paym ent for his assistance. W hen the sultan found himself at war with Russia in 1828 M ehemet Ali gave him only nom inal aid. Instead, he concentrated his efforts on building a new fleet and im proving his arm y. T hus in the early 1830’s M ehem et Ali was stronger than his master and overshadowed him in almost every respect. Mehemet Ali had the basic advantage of being the absolute master of his realm. He achieved this by ruthlessly eliminating the Mamelukes, who


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 305
formerly had ruled the country. M ehemet Ali also completely controlled and freely exploited the resources of Egypt. He was able to draw into his own coffers a larger proportion of the national income than any other Eastern ruler. But M ehemet Ali was more than a superefficient Oriental despot. He was unique in that he began, like other pashas, by seeking to amass a fortune, and ended by attempting to develop and civilize his adopted country. H e was also unique in realizing that the key to developm ent and civilization was to be found in the West. He spent large sums in an attem pt to establish modern industry in spite of the persistent and ultimately successful opposition of the British. He introduced cotton culture, which quickly became the mainstay of the national economy. He also developed a system of irrigation canals which extended the area under cultivation and made possible year-round farm ing. His most spectacular success was in the m ilitary field, where he made use of a corps of W estern advisers, mostly Frenchmen, to build the first mod ern arm y and navy in the N ear East. T he con trast betw een the strength of pasha and sultan was revealed during the Greek war. It became more appar ent during the following decade when M ehemet Ali made his bid for empire. Following the G reek adventure M ehemet Ali turned his eyes east ward toward the rich and strategic pashalik' of Syria. For a while he was diverted by a French proposal that he should expand with the support of France westward into Tunis, Algeria, and Morocco. The French, who had particularly close relations with M ehemet Ali, advised him that an advance into the Barbary States was less likely to meet with opposition from C on stantinople and from the European powers than an invasion of Syria. The French, of course, had other and m ore selfish reasons, such as the desire to eliminate the Barbary pirates and to distract popular attention from pressing constitutional problems at home. M ehemet Ali decided to undertake the venture on the condition that the French cede outright four warships. While this was being considered, the European capitals got wind of what was afoot. The British protested vehemently. “France has no right,” declared Wellington, “to appeal to M ehem et Ali because he is a subject of the Sultan. . . . The alliance of M ehem et Ali with France will be envisaged as a com bination fatal for the Ottoman Em pire.”1 Faced with this opposition, the French dropped the notion of coop eration with M ehemet Ali. Instead, they began preparations for a purely French invasion of Algeria while M ehemet Ali again turned toward Syria. In the summer of 1830 a French expedition reached Algeria and quickly over ran the country with little difficulty and with the diplom atic protests confined to London and Constantinople. But when M ehemet Ali invaded Syria in November, 1831, a full-fledged international crisis quickly developed. The reason was that the great superiority of the Egyptian armies threatened the very existence of the Ottom an Em pire. W hen that threat was made, European interests were involved and European powers intervened. M ehcm et’s son Ibrahim captured the Syrian cities and fortresses one after the other— Jaffa, Gaza, Jerusalem, Acrc, and Damascus. He met and defeated


306 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
a Turkish army near Alexandretta and advanced into Asia M inor without resistance. In December, 1832, he routed the main Turkish army led by the grand vizir in the battle of Konya. W ith no further opposition he pressed on to Brusa, within striking distance of the Straits and Constantinople. Meanwhile M ahm ud in the summer of 1832 had appealed to Britain for assistance. Foreign M inister Palm erston was in favor of telling M ehemet “forthwith to retire to Egypt and rest contented with that fertile country.” 2 B ut his colleagues were engrossed in the question of parliam entary reform ; furtherm ore, the navy at that time was engaged in operations off the coasts of Portugal and H olland. A ccordingly the cabinet rejected M ahm ud’s request for aid. A few years later Palmerston expressed the opinion that “no British Cabinet at any period of the history of England ever made so great a mistake in regard to foreign affairs. . . . O ur refusal at that time has been the cause of more danger to the peace of Europe, to the balance of power and to the interest of England than perhaps any one determination ever before pro duced.” 3 / The French government was not concerned about the Egyptian vic tories since it was definitely partial to M ehemet Ali. Only the Russian govern m ent reacted strongly to Ib rah im ’s advance through Syria and A sia M inor. Its motivation was clear and simple. As in 1829, at the time of the Adrianople Treaty, so now the Russian government had no desire to see the weak O tto man dynasty replaced by a new regime that was likely to be strong and ag gressive. Accordingly, Tsar Nicholas sent General Muraviev on a special mission to Constantinople and Alexandria to promote a settlement. Muraviev arrived in Constantinople simultaneously with the news of the disaster at Konya. He offered M ahmud a naval squadron for the protection of Con stantinople. The sultan hesitated, so M uraviev proceeded to Alexandria. The most that he could get out of Mehemet was that Ibrahim would not, for the moment, advance closer to Constantinople. Meanwhile the sultan had decided that only outside aid could avert the ruin of his empire and formally requested the proffered Russian fleet. The British and French ministers in Constantinople protested strongly, but the Turkish foreign minister replied pointedly, “A drowning man will clutch at a serpent.” 4 On February 20, 1833, a powerful Russian squadron sailed into the Bosphorus and anchored before Constantinople. Both Britain and France were seriously alarm ed and brought pressure upon the sultan to request its withdrawal. The tsar would not hear of this so long as Ibrahim rem ained in A sia M inor. A nd Ibrahim in turn refused to move until the sultan had met his demands, namely, the cession of Syria and the im portant town and dis trict of A dana (Seghan) in southw estern Asia M inor. In M arch the sultan offered to cede Syria, but M ehemet Ali scornfully rejected the offer and in structed Ibrahim to m arch upon Constantinople if his dem ands were not fully satisfied. M ahmud finally yielded and on April 8, 1833, signed the Convcn


Oltoman Reform and. Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 307
tion of Kutahia, ceding both Syria and A dana to M ehemet Ali. Ibrahim began preparations for withdrawing his troops, but the sultan now gave signs of at tempting to retain A dana despite his commitment. Ibrahim entrenched him self once more while the Russians brought additional warships to C onstan tinople and even landed fifteen thousand troops on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus. The situation became too serious for the sultan to tarry longer, so on May 3 he formally recognized the cession of Adana. Two days later, a special Russian envoy, Count Alexis Orlov, arrived in Constantinople. His instructions were to bolster the Turkish government until peace was concluded and to induce the sultan to look to Russia as the only hope of salvation. Since an agreement already had been reached, Orlov concentrated his attention on M ahmud. He was so conciliatory and charming that he completely won over the sultan and his court. They were already in a receptive mood because they suspected France of favoring Mehemet and resented E ngland’s original refusal of naval support. By contrast, the tsar ap peared to be a generous and reliable friend. Orlov exploited this situation so skillfully th at in the end it was M ahm ud himself who proposed a TurkishRussian alliance. The outcome was the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi signed on July 8, 1833. The public articles proclaim ed the existence of peace and friendship between the two emperors and provided that they should reach an under standing with each oth er upon all m atters affecting their peace and security. They were also comm itted to “afford to each other mutually for this purpose substantial aid, and the most efficacious assistance.” The real significance of the treaty, however, was contained in a secret article which released the sultan from any obligation to render such assistance to the tsar and provided that T urkey should instead “lim it its action in favor of the Im perial C ourt of Russia to closing the Straits of the D ardanelles, that is, to not allowing any foreign vessels of war to enter them under any pretext whatsoever.” 5 The provisions of the secret article leaked out and caused an uproar, particularly in Britain. Palm erston charged that the sultan was bound to give the Russian fleet free access to the Straits and to the M editerranean while the W estern fleets, by contrast, would not be perm itted to pass through to the Black Sea. The Russian foreign minister, Nesselrode, repeatedly denied this charge. He pointed out that the status of the Straits had been determined hitherto by the 1809 Anglo-Turkish treaty, which stipulated that it was at “all times forbidden for war vessels to enter the channel of C onstantinople.. . . ” Accordingly, he maintained, with full justification, that the secret article in the Unkiar-Skelessi Treaty “does not impose on the Porte any burdensome condition and does not cause it to contract any new engagement. It serves only to state the fact of the closure of the Dardanelles for the military flag of the foreign Powers; a system which the Porte has m aintained at all times and from which, indeed, it could not depart without injuring its most direct interests.” 8 Palm erston’s obvious rejoinder to N esselrode was th at “if this treaty


308 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
did not bring you any advantages or new privileges, then who urged you to conclude it?” 7 T he answ er is to be found in the treaty’s stipulation requiring the signatories “to come to agreement without reserve on all m atters concern ing their respective tranquillity and safety. . . .” In other words, Turkey was obligated, in case of trouble, to consult with Russia first and to depend upon Russia first in case assistance should be needed. Thus Russia had gained the right of prior consultation in O ttom an affairs. Palm erston perceived this when he pointed out that the “most objectionable part of the treaty is the m utual engagement between the two Powers to consult each other confidentially upon all their respective interests, and by which the Russian Am bassador becomes chief Cabinet M inister of the Sultan.” 8 Russia could not hope to reconcile Britain to the Unkiar-Skelessi Treaty and she did not try to do so. But she was bound by strategic considera tions to reach some agreement with A ustria concerning her Turkish policy. Land communications between Russia and Constantinople ran through the D anubian Principalities and Bulgaria. A ustria was able, from her position in Transylvania, to sever those communications whenever she so wished. This explains why, two months after Unkiar-Skelessi, Russia concluded the Munchengratz A greem ent with A ustria. By it Russia declared herself in favor of the m aintenance of the O ttom an Empire and agreed that if partition became inevitable she would act only in concert with A ustria. During the following years Prince M etternich of Austria tried to ex tend the Miinchengratz Agreement to include Britain and France. But neither Britain nor Russia was willing. T sar Nicholas had agreed to consult and to cooperate with A ustria because of the exigencies of military strategy. But he absolutely refused to grant to the two W estern powers a lever by which they could control his T urkish policy. Palm erston likewise rejected M etternich’s proposal for a Four Power Pact. He plainly suspected that it was a trick and replied belligerently that the chief danger was “the active policy of the R us sian Governm ent [which] . . . for years has been directed systematically, perseveringly and with no small degree of success to the . . . annexation of large and im portant portions of the T urkish dom inions. . . .” !> This suspicion of Russia is quite significant. In the light of later events it is clear that one of the chief and most om inous results of this N ear E astern crisis of 1831 to 1833 is precisely this R ussophobia that it generated. Palmerston was not the only one affected. Wide sections of the British public shared his dislike and distrust of Russia. Various factors contributed to this deep-rooted feeling. In addition to the N ear Eastern crisis there was the wide spread resentm ent aroused by R ussia’s suppression of the Polish revolt of 1830. Very effective also was the propaganda and the deliberate provocations of a small group of dedicated Russophobes who labored zealously to prom ote the thesis that barbaric Asiatic Russia was about to swallow the entire Near E ast as she already had Poland. A leading role was played by a strange Scots man named David Urquhart, a capable, energetic, and rather unbalanced mystic who in other circum stances might have been the messiah of a religious


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831—1852 309
revival. T he im pact of these various factors is evident in the findings of a historian who carefully studied British public opinion at this time and con cluded that “by the end of 1837 Russophobia was a m ajor element in English opinion. . . .” 10 This should be kept in m ind as one of the m ajor antecedents of the Crimean W ar two decades later. Palmerston was as much opposed to Mehemet Ali as he was to the Russians. “1 hate M ehemet Ali,” he declared frankly, “whom 1 consider as nothing but an ignorant barbarian, who by cunning and boldness and mothcrwit, has been successful in rebellion; . . . I look upon his boasted civilization of E gypt as the arrantest hum bug; and I believe that he is as great a tyrant and oppressor as ever m ade a people w retched.”11 This characteristic explo sion is less than fair to M ehem et Ali. Palm erston undoubtedly would have been delighted if some of M ehem et A li’s m any accom plishm ents, which he dismissed so airily, could have been effected in the provinces under the sul ta n ’s control. Palm erston obviously was prejudiced in this m atter, and he was prejudiced because M ehem et’s am bitions conflicted with British im perial in terests. The N ear East at this time was beginning to assume a new signifi cance as a short cut to India and the Far East. T h e Industrial Revolution was progressing in E ngland with ever-increasing speed. T he new factories required a constant flow of raw m aterials from overseas, while the m anufactured goods likewise had to be transported to foreign markets. Steamships were now m ak ing their appearance and were proving speedier and more dependable than sailing ships. But for long voyages so much fuel and water were needed that little space was left for cargo. A shorter passage with frequent stops for sup plies was indispensable. This meant a reversion to the old routes through the N ear E astern lands. D uring the 1830’s several English surveyors and scien tists conducted investigations. Their reports produced conflicting views in British official circles. Some favored a canal across the Suez Isthmus; others preferred a railway to a canal; and still others urged developm ent of the Euphrates-Persian Gulf route. The im portant point is that whichever route was considered, M e hem et Ali was found to be in the way. In Syria he blocked the route to the Euphrates and the Persian Gulf. In Egypt he controlled the vital Suez pas sageway. Furtherm ore, his armies were encircling the Red Sea by pushing down the west coast of the A rabian Peninsula. When they neared the stra tegic port of A den in 1838 the British quickly intervened and annexed the port. Palmerston informed Mehemet that Aden was “ a British possession” and “ a hostile attack . . . will be dealt with accordingly.” 12 Palm erston explicitly acknowledged the strategic considerations un derlying his difficulties with E gypt’s ruler. M ehem et’s “ real design,” he de clared on one occasion, “is to establish an A rabian kingdom , including all the countries in w hich A rabic is the language. T here might be no harm in such a thing in itself; but as it necessarily would imply the dism em berm ent of T urkey, we could not agree to it. Besides, T urkey is as good an occupier of


310 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
the road to India as an active A rabian sovereign would be.” The inference to be drawn from these assumptions is that Turkey should be supported to resist M ehemet. “W e m ust try to help the Sultan,” concluded Palm erston, “in organizing his army, navy, and finances; and if he can get those three depart m ents into good order he m ay still hold his ground.” 13 T he conclusion apparent from these rem arks is th at Palm erston was determ ined to protect the sultan against both the tsar and M ehem et Ali. During the crisis of 1839 to 1841 he cooperated with the tsar to end the E gyptian menace once and for all. A decade later he aligned himself with France and fought the Crimean W ar to remove what he considered to be the Russian threat to O ttom an independence.
NEAR EASTERN CRISIS: 1839-1841
The N ear Eastern settlem ent of 1833 could not last indefinitely. N either M ahm ud nor M ehem et Ali was willing to accept the status quo. The sultan was determined to crush the upstart pasha and to recover his losses, whereas M ehemet Ali longed for more territory and for full independence. T he great pow ers, suspicious though they were of each other’s policies in the Near East, actively endeavored to keep the peace. A t one time or another they all warned M ahmud and M ehemet Ali against renewing hostilities. M ahm ud broke the uneasy peace in April, 1839, and thereby pre cipitated a crisis th at involved all the great pow ers and lasted to 1841. M ah mud had been encouraged by reports of widespread disaffection in Syria against Egyptian rule. Also, his army had been reorganized by a young Prus sian officer, H elm uth von M oltke, destined to win fame in later years as the conqueror of A ustria and France. It is true th at M oltke w arned the sultan that his army was not yet quite ready to be put to the test. But M ahm ud by this time was far advanced in years and was resolved to delay no further his long-planned revenge. “The Sultan,” reported Ponsonby, the British minister in Constantinople, “would rather die or be the vassal of Russia than not en deavour to destroy the rebel subject.” 14 The O ttom an armies gave a better account of themselves in this war than in the previous one. But the outcome was fully as disastrous— in fact, more so. On June 24, 1839, Ibrahim met the main Turkish army at Nezib (N izip), just inside the Syrian frontier. The battle was hard-fought but ended with an overwhelming victory for Ibrahim . “The Turks threw down their arm s,” reported M oltke, “ and abandoned their artillery and am m unition, fly ing in every direction.” 18 Before the news of disaster reached Constantinople the old sultan mercifully died, worn out by illness and excessive drinking. His successor, Abdul Mejid, was a boy of sixteen, lacking both ability and experience. At this critical moment another calamity befell the empire. The entire Turkish fleet, which had set sail from the Straits in search of the Egyptian navy, pro ceeded to A lexandria and surrendered to M ehem et Ali. It is not clear w hether


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 311
the Turkish admiral had been bribed to commit this extraordinary act or whether he had moved on the conviction that the war was lost and that it was preferable that the navy should fall to the Moslem Egyptians rather than to the infidel Russians. In any case, during the fateful week between June 24 and July 1 the empire lost an army, a navy, and a sultan. M ehemet Ali now committed what proved to be a fatal blunder. He dem anded not only that he should be recognized as hereditary ruler of Egypt and Syria but also that his bitter enemy, Grand Vizir Chosrew, should be dismissed from his post. The latter condition caused a delay which gave the great powers an opportunity to intervene under the aggressive leadership of Palm erston. T h eir intervention m arked the virtual end of M ehm et A li’s career. On July 27, 1839, the powers presented a collective note to the Ottom an government requesting it to suspend negotiations and to refrain from “any definitive resolution without their concurrence.” The sultan wel com ed the proposal and gladly accepted it. The surprising feature of this situation was the willingness of France to associate herself with the other powers. Palmerston repeatedly had declared that Mehemet Ali should be forced to surrender all his possessions except Egypt. The French from the outset were unwilling to support such a drastic proposal. M any Frenchm en regarded Mehemet as the disciple of Napoleon, almost as his apostolic suc cessor in Egypt. Also, a strong M ehemet Ali in the eastern M editerranean m eant a correspondingly strong French influence in that vital region. N ever theless, the French government maintained a discreet silence and refused to make an issue of these differences. It apparently assumed that, when the showdown came, Palm erston would decide to accept a compromise settle ment with Mehemet Ali rather than risk another appearance of Russian w ar ships and soldiers in the Straits. This strategy was shrewd but it boom eranged against the French. The reason was that the Russians did the exact opposite of what was ex pected. They did not take aggressive measures in the Straits, as they could have on the basis of the Unkiar-Skelessi provisions. Instead, Nesselrode de clared repeatedly that he would back up Palmerston in his support of the sultan. Nesselrode went further and sent Baron Brunnow as Envoy Extraor dinary to London in September, 1839. The baron assured Palm erston that T sar Nicholas agreed entirely with the British views concerning the TurkishEgyptian question and would join in whatever measures might be necessary to put these views into effect. M ore specifically, he stated that Russia was willing to allow the Unkiar-Skelessi Treaty to lapse. He also declared that if it should prove necessary to send a Russian force to the Straits in order to coerce Mehemet Ali, the force would be sent only with the agreement and (he consent of the other powers. The significance of this Russian about-face is apparent. Russia was ready to surrender whatever special privileges she had obtained by the Unkiar-Skelessi T reaty. But in return she would obtain a close working


312 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
agreement with Britain and she would also isolate France. In other words, Russia was exploiting the differences between Britain and France over M ehemet Ali in order to break up the A nglo-French entente. Palm erston was ready to accept this diplomatic revolution, but his colleagues and his sover eign were hesitant. They desired a more specific and secure agreement with Russia. They proposed that if it should prove necessary for R ussian forces to enter the Bosphorus, allied forces should at the same time enter the other end of the Straits at the Dardanelles. W hen Brunnow returned to St. Petersburg with this counterproposal, the tsar and his ministers were delighted. “ If the plan of L ord Palm erston is adop ted ,” declared N esselrode, “the A nglo-French alliance is ipso facto dis solved and is replaced, in the affairs of the O rient, by an accord between the two Im perial Courts [Russia- and Austria] and England. . . . F o r myself, I avow to you th at I should like very m uch the plan of L ord Palm erston.” 1,1 Brunnow returned to London in Decem ber, 1839, with an affirmative an swer. Palm erston was as pleased as Nesselrode. “This will give us a pull upon France, and will enable us to carry our own views into execution about Turkey and Egypt; for A ustria and Prussia will side with us and Russia;and France if she stands aloof, will be left to herself.” 17 France indeed was isolated. A t this critical stage the French gov ernm ent fell over a domestic issue and a new cabinet was form ed headed by A dolphe Thiers. His strategy was to procrastinate and to cause delays in the hope that meanwhile the sultan and M ehemet Ali would reach an agree ment between themselves. Given the strong sentiment in France in favor of Mehemet Ali, there was scarcely any other course that Thiers could follow. But the French minister in London, François Guizot, warned Thiers of the dangers of this policy of delay.
The more I observe, the more I satisfy myself that the British Cabinet considers the circumstances as favorable for settling the affairs of the East, and wishes seriously to take advantage of them . It would m uch prefer to act in con cert with us; it is disposed to make concessions to establish that concert. N ever theless, if, on our part, we do not decide on something positive, if we appear to desire only to adjourn and convert all difficulties into impossibilities, a moment may arrive, I think, when, . . . the British Cabinet would act without us and with others rather than not act at all.18
This astute analysis of the situation soon was proved fully justified. Palmerston now moved quickly and decisively, spurred on by two disturbing dispatches from the Levant. The one brought news of the dismissal of G rand Vizir Chosrew in Constantinople. Since he was a firm opponent of M ehemet Ali, the latter greeted the news joyfully and immediately sent an envoy to the sultan to seek a settlement. The other dispatch was from the British min ister in Constantinople, who reported that a French journalist closely con nected with Thiers was attempting to persuade the Turkish government to make a deal directly with M ehemet Ali.


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 313
T hough conclusive proof is not available, it is alm ost certain that Thiers was cognizant of and had perhaps inspired this attem pt to short-circuit the negotiations being conducted in London. Palm erston, at any rate, was convinced that such was the case. He was furious that Thiers should be act ing independently in the Levant in contravention of the note of July 27, 1839, requiring collective action of the great powers. A direct Turkish-Egyptian settlement, Palm erston knew, would strengthen French influence in the N ear East and set back the other powers there, particularly Britain. Palmers ton thereupon secretly came to an understanding with the other threeRussia, Austria, and Prussia— concerning a common Near Eastern policy to which France would not be a party. Many members of the British cabinet were reluctant to break so sharply with their traditional French ally. Palm erston got his way by threatening to resign and by describing very effec tively the dangers of inaction.
The immediate result of our declining to go on with the three Powers because F rance does not join us will be, that Russia will w ithdraw her offers to unite herself with Ihc other Powers for a settlement of the affairs of Turkey, and she will again resum e her separate and isolated position with respect to those affairs; and you will have the treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi renewed under some still m ore objectionable form . . . . T he ultim ate results of such a division will be the practical division of the Turkish empire into two separate and independent states, whereof one will be the dependency o f France, and the other a satellite o f Russia; and in both o f which our political influence will be annulled, and our commercial interests will be sacrificed; and this dism em berm ent will inevitably give rise to local struggles and conflicts w hich will involve the Powers of E urope in most serious disputes.1''’
The “Convention for the Pacification of the Levant,” as it was desig nated, was signed on July 15, 1840, by representatives of the four Allied Powers and an envoy of the sultan. The powers agreed to impose their terms upon M ehem et Ali and to support the sultan by arm ed force if necessary. M ehemet was to be offered Egypt as a hereditary possession and southern Syria for life, and in return was to return the T urkish fleet and give up north ern Syria, M ecca, M edina, and Crete. Failure to accept these term s in ten days was to mean the withdrawal of the offer of southern Syria. Failure to accept the revised offer in another ten days would mean the withdrawal of the whole offer and freedom for the sultan to make other arrangements. Finally, the powers agreed that although in the existing emergency they m ight find it necessary to send forces to defend C onstantinople, in the future they would conform to “the ancient rule of the O ttom an Em pire” by virtue of which it had “in all times been prohibited for Ships of W ar of Foreign Powers to enter the Straits of the Dardanelles and of the Bosphorus.” Thus, almost a year after the powers had issued their collective note to the Turkish government, an arrangem ent for the solution of the TurkishEgyptian question was concluded. The question now was whether Mehemet Ali would accept these term s, and, if not, w hether France would dare-assist


314 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
him against a united E urope. M ehem et’s answer was unequivocal. “ I will rather perish than accept,” he replied defiantly. He apparently calculated that he would be able to resist Allied pressure long enough for differences to de velop between the British and the Russians. Thiers appears to have shared this hope. He believed that M ehemet Ali would be able to hold out against a naval blockade. A Russian land campaign would then be necessary, and this, he expected, would shatter Allied unity. All these calculations were based on the assumption that M ehemet Ali was strong enough to hold his own against naval attacks and against sm all landing forces. P alm erston’s strategy was based on the opposite as sum ption. His agents in the L evant had inform ed him th at Ib rahim ’s position in Syria was precarious because of serious discontent against conscription and high taxes. These agents had encouraged the disaffection by judicious distribution of money and arms. Palmerston therefore was certain that Ibra him could be ousted from Syria without large-scale land operations, and had specific plans for doing so. This explains his confidence and his refusal to give ground before the bluster and the w ar preparations of the French. On September 22, 1840, at the height of the crisis, he instructed his minister in Paris that “if Thiers should again hold out to you the language of menace, however indistinctly and vaguely shadowed out, pray retort . . . in the most friendly and inoffensive m anner possible, th at if F rance throw s down the gauntlet we shall not refuse to pick it up; and that if she begins a war, she will to a certainty lose her ships, colonies, and commerce before she sees the end of it . . . and th at M ehem et Ali will ju st be chucked into the N ile.” 20 P alm erston’s confidence was justified. His estim ate of the situation in Syria proved accurate and his strategy prevailed. British warships landed Turkish troops and A ustrian and British marines. Also, twenty thousand muskets were delivered to Syrian rebels. These land forces operated under the com m and of Sir Charles N apier while the British fleet under A dm iral Stopford bom barded coastal towns and m ilitary installations at will. N apier was able, with the support of naval artillery, to capture Beirut and Sidon in October, 1840, and the great fortress of A cre on November 3. As it became clear that the Allies would have their way in the Levant, war fever m ounted in Paris. Wild talk was heard of fighting the Austrians and Prussians on land and the British on sea. But the cautious king, Louis Philippe, refused to risk w ar any further. Ib rah im ’s unexpected collapse had ended his expectation that the Allies would be forced by military stalemate to accept a compromise settlement. Furtherm ore, the talk of war was ac companied by talk of revolution. The radical press was becoming increas ingly outspoken, and on O ctober 15 an attem pt was m ade on the life of the king. Louis Philippe resolved to half this dangerous trend. The opportunity came on October 20, when Thiers proposed that he deliver a particularly belligerent address at the opening session of the legislative chambers. Louis Philippe refused and Thiers immediately resigned. A new cabinet was formed


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 3 1 5
with Guizot in charge of foreign affairs. The change in government clearly indicated that the king desired a peaceful ending to the crisis. M eanwhile M ehemet Ali was being forced to accept the terms he had rejected several m onths earlier. T he rem nants of Ib rahim ’s shattered army were streaming into Egypt while a British squadron was anchored be fore Alexandria. On November 27, 1840, Mehemet reached an agreement with N apier by which he was to return the Turkish fleet and abandon his claims to Syria in return for being recognized as hereditary ruler of Egypt. This settlement was not formally concluded until the following summer. The Turkish government, feeling secure for the first time in years, was loathe to grant hereditary status to Mehemet. The British minister in Constantinople, Viscount Ponsonby, also delayed proceedings by his extreme partiality for Turkish interests. Finally, on June 1, 1841, the sultan issued a firm an which, after acknowledging the “loyalty, devotion, and fidelity” of M ehemet Ali, solemnly conferred upon him the government of Egypt “with the addi tional privilege of hereditary succession.” With the Egyptian question settled, the cause for the European crisis was removed. France was invited to re-enter the European concert, which she did on July 13, 1841, by signing the Straits Convention together with Britain, Russia, Austria, and Prussia. This provided that the Straits be closed to the warships of all foreign powers in time of peace. The ending of the N ear Eastern crisis marks a high point in British prestige on the Continent. It was a great victory for England and an even greater personal trium ph for Palm erston— perhaps the greatest of his career. Unkiar-Skelessi had been done away with, and the routes to India remained open and accessible. The principal beneficiary was the sultan, who was saved from the hostility of M ehemet Ali and the friendship of Russia. The loser was M ehem et Ali, m uch of his life’s w ork in ruins and his active career ended. He lived on until 1849, when he died at the age of eighty. His grand son, Abbas I, succeeded him as khedive of Egypt, and for over a century his descendants were to follow one another on the throne. Although M ehemet Ali was prevented from becoming sultan or A rab em peror, he has come down in history as the founder of m odern Egypt.
RESHID AND THE REFORM M O V EM EN T:
1839-1852
On Novem ber 3, 1839, in the midst of the disasters of the Egyptian war, young Sultan Abdul Mejid issued a reform decree known as the Hatti Sherif of Gulhane. This decree stands out in O ttom an history as the be ginning of the reform movement commonly referred to as the Tanzimat, as it is called in Turkish. This reform m ovem ent continued with varying effec tiveness from 1839 untjl 1880, w hen Sultan A bdul H am id established hisautocratic regime which lasted to the eve of W orld W ar I. T he tim ing of the reform decree is paradoxical. The previous sultan,


316 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
M ahm ud, had forced changes upon his unwilling subjects to the point of being called the giaour, or infidel sultan. But the final result was defeat so catastrophic that the very existence of the empire was threatened. Under the circumstances it would not have been surprising if the new sultan, Abdul Mejid, had turned back from the course followed by his predecessor. Far from doing so, he accepted a bold new reform program that marked the formal beginning of the Tanzimat. The person primarily responsible for this unexpected development was Reshid M ustafa Pasha, one of the outstand ing reformers in Turkish history. Reshid was born in 1802 in C onstantinople, the son of a Turkish official. He early entered the governm ent service, where his ability and lead ership qualities advanced him rapidly to high office. His experience in various positions gave him valuable insight into the workings of the O ttom an imperial bureaucracy. In addition, he served as am bassador in London and Paris, where he became familiar with European affairs and was influenced by Euro pean institutions. Foreign officials with whom he dealt found him to be “a just, though severe man, . . . highly respected” and with “that kind of moral authority . . . which a leading man in any profession exercises over its infe rio r num bers.” 21 While in London Reshid presented to the Foreign Office on August 12, 1839, a long m em orandum on the problem of O ttom an reform. The em pire, he w arned, is in “ an extrem ely dangerous crisis. . . . But the Egyptian question,” he added, “is only a sym ptom . It would not be enough to obtain . . . a solution for it. So long as there is no effective rem edy for the real danger, for the ancient m alady of the Sublime Porte, it will not be able to regenerate itself; furtherm ore a symptom may disappear but a thousand others m ight appear tom orrow .” 22 This analysis is significant because it dis proves the contention that the Gulhane reform edict, which Reshid persuaded the sultan to issue a few m onths later, was designed merely to win the sup port of the European powers against the Egyptian menace. The provisions of the Gulhane decree were general in nature. They merely set forth the reforms which the government wished to effect. These were defined as follows: “ 1. G uarantees ensuring to our subjects perfect security for life, honor, and fortune. 2. A regular system of assessing and levying taxes. 3. A n equally regular system for the levy of troops and the duration of their service.” These objectives were somewhat elaborated upon, and then it was stipulated that they should “extend to all our subjects, of whatever religion or sect they may be; they shall enjoy them without ex ception.” 23 The im plem entation of this decree will be viewed from two vantage points, Constantinople and the Balkans. First, in regard to Constantinople, Reshid worked hard there to issue and to enforce the necessary edicts. His first edict, in December, 1839, provided that governors of provinces, cities, and towns were to be paid fixed salaries; that prom otions were to be made on the basis of merit; and that governors should exact only the established


Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises: 1831-1852 317
imposts. In May, 1840, a new penal code established equality for all subjects, regardless of race or faith. It further stipulated that all trials term inating in capital punishment should be reviewed by the Supreme Council of Justice and that no capital sentence could be effected w ithout the sultan’s signature. These and other reforms alienated those whose interests had been affected. Reshid also made enemies by ousting powerful officials convicted of embezzle ment. The opposition became so strong that Reshid resigned his position in M arch, 1841, and accepted the am bassadorship to Paris. In 1845 Reshid returned to office, first as foreign minister and then as grand vizir. He was able again to promulgate some im portant reform measures. He established mixed tribunals in which the evidence of Christians had equal weight with that of Moslems. In the field of education a commis sion submitted a report in 1846 recommending sweeping changes. Some of these were adopted, including minimum salaries, improved textbooks, and new colleges for training civil servants and military, naval, and veterinary officers. An im portant measure for foreigners was the commercial code adopted in 1850 and based on French commercial laws. The code was sup plemented by the establishment of mixed commercial tribunals which in cluded Turkish and European representatives and which tried commercial cases between Turkish subjects and foreigners. This proved to be the last of R eshid’s m ajor reform s because a crisis in foreign relations was pushing the reform issue to the background. . Before turning to reform in the provinces it should be noted that although much of the above legislation did not pass beyond the paper stage, there did remain a residue of real progress. The whole tone of life in the em pire changed appreciably. The change was most noticeable in the sphere of law and general security. A rbitrary confiscation of property was becoming a thing of the past, as was also the use of torture to force confessions. Pashas no longer could rob and kill with impunity. The principle was established that they would be brought to trial and punished for gross maladministration. Christians still were not allowed to serve in the army, but they probably were less concerned about this than were their champions in the West. Further more, they now were recognized as equals with Moslems before the law, and their testimony was accepted in all legal adjudications. Also, the advances in education were significant, though they concerned mostly the Moslem pop ulation. A t this same time that the various reform measures were promulgated in the capital, a serious effort was made to improve provincial administration, particularly in the Balkans, where the plight of the Christian population sporadically attracted the interest of the great powers. Three methods were employed by the O ttom an government in provincial affairs: it sent out com missioners on tours of inspection, it called delegates from the provinces to the capital, and it attached to each provincial governor a council representa tive to a slight degree of the people governed. The first two procedures had been used before and did not yield


Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
startling results. The commissioners who toured the provinces submitted re ports which do not seem to have had m uch effect. Similarly, the provincial delegates who met in Constantinople were not very articulate for fear of offending the ministers or the local authorities who had selected them for the mission to the capital. The third procedure, however, represented a real inno vation. The council or mejliss, attached to each governor, consisted of a president and two secretaries appointed by Constantinople, of the defterdar or provincial treasurer, of the chief Jewish or Christian ecclesiastical author ity, and of a few delegates from the M oslem and non-M oslem communities. The actions of the governor henceforth had to be accompanied by the masbatta, or written and sealed sanction of his mejliss. The theory was that the mejliss would represent and voice the needs of the governed, and would also serve as a brake against arbitrary acts by the governor. The functioning of the mejliss varied from province to province but generally it was disappointing. Sometimes the mejliss became a mere rubber stamp for an avaricious governor, but more frequently it controlled the gov ernor, having enough influence locally and in the capital to have its way. W hether the mejliss had a majority of Christians or of Moslems made little difference. The m anner in which the Christian mejliss members were to be elected had never been specified, with the result that the wealthy primates naturally assumed the positions. This was particularly true because service in the mejliss carried no rem uneration, so that only persons of means could accept appointment. Thus the Christian members usually represented local vested interests, and acted exactly like their Moslem colleagues. In fact, the mejliss, whether predom inantly Christian or Moslem, almost invariably was found to be more retrograde than the governor from Constantinople. This tie-up between local vested interests and provincial adm inistration explains why, in the period after the Crimean W ar, the reform of provincial adminis tration with the vilayet law of 1864 was preceded by the reform of the millets or non-M oslem communal organizations, to be discussed in Chapter 20.


1 7 . C r i m e a n W a r : 1 8 5 3 —1 8 5 6
I n t h e 1770’s B ritain helped R ussia to defeat Turkey and to gain access to the Black Sea. Likewise in 1827 Britain cooperated with Russia in behalf of the Greeks who wished to break away from the O tto m an Empire. But twenty-five years later Britain waged war against Russia in order to preserve the integrity of this same empire. In tracing the origins of this about-face we shall first analyze certain strategic and economic con siderations which rarely came to the foreground but which nevertheless exerted substantial influence. Then we shall consider various other factors, including conflict of personalities, pressure of public opinion, and mutual suspicion and m isunderstanding which together served to involve the E uro pean powers in a generally unwanted war. A nd finally we shall estimate the effect of the war upon the Balkans and, more im portant, upon the over-all European balance of power.
STRATEGIC AND CO M M ER CIA L BACKGROUND
The strategic considerations that contributed to the Crimean W ar were precisely the same as those that led Palmerston to support the sultan against M ehem et Ali. As in the 18 4 0 ’s, so now, a decade later, B ritain was interested in the trade routes running through the N ear East. H er interest, in fact, was greater because her trade with the Far East was increasing with the growing momentum of the Industrial Revolution. Furtherm ore, the trade was changing in character. In place of the spices and silks and calicoes of earlier centuries, Britain now was importing jute and other bulky raw materials for her industries. This created a transportation problem because the steamships now being introduced required so much coal and water for the long voyage around the Cape that little space was left for their cargoes. The solution was to return to the old Near Eastern routes that had been abandoned three cen turies earlier. The distance from England to India by way of the Suez or the Euphrates was little more than one third of the Cape route. The precise
319


320 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
m anner in which the N ear Eastern lands were to be traversed— by canal or railway or river transportation— had not yet been decided. But regardless of the method, the prerequisite was that the routes should not pass under the control of a rival great power. Thus British imperial strategy required that the integrity of the O ttom an Em pire be safeguarded against encroachment from any quarter. British economic interests in the N ear East also demanded that the O tto m an E m pire be preserved intact. T hese were years when B ritain’s for eign trade was mounting steadily and steeply. In 1825 her imports and ex ports amounted respectively to £ 4 4 ,2 0 8 ,8 0 3 and £-56,320,182. By 1853 the corresponding figures were £ 1 2 3 ,0 9 9 ,0 0 0 and £ 2 4 2 ,0 7 2 ,0 0 0 . In little more than a quarter of a century imports had increased by 270 per cent, and exports by 432 per cent. It follows that Britain had to seek constantly for markets for her m anufactured goods and for sources of raw materials and foodstuffs for her factories and her rising urban population. The Ottom an Em pire satisfied both requirem ents admirably during this period. As a m arket for manufactured goods the Ottoman Empire offered unique opportunities. W hereas the various Continental countries were raising their tariffs against British manufactures, the Turkish government was limited by the capitulatory treaties to a 3 per cent ad valorem duty on imports. An additional levy of 2 per cent on the consum er of foreign goods raised the tax to 5 per cent. This was insignificant com pared to the high protective tariffs being adopted by Russia, France, Germany, and other Continental countries. It is true th at British m erchants com plained against certain restrictions in Turkey, particularly excessive export duties, transshipm ent dues, and m o nopolies which raised the cost and decreased the consumption of various commodities. But most of these subsidiary charges and objectionable prac tices were dropped by the terms of the Balta Lim an Convention signed by Britain and Turkey on August 16, 1838. The following figures reveal how British trade with Turkey flourished under these favorable circumstances.
Trade of the United Kingdom with Turkey, by Value, 1825-1852
Source: F. E. Bailey, British Policy and the Turkish Reform M ovem ent (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1942), p. 74.
We see that between 1825 and 1852 British exports to Turkey in creased eightfold while imports did not even double. This left a favorable


Crimean War: 1853—1856 321
trade balance amounting to over six million pounds each year during the decade before the Crimean W ar. Meanwhile protective tariffs were restricting trade with the Continent. Thus British exports to Turkey by the eve of the Crimean W ar surpassed the exports to Russia, Italy, France, or Austria. The O ttom an Em pire was also im portant to Britain as a source of foodstuffs and industrial raw materials. The most im portant of these com modities were m adder root for textile dyeing, raw silk, raisins, and valonia, the latter being a by-product of acorns used for tanning purposes. Grains also began to be im ported in increasing quantities following the repeal of the C orn Laws in 1846. By 1850 corn and wheat rated third and fourth respec tively in value in the list of commodities im ported by Britain from Turkey. Most of this grain came from the Danubian Principalities, which were be coming an im portant source of foodstuffs for Britain. This was reflected in the growing num ber of British ships that passed through the Straits each year. In 1842 only 250 used the passageway; in 1848 the num ber had in creased to 1,397, and by 1852 to 1,741. By the latter year British vessels also accounted for one third of all shipping on the D anube River. These figures illustrate the speed of British econom ic penetration in the Near East during this period. By 1851 Britain was obtaining as much grain from Turkey as from Russia, and in return was selling m anufactured goods to Turkey of a value double that which she sold to Russia. Further more, Turkey had no modern industry or any plans to establish one in the future. Russia, in contrast, was deliberately fostering her infant industries be hind high protective tariffs. In O ctober, 1841, the British m inister to St. Petersburg reported that these new industries were not competing with Britain but he warned that the time might come when they “may have a pernicious effect on British trade.” 1 These circumstances explain why Britain in the mid-nineteenth cen tury valued her trade with Turkey as highly as she had her Russian trade a century earlier. In 1849 Palm erston declared to the House of Commons: “ If in a political point of view the independence of T urkey is of great im por tance, in a com m ercial sense it is of no less im portance to this country. It is quite true th at with no country is our trad e so liberally perm itted and carried on as with Turkey.” 2 How far these new commercial relations affected diplomatic devel opm ents is difficult to m easure. D ocum ents rarely reveal explicit connections betw een trade and diplom acy. But it is not altogether coincidental th at the period during which Britain adopted the policy of supporting O ttom an integ rity was also the period when Britain developed her commerce with Turkey most rapidly and profitably.
DIPLOM ATIC PRELIM INARIES
The roots of the Crimean W ar go back ultimately to the fact that al though the O ttom an Em pire had become the “Sick M an of E urope” it re mained the owner of prized possessions coveted by others. Thus the essence


322 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
of the Eastern Question, as M etternich aptly observed, was whether to turn the Sick M an over to the doctor or to his heirs. During the eighteenth century Russia favored the latter procedure, but in 1829 she changed her mind. The likelihood of squabbles among the heirs led her to adopt the new policy of tolerating the invalid while at the same time being ever-ready, in case of sudden death, to claim a full share of his estate. In accordance with this policy Nicholas cooperated with Palm erston in the 1840’s to protect the O ttom an Empire against the attacks of M ehemet Ali. Nicholas cherished the new tie with England because it not only guaranteed the status quo in the N ear East but also isolated France— the country of revolution which he feared and hated. For this reason he was anxious to establish a firmer rela tionship with Britain, i Late in December, 1840, the tsar asked the British am bassador in St. Petersburg w hether “H er M ajesty’s governm ent would object to record and establish by some act the alliance, which now happily existed between the Four Powers [Russia, England, Austria, and Prussia], to serve as a se curity against any efforts France might make to awaken revolutionary feeling in E u ro p e.” 3 T he tsar added th at if P arliam ent objected to such a com m it ment he would be satisfied with a verbal understanding between the two gov ernments. Palmerston replied frankly that Parliam ent would not favor an agreement that bound England to take up arms in a contingency that was un certain and unforeseeable. And as for a verbal agreement, he pointed out that without the approval of Parliam ent it would bind only the ministers who made it and could be disavowed by their successors. This reply not only ended the overture but also made a point concerning British constitutional practice that was quite significant in the light of later events. In 1844 Nicholas made a second attem pt to get a commitment from the British. He visited England and talked with Queen Victoria, the Duke of W ellington, Prime M inister Peel, and Foreign Secretary Aberdeen, all of whom he charm ed with his graciousness and impressed with his frankness. The Russian foreign minister, Nesselrode, prepared a memorandum sum marizing these conversations. According to this document the two powers agreed to preserve the O ttom an Empire as long as possible and, in case of impending dissolution, to consult with each other about what should be done. This memorandum was submitted to Aberdeen, who accepted it and ex changed letters testifying to “the accuracy of the statem ent.” This agreement was purely personal. It involved only Peel, Aberdeen, and W ellington on the one hand and Nicholas and Nesselrode on the other. The British cabinet knew nothing of it. It had no validity save that derived from the exchange of letters between Nesselrode and Aberdeen. But these letters were personal in character. They were never submitted to the British cabinet. Thus the point that Palmerston had made four years earlier— that personal engagements committed only the personalities involved— applied to this case perfectly. The British historian, H arold Temperley, rightly states, “If the Czar was deceived he had himself to blame for the deception.” 4


Crimean War: 1 8 5 3 -1 8 5 6 323
This self-deception, however, proved to be an im portant factor in the com ing of the war. The tsar acted on the assumption that he could count on British support. By the time he realized that this assumption was unwarranted, com prom ise had become difficult. Four years after this exchange the revolutions of 1848 broke out all over Europe. In an unexpected fashion these revolutions led to a crisis in British-Russian relations which in turn stimulated a wave of violent Russophobia in England. Palmerston, who was then foreign minister, tried not to provoke the tsar during this critical period. W hen Russian troops occupied the W allachian Principality he assured the House that the occupation was tem porary and that there was no cause for alarm. Likewise he made no pro test when a Russian army crossed the Carpathians and helped the Hapsburgs crush the Hungarian revolution. The trouble did not begin until the fall of 1849, after the Hungarian uprising had been suppressed and the defeated revolutionaries had fled across the frontier into O ttom an territory. The refugees consisted of 3,600 Hungarians and some 800 Poles, the latter being Russian subjects who had fought for Hungarian freedom. The Russian and H apsburg emperors demanded the extradition of their fugitive subjects and intimated that they would use force to back up their dem and. The Turks traditionally had warm feelings for both the H ungarians and the Poles. They also knew the fate that awaited the refugees if they de livered them across the frontier. Accordingly, the Turkish ministers, with the encouragement of the British and French ambassadors, voted to reject the extradition dem and. They persisted in their refusal despite threats from V ienna and St. Petersburg. O n Septem ber 17, 1849, R ussia and A ustria severed diplomatic relations with Constantinople. O n O ctober 7, Palm erston countered by announcing that Britain and France were resolved to support the Turkish governm ent and that the British and French fleets were on their way to “the neighborhood of the Dardanelles.” This crisis passed away as quickly as it h ad risen. T he tsar was alarm ed by the vigorous reaction of the W estern powers. On O ctober 19 he took advantage of a personal appeal by a special Turkish envoy to announce that he was dropping his dem and for extradition. But the damage had already been done. A wave of intense anti-Russian sentiment had swept over Eng land. Palm erston wrote to Stratford in Constantinople that “there never was so strong and unanim ous outburst of generous feeling, all men of all parties and opinions, politicians, soldiers, sailors, clergymen and Quakers. All news papers, T ory, W hig and R adical have joined in chorus.” 5 D espite the tsa r’s decision to back down, an enduring impression had been left on the minds of thousands of Englishmen. The tsar and the Hapsburg emperor were now “merciless tyrants” and the “hangmen of liberty.” N ot only had they crushed the liberation movements of the enslaved peoples of E urope but they also had attem pted to wreak vengeance on helpless refugees. By an ironic twist of history Turkey now stood out in the public mind as the cham pion of E uro pean liberty against the brutal despotism of the two emperors. This popular


3 2 4 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
impression was not without signifiance. A few years later, when another crisis developed, it greatly strengthened the position of Palm erston and others who favored strong measures against Russia.
HOLY PLACES DISPUTE
Less than a year after the settlement of the refugee crisis the dispute over the Holy Places began. After nearly four years of negotiations and blunders it culm inated in the Crim ean W ar. The Holy Places issue was in itself absurdly trivial. It has been described as a “churchwardens’ quarrel” that could have been settled by any com petent stage m anager in half an hour. The question was whether Greek Orthodox or Roman Catholic monks should control certain shrines in the Holy Land. These included the great church of Bethlehem, the tomb of the Virgin at Gethsemane, the Holy Sepulcher, and the grotto of the Nativity. Traditionally Russia had supported the claims of the O rthodox monks and France the claims of the Catholic. Since the m id eighteenth century, however, France had been too engrossed in the Enlighten ment, the French Revolution, and the subsequent tumults to pay any atten tion to shrines in Palestine. The G reek monks, who continued to receive Russian backing, exploited this opportunity. By the m id-nineteenth century they had gained custody of numerous Holy Places originally held by the Latins. A t this point, when Catholic prestige was at its nadir, Louis N apo leon was elected president of the French Republic. He was determined to remain the head of France and immediately began preparations for a coup d ’ état to overthrow the republic and re-establish the empire. Since the radicals were hostile to him he turned to the powerful Catholic party. In order to win its support he aided in restoring Rom e to the Papacy in 1849. F or the same reason he sent an envoy to Constantinople in 1850 to dem and the rein statem ent of the Latins in the Holy Places. In this m anner N apoleon hoped to use “ the men in black” against “the men in red.” After heavy pressure upon the sultan, Napoleon won in 1852 several concessions for the Catholics. The most im portant was possession of the keys to both the inner and outer church of Bethlehem. A bout the same time N apoleon effected his coup in France and becam e em peror. H e no longer needed to continue his risky game in Palestine. Accordingly, he sent an envoy directly to the tsar to negotiate an agreement on the Holy Places that would be m utually satisfactory. But by this tim e it was too late. Various factors operated against a settlement at this early stage. Public opinion in Russia was genuinely aroused by the surrender of the keys to the hated Latin heretics. Also, there was personal enmity between N apo leon and Nicholas. The tsar looked down upon the French em peror as an arriviste who had obtained his throne by revolution and plebiscite. With studied contem pt he addressed him as “bon ami” rather than as “mon frère,” which was custom ary among sovereigns. Still another difficulty was that N apoleon’s envoy arrived in St. Petersburg after N icholas had sent


Crimean War: 1853-1856 325
Prince M enshikov to Constantinople to negotiate directly with the Turks. Nicholas had been impressed by the success a few months earlier of an A us trian mission under Count Leiningen. The count had delivered an ultimatum regarding certain developments in Bosnia and M ontenegro that concerned his government. The sultan accepted the ultimatum and took measures to settle affairs to the satisfaction of A ustria. T sar N icholas noted Leiningen’s success and sent out Prince M enshikov to settle the Holy Places dispute in a similar manner. A t the same time that he dispatched M enshikov to Constantinople the tsar conducted exploratory talks with the British am bassador, Sir Ham il ton Seymour. His aim was the same as in 1840 and 1844, namely, to obtain an understanding with Britain that would isolate France and assure common action in the N ear East. Nicholas was encouraged by the fact that a new British government had just been formed with the conciliatory Lord A ber deen as prime minister and the bellicose Palmerston relegated to the humble post of home secretary. The tsar had four conversations with Seym our in January and F eb ruary of 1853. He asserted his views with typical frankness. He stated that he wished to maintain Turkey as long as possible. But he also expressed doubts as to the longevity of what he term ed the “sick m an” of Europe. R e peatedly he stated that Turkey was “gravely ill” and he urged that Britain and Russia agree beforehand concerning the disposition of the sick m an’s estate. So far as R ussia’s aims were concerned, the tsar specifically repudiated E m press C atherine’s designs on C onstantinople and the Balkans. H e already had as much territory as he desired, the tsar declared, and he would be satis fied if C onstantinople were m ade a free port. Serbia, Bulgaria, and the D anubian Principalities should be independent states under Russian protection. Finally, the tsar inform ed Seym our that he would have no objections if Britain acquired Crete and Egypt. The British foreign secretary, Lord John Russell, replied that his government considered the fall of Turkey a remote contingency. Further more, the mere existence of a partition plan was likely to hasten the dis memberment of the O ttom an Empire and thus increase the danger of war rather than lessen it. This was a reaffirm ation of traditional British policy and was not likely to please the tsar. But Russell went on to declare that H er M ajesty’s G overnm ent was “ready to prom ise th at they will enter into no agreement to provide for the contingency of the fall of Turkey without previ ous communication with the Em peror of Russia.” The tsar was delighted with this com m itm ent. H e w rote in the m argin: “This is a precious assur ance since it proves w hat perfect identity of intentions exists between Eng land and Russia. . . . ” 6 Seymour was convinced that the tsar was a scheming hypocrite, seeking to destroy the O ttom an Em pire by separating England from France and bribing her with a few Turkish provinces. This interpretation won pop ular acceptance with the outbreak of the Crim ean W ar. But the evidence


326 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
indicates clearly that the tsar sincerely wished to m aintain the status quo in the N ear East. Furtherm ore, he convinced the British cabinet that this was his intention. L o rd A berdeen and his m inisters did not share Seym our’s ap prehension of R ussian designs. They were not alarm ed by the tsa r’s partition proposal even though they disagreed with him concerning the prospects of T urkish survival. In fact, the B ritish w ere favorably im pressed by the tsa r’s frankness and the conversations ended in an atm osphere of m utual good will. Despite this favorable atmosphere the conversations did not con tribute to the preservation of peace. It may well be that their final effect was precisely the opposite. T he tsa r was greatly encouraged by R ussell’s prom ise of “previous comm unication.” He assumed that he could rely on Britain and that British cooperation with France was out of the question. But events had already occurred in Constantinople that were to demonstrate the fallacy of this assumption.
STEPS TO WAR
The diplom atic developments culm inating in the Crim ean W ar fall naturally into three phases: (I) the period of direct negotiation between Turkey and Russia, opening with the arrival of Prince M enshikov in Con stantinople in M arch, 1853, and closing with the Russian occupation of the Principalities in July, 1853; (II) the period of neither war nor peace, m arked by repeated attempts on the part of Britain, France, Austria, and Prussia to arrange a com prom ise settlem ent, and ended by T urkey’s declaration of w ar on Russia on October 4, 1853; (III) the period of the Russo-Turkish W ar during which the four powers continued to seek a peaceful settlement until finally Britain and France declared war on Russia on M arch 28, 1854. Phase I: The M enshikov mission to Constantinople started out with two handicaps. M enshikov himself was a rough and overbearing soldier, illsuited for the delicate negotiations entrusted to him. The instructions he received were also unfortunate. He was charged not only to obtain full satis faction in regard to the Holy Places but also to secure acknowledgment, em bodied in a form al treaty, of the tsa r’s protectorate over all the O rthodox subjects of the sultan. If the Turks refused to sign such a treaty, Menshikov was to conclude a secret defensive alliance with Turkey to protect her from France. Thus the Russian envoy was expected not only to settle the problem of the moment but also to secure guarantees for the future. M enshikov arrived in Constantinople with much fanfare on the last day of February, 1853. He began by insulting the Turkish foreign minister and forcing his resignation. The British and French ministers both happened to be absent from Constantinople at the time. But M enshikov moved too slowly to take advantage of this favorable opportunity to get what he wanted. The negotiations were still in progress when the masterful British ambassador, Stratford Canning, arrived upon the scene on April 5, 1853. Stratford Canning, a cousin of George Canning, had left Constan tinople less than a year before. His reappointm ent at this time had not been


Crimean War: 1853 -1 85 6 327
made without certain misgivings. He was known to be a strong man, given to independent thinking and actions, and holding pronounced anti-Russian views. This was a m atter of some significance in these pre-wireless years when a dispatch from London required over two weeks to reach Constanti nople. B ut the new spapers were clam oring for Stratford C anning’s appoint ment, and the government itself was not anxious to keep him home where he was in the habit of asking awkward questions in Parliam ent. Thus Stratford Canning was sent back to the scene of his earlier triumphs. His instructions specifically forbade him to call the British M editerranean fleet to the vicinity of the D ardanelles “w ithout positive instructions from H er M ajesty’s gov ernment.” 7 W hatever Stratford C anning’s failings m ay have been, he at least had influence with the Turks and he knew how to get things done in the capital. The Holy Places dispute had been dragging on for three years before his arrival. Within three weeks he was able to arrange a settlement acceptable to all parties concerned. M enshikov now proceeded, in accordance with his instructions, to demand a convention guaranteeing the ancient privileges of “the O rthodox Eastern religion, its clergy and possessions.” Stratford C an ning pointed out that the term “religion” covered the O rthodox lay subjects of the sultan— some twelve million in all. A convention with Russia con cerning their privileges was, in his opinion, incom patible with “the desire of maintaining the Integrity and Independence of the O ttom an Empire. . . . ” 8 Stratford Canning expressed his views to the Turks, who felt suffi ciently encouraged to reject M enshikov’s dem ands. T he Russian now offered to accept a Turkish diplomatic note instead of a convention. Stratford Can ning advised the Turks that the new demand was essentially the same as the old, and that acceptance would mean “the introduction of Russian influence, to be exercised with the force of acknowledged right.” The Turks again re buffed Menshikov, who thereupon left Constantinople on May 21, 1853. M enshikov’s failure enraged the tsar: “ I feel,” he said, “the sm art of the Sultan’s fingers on my cheek.” His first im pulse was to declare w ar immediately. Nesselrode w arned him that he might have to contend with the whole of Europe as well as Turkey. The tsar satisfied himself with a half m easure. O n M ay 31 he w arned the O ttom an governm ent that unless it ac cepted M enshikov’s dem ands w ithin eight days Russian troops would occupy the Principalities “by force, but without w ar.” W hen the Turks replied with a polite refusal, the Russians crossed the Pruth River early in July. M eanwhile in Britain the news of the stormy and ominous term ina tion of M enshikov’s m ission also aroused agitation for action. T he cabinet was divided, with Prim e M inister Aberdeen and G ladstone favoring a pacific policy and Foreign M inister Russell and Palmerston demanding strong measures. Public opinion now began to make itself felt. Alm ost all news papers clamored for positive measures against Russia. The factions in the cabinet finally agreed on a com prom ise policy. On M ay 31 they ordered the M editerranean fleet to Besika Bay at the entrance of the Dardanelles, and


328 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
they also authorized Stratford Canning to sum m on the fleet to Constantinople in case of emergency. The Russian decision to occupy the Principalities and the British de cision to send the fleet to Besika Bay were reached at the same time and in dependently of each other. The two decisions did not produce war but they certainly brought it nearer. A great-power fleet now kept watch over a greatpower army. Also, the diplomats henceforth had to operate under the pressure of a time limit. The weather in the eastern M editerranean broke in October. After that date the British fleet would not be able to rem ain in the exposed Besika Bay. The Russian army in the Principalities likewise would not be able to campaign once the rainy season began. This left the diplomats only three months— July, August, and September— in which to reach an agree ment. In October, decisions would be inescapable. Phase II: The task facing the diplomats was to find a form ula that would assure the independence of Turkey, clear the Principalities of the Russians, and also save the face of the tsar. No less than eleven pacification projects were advanced during the second half of 1853. One of the obstacles in the way of settlem ent was the m ounting w ar fever in C onstantinople. T he Turks had regarded the Russian occupation of the Principalities as a bel ligerent act. O nly Stratford C anning’s strong insistence had restrained them from beginning hostilities. During the following weeks the Turks strengthened the defenses of their capital. Also, they received assurances of aid from the bey of Tunis and the khedive of Egypt. Furtherm ore, the British fleet reached Besika Bay on June 13 and the F rench fleet followed the next day. The Turks had no reason to be conciliatory under such comfortable circum stances. Instead, they became more inflexible as national and religious feel ing rose in Constantinople. Under pressure from Stratford Canning the Turks accepted a com promise proposal which included this statem ent: “The ancient privileges of the religion professed by H. M. the Em peror of Russia, and by the greater part of his subjects, have been fully confirmed in perpetuity; the Sublime Porte hopes that the Russian Governm ent will learn this with pleasure.” 9 This proposal had two serious defects. It unfortunately was given the title “Turkish U ltim atum .” Also, the guarantee concerning O rthodox privileges was not in the form of a bilateral pledge between Russia and T urkey as the tsar had demanded. Instead, it was a unilateral statem ent which the sultan could revoke whenever he so desired. The “Turkish Ultimatum” was forwarded to the Conference of Am bassadors in Vienna for transm ission to St. Petersburg. The ambassadors re jected the “Ultim atum ” in favor of a counterproject which they were prepar ing and which they believed would be more acceptable to the tsar. This “Vienna N ote,” as it came to be called, reaffirmed the adherence of the O ttom an government to “the letter and spirit of the Treaties of Kainardji and Adrianople relative to the protection of the Christian religion.” The “N ote” also stipulated that “the existing state of things shall in no wise be


Crimean War: 1 8 53-1856 329
modified without previous understanding with the Governments of France and R ussia and w ithout any prejudice to the different C hristian com m unities.” 10 The “N ote” differed basically from the “ Ultimatum” in that Russia and F rance were to be the legal guarantors of T urkey’s good faith, thereby elim inating the possibility of unilateral revocation of privileges. On August 5, 1853, the tsar accepted the Vienna Note. It was gen erally assum ed th at the crisis had passed. B ut on A ugust 19 the grand vizir announced that T urkey would accept it only on condition that three am end ments were incorporated. The tsar indignantly refused to permit any modi fication and so the deadlock continued more ominously than before. T urkey’s unexpected rejection of the V ienna N ote was a m ajor step toward war. Various factors explain the rejection. One was the inflamed state of public opinion in Constantinople. W ith great difficulty Stratford Canning had persuaded the sultan and his ministers to accept the “Ultim a tum .” Its rejection by the am bassadors in Vienna strengthened the position of the war party in Constantinople. It was further bolstered by the arrival of the Egyptian fleet and the presence of the Anglo-French squadron at the entrance to the Straits. The im portant question is w hether Stratford C anning exerted himself fully to secure acceptance of the Vienna Note as he was in structed to do by his governm ent. It is know n th at he officially supported the “N ote.” It is also known that he personally disapproved of it. T he problem is w hether he m erely went through the m otions of backing the “ N ote” while at the same time assuring its rejection by a private verbal message or by some other means. This could very well have happened, but whether or not it did can not be proven. Prim e M inister A berdeen spoke openly of Stratford C anning’s “dishonesty.” O ther ministers felt that Stratford Canning had not used his influence fully in behalf of the “N ote.” Despite these misgivings the cabinet dared not remove him because of the pressure of public opinion. Such a step would have been popularly interpreted as appeasement of Russia and betrayal of Turkey. A lso, Stratford C anning’s position was strengthened by a letter from Nesselrode to the Russian m inister at Berlin in which the Vienna Note was interpreted as granting Russia “the right of a protectorate over the C hris tian subjects of the Sultan.” This so-called “violent interpretation” of the Vienna Note persuaded many that Stratford Canning had been right, though insubordinate, in failing to secure its acceptance. The tsar now dem onstrated his sincere desire for peace by substan tially modifying his dem ands. He asked A ustria to present a new proposal, known as the “Buol project” after the Austrian foreign minister. The pro posal consisted of the original text of the Vienna Note but also included the explanation that the Russian governm ent “ will in no way exercise [for] itself the protection of a Christian cult inside the O ttom an Em pire, and that the duty of protecting this cult and maintaining its religious immunity has de volved on the Sultan and that Russia only reserves to herself that of watching that the engagement contracted by the O ttom an Em pire in the Treaty of


330 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
K ainardji be strictly executed.” 11 This was obviously a serious peace gesture. Napoleon was impressed by it and favored its acceptance. So did Prime M in ister Aberdeen, but he unfortunately was overruled by his cabinet. The latter went further and ordered Stratford Canning on O ctober 8, 1853, to call the fleet from Besika Bay to Constantinople. This was an ill-advised move, to be attributed to the constant pressure of public opinion and to a deep-rooted distrust of R ussia reinforced by N esselrode’s “violent interpretation” of the Vienna Note. M eanwhile the w ar party in C onstantinople had gained the upper hand. On the last day of August Stratford Canning wrote: “The Turks I think are bent on war, unless their amendments are accepted, and I fear they cannot help them selves with respect to their arm y and nation. . . 12 O n October 4 the Turks issued an ultimatum demanding the evacuation of the Principalities within fifteen days. The Russians made no move, and on O cto ber 23 the first armed clash occurred when the Turks sent raiding parties across the Danube. Phase III: Once Turkey and Russia were at war the question was whether the conflict could be prevented from spreading into a general E uro pean conflagration. Stratford Canning was able to persuade the Turkish min isters to suspend hostilties for ten or twelve days. Orders to this effect were issued but they reached the D anubian front too late. A few m inor skirmishes were won by the Turks before the rains came in early November. These in significant successes unfortunately inflamed the m artial ardor of the Turkish naval officers, who rashly ventured into the Black Sea with a pitifully inade quate fleet. A powerful Russian squadron pounced upon them at Sinope, a harbor on the northern coast of Asia M inor. W ith the exception of a small steamer, every one of the Turkish ships was destroyed on that disastrous day of November 30. The “Sinope m assacre,” as it came to be called, aroused passions to such heights that it made general war inevitable. There was no rational justi fication for the emotional outburst. The Turks had started hostilities on both the Danubian and Caucasian fronts. The Russian attack at Sinope was a perfectly natural and legitimate retaliation. There was no justifiable reason for calling it a massacre. But myth frequently trium phs over fact, and at this moment most Englishmen were little concerned with fact as they pa triotically sang
And did he say the Turk was sick And that the Turk should die? There’s 50,000 Englishmen Will know the reason w h y !13
Even the hitherto m oderate Times now gave way and informed its readers that peace was “no longer compatible with the honour and dignity of the country. . . . w ar has begun in earn est.” 14 The government was unable to ignore such a popular explosion. The


Crimean War: 1 8 5 3 -1 8 5 6 331
pressure was heightened by the resignation of Palmerston a few days after the news of Sinope reached the country. The resignation was due to differences of opinion over the R eform Bill, but the press alm ost unanim ously attributed it to Palm erston’s disgust with the “un-E nglish” foreign policy of the govern ment. The cabinet also was under pressure from N apoleon, who demanded that the French and British fleets sail through the Straits and “sweep the R ussian flag off the Black Sea.” T he governm ent finally yielded. O n D ecem ber 24, 1853, it instructed Stratford C anning that the “O ttom an flag, as well as the O ttom an territory, should be protected by the com bined fleets, and . . . all Russian vessels, other than m erchant-men, met in the Black Sea, should be required to return to Sebastopol.” The cabinet knew what this order signified. “H er M ajesty’s G overnm ent do not disguise from themselves that it m ay at no distant period involve E ngland and France in w ar with R ussia.” 15 W ar came soon enough. Russia retaliated on February 6, 1854, by breaking off relations with Britain and France. On February 27 an AngloFrench ultimatum to Russia demanded evacuation of the Principalities. The tsar did not even deign to reply to this, so on March 28 the two Western powers declared war. With the exception of the Turks, the Crimean W ar was an unwanted war. Why, then, was it allowed to begin? Thom as Carlyle, laboring on the first volume of his Frederick the Great, sensed the influence of public opinion. With characteristic pungency he wrote in his diary:
Russian war: soldiers marching off, etc. Never such enthusiasm among the population. Cold, I, as a very stone to all that: seems to me privately I have hardly seen a madder business. . . . A lazy, ugly, sensual, dark fanatic that Turk, whom we have now had for 400 years. I, for my part, would not buy the con tinuance of him there at the rate of sixpence a century. . . . It is the idle popula tion of editors, etc., that have done all this in England. One perceives clearly the Ministers go forward in it against their will. Indeed, 1 have seen no rational person who is not privately very much inclined to be of my opinion: all fools and loosespoken inexperienced persons being of the other opinions. Poor Souls! What could the Ministry do after all? 16
Public opinion played a vital role, but that fact does not by itself explain the Crimean War. Equally im portant was the combination of blun dering, incompetence, and misunderstanding dem onstrated in the sending of Stratford Canning and Menshikov to Constantinople, the inability of the tsar to comprehend British constitutional procedure, and the failure of Aberdeen to control the aggressive elements in his cabinet— a failure that was doubly significant because the tsar acted on the assum ption th a t the prim e m inister’s pacific views would prevail. Finally, the roots of the war may be traced still further back to those strategic and economic factors whose influence cannot be measured but whose constant impress cannot be ignored.


332 A ge of Nationalism: 1 8 1 5 -1 8 7 8
WAR
The Crim ean W ar was in many ways a strange war. It took longer to get itself declared than any other war in history. Once it began, the belliger ents faced the very real problem of where they should fight. A n encounter between landlocked Russia and the maritime West was akin to one between an elephant and a whale. A nd as soon as the fighting did begin, peace nego tiations also began, and they continued from the beginning of the war in M arch, 1854, to its conclusion in M arch, 1856. Britain and France could attack Russia only in two restricted areas, the Baltic and the Black Sea coasts. A combined lleet was sent into the Baltic Sea but it accomplished nothing. It could not lure the Russian fleet out from under the protecting guns of the K ronstadt fortress and it lacked the m an power needed for a land campaign. In the Black Sea the Allies sent a joint force to V arna with the intention of marching northw ard to relieve Silistria, the Turkish fortress on the Danube River. But on June 23 the Russians raised the siege of Silistria and the following m onth they began to evacuate the Principalities. By early August not a single Russian soldier remained on the Turkish side of the Pruth. Since the Allies had declared w ar in order to force the Russians back to their frontier, the object of their intervention appeared to have been attained. Yet the Allies now undertook a m ajor operation by sending a joint expedition against the great Russian fortress of Sebastopol on the tip of the Crimea. The explanation for the Russian withdrawal and the Allied thrust forw ard is to be found in the diplom acy of the great powers. Britain and France were allies, but their war aims were quite different. N apoleon wished to raise the prestige of his dynasty and to break up the alliance of Russia, Prussia, and A ustria that had hemmed in France during the forty years since 1815. Britain, on the other hand, wished to further her economic and strategic interests in the Levant. She also claimed that Russian expansion since Peter the Great had upset the European balance of power and that Russia must be prevented from breaking into the Near East. This contention contained an element of truth and it was well suited for propaganda. The W estern powers, therefore, proclaim ed that they were fighting not for their own interests but for those of Europe. On this basis they sought to win allies and to found an anti-Russian “Concert of Europe” similar to the anti-French “Concert of Europe” at the end of the Napoleonic Wars. The W estern powers were not able to win over Prussia. Lack of im mediate concern with the N ear East, the traditional obsequiousness of the H ohenzollerns tow ard the tsars, and the prospect of great financial profit if Russia were blockaded all combined to persuade Frederick William that neu trality was the best policy. A ustria was in a somewhat different position. She had direct interests in the Balkans and was therefore disturbed by Russia’s occupation of the Principalities. On the other hand, she had no desire to join the Allies in driving Russia out. She rem em bered the four defeats she had


Crimean War: 1853—1856 333
sustained at the hands of the first N apoleon. She also realized that, unlike the W estern pow ers, she had R ussia as a neighbor. A ustria’s aim, therefore, was to abstain from hostilities but, at the same time, to keep Russia out of the Balkans and also to hasten the end of the war in order to reduce the danger of a general European conflagration. This aim explains the deviousness of A ustrian diplomacy at this time. Austria made moves in the direction of the Allies but not with the purpose of actually joining them. R ather, she wished to use the Allies to check Russia in the Balkans and to force Russia to accept a peace settlement. On June 3, 1854, A ustria sent an ultim atum to St. Petersburg de manding that Russia should refrain from extending the war into the Balkans and also that she should set a date for the evacuation of the Principalities. Austria calculated that Russia would comply peacefully rather than add an other m ajor power to the ranks of her enemies. At the same time Austria opened negotiations with the W estern pow ers in order to have assistance in case it should be needed. On August 8 Britain, France, and A ustria agreed upon the so-called Vienna Four Points. These stipulated the conditions of peace: (1 ) Russian guarantee of Serbia and the Principalities replaced by a European guarantee; (2 ) free passage of the Danube mouth assured; (3) the 1841 Straits C onvention revised in the interests of the E uropean balance of pow er; and (4 ) R ussia’s claim to a protectorate over the O ttom an C hris tians abandoned and privileges secured for the Christians without impairing the independence of Turkey. The Austrian calculations proved correct. Russia withdrew from the Principalities and on August 22 Austria occupied them for the duration of the w ar in accordance with an earlier understanding with Turkey. A ustria’s next move was to secure Russian acceptance of the Four Points in order to prepare the way for a peace conference. Russia at first refused indignantly, but when A ustria mobilized on O ctober 22 Russia accepted the Four Points. On De cember 2 A ustria signed a tripartite treaty with the W estern powers that was designed to put additional pressure on Russia to bring her to terms. The most im portant article provided th at if peace on the basis of the F our Points were not obtained the signatories would consult on “the most efficacious means for attaining the object of their alliance.” T he peace negotiations began in Vienna on M arch 15, 1855. The death of Tsar Nicholas a fortnight earlier raised hopes that the new tsar, A lexander II, would prove m ore conciliatory. In fact, the Russian envoys did m ake extensive concessions. They dropped the claims to special rights in Serbia and the Principalities. They agreed that a European commission hence forth should regulate the Danube. But they balked when the Allies insisted on limitation of Russian naval arm am ents in the Black Sea. The Austrian foreign minister, Count Buol, argued that since Russia was going to promise not to attack Turkey, she would not, in any case, need a Black Sea squadron. The reply of the Russians was significant. Sooner or later Turkey would crum ble and Russia must have a fleet to get to Constantinople before the


334 A ge of Nationalism: 1 8 1 5 -1 8 7 8
other powers. Equally significant was the position of the British. A few months before the conference Foreign M inister Lord Clarendon painted a black picture of what would happen if Russia were perm itted to retain the Sebastopol fortress and to maintain her Black Sea navy. The O ttom an Em pire, he warned, would be “held firmly in her grasp” ; the Black Sea would become “really a Russian lake” ; Circassia, Georgia, Persia, and Asia M inor “must at once fall under her dom inion” ; and Russian power “must extend over Greece, Thessaly, Albania, and the Danubian Principalities.” Thus Rus sia, according to Clarendon, “would then be in a position to dictate the law to Europe; every evil that England and France hoped to avert by the war might occur. . . 17 The negotiations broke down over this issue of naval limitation. Thus the Crimean W ar, which began ostensibly because of the Russian occupation of the Principalities, now was to be fought to the bitter end over the issue of Russian preponderance in the Black Sea. Meanwhile the war was being fought in the environs of Sebastopol. On September 14, 1854, an Allied expeditionary force of approximately 60,000 disembarked in the Bay o f E upatoria to the north of Sebastopol. A few days later, while marching toward Sebastopol, the Allies fought and dispersed a small R ussian force under G eneral M enshikov. T he latter fell back upon Sebastopol while the Allies m arched around the fortress, occupied the harbor of Balaclava, and made preparations for a regular siege. The slow and deliberate moves of the Allies gave the defenders an opportunity which they used to the full. Indeed, the cam paign is outstanding in the annals of warfare only for the brilliant improvisation of a young Rus sian engineer, Colonel von Todleben. He cleared the largest Russian ships of guns and men and sank them at the entrance to the harbor. The remaining ships were kept inside the harbor to aid in the defense. By the time the Allies began their bom bardm ent on O ctober 17 the harbor was sealed and the de fense works greatly strengthened. The Allied bom bardm ent had no perceptible effect on the fortress. Worse still, the Russians received reinforcements and captured and retained the heights above Balaclava. The besiegers had become the besieged. They were barely able to keep their precarious toe hold in Balaclava Bay until the arrival of reinforcements. On November 14, 1854, the Allies suffered a dis astrous blow. A fierce hurricane accom panied by storms of rain and snow leveled installations on the shore and destroyed shipping in the harbor. Thirty vessels with their precious cargoes were lost. This setback marked the beginning of the terrible “Crimean W inter” that has become a byword in military history. The effect of the storm was compounded by the breakdown of the supply and medical services. The lack of simple forage, for example, resulted in the wholesale death of transport animals. F or a period, supplies distant only seven miles from the camps could not be made available to the troops. M any more men died from lack of drugs and of health facilities than from enemy bullets. C ontrary to popular belief,


Crimean War: 1853-1856 335
the climate was not responsible for the misery and privations of the soldiers. The coastal area, in fact, traditionally has been a health resort in both sum mer and winter. In May, 1855, the Allies assumed the offensive with an amphibious expedition through the Strait of Kerch. They captured all the shipping supply ing the Russian armies and destroyed the main Russian supply depot at Taganrog. During the summer months the Allies repeatedly stormed Sebasto pol but were repulsed by the gallant defenders. Finally, on September 8, the French captured the M alakov strong point in one of the most famous assaults of the century. The British failed in their simultaneous attack on the Redan outpost. But the French success proved sufficient. The Russians abandoned the fortress after blowing up the magazines and scuttling the fleet. O n Sep tem ber 9, 1855, following a siege of 349 days, the Allies occupied the burning ruins of Sebastopol. Meanwhile the Russians on their part had been besieging Kars, a key Turkish fortress in the Caucasus. Linder the British General Fenwick W il liams, the Turkish garrison held out heroically for six m onths against over whelming odds. When a relief force failed to arrive in time, the garrison was starved out and forced to surrender on November 28, 1855.
TREATY OF PARIS
The victory at Sebastopol did not dispose the British toward peace. Palm erston was now the prime minister, having replaced Aberdeen early in 1855. Palmerston had maintained from the outset that the sword alone could force Russia to term s. A ccordingly he m ade E n gland’s blade weighty and sharp. He added 30,000 men to the army, making 256,000 in all, and he strengthened the navy proportionately. England was fitter for war now than at the beginning. Furtherm ore, the failure of the British assault on the Redan m eant that the fall of Sebastopol was viewed primarily as a French victory. H ence there was a general desire in B ritain for another cam paign in order to satisfy national honor and also to bring Russia really to her knees. The attitude in France was quite different. Most Frenchm en felt that the war was being fought mainly for British interests. They could understand and support a war on the Rhine or a war to free Poland or Italy. But why should the fighting continue in the distant Crimea after Sebastopol had been taken? Napoleon shared this sentiment. He already had gotten what he w anted out of the w ar—^prestige for his dynasty, glory for France, and the disruption of the R ussian-A ustrian-Prussian bloc. A ustria also was eager to end the war speedily, as indeed she had been from the very beginning. It was the French and Austrian diplomats, therefore, who now took the initiative for peace. They prepared tentative terms based on the Vienna F our Points. Palm erston "fumed and fussed but had to go along. After lengthy negotiations the three powers agreed on terms which Austria then presented to Russia on December 28 in the form of an


336 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
ultimatum. A ustria threatened to intervene in the war unless Russia agreed to peace negotiations based on the Four Points plus the neutralization of the Black Sea and the cession of Bessarabia. Austria calculated that Russia was exhausted and ready for peace and that she would therefore accept the ultimatum. This proved to be the case. Russia now faced not only Britain, France, and Turkey but also Sar dinia, which had entered the war in January, 1855. Sweden, too, was veering toward the Allies. King Frederick William of Prussia urged T sar Alexander to accept the terms and warned him that Austria was serious in her interven tion threat. Alexander yielded to this pressure and the peace conference was held in Paris in February and M arch, 1856. Palm erston was as bellicose during the conference as he had been before. He instructed his foreign minister, Lord Clarendon, that “ Russia has brought . . . humiliation on herself and she must drink from the chalice which she herself has filled.” 18 N apoleon had hopes of using the peace gath ering to effect a general revision of the 1815 settlement, including the Polish and Italian problems. Palmerston refused to consider such wholesale change and drew closer to Austria in order to preserve the status quo. France there upon sided with Russia on most controversial issues. In fact, the Paris Con ference marked the beginning of a Franco-Russian rapprochement that was to result in close cooperation between the two powers during the following years. The French foreign minister, Count Walewski, who presided over the conference, was regarded as being “more Russian than the Russians.” The Treaty of Paris of M arch 30, 1856, included the following provisions: 1. T he O ttom an Em pire was form ally adm itted to the concert of Europe and the signatory powers engaged to respect and guarantee the em p ire’s independence and territorial integrity. 2. The powers took appreciative cognizance of the reform edict, the H atti-Humayun, issued by the sultan on F ebruary 18, 1856. T his edict, which will be considered in detail in C hapter 20, prom ised religious equality before the law, reform of police and prisons, of coinage and taxation. But in rec ognizing the edict the powers expressly repudiated “the right to interfere, either collectively or separately,” in the internal affairs of Turkey. 3. The Black Sea was neutralized. No fortifications, either Russian or Turkish, were to be m aintained on its coasts. Its waters and ports were to be open to the mercantile marine of every nation but permanently closed to all warships. 4. T he D anube was to be open to the ships of all nations and its navigation was to be under the control of an international commission. 5. Sebastopol was to be restored to Russia and Kars to the Turks. 6. Russia was to cede southern Bessarabia to M oldavia, thereby los ing access to the Danube. The Principalities of M oldavia and W allachia were to remain under the suzerainty of the Porte. Russia renounced her exclusive protection over them, and the signatory powers collectively guaranteed their


Crimean War: 1853—1856 337
privileges. No agreement could be reached on the political organization of the Principalities, so this was left to an international commission which was to m ake recom m endations after the wishes of the people had been expressed in popularly elected assemblies. 7. The liberties of Serbia were to be similarly guaranteed, though a Turkish garrison was to rem ain in th at country. Under a separate treaty concluded on April 15, Britain, France, and Austria agreed to regard any infringement of Turkish independence and in tegrity as a causus belli and to concert m easures to m eet it.
BALKAN AND EUROPEAN REPERCUSSIONS
Some twenty years after the Crimean W ar a British foreign minister declared that “England put her money on the wrong horse.” Others have pronounced the war to have been both unnecessary and useless. Are these judgments justified in the light of history? T he answ er depends on w hether one is thinking in term s of Balkan or general European history. So far as the Balkans are concerned, the Cri m ean W ar had less im pact than might be expected. W ithin a few years most of the provisions of the Paris Treaty had been violated. Russia repudiated the Black Sea clauses in 1870; Russia, Britain, and A ustria encroached on O ttom an integrity in 1878; and Turkey failed to reform herself despite Brit ish expectations and her own Hatti-Humayun. O n the other hand, it is som e times argued that the Crimean W ar prevented Russia from engulfing the Balkan Peninsula and thus made possible the future independence of the Balkan states. This thesis has some basis in fact. T he w ar did hasten the tran s form ation of the Danubian Principalities into the united and independent R um anian state. But to accept the thesis fully it is necessary to accept also its basic assumption that Russia wished to annex the Balkan lands and would have succeeded were it not for the Crim ean W ar. This assum ption is open to question. It is certainly true that T sar N icholas’s constant preoccupation with Turkish partition came to be regarded in certain circles as evidence of a plot to subvert the sultan’s em pire. Y et the fact rem ains th at a careful analysis of the tsa r’s statem ents and actions leads to the conclusion th at he was p rom pted “not by any M achiavellian determ ination to encom pass the Sultan’s downfall as m uch as by a genuine and natural desire to safeguard R ussia’s vital interests and avoid the risk that T urkey’s collapse might take the pow ers unaw ares and provoke a general w ar.” 19 The Crimean W ar had a greater impact on Europe than on the Near East. It marked a turning point in the course of European diplomacy. In the first place, it enhanced enormously the prestige of Napoleon and of France. The holding of the peace conference in Paris was symptomatic of the change in French fortunes. A fter 1856 France took the place of A ustria as the lead ing power on the Continent. More significant was the disruptive effect of the war upon the con


3 38 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
servative, pro-status quo bloc of the three eastern Powers, Russia, Prussia, and Austria. The effectiveness of this bloc had been demonstrated in 1849 when Tsar Nicholas sent an army to help the Hapsburg emperor crush the H ungarian rebels. Only a few years later, in 1854, Austria repaid Russia by delivering an ultim atum and aligning herself with R ussia’s enemies. N icholas gave vent to his fury by presenting his valet with a statuette of Francis Joseph which hitherto had adorned his study. This rupture between Russia and Austria was a diplomatic revolution of first-rate importance. The tri partite bloc no longer existed to maintain the status quo. Austria no longer could look to Russia or to Prussia for backing against the W estern powers and against-her own subject nationalities. Thus the Continent was unfrozen, and in little more than a decade Cavour unified Italy, Bismarck unified G er many, and Napoleon fell from the glory of the M alakov to the disaster of Sedan.


1 8 . M a k in g o f R u m a n ia to 1 8 7 8
O stensibly the C rimean W ar was fought to m ain tain the integrity and independence of the Ottom an Empire. Yet the imme diate effect of the war was the unification of the M oldavian and W allachian Principalities into the autonomous kingdom of Rumania. This establishment of the Rum anian state cannot be explained entirely by the provisions of the Treaty of Paris and the diplomatic policies of the European powers. Account also must be taken of the Rum anian people themselves, who were by no means passive pawns. How did these people survive almost two millenia of barbarian invasions and foreign rule? Why were they now, in the mid-nineteenth century, beginning to awaken and to demand their place in the family of nations? Also, why were these people, unlike their Greek and South Slavic neighbors, divided into a small landowning class and a vast exploited peasant mass? Consideration of these questions will explain the creation of the R u m anian state and make its later history easier to understand.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The Rum anians are the descendants of the original Dacian people, with additions of R om an, Slavic, and, to a much lesser degree, T atar strains. These people occupy the lower Danubian lands on either side of the T ran sylvanian Alps. T he “cisalpine” R um anians live in the political entities of Moldavia, W allachia, Bukovina, and Bessarabia, whereas the “transalpine” Rumanians occupy Transylvania and the Banat of Temesvar. By the mid nineteenth century the Rum anians had fallen under the rule of three neigh boring powers: Bessarabia belonging to Russia; Bukovina, Transylvania, and the Banat of Temesvar to Austria; M oldavia and W allachia accepting the suzerainty of Turkey and the protectorate of Russia. It follows that a nation alist awakening among the Rum anian people was likely to be a m atter of international rather than purely local concern.
339


340 A ge of Nationalism: 1815—1878
We noted in Chapter 2 that the original Dacians were under Rom an rule between a .d . 100 and 275. W hen the Rom ans retreated to the southern bank of the Danube the floodgates of invasion were left open. During the following centuries a host of barbarian invaders m arched through the flat Rum anian valley lands on their way to the west and south. W hen this move ment of peoples subsided, the Rum anians were able to organize two semi independent states, W allachia and M oldavia, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, respectively. From the outset these states were in a precarious posi tion, each being surrounded by powerful and aggressive neighbors. W allachia had to contend with Turkey and Hungary, while M oldavia faced Turkey, H ungary, and Poland. W hen the O ttom an armies crushed all opposition in Southeastern Europe the Rumanians were forced to accept Turkish suze rainty. W allachia becam e a T urkish dependency in the fifteenth century and M oldavia in the sixteenth. At one point an exceptionally capable W allachian prince, M ichael the Brave, was able to assert his independence and overrun M oldavia and Transylvania. In 1600 he proclaim ed him self Prince of all Rum anians. But the following year he was killed and his purely personal empire disappeared with him. O ttom an domination then remained unchal lenged in the R um anian lands until the nineteenth century. The Turks allowed their Rum anian subjects a large measure of au tonom y. They exacted annual tribute and in return they agreed not to hold land in the Principalities. Also, the Rum anian nobles or boyars were free to elect their own princes, known as hospodars. The Turks continued to ob serve these terms but only in a nom inal fashion. In actual practice Rum anian autonomy soon became meaningless. One reason was that the Turks used the right of pre-emption in the Rum anian markets to the point of economic spoliation. They normally paid for the large shipments of grain and sheep sent regularly to Constantinople, but they set the rates so low that they amounted, in effect, to additional tribute. Moreover, the Turks took advan tage of quarrels among the boyars to influence directly and decisively the choice of hospodars. As noted in C h ap ter 7, aspirants to the princely office had to bribe the sultan’s m inisters for their support. Before long the T urks were appointing and removing the hospodars in rapid succession, for the quicker the turnover the greater the proceeds. The net result was a system of vicious economic exploitation and purely nominal political autonomy. Those Rum anians who lived outside the two Principalities did not fare better. W hen the O ttom an E m pire was at its height it encom passed all the Rum anian lands. But as it grew w eaker it lost one province after another to the neighboring powers. The Hapsburgs obtained Transylvania by the Karlowitz Treaty in 1699, the Banat of Temesvar by the Passarowitz Treaty in 1718, and Bukovina in 1775. Likewise, Russia reached the D niester River with the Jassy Treaty of 1792 and then annexed the province of Bessarabia by the Bucharest Treaty of 1812. The R ussians also steadily encroached on the sultan’s authority in M oldavia and W allachia. They began with the Kuchuk Kainarji Treaty of


Making of Rumania to 1878 341
1774, which gave them the right to protect the Christian religion and its churches throughout Turkey and which also allowed the Russian am bassador in Constantinople to intercede in behalf of the Principalities. From then on the R ussians steadily extended their authority in the Principalities until fi nally they became virtually corulers with the A drianople Treaty of 1829. This required that the sultan should accept the elected hospodars for life; he could not reject or dismiss them w ithout Russia’s concurrence; and he could not maintain any fortified place or any Moslem settlement anywhere in the Prin cipalities, i The sultan also agreed that the Russians should occupy the two provinces until the last installment of the war indemnity had been paid. Finally, he undertook to accept the new constitution for the Principalities which the Russian com m ander, General Kisselev, was preparing, and he even agreed that the Russian consuls in the Principalities should be specifically authorized to watch over the working of the constitution. This gave the con suls a m ajor role in M oldavian and W allachian affairs. Indeed, the sultan ordered the hospodars to comply with the wishes of the consuls as much as possible. A nd it is know n th at some hospodars were dismissed and others appointed on Russian insistence. Thus the A drianople Treaty established a dual authority in the Principalities, and bf the two powers Russia was clearly the senior partner] We may conclude that in the early nineteenth century the outlook for the Rum anian people everywhere appeared dark and hopeless. Yet in 1848 they arose, together with the other subject nations of Europe, and they made clear their desire for national unity and for independence. The uprising was a m anifestation of the slowly developing nationalist movement among the Rum anians. But this movement was a narrow and rather esoteric affair. It was nationalistic but not national. It did not include the vast peasant mass that constituted the overwhelming majority of the Rum anian nation. These peasants were quite unaware of nationalism or constitutionalism or any of the other isms of the period. They were concerned only with land, servile dues, labor obligations, and other such m atters that affected their daily lives. The nationalist movement, therefore, cannot be placed in proper perspective unless the underlying peasant problem is first recognized and understood.
PEASANT PROBLEM
W hen the W allachian and Moldavian Principalities were organized in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries Rum anian society was rural and egalitarian. The peasants were free joint holders of the village lands and were required only to give the village headm an one tenth of their produce and three days’ labor each year. Land tenure rested on the principle that all the inhabitants had an equal right to the use of the soil. With the founding of the two Principalities new social relationships developed which soon undermined the egalitarianism of Rumanian society. The appearance of a central authority dispensing justice and favors induced


342 A ge of Nationalism: 1 8 1 5 -1 8 7 8
the village headm en to look m ore to the princes than to their own people. They began to leave the villages for court positions at Jassy and Bucharest. There they found opportunity for self-enrichment and social advancement. They also found a cultural pattern quite different from that of the village. As they adapted themselves to that pattern they drifted further away from the peasant mass. In this manner class differentiation gradually developed. The new noble or boyar class steadily gained in status and riches while the formerly free peasants declined into serfdom. By the eighteenth century the boyars and the monasteries controlled a large proportion of the land to which the majority of the peasants were bound as serfs. Thus R um anian serfdom, in its relatively late flowering, re sembled that of Russia rather than that of W estern Europe. Also, it should be noted that the peasants were subjugated not because of foreign invasion but rather because of the establishment of a central government with favors to bestow and needs to be fulfilled. It is significant that M ichael the Brave, the most independent of the R um anian princes, was the first legally to impose restrictions upon the peasantry. And he did so in order to ensure a settled population able to provide military supplies for his new standing army. Thus foreign domination does not explain the enslavement of the peasants, though it does account in part for the heavy tax burden that they had to bear. Not only did they supply the needs of the hospodars and the boyars, but in the final analysis it was they who also paid for the tributes, bribes, and other payments made to the Turks. The R um anian peasants had to contend with G reek as well as T urk ish and native exploiters. Indeed, by the eighteenth century the G reek Phana riotes had almost a strangle hold on the Rum anian economy. A native middle class did not exist between the boyars and the peasants, so the Greeks were able to move in as merchants, moneylenders, and tax farmers. As they be came wealthier and won more influence in the O ttom an court they were able to make or break the Rum anian hospodars. The latter frequently were mere tools in the hands of the Phanariotes, dependent upon them for both finan cial and political backing. In the early eighteenth century, as we noted in C hapter 13, the Phanariotes secured the office of hospodar for themselves. Until the Greek revolution of 1821 a succession of Phanariote hospodars followed one another in rapid succession at Jassy and Bucharest. Each paid lavish bribes for his office and naturally m ade every effort to recover his in vestment and as much extra as feasible. The burden ultimately fell upon the back of the peasant. Thouvenel, the French am bassador in Constantinople, aptly observed that “the sultan weighed on the prince, the prince on the boyars, and the boyars on the peasants. . . . ” 1 Likewise, a British consul reported in the early nineteenth century: “There does not, perhaps, exist a people labouring under a greater degree of oppression from the effect of despotic power and more heavily burthened with impositions and taxes than the peasants of W allachia and M oldavia. . . . ” 2 The Phanariotes have been blamed for this unhappy state of affairs.


Making of Rumania to 1878 343
B ut the source of the trouble was institutional rather than personal. This is illustrated by the fact that exploitation prevailed before the Phanariotes ap peared on the scene and continued after they had disappeared. Also, it was a Phanariote hospodar, Constantine M avrokordatos, who issued decrees abolishing serfdom in W allachia in 1746 and in M oldavia in 1749. These decrees relieved the serfs of personal bondage so that they no longer were tied to the land. But the position of the peasants did not show improvement. The reason was that Rumanian agriculture was beginning to be commercial ized. It was beginning to produce for world rather than for local markets. This stimulated a drive for increased productivity which in turn led the boyars to impose new fetters upon the peasantry— fetters which were less obvious but fully as oppressive as the personal bondage of the past. In the latter part of the eighteenth century increasing quantities of Rum anian grain were being shipped to Constantinople and other Turkish cities. A gricultural exports to other neighboring countries, and particularly Austria, also were mounting. But the great stimulus to the Rum anian econ omy was supplied by the Treaty of Adrianople. This abolished the Turkish right of pre-em pting Rum anian products and declared that the trade of the Principalities should be freed from all Turkish restrictions. The immediate result was a rapid rise in the volum e of exports. By the 1840’s an average of 1,000 vessels totaling 200,000 tons called each year at Galatz and Braila, the shipping ports for M oldavia and W allachia, respectively. An even greater volume of agricultural products was shipped overland or by river to Austria, Turkey, and Russia. This economic flowering paradoxically contributed to the outbreak of the Crimean War. The Russians were chagrined that they should have unwittingly created competition for their own grain exports out of Odessa and Taganrog. Accordingly they used their position at the m outh of the Danube to obstruct by various ways the export of Rum anian grain. This drew loud protests from British merchants and led ultimately to the pro vision in the Paris Treaty for an international commission to control Danubian shipping. So far as the Rum anian peasants were concerned, the immediate effect of the commercial expansion was detrimental. The boyars wanted more land and more labor to produce greater quantities of grain for export. In various ways, legal and extralegal, they increased trem endously the labor obligations of the peasants. Also, they reserved a steadily expanding propor tion of the land for their own use and attem pted to limit the peasants’ right to pasture. Thus the peasant was deprived of both land and labor to the ad vantage of the boyar. This trend was reinforced by the “O rganic Statutes” introduced in 1831-1832 during the period of Russian occupation. These acts recognized the boyar for the first time as the legal proprietor of the land rather than as the leader of the village, which he originally had been. The peasants were granted use of land not in excess of two thirds of the estate, the remaining


344 A ge of Nationalism: 1 8 1 5 -1 8 7 8
third being completely at the disposal of the boyar. In return the peasants were obliged to provide fifty-six to sixty days of service each year. Theoreti cally they were free to move if they were dissatisfied, but a network of reg ulations and restrictions effectively bound them to their villages. W hen a peasant died, the land he had tilled was not to pass to his sons as in the past. It reverted, instead, to the boyar, who was held responsible for providing newly m arried young cultivators with a holding. General Kisselev was far from satisfied with these Organic Statutes, which were form ulated prim arily by boyar com m ittees. It is true th at they de fined precisely the peasants’ obligations and thus reduced the opportunity for arbitrary exactions. It is also true th a t R um anian agriculture spurted forw ard during the following decades. The acreage in cereals nearly doubled during the thirty years between 1829 and 1859. But the peasants who constituted the backbone of the nation did not benefit from this expansion. They were definitely worse off than in the old days when they practiced a predom i nantly cattle economy and had access to as much land as their cattle needed. Now they found themselves involved, willy-nilly, in a commercial grain economy. They did not com prehend the circumstances that had produced this change. They knew only that their holdings had been reduced by more than one half and that their labor obligations had increased thirty times. Michael Eminescu, the famous Rumanian author, commented bitterly: “The country was but a big estate, adm inistered like an estate— a complex of latifundia in which private law is public law, the inheritance of landed wealth the inheritance of power in the State.” 3
RISE OF NATIONALISM
The Rum anians constitute a single nationality but only recently did they unite under one flag. It was not until the collapse of the Russian and H apsburg empires during W orld W ar I that they were able to establish their “ G reater R um ania.” M ichael the Brave did bring all Rum anians under his scepter for a few years, but this cannot be interpreted as a trium ph of R um anian nationalism. M ichael regarded his empire as a purely personal creation and possession. The Rumanians of Moldavia and Transylvania looked upon him at the time as a meddlesome usurper rather than as a liberator. His reputation as the father of his people is an unw arranted though understandable product of the national self-consciousness that manifested it self in the nineteenth century. R um anian nationalism appeared late and developed slowly. One reason was the foreign dom ination in every field— not only political and eco nomic but also cultural. A t first the main cultural influence was Slavonic. The old Church Slavonic was the official ecclesiastical and literary language among the R um anians as well as am ong the Serbians and Bulgarians. Also, the Turkish invasion of Bulgaria in 1393 drove numerous Bulgarian priests and scholars across the D anube and strengthened the Slavonic tradition in the Rum anian lands. Greek influence began to supplant the Slavonic after


Making of Rumania to 1878 345
the fall of Constantinople in 1453. By the following century G reek was taught in most monastic schools. The success of the Phanariotes in the po litical and economic spheres assured the predominance of Greek culture. By the beginning of the eighteenth century the Greek language was used in ad ministration and learning, and the Greek liturgy in the churches. The content of this im ported Greek culture was at first Byzantine and ecclesiastical. But gradually W estern secular thought penetrated the Greek world. This immediately affected the Rum anians because Bucharest and Jassy were, in the intellectual sense, as Greek as Athens and Yanina. A Phanariote hospodar first introduced the French language in the schools of W allachia in 1776, and he was immediately im itated in Moldavia. The works of Voltaire, Rousseau, and the Encyclopedists were widely read in the Prin cipalities, both in the original and in Greek translation. The French Revolu tion itself was followed eagerly in the columns of Greek newspapers pub lished in Vienna. The famous G reek revolutionary, Rhigas Pheraios, was the moving spirit in a literary and political organization in Bucharest. In short, a highly cultured and politically conscious G reco-Rum anian society was ac tive in Bucharest and Jassy in the latter part of the eighteenth century. This explains why Alexander' Ypsilantis, who was of a Phanariote hospodar family, decided to launch the Greek revolution in 1821 with an uprising in the Principalities. He soon learned that the gulf between a cos mopolitan drawing-room society and an inert peasant mass was too great to be bridged by political slogans. When Ypsilantis crossed the Pruth River with his small force of G reek revolutionaries on M arch 16, 1821, as de scribed in C hapter 15, his only hope of success was to arouse the peasants and win them to his side. But the few peasants that were arm ed and organ ized at this time were led by a certain Tudor Vladimirescu, who was not disposed to follow Greek leadership blindly. Vladimirescu was not an unin form ed rustic, as is usually assum ed. H e was of peasant origin b u t he had amassed considerable wealth and had gained experience fighting with the Russians during the 1806 Russo-Turkish W ar. He rose to the rank of lieu tenant in the Russian army and later served the Russian consul in Bucharest in various capacities. V ladim irescu had been in contact with the G reek revolutionaries be fore they entered the Principalities, and had indicated his willingness to co operate with them. But in doing so, his aim was to further the Rum anian cause rather than the Greek. In taking up arms at this time, he issued procla mations demanding tax reform, a national army, a national assembly repre sentative of all classes of the population, and native hospodars in place of the Greek Phanariotes. W hen the tsar repudiated Ypsilantis, Vladimirescu decided that the Greeks were doomed and that nothing would be gained by fighting with them. “We will help Ypsilantis,” declared Vladim irescu, “to recross the Danube so that he might liberate his own fatherland.” 4 Vladi mirescu now had to find other allies, so he tried to establish a working ar rangem ent with the boyars. On August 23, 1821, he called on his followers


346 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
to support a boyar government that had been established in Bucharest. This move proved to be a fatal miscalculation. It alienated his peasant following and failed to win over the boyars, who preferred the re-establishment of Turkish rule to the perils of an unpredictable uprising. Thus Vladimirescu found himself largely deserted, and soon afterward he fell into the hands of the Greeks and was executed. These events in 1821 are significant because they represent the pre lude to the large-scale peasant uprisings of the following decades, and also because they m ark the beginning of the end of Greek influence in the Princi palities. The O ttoman government reacted to the Greek revolution by hence forth appointing Rum anian boyars in place of the Phanariotes as hospodars of M oldavia and W allachia. A t the same time that the Greeks were losing their official positions in the Principalities they were also declining in their cultural influence. The new currents that were gaining predom inance were the so-called Latinist m ovement and, above all, the ideology and culture of France. Latinism began in the late eighteenth century, when a num ber of Transylvanian Rum anians were sent to Jesuit institutions in Rome. The young students were inspired by the monuments of antiquity that they saw about them. The most exciting was the famous column of Trajan, the em peror who had made their own homeland, ancient Dacia, a part of the Roman E m pire. It is not surprising th at these young m en, the representatives of a people who had suffered under foreign rule for centuries, responded enthu siastically to this association with a glorious past. They developed and pop ularized the theory that they were the direct descendants of the noble Romans. They claimed that the Rum anians were a chosen people, an out post of Latin culture in the surrounding sea of Slavic and Teutonic barbarism. The chief work of these cham pions of Latinism was in the linguistic field. They replaced the Slavonic alphabet with the Latin. They purged the R um a nian language of Slavic, Greek, and other non-Latin words. They gradually secured the use of Rum anian as the language of instruction in place of Greek. These reforms helped to create a uniform literary language and thereby pro vided the essential basis for the development of Rum anian culture. The influence of France was much greater than that of the shadowy Rom an Empire. We have seen that French ideas reached the Rum anians in directly by way of the Greeks. A nother medium of French culture was the Russian army during the years of occupation. Russian officers spoke French, affected W estern m anners, and taught the ladies how to dance à la française. Rum anian students who attended French universities also contributed to the propagation of French language and culture. Not all of them obtained their degrees, but they all returned ardent admirers of the great Latin sister nation. Their proudest boast was that their own Bucharest was the “Paris of the Balkans.” Finally, the French Revolution and the exploits of Napoleon made a deep impression on politically minded Rumanians. The French viceconsul at Jassy reported: “For the small portion of the boyars who know


Making of Rumania to 1878 347
how to reason, the French R evolution is not w ithout attraction. They like to be told about it and cannot help showing a certain approval and at least admiring its prodigious accom plishm ents.” 5 An early political manifestation of this intellectual ferment was the organization of the Philharm onic Society in 1833. Its stated purpose was to encourage literature and the arts. But the younger and more radical members drew up a program of their own that reflected clearly the influence of France. They wanted the unification of the two Principalities, a constitutional regime, freedom of the press, free education, and equality for all Rumanians before the law. The bolder spirits among them tried to take advantage of the N ear Eastern crisis of 1839-1841 to realize their aims. They staged scattered out breaks but were easily suppressed. The year 1848 was a year of revolution in the Principalities as well as in Central and W estern Europe. The leaders were the students who had studied abroad. The great majority of them had gone to Paris, where they were profoundly affected by the liberal doctrines expounded at the Collège de France. They heard Jules M ichelet lecture on his philosophy of history. They identified themselves with Adam Mickiewicz, Edgar Quinet, and others who depicted the sad plight of the Italians and the Poles and raised hopes for future revolutions that would liberate all the enslaved nations of Europe. Under such tutelage the young Rumanian students became strongly nation alistic and also anti-Russian. They regarded the tsar as the hateful gendarme of Europe. Some of them published articles and pamphlets in Paris with the aim of bringing the Rum anian problem to the attention of the West. Their principal argument was that a free and united Rum ania would serve as “an insuperable barrier against the encroachments of the Tsar.” B With such ideas and aspirations the Rum anian students were quick to take up arms when the 1848 revolutions swept over Europe. Some of them took part in the F ebruary uprising in Paris and hoisted the R um anian flag at the H ôtel de Ville, where it flew with the French, Polish, and Italian flags. Thus was symbolized the union of the oppressed peoples of Europe against international reaction. The Rumanian students then hurried home full of plans for the liberation of their countrymen and the establishment of the m illenium . The ground had been prepared at home by the cultural and propa ganda work of various literary societies and by the activities of a secret revo lutionary organization, the Fratia or Brotherhood. The uprising in Jassy proved a fiasco. It was poorly organized and the reigning hospodar was able to crush it quickly and easily. In W allachia the revolutionaries were more successful. They presented several petitions for reform to the hospodar, George Bibescu, who rejected them at the insistence of the Russian consul. Disturbances then broke out in the streets and, after vain efforts to curb them, Bibescu lost his nerve and accepted on June 23 a revolutionary cabinet and a constitution. Two days later he abdicated and a provisional govern ment was established.


348 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
The new government issued decrees abolishing ranks and establishing freedom of speech, assembly, and the press. It also declared itself for the unification of the Rum anian people. “All lands inhabited by Rum anians should be called Rumania and form one state. . . . the Rumanian nation de mands that it be one and indivisible.” 7 This dream of national unity was soon dispelled. It was apparent from the outset that Russia was determined to stamp out this conflagration near her border. The revolutionaries were aware of this and tried to win the Turks over to their side. The Turks were rather pleased to have an avowedly anti-R ussian governm ent in W allachia. O ne of the sultan’s officials declared gleefully, “T here is only one thing still w anting— the union of the two Prin cipalities. T hat would be a stake in the entrails of Russia.” 8 But the decisive factor determining Turkish policy was, as usual, the attitude of the powers. Russia demanded that the revolutionary regime be destroyed and the Western powers refused to offer support against this pressure. Accordingly, the sultan bowed to the will of the tsar. He sent an army across the D anube and after a brief skirmish the provincial governm ent collapsed and its leaders scattered in all directions. The 1848 revolutions in the Principalities had an opéra bouf]e qual ity about them. They were doomed from the outset, partly because of the hands-off policy of London and Paris, but also because of the narrow out look of the leaders. The fundam ental problem in the provinces was agrarian. B ut most of the revolutionaries, with their midde-class viewpoint, failed to grasp the significance of this fact. They did establish a commission to investi gate the problem. It held meetings long enough for some peasant spokesmen to give passionate expression to their grievances.
If the Ciocoi Ta grasping parvenu or exploiter of the peasants] could have laid his hand on the sun, he would have seized it and sold to the peasant for money the light and the heat of God. Your lands would bring you nothing if we were not there to fill your granaries with produce and your houses with gold and silver. These riches are not the fruit of the work of your arms, they are made by the sweat of our brow, under the blows of your whip and that of your Gov ernment.3
A few of the leaders of the provisional government sympathized with the viewpoint of the peasants. Nicholas Balcescu, for example, stated: “The boyar has no love for the land; he. does not live on it and work it. . . . H e looks upon the land as a penal settlement in which to keep the peasant so as to exploit him. . . . T he peasant represents the boyar’s capital.” 10 Few members of the government were willing to go so far. M ost of them wanted political reform, not social revolution. N or did they wish to add the boyars to the list of their enemies. So they dissolved the commmission and did nothing about the agrarian problem. The grievances of the peasants remained unsatisfied and the revolutionaries thus forfeited whatever chance they may have had of winning mass support against their external foes.


Making of Rumania to 1878 349
T he only significance of the revolution is th a t it dem onstrated th at a nationalist spirit existed— the embryo of the “G reater Rum ania” of the future. But this spirit should not be exaggerated. It was still only an embryo. It cannot be dignified with the name of a nationalist movement. Only an infinitesimally small proportion of the population held national ideals. And even this small group was divided into conservative and radical wings. The conservatives wished to unite the Principalities, get rid of the Russians, and assume pow er and office themselves. T he radicals w anted to go further. They wished to remake Rum anian society in accordance with the liberal principles they had imbibed in Paris. The fact that these had little relevance or meaning for the millions of peasants they scarcely perceived.
w i n n i n g o f u n i t y : 1856-1859
A fter the failure of the insurrection in W allachia many of the n a tionalist leaders fled to Paris. T here they sided with the republicans against Napoleon. One of the Rumanians, Dimitrie Bratianu, was arrested and jailed for participating in a plot. While in prison he gave vent to his feelings in a letter in which he execrated Napoleon as “a bastard, a miserable wretch, w ithout country and w ithout fam ily.” 11 A few years later the same B ratianu gratefully hailed Napoleon as the founder of the Rumanian state. This tribute was fully deserved. W ithout N apoleon’s support the Principalities w ould not have been united when they were. Why did Napoleon champion the cause of a little-known nationality in Eastern Europe? One theory holds that Napoleon wished to unite the Principalities in order to protect Turkey against Russian encroachm ent. This seems plausible until it is recalled that Russia herself favored the unification of the Principalities, and that Napoleon during these years sought friendship, and perhaps an alliance, with the Russia which he allegedly wished to block. M ore convincing than this b arrier theory is the nationality theory. It attributes N apoleon’s R um anian policy to his espousal of the nationality principle in general, of which the unification of the Principalities was but one manifes tation. Napoleon had good reasons, both as a Bonaparte and as the head of the French state, for opposing the 1815 settlement with its wholesale disre gard of E u ro p e’s nationalities. P erhaps the explanation for N apoleon’s sup po rt of the R um anians is to be found in L ord C larendon’s report of w hat Napoleon told him at the Paris Congress.
He [Napoleon] said that the great fault of the Congress of Vienna was that the interests of the sovereigns were only consulted, while the interests of their subjects were wholly neglected, and that the present congress [of Paris] should not fall into a similar error.12
Napoleon consistently and ardently urged that the Principalities be united under a foreign prince. His firmest opponent was Austria, partly be cause she had plans for the economic exploitation of the Rumanian lands,


but primarily because she feared the attraction that a united Rum ania would hold for her own R um anian subjects in Transylvania and Bukovina. Turkey also opposed union, considering it with much justification as a long step toward full independence. Britain wavered from lukewarm acceptance of uni fication at the beginning to strong opposition before the end. Her traditional distrust of Russia explains the shift. Britain wanted to strengthen Turkey, and she feared that unification would soon deprive Turkey of her two stra tegic provinces across the Danube. The powers that backed Napoleon were Sardinia, who naturally favored the nationality principle, and Prussia, who desired to w eaken her A ustrian rival. B ut N apoleon’s chief ally, paradoxically enough, was Russia. By favoring unification Russia hoped to win the good will of the R um anian people and also to widen the rift between Britain and France. These differences among the powers made a final settlement at the Paris Conference impossible. The treaty provided that the wishes of the R um anian people should be ascertained through freely elected assemblies representative of all classes in each Principality. A commission, composed of representatives of the powers, was to meet in the Principalities, determine the views of the assemblies, and report them to a future great-power confer ence that was to make the final decision. This procedure for consulting the people concerned was unimpeachably democratic. But in a land with mass illiteracy and despotic traditions it led to wholesale fraud and intimidation. And the representatives of the powers became deeply involved as they des perately strove to further the interests of their respective governments. The first election was held in M oldavia on July 19, 1857. An anti unionist majority was returned, but only through the most blatant chicanery on the part of the Turkish-appointed officials. This precipitated an unseemly brawl among the representatives of the powers with Stratford Canning and the French am bassador, Thouvenel, in the forefront. Thouvenel, supported by the Russian, Prussian, and Sardinian representatives, presented to the O ttom an governm ent what was in effect an ultim atum dem anding the annul ment of the election. Stratford Canning bristled and warned the Turks that if they did not stand firm the French am bassador “will ride roughshod over u s.” Thouvenel retorted that Stratford Canning “is not an am bassador but a sovereign,” an opinion that even the Austrian representative seems to have shared when he rem arked that Stratford Canning acted like “the sixth G reat Pow er of E u ro p e.” 13 In any case the T urks refused to satisfy Thouvenel, who thereupon embarked dramatically on a French warship. The other three ministers broke off diplomatic relations at the same time.
The danger of war became real, and Palm erston increased it by in forming the French am bassador in L ondon that “the English were ready for any eventualities, how ever painful they m ay b e.” 14 F ortunately for the cause of peace, British public opinion was concentrated on the Indian Mutiny. This distraction left the more tem perate elements in the cabinet free to restrain the bellicose Palm erston. By great good luck an official visit of N apoleon III
350 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878


Making of Rumania to 1878 351
and Empress Eugénie to Queen Victoria and Prince A lbert had been ar ranged for August 6 at Osborne on the Isle of Wight. Long conversations between the sovereigns and their chief ministers finally produced a com pro mise. The elections were to be annulled, but in return Napoleon agreed that the Principalities should not be united. Instead, they were to receive “similar organic institutions” and “a common system in all things civil and m ilitary.” New elections were held in both Principalities in September, 1857. The assemblies met in Jassy and Bucharest the following m onth. They voted overwhelmingly that the Principalities be united into a single state, subject to the suzerainty of the sultan, and under the constitutional government of a foreign prince. This was contrary to the terms of the agreement reached at Osborne. W hat were the powers to do? After months of deliberation they decided in the Paris Convention of August, 1858, that the Principalities should remain separate, that each should have its own prince and its own parliam ent to be elected by itself, and that affairs com m on to both should be entrusted to a joint Central Commission of sixteen members consisting of an equal number of deputies from each parliament. This arrangem ent was artificial and clumsy, and failed to satisfy the aspirations of the Rum anian nationalists. But at least it placed them well along the road to unity. And their good fortune held out so that they quickly reached the end of the road. W ar clouds now were gathering over Europe. Events were under way that soon were to culminate in the Franco-Austrian war over Italy. While the powers were distracted by this crisis the Rum anians boldly cut the G ordian knot tied by the powers. The two parliam ents m et in their respective capitals in January and February, 1859. Both unanimously elected as their prince the same man, a native boyar, Colonel Alexander Cuza. Napoleon recognized Cuza at once. Austria and Turkey expressed strong opposition. Britain fortunately came forward with a face-saving for mula that was accepted. Turkey recognized Cuza as prince with the under standing that this was an exceptional case and that the two separate par liaments should continue. Thus the “illegitimate offspring of the two Principalities,” as a British consul called Cuza, was legitimatized. For all practical purposes a united and autonomous Rum anian state existed.
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENTS TO 1878
W hen Cuza was elected prince the foreign consuls described him in their reports as a card player who “preferred Jam aica rum to public affairs.” Like so many other Rum anians of his class, Cuza was easygoing, self-in dulgent, and dissolute. But he had one quality that made up for his failings. U nlike most of his fellow boyars, he had .some sense of social responsibility. Rum ania for him was not simply the ruling class to which he belonged. He recognized the plight of the peasants, sympathized with them, and endeavored to help them. He was fortunate enough to have as chief minister M ichael Kogalniceanu, an energetic Moldavian reformer who declared that his aim


352 Age oj Nationalism: 1815-1878
in public life was “to level up society, to lower the highly placed and to raise the hum ble.” 15 The humble of Rum ania did need raising at this time. These were years of peasant reform throughout E urope. Serfdom had been abolished in A ustria in 1841 and in Prussia in 1850. In Russia the em ancipation of 1861 was being prepared. Only in the Rum anian provinces were the landlords still strong enough to block reform. As a result the Rum anian peasants under Russian and A ustrian rule were substantially better off than those in the two Principalities. The representatives of the great powers were aware of this situation. Accordingly they stipulated in the 1856 Paris Treaty that the as semblies that were to be elected in each Principality should represent “the interests of all the social classes.” A few peasants were perm itted in the as semblies, and they voiced their grievances passionately. “We want to buy our freedom that we may no longer belong to anybody, but only to the soil, so that we, too, should have a fatherland. . . . We do not want to trespass upon anyone’s rights, but neither do we wish our own rights to be forgot ten .” 1(! T he boyars angrily denounced these “com m unistic tendencies” and nothing was done. The powers still persisted, and the Paris Convention of 1858 which dealt with the future organization of the Principalities contained this stipula tion: “All the privileges, exemptions and monopolies which certain classes still enjoy shall be abrogated, and the laws which regulate the relations 'of landlords and peasants shall be revised without delay, with a view to im proving the conditions of the peasantry.” 17 Cuza complied enthusiastically with this directive for reform. H s began by expropriating the so-called “Dedicated M onasteries,” a measure that was generally popular because it did not affect native interests. The monasteries had been lavishly endowed by princes and boyars so that they might perform necessary social functions such as maintaining schools, hos pitals and orphanges, distributing alms in time of famine, and providing hospitality and asylum to travelers in distress. In order to protect these en dowments the practice had grown up of placing the monasteries under the protection of the Holy Places in Jerusalem , Sinai, A thos, or one of the great patriarchates of the Levant. Then as Greek Phanariote influence became dom inant in both church and state, the “ Dedicated M onasteries” passed more and more into the control of foreign monks, who diverted the revenues abroad. Because the monasteries had accumulated over the years about one fourth of the arable land in W allachia and one third of that in M oldavia, it is apparent that the disposal of the revenues was a m ajor issue th at affected the welfare of the population and the income of the state. In September, 1863, the Assembly voted to expropriate the monasteries with a certain amount of compensation. The Patriarch and monks refused to negotiate, hoping to gain more by foreign support. In the end they received nothing, and thus what were probably the richest ecclesiastical properties in Chris tendom passed under state control.


Making of Rumania to 1878 353
Kogalniceanu next introduced a bill giving the peasants clear title to the land they were working. This affected the boyars who indignantly re jected the bill. They had no difficulty doing so since they dom inated the Assembly elected by 3,796 voters. The boyars then passed a bill of their own which freed the peasants of all dues and restrictions but failed to pro vide them with any land. This would have created a landless rural prole tariat that would have constituted a cheap and dependent labor supply for the landlords. Cuza now decided that the land question could not be settled without forceful measures. He vetoed the boyars’ bill, dissolved the Assem bly, and, in imitation of Napoleon III, appealed to the people through a plebiscite. T he peasants, he confided to the F rench consul, “ are the state’s active force. The rest do not m atter, and the day an effort is m ade to over throw me, I shall have three million peasants with m e.” 18 Cuza fatally overestimated the responsiveness of his peasants. They were certainly the most num erous elem ent in Rum anian society but they were scattered and unorganized. When the showdown came they may have been for him but they were not beside him. The plebiscite was held on May 14, 1864. The people were asked to vote yes or no on two proposals: a new electoral law that established virtually universal suffrage, and a new consti tution that greatly strengthened the position of the prince. The returns were favorable by 682,621 to 1,307. Cuza then promulgated his famous Agrarian Reform Law of August 25, 1864. It freed the peasants of all restrictions on their movements and abolished all dues in labor and in kind. In return the landlords received com pensation in state bonds which were to be paid for by the peasants over a period of fifteen years. The peasants also were given holdings which varied according to the num ber of cattle they possessed. Up to tw o thirds of a b o y ar’s land could be used for this purpose, and in regions where this did not suffice the state lands were to be used. Despite the good intentions of its authors, this act did not solve the agrarian problem in Rum ania. Indeed, the general welfare of the peasants probably deteriorated during the following decades. One reason was that the boyars, who controlled local adm inistration, twisted the provisions of the law to their advantage. They kept the best land for themselves, used false measuring standards, and so divided the holdings that the individual peasant either spent much of his time walking from one small lot to another or was unable to reach his property without paying a toll. The law provided that the peasants should receive the land they had used before the reform but ac tually they received less land and of lower quality. N ot only was the law unjustly enforced but certain of its provisions were shortsighted and proved most unfortunate in practice. The peasants could not obtain m ore th an two thirds of the lo rd ’s estate, but in those lightly populated regions where the peasants required less than the two-thirds portion the lord was perm itted to retain as his absolute property all that rem ained. Thus it is estim ated that by fair m eans or foul, the boyars ulti mately kept over one half the total land, while the state reserves were used


354 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
to provide plots for the peasants from thickly populated areas. Also, the Organic Statutes of 1831-1832 had held the boyar responsible for providing each newly m arried peasant with a holding, but the new act made no pro vision for subsequent generations. Since the population rose rapidly and the peasants invariably divided their plots equally among their sons, the result was the progressive fragmentation of peasant property. The original holdings in many cases had not been large enough to support a family. A fter frag m entation had occurred, the land-hungry peasants had no choice but to work the lo rd ’s land on alm ost any term s he stipulated. The plight of the peasantry was worsened by certain developments in the latter part of the nineteenth century. One was the growth of popula tion, which increased 54 per cent between 1859 and 1899. A nother was the passage of laws on agricultural contracts in 1866 and 1872. These laws gave the landowners sweeping powers in enforcing labor contracts, even to the point of using military units to drive the peasants to work. In fact, the army customarily “loaned” soldiers to the landowners during busy seasons, 26,538 soldiers being used in this m anner in 1912. Also, the peasants’ theoretical freedom of movement rarely existed in fact because of their chronic in debtedness to their landowners or to the tax collectors. “I have known sober, hard-working peasants,” one landlord admitted, “who laboured fifteen years to pay off a debt they contracted in the winter 1866-7 for maize which they had borrow ed to feed their fam ilies.” 10 Finally, social friction in the countryside was increased by the grow ing prevalence of absenteeism on the great estates. The effects were particu larly unfortunate because the landowners, who spent their time in Bucharest or in foreign capitals, commonly leased their properties not to individual peasants but to entrepreneurs. The latter were essentially speculators who merely sublet the land to the peasants for as high rents as possible in order to get a big return on their investment. Because of the population pressure they were able to impose fantastically unjust terms on the land-hungry peas ants, who responded with a bitter hatred that periodically burst out into open revolt. The 1864 reform failed completely to create the small peasant pro prietor class that Cuza and Kogalniceanu had in mind. Instead, the great majority of the peasants found themselves with totally inadequate holdings and were forced into a position of complete economic subservience to the great landowners. Their plight has been well summarized by an authority as fo llo w s:
. . . the agrarian system fell into a peculiar compound of serfdom and capitalism; from it landlords and their tenants secured all the advantages of both while the peasants were saddled with all the burdens of both. From serfdom the landlords had all the facilities of servile labour without any of the feudal obliga tions towards it; while from capitalism they had the freedom to bargain with labour without the restraint of a free labour market. The peasants, however, were subjected to servile labour without its counterpart in land rights; and from cap


Making of Rumania to 1878 355
italism they had all the trials of wage earners without being really free to trade their labours where they willed. One class, says M. Gherea, had achieved for itself “roses without thorns, while the thorns— and the thorns alone— were left for the peasants.” 20
This unhealthy imbalance in R um anian society stood out in marked contrast to the conditions in the other Balkan countries. Direct O ttom an rule over the Greeks and the South Slavs had eliminated the native nobilities and had left comparatively egalitarian peasant nations. To find a parallel to R um ania’s econom ic and social structure one must look east of the P ruth rather than south of the Danube. Russia and Rum ania emancipated their peasantry in 1861 and 1864, respectively. But the outcome in both countries was a land-hungry, depressed, and dissatisfied peasant mass. It is not sur prising that the political repercussions were correspondingly similar— sporadic peasant outbreaks in both countries in the late nineteenth century, violent revolution in Russia in 1905 and in R um ania in 1907, and the great Russian Revolution of 1917 which stimulated directly the Rum anian agrarian reforms of 1917-1921.
POLITICAL DEVELOPM ENTS TO 1 8 7 8
Cuza ruled as prince of Rumania from 1859 to 1866. During those seven years he passed from one crisis to another. His regime never took on the appearance of stability. It always seemed a tem porary stopgap affair, as, indeed, it turned out to be. Perhaps the basic reason for this was the irrecon cilable opposition of the boyars, the only organized and articulate element in R um anian society. A nother im portant factor was the character of Cuza him self. He was a poor adm inistrator, so that many of his reforms rem ained only paper measures. Also, he lacked completely the arts of the demagogue. He disliked public spectacles and participated in them rarely and diffidently. Thus he was incapable of rallying his subjects and popularizing his leadership. D espite these failings, Cuza accom plished m uch, in the political field as well as in the economic. W hen he was first elected he had the almost impossible task of serving as prince of two principalities with two assemblies, two cabinets, and a central commission. He found it necessary to spend half his time traveling back and forth between Bucharest and Jassy. In October, 1860, Cuza paid a visit to Constantinople, where he pleaded very effectively for a real instead of a personal union of the Principalities, and in the follow ing year the sultan issued a firman granting his assent. Finally, on December 23, 1861, the union of the Principalities was formally proclaimed. The new united and autonomous, though not independent, state was christened R u mania, and Bucharest was designated the capital, to the mortification of Jassy. Cuza now let loose a torrent of reform measures. The most outstand ing was the 1864 agrarian law noted above. In the same year he issued a decrce on public instruction. This provided for free and obligatory education.


356 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
New prim ary and secondary schools were established, as well as the uni versities of Jassy and Bucharest. Also, scholarships were made available for poor students of merit wishing to continue from their village school to a sec ondary school. M any provisions of this law remained unenforced because of the inadequate num ber of schools. But the law did set forth certain principles and goals upon which future progress was based. Cuza and his ministers were responsible for many other measures. They established a conservatory of music and a school of fine arts, adopted the Napoleonic Code with slight modifications, improved the judicial system, introduced trial by jury in a limited form, established government monopolies in salt and tobacco, and improved the tax-collecting system. This program of improvement justified the benevolent dictatorship that Cuza established following his coup d ’ état of 1864. But the coup and the agrarian reform th at followed it won him the irreconcilable enm ity of the boyars. And since Cuza lacked the qualities necessary to attract an en thusiastic and organized mass following, he had little chance of remaining indefinitely on the throne. M oreover, Cuza played into the hands of his enemies in various ways. He treated in a scandalous fashion his wife, who was of the powerful Rosetti family. He erred in dismissing his reform min ister, Kogalniceanu. The latter had become increasingly ambitious and domi neering, yet he had provided an indomitable driving power that Cuza sadly lacked. Also, the peasants were confused and wavering because the agrarian * reform was enforced tardily and in many cases most unjustly. Finally, finan cial difficulties had their effect because the treasury was bankrupt and gov ernm ent employees, including army officers, were left unpaid for months. The end came on the night of February 23, 1866. A number of army officers broke into the palace and roused Cuza from his bed. A fter he had been forced to sign abdication papers he was permitted to dress, as was also his mistress, who had hid behind some draperies. A regency was established while Cuza crossed the frontier on his way to Vienna. W hen he reached the A ustrian capital the French am bassador talked with him. Cuza showed no rancor. He merely expressed his gratitude to N apoleon for supporting the R um anian cause and begged that he should continue to do so. W hatever his faults, Cuza put country before self to the end. C uza’s successor was the H ohenzollern Prince Charles, a cousin of the King of Prussia. It is said th at C harles had never heard of R um ania when the offer reached him. After locating the country in an atlas he was im pressed by its strategic location. “T h a t is a country with a future,” he re m arked, and prom ptly decided to accept the crow n.21 B ism arck also had som ething to do with C harles’s decision. The Prussian chancellor, who was about to plunge into war with Austria, perceived the advantage of enthron ing a Hohenzollern dynasty in Bucharest. W hen Charles departed for his kingdom on M ay 11, 1866, A ustria was already mobilizing against Prussia. It was a hazardous m om ent for a Prussian to set foot on Austrian soil. So Charles journeyed in disguise southeastw ard on a Danube steamer. His pass


Making of Rumania to 1878 357
port was made out for a certain H err Hettingen bound for Odessa. W hen the steam er reached the first Rum anian port, Turnu-Severin, Charles pre pared to go ashore. The captain asked why he was leaving when his destina tion was Odessa. Charles replied he wished to stretch his legs for a few minutes. As he stepped off the gangplank he heard the captain exclaim, “By G od, th at m ust be the Prince of H ohenzollern.” 22 A few days later Charles arrived in Bucharest. His regal bearing and urbanity im pressed his new subjects, being a decided contrast to C uza’s aloofness and slovenliness. Charles was a young m an of twenty-seven at this time, and he remained on the throne until his death in 1914. He was not a person of exceptional attainm ents. H e lacked C u za’s social perceptiveness and fertility of ideas. He accepted existing institutions and thus enjoyed the support, by and large, of the landowning class. But his patience, tenacity, and a strong sense of duty perhaps made up for his lack of brilliance. In con trast to the ruinous conduct of Milan and Alexander Obrenovich in Serbia, he provided his adopted country with dignified and stable leadership for fortyeight years. The most serious crisis that Charles faced during his reign occurred during the Franco-Prussian W ar. Public sentiment in Rum ania was over whelmingly pro-French. C harles’s position was particularly delicate because it was his own brother L eopold whose candidacy for the Spanish throne had precipitated the war. “We cannot go to France to fight the G erm ans,” the demagogues shouted, “ but we will do it here.” 23 In A ugust, 1870, a revolt broke out in the town of Ploesti. T he arm y rem ained loyal and suppressed the uprising easily. B ut the ju ry ’s acquittal of the conspirators reflected the state of public opinion. The following spring a Bucharest mob broke the windows of a hall in which the G erm an colony was celebrating the victories against F rance. T he police m ade no move to curb the rioters. C harles’s posi tion was so difficult that he subm itted his abdication, and withdrew it only after the Conservative party prom ised full support in the future. Rum anian politics during these decades revolved around the Con servative and Liberal parties. The constitution, which was adopted on C harles’s arrival, was based on that of Belgium, and the legal system was taken from the Napoleonic Code. Thus Rum ania had all the trappings of a W estern parliam entary democracy, but the substance underneath was very different. The Conservative party represented primarily the landowners, and the Liberals the middle class. The peasants were inarticulate and ignored. A system of electoral colleges, rather like that of Prussia before 1918, as sured the political preponderance of the landowners and the wealthy urban groups, and left the peasants unrepresented. M uch estimable legislation was passed by men who had studied law in the W est and who imitated W estern models. But most of it was inadequately enforced or forgotten altogether. Likewise, in other fields— public finance, civil rights, and the press— the same dualism existed between appearance and substance. And the dualism persisted unchallenged until the great peasant revolt of 1907.


358 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
TRANSYLVANIA, BUKOVINA, AND
BESSARABIA TO 1878
With the decline of the O ttom an Em pire various outlying Rum anian lands passed under the control of neighboring great powers. A ustria acquired Transylvania in 1699 and Bukovina in 1775, while Russia obtained Bessa rabia in 1812. Developments in these provinces during the period prior to 1878 had considerable bearing on the history of the R um anian people as a whole. This was particularly true of the Transylvanian Rumanians, who, despite their double Hapsburg-Hungarian yoke, exerted a considerable leavening influence on their com patriots in the Principalities. T he outstanding feature of T ransylvania’s history in m odern times has been the uncompromising struggle between the Rum anians and the H un garians for control of the province. Both claimants have drawn upon history to buttress their positions. The Rumanians contend that they are the descend ants of T ra ja n ’s colonists, th at T ransylvania is the cradle of their race, that they have lived continuously in that province since Rom an times, and that the Magyars consequently are mere interlopers from Asia. The Hungarians, on the other hand, claim that Transylvania was left abandoned when the Rom ans withdrew in a .d . 271, that they found no Rum anians in the province when they conquered it early in the eleventh century, that the Rumanians did not recross the Danube into the Principalities until the thirteenth century, and that only after that date did the Rum anians gradually overflow into Transylvania in response to the welcome extended by the H ungarian rulers to foreign settlers. Rum anian and H ungarian historians have waged polemics over this issue for generations, although with no perceptible practical results. Even if the historians had discovered evidence deciding the issue definitely and indisputably in favor of either side, this obviously would not have af fected in the slightest degree M agyar predom inance in Transylvania before W orld W ar I nor would it have affected Rum anian predominance since the war. The H ungarians conquered Transylvania early in the eleventh-cen tury and proceeded to invite colonists from various countries to settle in their sparsely populated province. In time four distinct ethnic groups comprised the bulk of the population: Rumanians, Germans, Magyars, and Szeklers, the latter believed to be the descendants of an Avarian tribe that settled down and adopted the M agyar language. W hen Sultan Suleiman destroyed the Hungarian kingdom at Mohacs in 1526 Transylvania became a part of the O ttom an Empire. The Turks granted full autonomy to their new province, requiring only payment of tribute and recognition of their suzerainty. On the whole, Transylvania fared well under the Turks, being spared both for eign invasions and the horrors of the religious wars that were devastating the W est at the time. The failure of the Turks to take Vienna in 1683 was followed by the


Making of Rumania to 1878 359
great Hapsburg victories in Hungary and eventually by the 1699 Karlowitz Treaty which ended O ttom an rule in Transylvania. The H apsburg em peror had already issued in 1691 the so-called “Leopoldine D iplom a,” defining the status of Transylvania within his empire. The province technically became a part of Hungary but in practice it was controlled by the em peror who, in his Diploma, confirmed all existing laws, rights, and privileges, both civil and religious. For several decades Transylvania led an existence of peaceful obscurity under the Hapsburgs. Until the late eighteenth century the principal issues were of an ec clesiastical character, though they acquired in time definite social and po litical overtones. Ecclesiastical questions came to the fore with the establish ment of Hapsburg rule because powerful Catholic interests engineered a schism among the O rthodox Rum anians of Transylvania. Numerous material inducements persuaded the Orthodox hierarchy to accept papal supremacy and to establish a new U niate C hurch in 1698. T he aim of those who spon sored the new church was to prom ote Catholicism in the Orthodox East and at the same time to contribute to the cohesiveness of the Hapsburg Empire. But the final outcome was quite different from these expectations. The Uniate Church stimulated rather than extinguished Rum anian national feeling. It raised standards of education, financed seminaries and printing presses, and established connections between the Rumanian people and the West. These developments had a strong catalytic influence upon the hitherto neglected and dorm ant Rumanian people. The first outstanding cham pion of the R um anian cause in Transyl vania was Bishop John Innocent Micu, better known by his germanized nam e of Klein. As the head of the Uniate C hurch between 1729 and 1751 he regarded himself as the representative not only of his church but also of all his fellow Rumanians. He fought courageously and uncompromisingly against both the Hungarians who strove to Magyrize his people and against the Jesuits who wished to control his church. “O ur nation,” he proudly as serted, “is not inferior to any in Transylvania, either in virtue, in knowledge or in judgement of affairs.” He appealed repeatedly to the imperial authorities to end the policy of “holding the clergy and nation of the W allachs [Rum anians] in E gyptian bondage under the bloody w hip.” 24 Eventually the bishop was forced by overwhelming pressures to sur render his post and to spend his last years as an exile in Rome. But his valiant struggle did not prove to be in vain. He aroused his long-suffering people to such a degree that many of them now left the U niate Church for their original Orthodox faith. In fact, the imperial government felt constrained in 1762 to issue a p aten t providing an organization for the O rthodox R um anians in Transylvania. The O rthodox community, of course, had a status inferior to that of the Uniate Church, and the latter in turn ranked below the four tradi tional and privileged churches of Transylvania: the Catholic, Calvinist, Lu theran, and Unitarian. Nevertheless, both the Uniate and the Orthodox


360 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
churches performed an invaluable service for the Transylvanian Rum anians by providing cultural tradition, intellectual leadership, and organizational strength. In the later years of the eighteenth century, issues in Transylvania became more overtly political and social. The reforming em peror, Joseph II, was partly responsible for this trend. He toured the province in 1773 and was moved to action by the appalling conditions he observed. He found the Ru manians to be the chief victims of an exceptionally extortionate feudal sys tem. They were required to w ork from three to five days a week for their landowners, who were usually Magyars. They also had to pay a tithe on the produce of their fields and their wives had to spin a certain am ount of llax for the lords. They had no civil rights, could not plead in court, could not own land, and were always at the mercy of the lash. Those who escaped with the regulation “five and tw enty” considered them selves fortunate. Some wretches did not survive the ordeal, in which case the responsible noble was required at the m ost to pay a slight fine. In 1783 and 1784 Em peror Joseph issued several decrees to alleviate the plight of the Rum anian serfs. He declared that they were no longer tied to the soil and he allowed them to marry, to practice a trade, and to dispose of their property without the sanction of their lords. These and other meas ures proved abortive because Jo sep h ’s reform program was w recked by un favorable domestic and foreign developments. But the liberal erhpcror left behind him a legacy of idealism and effort, and the Rumanian peasants, al though they remained serfs, were not altogether unaffected by “our em peror,” as they fondly termed Joseph. The Transylvanian Rum anians were also stirred by increasing con tact with the W est. T he U niate C hurch m ade an im portant contribution in this respect because of its associations with Rom e. The three pioneers of the R um anian cultural aw akening in T ransylvania— George Sincai, Peter M aior, and Samuel Klein, the latter a nephew of the great bishop— began their ca reers as theological students in U niate sem inaries. Continuing their studies in Vienna and Rom e, they were inspired in the latter city by the m onuments of antiquity. They popularized enthusiastically, though uncritically, the theory that they were the direct descendants of the noble Romans. This vision of past greatness spurred these young apostles to begin the work of cultural re generation which throughout Eastern Europe has been the prelude to national awakening and eventual political independence. In 1780 they produced the first modern Rum anian grammar, Ele ments of the Daco-Roman or Wallach Language. In 1812 they published the first national history by Rum anian authors, History of the Origin of the Ru manians in Dacia. A t the sam e tim e they did essential w ork in the linguistic field, replacing the Slavonic alphabet with the L atin and purging the R u m anian language of Slavic, Greek, and other non-Latin words that had been adopted through the centuries. These achievements were comparable to those of Obradovich and Karajich among the Serbians. And just as the influence


Making of Rumania to 1878 361
of Obradovich and Karajich extended beyond the Danube to the Belgrade pashalik, so these R um anian reformers in Transylvania, as noted earlier in this chapter, exerted great influence on their com patriots across the C ar pathians in the Principalities. The first great test for the Transylvanian Rum anians came during the 1848 revolution. A t this time the Hungarians took up arms against the H apsburgs in the nam e of liberty and nationality. On M arch 15, 1848, the H ungarian Parliam ent adopted its famous reform program which boldly swept away the old feudal order with all its special privileges and exemptions. In its place the H ungarians decreed annual parliam ents, responsible ministerial government, direct franchise, liberty of the press, religious equality, and trial by jury. They also voted that Transylvania be united with Hungary, and at the same time they affirmed their readiness to m aintain “all those special laws and liberties of Transylvania which, without hindering com plete union, are favorable to national liberty and unity.” 25 T he key phrase in the H ungarian pronouncem ent was “w ithout hin dering com plete union.” This was in reality a euphem ism for the M agyarization of the non-Hungarian peoples of Transylvania. Louis Kossuth, the H un garian leader, stated outright in his personal new spaper th at “we m ust hasten to Magyarise the Croats, Roumanians and Saxons, for otherwise we shall perish.” 2lf The Rumanians had no intention of accepting this type of “complete union.” F orty thousand of them gathered on M ay 15, 1848, in a m em orable meeting held in the “ Field of L iberty,” a m eadow near the small tow n of Blaj. They passed resolutions approving the liberal reforms which the H un garians had decreed but adding certain demands of their own. They claimed that the Rumanian nation henccforth should be represented in proportion to its num bers in political, legal, and m ilitary offices. T hey also dem anded that the Uniate and O rthodox churches should enjoy equal rights with the other churches, and, above all, they insisted that there should be no union of T ran sylvania and Hungary without their prior consultation and approval. Kossuth rejected these demands of the Rum anians just as he rejected those of the South Slavs. The outcom e was a race war made doubly savage by the fact that it was at the same time a social conflict between M agyar land owners and Rum anian serfs. Thus the Transylvanian Rum anians, like the Serbians further west, it will be recalled from C hapter 14, helped the H aps burgs put down the M agyar revolution. W hen Tsar Nicholas sent an army into Transylvania to attack the Hungarians in the rear, the R um anian peas ants gave invaluable help to the army. The following report by the Russian general, Liiders, throws much light on the status and role of the Transylvan ian Rum anians at this time.
There is a profound hatred between the Austrians and the Hungarians and the latter are equally detested by the other races in Hungarian territory, the Saxons, Serbs, Croats and Wallaehians [i.e., Rumanians], The Wallachians espe


362 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
daily have the status of pariahs and are the most miserable people in Transylvania, it is they who have, since the beginning of the insurrection, supported the Aus trian army and have cooperated in supplying provisions to the Russians. Since the beginning, the union of the Wallachians with Hungary would have given a different turn to the insurrection. Without the provisions which I have found in the Principalities and without Yanco, the leader of the Wallachians in Transyl vania, I could not have succeeded.27
After the Rum anians had made their vital contribution to the defeat of the H ungarians, the Hapsburgs treated them in the same cavalier fashion as they did the South Slavs. First there was a decade of extreme centralization and subservience to Vienna. Then came the 1867 Ausgleich or Compromise which the imperial government concluded with the Magyars at the expense of the Rum anians. Since the M agyars were becoming increasingly difficult to keep under control, the Hapsburgs agreed to share their empire with them in equal partnership. This m eant that the Magyars now were the unchallenged masters of the Hungarian part of the new Austro-Hungarian Dual M onarchy, and Transylvania was included in their part. Thus the Rum anians were left to the mercy of the Magyars under the most unfavorable circumstances. So long as Transylvania remained a separate unit the Rum anians could hold some hope for the future because they constituted a majority of the popula tion— 1,397,282 Rum anians in 1900 as against 814,994 Hungarians and Szeklers combined, and 233,019 Germans. But after being incorporated into H ungary the R um anians were reduced to a powerless m inority of 15 per cent facing a master race still bent upon M agyarization. The Rum anians in Bukovina and Bessarabia were not faring better than their brothers in Transylvania. In Bukovina A ustrian rule at first rep resented a substantial improvement over the old state of affairs. W hen the Austrians took over the province in 1775 they found the population in mis erable straits. N ot a single doctor practiced in the whole country. There were no bridges, scarcely any roads, and only five schools. M ost of the land be longed to the monasteries, which were shockingly mismanaged by alien monks. , Perhaps the most im portant measure of the Austrians was their re form and supervision of the monasteries. Sufficient funds were thereby made available for church schools, clerical stipends, and episcopal endowments. The A ustrians also organized an education system, establishing in the first decade a seminary, three normal schools, and nine state schools. Despite these gains the Rum anians steadily lost ground in Bukovina during the nineteenth century because of heavy Ruthenian immigration from the east. W hen the province first came under A ustrian rule there were only a few Ruthenians in the eastern countries. By 1848 they num bered 108,000 as against 209,000 Rumanians. The proportions were reversed by 1880, when the Ruthenians outnum bered the Rum anians by 239,690 to 190,005. The 1910 census showed 305,101 Ruthenians as against 273,254 Rumanians. The same census revealed that the principal elements other than the Ru


Making of Rumania to 1878 363
manians and the Ruthenians were the Jews and the Germans, who numbered 102,000 and 66,000, respectively.28 The Rumanians of Bessarabia were subjected to a combination of blatant misgovernment and severe Russification. W hen T sar Alexander ac quired the province in 1812 he issued instructions to his officials that re flected his well-known liberal sentiments.
Let the inhabitants feel the advantage of a fatherly and liberal admin istration. Draw the attention of neighboring peoples to this province by making it happy. The last war had aroused great hopes among the Christian peoples: now that our army has been called away to another field, one must take care to pre serve that devotion towards us and to withdraw them from the influence of our enemies. The Bulgars, the Moldavians, the Wallachians, the Serbs, seek a father land: you can contribute towards finding one for them.29
This lofty goal was never realized. The Russian officials, both mili tary and civil, were hopelessly incom petent and corrupt. They were concerned less with the welfare of the local population than with the acquisition of princely estates. W ithin a few decades most of the land had fallen to a small group of foreign Russian proprietors. With the accession of Tsar Nicholas in 1825 Russification became the order of the day. The courts were reorganized after the Russian pattern, Russian became the exclusive language of admin istration, and power was concentrated in the hands of a military governor who was directly dependent on the governor-general in Odessa. Even the introduction of the zemstvo system of local government in 1869, which elsewhere in the Russian Em pire m arked the first faint dawn of liberalism, served only to worsen the situation in Bessarabia because the most reactionary elements gained control of the councils. The 1905 Russian revo lution led to a slight improvement of the situation, but within two years the old restrictions had been reimposed. Yet the Rumanian peasants retained their identity through the decades of exploitation and Russification. Accord ing to the census of 1908 the 2,345,000 inhabitants of Bessarabia were 54 per cent R um anian com pared to 28 per cent Russian, the rem ainder being mostly Jews, G erm ans, Bulgars, and T urco -T atars. “F a th e r is R ussian and m other is R ussian,” a revealing local proverb relates, “but Ivan is M oldavian.” In conclusion it is ap p aren t th at the outlook for the R um anians of Transylvania, Bukovina, and Bessarabia was indeed dark in 1878. The Ru m anian m otherland was as weak as the H apsburg and Russian empires ap peared to be invincible and everlasting. The ferocious denationalization meas ures of the M agyars and the Russians seemed destined to continue indefinitely and to achieve their purpose ultimately. Certainly no one in 1878 could have foreseen that within four decades all R um anians would be united for the first time in their history w ithin the frontiers of a great R um anian state.


1 9 . B u lg a ria n A w a k e n in g to 1 8 7 8
T
A h e B u l g a r ia n s were the first of the Balkan peoples to succumb to the Turkish invaders. They were also the last to regain their independence, with the exception of the Albanians, who were held back by certain exceptional factors. In the mid-nineteenth century the Bulgarians ex perienced a cultural awakening which was largely the work of certain pioneer teachers and writers, who in turn were subsidized by a rising new class of wealthy m erchants and artisans. The cultural awakening was followed, as in the case of the other Balkan peoples, by political activity that was partfy revolutionary and partly reformist. The revolutionary bands were not able to accomplish anything concrete despite periodic insurrections. The most im portant achievement before the Russo-Turkish W ar of 1877-1878 was the establishment in 1870 of the autocephalous Bulgarian Exarchate churchan event of m ajor significance for the entire peninsula as well as for Bulgaria.
TURKISH RULE
The late awakening of the Bulgarian people can be explained in large part by their location close to the center of Turkish power in Constantinople. One result of this location was that more Turks and other Moslem peoples settled in the Bulgarian lands than in the more distant G reek and Serbian provinces. A nother result was that Turkish forces were able to reach the Bulgarian lands easily and quickly along the roads leading north and west from Constantinople. Finally, the location of the Bulgarians in the eastern part of the Balkans isolated them from the countries of Central and W estern Europe. Unlike the Greeks, Serbians, and Rumanians, they did not have di rect contact with any of the m ajor powers of Europe. Thus the Bulgarians not only were subject more directly to Turkish power but also were deprived of the stim ulating effects of W estern contacts. Accordingly, they remained subject to Turkish domination longer than the other Balkan peoples who in habited the more peripheral regions of the empire.
364


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 365
The Bulgarians were not at all times oppressed during the centuries of Turkish rule. A t first they were better off than they had been under their own nobles with their never-ending rivalries and internecine wars. In fact, the Turks were able to overrun Bulgaria as rapidly as they did because they were widely welcomed as deliverers who would end the anarchy and estab lish order. The Turks at the outset fulfilled this expectation reasonably well. A fter they defeated the Christian crusading army at the battle of V arna in 1444 they were able to consolidate their hold over the Balkan Peninsula and to regularize their administration. The Turks ruled the Bulgarians in essentially the same m anner that they did the Serbians and the G reeks. They divided the country into five sanjaks and applied their usual laissez-faire principles in m atters of religion, language, and local administration. They also followed their customary prac tice of encouraging certain towns, villages, and professions by granting vary ing degrees of tax exemption or complete self-government or both. They favored in this m anner the localities that supplied frontier and mountain guards, m ilitary police, falconers, and groom s for the sultan’s horses. They likewise favored certain industries that they regarded im portant, including cattle raising, mining, rice cultivation, and charcoal burning. In general, Turkish rule in Bulgaria was the same as in the rest of the peninsula, with the im portant exception that it was more direct and con trolling. There were no counterparts in Bulgaria to such self-governing re gions as M ontenegro or as M ane in Greece. The real core of the Turkish E m pire in E urope lay southeast of a line draw n from V idin on the D anube through Nish and Prizren. All the Bulgarian lands were located within this core. Close Turkish rule was not a handicap during the period immediately following the conquest. Rights and privileges were respected, roads were maintained, and commerce prospered. But gradually conditions deteriorated in Bulgaria as they did in other parts of the em pire. A nd here also a m ani festation of the worsening state of affairs was the increasing frequency of revolts. It is true that some uprisings were provoked by outside stim ulation. One example of this was the disturbance in 1598 inspired by M ichael the B rave’s successful defiance of the T urks. Similar outbreaks accom panied the A ustrian invasion of the Balkans in 1689. T here is no doubt, however, that the basic factor behind Bulgarian unrest was the steady deterioration of O tto man institutions which affected directly the everyday life of the peasantry. The decline in the discipline and morale of the Turkish armies was a serious m atter for the Bulgarians, whose lands were located on the routes northward to the D anubian front. During the long wars with Austria the Turkish soldiers ravaged the Bulgarian countryside through which they passed. In earlier times observers reported that disciplined Ottom an armies scrupulously respected private property and paid fair prices for all provisions requisitioned. But by the eighteenth century the typical Turkish soldier was as undisciplined as he was ineffective, and he wreaked more damage upon the


366 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
unfortunate peasantry who lived near the routes of march than he did upon the enemy. The general breakdown of O ttom an administration also aifected the Bulgarians. The weakening of central authority left the provinces subject to extortion and open violence. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth cen turies the Bulgarian lands were particularly hard hit by the depredations of the kirjalis, armed bandits who roam ed the countryside looting and devastat ing. Pasvan-O glu (see C hapter 13) succeeded in organizing a popular and virtually independent regime at Vidin in the late eighteenth century precisely because he was strong enough to curb the depredations of both the kirjalis and of the rapacious governm ent officials. Finally, the peasants in Bulgaria, as elsewhere in the Balkans, suf fered from the rise of chifliks. We saw in C hapter 9 that with the decline of imperial authority the tim ar landholding system established at the time of the conquest gave way to the much more onerous chiflik system. Peasants fre quently reacted against the new bonds by revolting or by fleeing to the free m ountain areas. In Bulgaria the chiflik owners not infrequently used the kirjalis to guard their estates and to replenish their labor supply by conduct ing impressment raids into the countryside. A British traveler who journeyed through the Balkans in 1802 dis covered that “the Pashas throughout all Thrace and Macedonia were in a state of warfare; either among themselves or with the Turkish government; and there was no road entirely free from the danger either of the insurgents, or of those bands of plunderers, who, profiting from the distracted state of the country, poured down from the mountains upon the plains.” Later in the same year this traveler set out from Constantinople in the train of a Turkish am bassador who was proceeding in great state to his post in Paris. As they made their way through the Bulgarian lands the Englishman noted:
The dread of being pillaged by the Turkish grandees, cause the people everywhere to fly at their approach. We had therefore choice enough of lodgings; for every place of habitation was deserted. . . . If the Grand Signior [Sultan] should choose to travel through his dominions, he would not find an inhabitant in any of the towns to receive him : for no sooner does the news arrive of the coming of Turks of distinction, than the people betake themselves to flight; and the still ness of death prevails in all the streets.1
GREEK PRELATES
The Bulgarians had to contend with G reek bishops and teachers as well as Turkish officials and kirjali m arauders. We saw in C hapter 3 that the Bulgarian patriarchate came to an end with the fall of Tirnovo to the Turks in 1393. During the succeeding centuries a Bulgarian archbishopric survived at O hrid with a certain though steadily diminishing degree of autonomy. But this also was abolished in 1767, a year after the elimination of the Serbian patriarchate at Ipek (Pec). Thus the Patriarch of Constantinople became the direct and suprem e religious leader of all O rthodox South Slavs.


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 367
Bulgarian nationalists have criticized bitterly what they term the eco nomic exploitation and cultural oppression of the G reek prelates during this period. They have charged specifically that the Greeks m onopolized all high church offices; that these offices were regularly sold to the highest bidders; and that the sums expended were recovered by systematic fleecing of the Bulgarian peasantry. They have also maintained that the Greeks practiced cultural imperialism by making Greek the language of instruction in the schools, by using the Greek liturgy in the churches, and by deliberately de stroying the old Bulgarian manuscripts, images, and testaments. Some of these charges are true and regrettably so; others are true but unavoidably and naturally so; while still others are altogether false. The charge that the G reeks destroyed m anuscripts and o th er symbols of Bulgaria’s glorious past is now rejected by m ost B ulgarian historians as a legend created during the process of national awakening and self-assertion. On the other hand, the Greek clergy did monopolize the higher posts and they did collect a multitude of taxes to support themselves and the Patriarchate in Constan tinople. It may be argued in their defense that simony in the church was part and parcel of the corruption that permeated the entire O ttom an imperial structure. But this argum ent, despite its Validity, was not likely to satisfy the ardent and indignant Bulgarian nationalists. The charge of G reek dom ination in schools, churches, and culture, in general, is largely justified. B ut this dom ination was to a considerable de gree unavoidable because of the cultural disparity between Greeks and Bul garians. A later generation of Bulgarian nationalists keenly resented the use of Greek in schools and churches and they assumed that their forebears had felt the sam e resentm ent. This assum ption is unjustified and is a good ex ample of the common error of interpreting the past in terms of the present. T he fact is that in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries the ideas “G reek” and “culture” were identified one with another. An educated Bul garian was one who spoke Greek, and if he could not do so he at least adorned his speech with Greek phrases. Commercial and private correspond ence also was carried on in G reek or in Bulgarian w ritten in G reek script. As late as the 1840’s a F rench traveler noted th at throughout the Balkans “the best commercial houses . . . the best schools are held by the Greeks. T he G reek is the mens agitans m olem [leavening intellect] of all the E ast: where he is not, there is barbarism .” 2 Viewed in this historical context the cultural dom ination of the G reeks becomes understandable. This dom ination was acceptable so long as the Bulgarians remained an illiterate peasant people wishing only to be left alone to earn their livelihood from the land and caring nothing for either their past or their future. But as soon as some of them experienced a sense of national consciousness they were bound to challenge the Greek hegemony. B ulgarian national regeneration inevitably was as m uch anti-G reek as it was anti-Turkish. The French traveler who found that the Greeks were the in tellectual leaders of the Near East also reported:


368 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
The enlightened men of the country realize fully that the clergy of Bul garia, as it exists, is the greatest obstacle to emancipation; it is almost impossible for a Bulgarian nationality to arise before there is a national clergy. One might object that all the lower clergy and the monks are indigenous; yes, but episcopal thunderbolts threaten the Bulgarian priests who dare to show their patriotism too clearly.3
REGENERATIVE FORCES
The low point in B ulgarian fortunes was reached in the late eight eenth and early nineteenth centuries— the time when the Greeks and the Serbs were successfully struggling for freedom. The Bulgarians lagged behind their neighbors by several decades. Tow ard the middle of the nineteenth cen tury they began to show significant signs of awakening national consciousness. Various factors explain this regeneration. One was the illiteracy of the overwhelming mass of the population. The peasants continued to speak their Bulgarian language and remained unaffected by the Greek literate cul ture that Hellenized so many of the educated Bulgarians. If illiteracy saved the Bulgarians from the Greeks, religion saved them from the Turks. Their Orthodox faith served effectively as a barrier between themselves and their Moslem masters. Only a few Bulgarians accepted Islam; their descendants, known as Pom aks, still live in southern Bulgaria. Language and religion prevented the Bulgarians from becoming G reeks or T urks; the rapid growth of com m erce and handicrafts in the early nineteenth century helped to make them actively aware of the fact that they were Bulgarians. As in the case of the Greeks, the economic revival of the Bulgarians owed much to the success of the colonies established abroad. The greatest of these was in C onstantinople w here, by the 1870’s, som e thirty or forty thousand Bulgarians worked and prospered as tailors, gardeners, and tradesmen. A few of them became immensely wealthy as contractors supply ing cloth, foodstuffs, and other provisions to the O ttom an army and palace. Many Bulgarians also made their fortunes in Bucharest, Odessa, and other cities in Russia and the D anubian Principalities. W ithin Bulgaria itself handi crafts nourished in centers such as G abrovo, Tirnovo, and Kotel. These, it should be noted, were all small and out-of-the-w ay m ountain towns. They were preferred to large cities such as Sofia, V arna, and Ruschuk, which were located on the main routes and vulnerable to the disorders of the time. This economic revival of the Bulgarians had cultural and political repercussions as far-reaching as that of the Greeks. The new class of m er chants and moneyed men exerted a dynamic influence on Bulgarian society. Their contacts with the outside world had given them new ideas while their wealth enabled them to act. They were particularly effective because of their organization into guilds. In these guilds they learned self-discipline and col lective action. Each guild had its treasury, supported by dues, fines, and a profit tax. The large sums thus collected were used not only to meet the needs of the guild members but also to finance the work of national rcgenera


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 369
tion. It was the guilds that provided the new schools and books that were Bulgarian rather than Greek. It was their members who formed the bulk of the reading public which bought the books, newspapers, and journals. It was the guilds, also, that furnished most of the leaders of the nationalist move ment. The Bulgarian national revival was to a very considerable degree the work of the Bulgarian guilds. Foreign countries also contributed to the Bulgarian awakening. Ser bia, by virtue of her proximity and her racial, linguistic, and religious affinity, exerted much inlluence in western Bulgaria. Bulgarian students attended Serbian schools in Belgrade. Bulgarian books were printed by the Serbian governm ent’s official press. C ertain Bulgarian leaders cam e under the influ ence of Obradovich and Karajich and through them became fam iliar with Germano-Slavic currents emanating from Vienna and Prague. In general Serbia served as a channel through which Central European and Russian influences eventually reached isolated Bulgaria. Greece left a deeper imprint upon Bulgaria than did Serbia. Until the mid-nineteenth century the great majority of educated Bulgarians had attended Greek schools in Smyrna, Athens, Saloniki, and Y anina, and in the various Aegean Islands. The teaching they received in these schools was gen erally secular and enlightened, thanks to the intellectual revolution that had occurred in the G reek world during earlier decades. Thus liberal W estern ideas reached the Bulgarians indirectly through the Greeks. Eventually the Bulgarians realized that the nationality principle was applicable to them selves as well as to the G reeks. W hen they grasped this point they turned upon their form er teachers in much the sam e way as Indian nationalists a century later quoted John Stuart Mill against their British teachers. Of all foreign countries Russia had the greatest influence on the Bulgarian national revival. Before the nineteenth century Russo-Bulgarian ties were restricted largely to the sphere of religion. Churchm en exchanged visits and Russian ecclesiastics sent printed literature to Bulgaria. The next stage in the relationships between the two countries was reached when large num bers of B ulgarians settled in Russian towns, particularly along the Black Sea. Many of these emigrants became wealthy and employed their fortunes to help and to arouse their compatriots at home. The Odessa community played an especially im portant role in the Bulgarian renaissance. Russian influence in Bulgaria became more strong and direct when the Russians began to take an interest in their Slavic Bulgarian brothers fol lowing the Crim ean W ar. Up to that time T sar Nicholas and his ministers had no sympathy for any-revolutionary nationalist cause. In 1858, however, the Slavonic Benevolent C om m ittee was established in M oscow for the pur pose of aiding the South Slavs. In practice this society concentrated its at tention on the Bulgars. Between 1856 and 1876 som e five hundred B ulgarian students received scholarships for study in Russia. This served to increase Russian inlluence in Bulgaria enorm ously, but the nature of the influence proved to be quite different from that which had been planned. The aim had


370 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
been to indoctrinate the Bulgarian students with Pan-Slav, O rthodox ideas. We shall see shortly that many of them came under the influence of the Russian revolutionaries and returned home implacable opponents of tsarist autocracy. B ut regardless of the precise nature of R ussia’s influence, it sur passed that of Greece after the mid-nineteenth century. The domestic and external forces noted above explain the Bulgarian revival in the nineteenth century. We shall now consider the various stages of this revival— the initial cultural phase, the struggle for the exarchate which ended in victory in 1870, and the revolutionary m ovem ent that culm inated in the “Bulgarian H orrors” of 1876.
CULTURAL AW AKENING
The lonely pioneer of the Bulgarian renaissance was Father Paisi, a m onk in a m onastery at Mt. A thos. In 1762 he wrote a history of Bulgaria in which he tried to make his long-subjugated people aware of their illustrious past. His w ork, considered as history, was of no scientific value. It was na'ive and uncritical, and was written in a clumsy and artificial idiom, half Church Slavonic and half m odern Bulgarian. But it was alive with nationalist fervor, and it had a dynamic effect in the limited circles in which it was read. It remained in manuscript form for eighty years, but was copied so frequently that forty manuscript copies are extant today. The following passage illus trates the au th o r’s fervent nationalism :
I have seen many Bulgarians adopt a foreign language and customs and scorn their own language; I have written for their instruction. O senseless people, why are you ashamed to call yourselves Bulgarians and why don’t you think and read in your own language? Didn’t the Bulgarians in former times have a great empire? Why be ashamed of your race and adopt a foreign tongue? One will say: the Greeks are a wiser and more cultivated race. The Bulgarians are stupid and have no refined language. It is therefore better for them to stay with the Greeks. But think well! There was a time when the Bulgarians were famous throughout the world; many times they have imposed tribute upon the strong Romans and the wise Greeks; they have given in marriage the daughters of our kings to the sovereigns of these peoples; of all the Slav peoples the Bulgarians have been the most illustrious. They were the first to receive baptism, the first to have a patri arch, the ones who made the most conquests, the first Slav saints were of our race. . . .4
Bishop Sofronii of V ratsa carried on Paisi’s w ork. F o r tw enty years he taught at Kotel and raised a generation of patriots. In 1803 he fled to Bucharest because of the unsettled conditions in his homeland. He enjoyed his new-found security but he was conscience-stricken for having deserted his flock. To make amends he spent the rest of his life writing “night and day,” as he put it, so that at least he could be read if not heard. He copied P aisi’s m anuscript and w rote a delightfully naive autobiography which he called The L ife and Sufferings of Sinful Sofronii. The only one of his works published in his lifetime was the Kiriakodrom ion or Sunday Hook. This col


Bulgarian A wakening to 1878 371
lection of sermons proved very popular, serving as the family bible in many Bulgarian homes. Ten editions in all were published, the first in 1806 and the latest in 1914. The views that the indefatigable bishop expressed in his sermons were very advanced. With a passion reminiscent of Paisi he called on his people to read and to support schools and to educate their children so that they would not remain “dumb animals.” The Bulgarian communities abroad now began to make their contribu tion to the national cause. In 1829 a Ukrainian historian, Yurii Venelin, pub lished his book entitled The Bulgarians Ancient and Modern. It was the first attem pt at a comprehensive history of the Bulgarian people. Two years after its appearance it was read by Vasili Aprilov, a wealthy Bulgarian m erchant in Odessa. Aprilov himself relates that up to this time he had identified himself with the G reeks, even to th‘e point of joining and contributing heavily to the revolutionary Greek organization, the Philike Hetairia. But after reading Venelin he was “ born anew ,” as he put it. He was thrilled by the story of B ulgaria’s past greatness. H e dropped his earlier philhellenism and devoted his life and fortune to the cause of his people. He sensibly realized that their greatest need was for education. H itherto the Bulgarians had available only two types of educational institu tions, the church schools with their narrow and sterile ecclesiastical curricu lum, and the famous Greek schools which were secular in their outlook and progressive in their methods. The latter were unacceptable to the Bulgarian nationalists because, although they provided a good education, it was naturally a Greek education. Some of the Bulgarian students who attended these schools became so Hellenized that they were lost to their race. Aprilov therefore de cided to use the techniques of the Greek schools but for Bulgarian purposes. He secured the assistance of other Bulgarian merchants in Russia and the D anubian Principalities and in 1835 he opened in Gabrovo, his native town, the first m odern Bulgarian school. It was the first one conducted by and for Bulgarians and using the Bulgarian language and Bulgarian textbooks and wall charts. Because of the shortage of teachers and funds the Lancaster-Bell system of instruction was employed. By making use of the most advanced pupils as assistants and monitors, a single teacher could instruct or supervise the instruction of as many as one thousand pupils. N ot only did students flock to Gabrovo from all over Bulgaria, but teachers also came to learn the new methods and to obtain the new texts. A rapidly growing num ber of schools organized after the Gabrovo model appeared throughout the country. Thus the establishment of the G abrovo school marked the beginning of the end of Greek cultural hegemony. It represents an im portant milestone in the development of Bulgarian nationalism. »
BULGARIAN EXARCHATE
The first great victory for Bulgarian nationalism was the establishment in 1870 of a national church know n as the exarchate. The origins of the m ove ment for a national church go back to the 1820’s, w hen occasional dem ands


372 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
were made for the rectification of financial abuses and for the appointm ent of Bulgarian bishops to head Bulgarian dioceses. Such demands were made peri odically until the period of the Crim ean W ar when the Turkish government issued its reform edict, the Hatti-Humayun, on February 18, 1856.* The edict contained an article specifically providing for the reorganization of the nonMoslem communities, or millets. The Bulgarians hailed this stipulation be cause reform of their Orthodox millet offered hope that some of their griev ances, and perhaps even some of their nationalist aspirations, might be satisfied. The patriarch did summon a council of bishops and laymen which, between 1860 and 1862, passed legislation for lay participation in the election of the patriarch and the adm inistration of the secular affairs of the church. These measures failed to satisfy the Bulgarians. Of the seven bishops and thirtyeight representatives who had comprised the council, only four representatives were Bulgarians. A nd when these four requested that church taxes be fixed and that Bulgarians be allowed to select their own bishops, they were turned down on the ground that the canons of the church did not recognize national distinctions. The Bulgarian com m unity in C onstantinople now took the lead in the movement for a national church by announcing early in M arch, 1860, that the Bulgarians henceforth would not recognize the jurisdiction of the patriarch and of the Greek bishops. On Easter Sunday, April 15, 1860, the Bulgarian church in C onstantinople substituted in its services the sultan’s nam e in place of the p atriarch ’s. This was repeated in som e thirty churches throughout Bulgaria, and was followed by the selection of a Bulgarian prelate, llarion Stoyanovich, to be the head of the Bulgarian church. These measures were of obvious significance. The .Bulgarians no longer were content with demanding financial reforms and native bishops. Their aim henceforth was the establishment of a Bulgarian national church. This precipi tated a bitter and prolonged conflict with the Greeks. It is im portant to note that this conflict was political rather than religious in nature. It represented a clash of rival Greek and Bulgarian nationalisms rather than a dispute over religious doctrine. O n both sides there were radical and m oderate elements. Some Bulgarians were willing to accept an improved status under the Patri arch of Constantinople while others insisted on a separate national church. Similarly, among the Greeks some prelates were willing to make wide conces sions for the sake of maintaining the unity of the church. Paradoxically enough, they were ham pered in their efforts because the ecclesiastical reorganization effected following the Hatti-Humayun increased the power of the lay elements which tended to be less conciliatory tow ard the Bulgarians. G reek laymen were concerned about the political implications of Bulgarian ecclesiastical independ ence, seeing in it a threat to the future of Hellenism. Thus the decade of the 1860’s w itnessed an all-out struggle betw een G reek and Bulgarian nationalism foueht under the guise of an ecclesiastical issue.
* To be discussed in the next chapter.


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 373
Foreign powers were involved in the conflict, partly because the Bul garians turned to them for support and partly because some of the powers themselves intervened to further their own interests. The Bulgarians were not backed by R ussia as solidly as is often assumed. Russia was generally sym pa thetic with the Bulgarian aspirations but at the same time she wished to avoid a schism and to avoid alienating the Patriarchate and the Greeks. The result was an ambivalence which the Russian am bassador in Constantinople, Count Nicholas Ignatiev, described as follows:
Our situation is very delicate. We cannot recognize the creation of a Bulgarian synod in Constantinople nor enter into communication with an auto cephalous Bulgarian church before it is recognized by the Patriarchate. Otherwise we shall alienate not only the Ecumenical patriarch, but all the other patriarchs of the Orient as well as all the other Greeks. If, however, we do not recognize the Bulgarian hierarchy, the Slavs will see in us enemies making common cause with the Greeks; furthermore, the Bulgarians perhaps would be tempted to follow sug gestions from the Western powers and the Turks and accept union with Rome.5
Ignatiev’s concern about C atholic penetration was not altogether fanci ful. France and A ustria actively supported, Catholic propaganda in the Balkans with the approval of the Porte, which hoped thereby to counter Orthodox R us sian influence. By promising to cham pion Bulgarian nationalist aspirations the Catholics converted a few Bulgarians in Constantinople and a few more in the homeland itself. In 1861 a Uniatc Bulgarian Church was organized which rec ognized the supremacy of the Pope but retained O rthodox dogma and ritual. Despite abundant financial backing and the approval of the Porte, the Uniate Church never amounted to anything. The great majority of Bulgarians wanted a church of their own rather than the Pope in the place of the Patriarch. Not infrequently those Bulgarians who turned to Catholicism did so in order to frighten the Russians into supporting their cause. The Protestant missionaries in Bulgaria were as unsuccessful as the Catholics, especially because the Protestant powers were unwilling to back the Bulgarian dem and for a national church. Sir Henry Bulwer, the British ambas sador in Constantinople, erroneously identified the Bulgarian agitation with Russian Pan-Slavism and refused to lend his support. Furtherm ore, most of the Bulgarians were as unwilling to em brace Protestantism as Catholicism. One of the Protestant missionaries, after an interview with some Bulgarians in Con stantinople, w rote: “The few leaders who would be ready to take the Bible as their foundation care more for keeping a united Bulgarian people than for obedience to C hrist’s teachings.” 11 Thus the overwhelm ing proportion of Bul garians rejected the foreign creeds and strove instead to win a national O rtho dox Church. The first m ajor concession to the Bulgarians was offered by Patriarch Joachim in July, 1860, when he proposed the use of Bulgarian in churches and schools, and the appointm ent of Bulgarians to a few bishoprics, llarion promptly replied that nothing short of a national church would now sullicc.


374 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
The next significant offer came in 1867, when a new Patriarch, Gregory VI, conceded the establishment of an autonomous Bulgarian church whose juris diction was to be limited to the territory between the Danube and the Balkan M ountains. “I am building with my hands,” the Patriarch told Ignatiev, “a bridge to the political independence of the Bulgarians.” 7 Ignatiev appreciated the significance of the P atriarch ’s offer and urged the Bulgarians to accept it. Instead, they rejected it because of the territorial limitation. The issue separating the Greeks and the Bulgarians was fundamental and pointed up the essentially political nature of the whole controversy. Once the principle of an autonomous Bulgarian church had been conceded there arose at once the problem of the church’s territorial limits. The G reeks were afraid of losing M acedonia and therefore insisted on setting a limit at the Balkan M ountains. The Bulgarians, on the other hand, despite pressure from Ignatiev, dem anded that populations of all the dioceses should themselves decide to which church they should belong. The Turks secretly encouraged the Bulgari ans in their firm stand. The island of Crete was about to break out in one of its periodic revolts and the Turks wished to make certain that the Bulgarians would not line up with the Greeks when the trouble began. In an effort to obtain some sort of compromise Ignatiev induced the Porte to set up a commission of three Greeks and three Bulgarians to study the problem. With the aid of Turkish officials and Ignatiev, the commission evolved a plan acceptable to both sides. A national Bulgarian church was to be estab lished and the dioceses were to be divided as follows: thirty-seven to the Patri archate, twenty-five to the Bulgarian church, four to the Serbian, and eight to be divided between the Patriarchate and the Bulgarian church. Everything seemed settled and only the consent of the Patriarch was needed. But he in sisted that some Bulgarian clergymen who had come to Constantinople with out his permission should first admit in writing that they had violated the canons. On this trivial disciplinary issue the whole plan foundered. This proved to be the P atriarch ’s last chance of coming to an agree ment with the Bulgars. The Turks now ended the dispute by issuing on M arch 11, 1870, a firman establishing an autonomous Bulgarian church or exarchate. The church was to be headed by an exarch elected by a synod. The jurisdic tion of the new church was to extend over seventeen dioceses, in contrast to the twenty-five specified in the earlier plan of the sultan’s mixed com m ission. This difference was more than made up by the all-important Article X of the firman, which stated that new dioceses could be added to the Bulgarian ex archate upon the vote of two thirds of the inhabitants. This cleared the way for the expansion of the exarchate into any area inhabited by Bulgarians. Ignatiev, upon informing his governm ent of the new church, stated that the Turks, “speculating solely on the rivalry which the bitter struggle had sown betw een the G reeks and the Bulgarians, calculated th at it would be worth while for the Porte to recogninize the Bulgarians and detach them from T ur key, and by so doing break the unity of the Christian nationalities of Turkey and alienate at least one of them [the Greeks] from Russia.” K The repercus


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 375
sions of the establishment of the exarchate did, in fact, correspond to the aims that Ignatiev attributed to the Turks. W hen the exarchate was actually created in February, 1872, the Patriarchate declared the new church heretical and ex communicated the exarch and his bishops. A t the same time crowds of Greeks shouted in the streets of C onstantinople: “Long live the schism. W e w on’t be absorbed by the Slavs; we w on’t let our children be bulgarized.” 9 A n anti-Slav journal, now founded in Athens, accused Russia “of exploiting the Greek ele ment in favor of the purely Slav interests.” The journal warned its readers “not to let yourselves be caught in snares disguised by apparent religious affinities,” and it recommended common action with the Moslem element “which would be less dangerous for the expansion of the G reek spirit th an is Slavism.” 10 This dissension among the Balkan peoples was not a passing storm. During the following decades, when the exarchate expanded steadily with the progressive application of Article X of the firman, the Bulgarians and the Greeks became locked in a desperate struggle for M acedonia. Eventually even the Serbs were alarmed by the growth of the exarchate and turned against their Bulgarian fellow Slavs. Thus the establishment of the exarchate had a direct and decisive effect on the vexed M acedonian question* that was to dominate Balkan diplomacy in the coming decades. So far as the Bulgarian national revival was concerned, the establish ment of the exarchate was a victory of incalculable importance. Patriarch Greg ory V I had stated in 1867 that a Bulgarian church confined to the area north of the Balkan M ountains represented “a bridge to the political independence of the B ulgarians.” Obviously a church th at was free to expand anywhere it received a two-thirds majority was much more than a bridge. It was, in fact, a solid foundation for the independent Bulgarian state that now obviously could not be long forestalled.
REVOLUTIONARY M O V EM EN T
The struggle against Greek ecclesiastical domination was paralleled by a struggle against Turkish political subjugation. At first the Bulgarian revolu tionaries did not feel strong enough to make an independent bid for freedom. Instead, they supported other Balkan peoples when they rose in revolt. Many Bulgarians fought with the Serbs under Karageorge and Milosh Obrenovich. M any more joined the Philike Hetairia and fought in the Greek W ar of Inde pendence. Bulgarian volunteers also joined the Russian armies when they en tered the Balkans in 1806, in 1811, and in 1829. W ith the 1830’s the B ulgarian revolutionaries began to act for the liberation of their own country. As in the case of the other Balkan peoples, the attitudes of the various classes of the Bulgarian population toward revolution varied a good deal. In the m ountains there were the haiduk outlaws, the Bul garian equivalent of the G reek klephts. They kept the spirit of resistance alive with their daring exploits but they were few, unorganized, and ingenuous.
* See C hapter 28.


Quite different were the chorbajis, corresponding to the Greek kodjabashis. They were wealthy and frequently served as moneylenders and tax collectors. In these capacities they aroused the antagonism of many of their fellow countrym en, so that the term “chorbaji” came to have an antinational connotation. This was by no means always justified, for many chorbajis gener ously supported schools and churches and opposed the most flagrant injustices of Turkish rule. Yet the fact remains that the chorbajis were closely associ ated with, and dependent upon, the O ttom an administrative system. The more public-spirited of them supported peaceful reform but almost unanimously they opposed revolutionary measures. The peasants were generally inert, though not without certain excep tions. These can be explained by the spread of chifliks, which was most pro nounced in the second quarter of the nineteenth century in the northwestern part of the country. It is significant th at a num ber of revolts broke out in that region at precisely that period. The O ttom an government was av/are of the relationship between Bulgarian unrest and the inequitable land system. It made several attem pts to improve conditions, including a decree in January, 1851, which provided for the distribution of the chiflik lands to the peasants. Nothing came of this act, which was opposed not only by the lords but also by the peasants, who objected because they would not have received clear title to the land. T hus agrarian unrest contributed to the revolutionary m ovem ent in cer tain sections of Bulgaria. T he m ost politically active elem ents in Bulgarian society cam e from the new class of craftsmen and merchants, including the teachers and writers who were dependent on them. These people were divided into two factions, the reformers who wanted improved status within the framework of the O tto man system and the revolutionaries who dem anded nothing less than full inde pendence. The reformists were strengthened by the vigorous and enlightened administration of M idhat Pasha. Between 1864 and 1867 M idhat transform ed his vilayet, which included most of the Bulgarian lands, into a model province. We shall note in the following chapter that he ruthlessly crushed every revolu tionary manifestation but at the same time he established agrarian banks and built roads, bridges, and schools. The Bulgarian communities abroad, which participated actively in the liberation movement, were also divided between revolution and reform. The large colony in Constantinople was predominantly reformist, and naturally so, since it was directly dependent upon the Turkish government for its privileges and prosperity. By contrast, the Bulgarian colony in B ucharest was largely, though by no m eans exclusively, revolutionary. The Rumanian capital was beyond the reach of the Turkish police, yet close enough for easy communication across the Danube. Thus it served as the headquarters for innumerable revolutionary groups which collected arms, hatched innumer able plots, and occasionally effected an actual revolt. In 1834 a revolt occurred at Tirnovo, and the following year another uprising broke out along the Serbian frontier. In 1841 sim ultaneous insurrec tions occurred in Nish on the Serbian frontier, in Kirk-Kilissa near A drianople,
376 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 311
and at Shimla west of Varna. The revolutionaries expected help from the pow ers, especially from France, who claimed to be the protector of the Christians in Turkey. The Serbian cabinet alone made an official protest against the ex cesses of the Turks in suppressing the disturbances. The French government did send an economist, Jerom e Blanqui, to Bulgaria to investigate conditions. A fter extensive travels he wrote an official report and also published a bitter attack against the Turkish adm inistration. He described it as “an outrage to the dignity of hum an nature. . . . A single word would suffice to put an end to this scandal: W hen will E urope say this w ord?” 11 N o pow er responded to B lanqui’s plea, but his writings, together with those of other publicists, m ade W estern public opinion for the first time aware of the existence of the Bulgari ans and of their plight under the Turks. In 1849 and 1850 new revolts broke out in the northw estern Vidin region. The rebels num bered at least 10,000, indicative of the mass agrarian unrest in that area. In 1853 still another uprising occurred, and the following year a considerable num ber of Bulgarians flocked to the Russian colors to fight against the T urks during the C rim ean W ar. A m ong the participants in the 1841 insurrections and in the Crim ean W ar was a young man nam ed George Rakovski. He was the first of a series of famous revolutionary leaders who now ap peared successively to incite their countrym en to action. These men accom plished nothing of a concrete nature but their heroic and self-sacrificing efforts captured the popular imagination much more than did the reformers. To this day Rakovski— and after him Lyuben Karavelov, Vasil Levski, and Khristo Botev— are reverently referred to as the martyrs and the apostles. Rakovski joined the revolutionary movement at the age of sixteen. W ith the failure of the 1841 revolt he fled to M arseilles, then returned to Con' stantinople and later fought in the Crim ean W ar with the Russians. In 1863 he went on a tour of the Greek, M ontenegrin, and Serbian capitals to enlist support for the Bulgarian cause. He was disillusioned by what he considered to be the cynical selfishness of his Balkan neighbors and the indifference of the great pow ers. W hen he was in A thens he rem arked: “T here is nothing to be done here. . . . The Greeks only think of finding a European princelet who would deign to com m and them [following the overthrow of King Otho which occurred at this time]. . . . Italy has abandoned us. France does not concern herself with us, as if the keys to the Balkans were not in our hands. E urope does not recognize us. . . . However the Bulgarians are honest and brave! . . . I m ust address m yself there, where there is at least a glim m er of hope.” 12 Rakovski did turn to his beloved Bulgarians* and feverishly published news papers, w rote poetry and hatched plans until tuberculosis burned out his life in 1867 at the age of forty-nine. The wealthy and relatively conservative Bulgarian merchants of Bucha rest had disapproved of Rakovski because of his violent methods and his rad ical political and social tenets. Now they espoused three successive schemes designed to secure Bulgarian freedom with outside aid. The first of these in volved a group of Bulgarians and Rumanians who, in M arch, 1866, drew up


378 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
an “A ct of Union between the Bulgarians and Rum anians.” This provided that the two peoples should make preparations for a common revolt which should include, if possible, also the Serbs. The Rum anians lost interest, however, when the domestic crisis that they had faced following the abdication of Prince Cuza was ended by the election to the throne of Prince Charles on May 10, 1866. The second scheme called for a dual Turko-Bulgarian state in which the sultan was to be crowned tsar of the Bulgars as well as sultan of the Turks. A petition presenting the details of this plan was sent to Sultan Abdul Aziz early in 1867 by a Bulgarian committee in Bucharest. The plan appears to have been inspired partly by the A ustro-H ungarian Ausgleich of the same year and partly by the Greco-Bulgarian feud that was raging at the time over the church question. The Turks ignored the petition with the result that the revolutionary committee sponsoring it petered out. The third scheme that appeared at this time seemed to have more chance of success. It consisted of an agreement concluded on May 22, 1867, by the Serbian government and a Bulgarian committee in Bucharest. The agree ment provided for the creation of a Yugoslav kingdom consisting of Serbia and Bulgaria and headed by Prince Michael of Serbia. The Serbian government obligated itself to “render all material and moral assistance for the attainm ent of the com m on end. . . 13 This understanding, like several other inter-B alkan pacts concluded at this time, depended on the ambitious Prince Michael of Serbia, who organized a Balkan League * in order to drive the T urks'out of Europe. W hen M ichael was assassinated on June 10, 1868, the League col lapsed and the Serbian-Bulgarian agreement was forgotten. Meanwhile, the true revolutionaries had had no traffic with these plans for collaboration with the Rum anians, the Turks, and the Serbs.-Since the death of Rakovski new leaders had appeared who continued his work of preparing for revolution. Outstanding among these were Lyuben Karavelov and Vasil Levski. The latter was a young deacon who in 1862 ran away from his monas tery to join the revolutionary movement to which he devoted and sacrificed his life. Karavelov spent nine years as a student in M oscow, where he came under the influence of Russian radical thought. He returned to Belgrade in 1867 and in the next year settled in Bucharest, whence he conducted his revolutionary activities. In 1871 these two men established a new revolutionary committee in Bucharest and organized an underground netw ork in Bulgaria. They also established comm unication with Serbian and Russian agents, and by the end of 1872 everything was supposed to be ready for a coordinated rising. But the whole movement was brought to an end by an adventurer who was caught robbing a Turkish transport and forced into divulging the secret plans. Soon afterward Levski was apprehended and executed, and thus the revolutionists’ hopes were once more dashed. Two new leaders now appeared, Khristo Botev and Stephen Stambulov. Both men had absorbed nihilist doctrines during school days in Russia and then
* See Chapter 21.


Bulgarian Awakening to 1878 379
had gone to Bucharest, where together they published a volume of patriotic poems and plunged into the work of revolutionary organization. Stambulov, though only a lad of twenty, was given the task of resum ing Levski’s un d er ground work in Bulgaria. Disguised as a book peddler, he wandered through the countryside, reviving and extending Levski’s secret groups. O ne of the members betrayed him to the Turks, forcing him to flee to Bucharest. He ar rived there in the spring of 1875, and a few m onths later news arrived of the July revolt in neighboring Herzegovina. The Bulgarian leaders had no way of knowing that this revolt was to persist and to spread until it culm inated in a general South Slav revolt and a Russo-Turkish war. At this point they knew only that the Herzegovinian up rising provided them with a favorable opportunity to proceed with their own plans. Botev wrote enthusiastically at this time: “ H erzegovina is fighting; M onte negro is spreading over its m ountains and com ing with help; Serbia is ready to put its forces on the move; Greece is about to declare war; R um ania will not rem ain neutral. . . . Is there any doubt that death is hanging over T urkey?” 14 In accordance with this overoptimistic interpretation, the revolutionaries made preparations for another uprising. The Turks intercepted their messages and forced them to take up arms on September T 6, 1875. Stambulov had been assured that several thousand impatient patriots were waiting for the signal to rise, but when the showdown came only twenty-three souls met on a hilltop. W ithout doing anything more violent than singing a revolutionary hymn, the crestfallen would-be rebels fled to the m ountains with the T urks in pursuit. A nother chapter in the story of revolution in Bulgaria cam e to its dismal end. Botev’s com m ittee broke up at this point following a controversy in volving misappropriation of funds. A new body now -appeared dom inated by an impatient young revolutionary, George Benkovski. Plans were made for an uprising on May 13, 1876. Because of treachery and arrests the revolt began instead on May 2 in the town of Panagyurishte in central Bulgaria. The rebels issued a proclam ation that ended with these words: “From today on, we make know n in the nam e of the B ulgarian people before all the world th a t we de mand: Freedom or death to the people! Forw ard, forward, Brother, God is with us.” 15 A young w om an teacher, who had learned the art of needlew ork in an A m erican m issionary school, p repared a Hag showing a savage yellow lion with his paw on a crescent and, with it, the m otto “Liberty or D eath.” The excited populace assembled in the square, sang revolutionary songs, heard flaming speeches by Benkovski, and then scattered to kill peaceable Turks wherever they could be found. Retribution was not long in coming. The enthusiastic rebels made sev eral fatal mistakes from the outset. They allowed some Turks to escape and sound the alarm. They failed to cut telegraph lines and burn bridges. W orst of all, instead of concentrating their forces, they rem ained isolated and scattered in their various villages. T hus the Turks were able without opposition to amass their troops and overwhelm the villages one by one. The Turks, who were alarmed by the violence of the outbreak, collected some 5,000 regulars and


380 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
also a considerable num ber of irregular bashi-bazouks recruited from the local population. Towns and villages fell one after another to these forces. The bashibazouks were particularly savage because of the earlier killings of their M os lem fellow villagers. W hen the looting and burning and killing finally ended, thousands of bodies lay scattered amid the smoldering ruins. An official T urk ish estim ate set the casualties at 3,100 Christians and 400 Moslems. A British consular agent estim ated the dead at 12,000, while an Am erican investigator set the figure at 15,000. Subsequent Bulgarian historians claimed losses of 30,000 to 60,000. M ore im portant than the precise num ber of dead was the international reaction to this bloodshed. In Russia and in W estern Europe, and especially in G reat Britain, there was a general revulsion against the “Bulgarian H orrors,” as they were prom ptly dubbed. The patriots had failed miserably as they had so frequently in the past. But their sacrifices this time were not again in vain. The “Bulgarian H orrors” contributed appreciably to the combination of pres sures that finally culm inated in the intervention of the powers, in the RussoTurkish W ar, and finally in the liberation of Bulgaria.*
* See Chapter 21.
\
/


20. Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire:
1856-1877
^ . t t h r e e o ’c l o c k in the afternoon of F ebruary 18, 1856, a crowd of several thousands gathered in C onstantinople to hear the solemn reading of the reform edict known as the Hatti-Humayun. A week later the representatives of the great powers signed the Treaty of Paris in which tliey recognized “the high value” of the edict and guaranteed the independence and the integrity of the O ttom an Em pire. In this manner the Turks were given, at least in theory, an opportunity to reform their em pire without interference from the outside. The many obstacles that they were to meet on the path of reform were foreshadowed symbolically by the unexpected ending of a banquet given by the sultan to celebrate the Treaty of Paris.
A minute or two after the Sultan had retired we were startled by two frightful claps of thunder followed by a storm of wind and hail. The whole build ing seemed to shake, and in a moment the gas went out and we were in total dark ness. The band dropped their instruments with a clash and fled. For some mo ments no one spoke, and then a thin, shrill voice was heard in French saying, “It wants but the handwriting on the wall and the words ‘Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin’ to make this a second feast of Belshazzar.” 1
This incident was indeed a portent of the difficulties that lay ahead. The first part of the Hatti-Humayun was devoted to the non-M oslem m inori ties, prom ising them equal rights in m atters of taxation, justice, m ilitary serv ice, education, public office, and social respect. The degree to which this prom ise was im plem ented will be the subject of this chapter. O ther sections of the Hatti-Humayun prescribed legislation for the reform of the whole empire, but the discussion here will be confined to the crucial question of whether the O tto man rulers were capable of changing institutions and conditions sufficiently to arrest the disruptive tide of nationalism among their Christian subjects. As for the Turks themselves, this was a period of intellectual and literary renaissance. A new group of critically thinking individuals turned
381


382 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
against the artificial, Persian-dom inated culture of the past and looked to the W est for both political and cultural guidance. These were also years of in creasing economic difficulties and increasing subservience to the W est in finan cial as well as commercial matters. The combination of economic distress and intellectual ferment led to revolution in 1876— the year of the three sultans. The last of these rulers, Abdul Hamid, ruthlessly crushed the bid for a consti tutional regime. Thus the year 1877 m arked the end of the period of reform and revolution and the beginning of the new period of Hamidian autocracy that was to last to 1908.
NATURE OF REFORM PROBLEM
AND OF BALKAN POLITICS
The problem of reform in the O ttom an Em pire was quite different in the middle of the nineteenth century from what it had been at the beginning. In the earlier period, reform could not even be considered until the central governm ent was able to assert its authority over the janissaries in the capital and the local lords in the provinces. W hen M ahm ud II finally destroyed these impediments to imperial authority he and his successors were able to deal di rectly with the problem of improving administration. This problem was formidable, involving as it did the ignorance, apathy, and almost ingrained corruption of the O ttom an bureaucrats. These individuals were, on the whole, an unlovely lot. They were known popularly as Stambul effendis, meaning, literally, learned gentlemen of Istanbul. M ost of them were graduates of the translation bureau attached to the foreign office. This bureau had been established by M ahm ud II at the time of the Greek revolution in order to train interpreters to take the place of the Greek officials, who no longer were acceptable. The students inevitably became familiar with Western culture as well as W estern languages. Some of them rose to high office and served the empire intelligently and faithfully. These were the best of the Stam bul effendis. But the m ajority acquired only a veneer of Occidental manners. Some also acquired contem pt for their own country. An Englishm an who lived in Asia M inor at this time described these superficially W esternized bureau crats in unflattering term s: “ . . . the same black frock coat, black trousers, generally unbuttoned where European ideas would most rigorously exact but toning, the same padded underclothes, shiny boots, and slight red cap, the same sallow puffy features, indicative of an unhealthy regimen, the same shuffling gait and lack-lustre eye, characterize every man of the tribe.” 2 The chief obstacle in the way of reform was not so much the person ality of those bureaucrats as it was the system in which they worked. As a rule, they had to bribe in order to obtain their posts. Tenure was uncertain and usually short. Under these circumstances they were almost driven to extortion and embezzlement in order to repay their debts and provide for an uncertain future. “I have no inducem ent to be honest,” a pasha told an A m erican mis sionary. “ If I attem pt to rule justly all of the other pashas will com bine against


Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire: 1856-1877 383
me and I shall soon be turned out of my place, and unless I take bribes I shall be too poor to purchase another.” 3 It is ap p aren t th at the problem of reform in the O ttom an E m pire was not merely one of redressing the grievances of the subject Christian peoples. N aturally this was a part of the reform problem, but only one part. Oppression in the empire was not confined to the Christians. Contem porary travelers al most invariably reported that the M oslem peasantry was as badly off as the Christian. They also reported that the Christians were m altreated fully as much by fellow Christians as by Turks. This latter point needs to be emphasized for an understanding of the plight of the Balkan Christians under Turkish rule. It is com m only assum ed th at their troubles arose from the m isgovernm ent and tyranny of the T urks. But the fact is that the C hristian peoples com plained as much against the rapacity of their own ecclesiastical and civil leaders as against th at of the T urks. O n June 1 1 ,1 8 6 0 , the British am bassador in Constantinople circularized a questionnaire among his num erous consuls throughout the O tto m an Empire. One of his questions was: “Are many of the grievances of which the Christian population complains owing to the conduct of their own authori ties?” 4 The replies invariably were in the affirmative. The following reports from tfiree of these consuls reveal the realities of Balkan affairs and the true nature of the problem of reform in the O ttom an Empire. Consul Charles J. Calvert in Saloniki, July 23, 1860:
The Christian authorities— by which I mean their Spiritual chiefs and their Primates (“Cojabashis” ) — are even more rapacious aod tyrannical in their small sphere than the Turkish authorities are in a larger sphere. The Bishops and Metropolitans are guilty of many acts of oppression and cupidity towards their flocks, which, if committed by Turks, would rouse a storm of indignation on the part of the Christian sympathisers. Only a few days ago, the Bishop of Vodena, being in want of money, sent to a small hamlet of only forty families in his diocese and extorted 1000 piastres. The assessed taxes are collected by the Co jabashis, who resort to the harshest measures in order to exact more than is justly due, so as to enable them to appropriate the surplus. In the village accounts, which are kept by the Cojabashis, the expenditure for extras is frequently ex orbitant; and a large amount is generally charged for “presents” (i.e., bribes), the greater part of which has not, probably, ever been disbursed.5
Consul A. C athcart in Prevesa, July 20, I860*
A vast deal of the discontent among the Christians arises from the petty exactions and tyranny of their own ecclesiastics, who exercise an almost un bounded authority, recognized by the Porte, over them. Here, as everywhere else in Turkey, every sort of injustice, malversation of funds, bribery, and corruption is openly attributed by the Christians to their clergy. The lower grades of priests who are miserably poor, are obliged to labor manually, and to dig and delve in the fields, like any other peasant, for a living, and are usually grossly ignorant; while the upper ranks roll in riches obtained from the vast unaudited funds of the Church, and are generally mixed up in every intrigue by which any money, inlluencc, or position is to be obtained.6


3 8 4 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
Vice Consul Blunt in Adrianople, April 4, 1867:
These notables, be they Turks, Christians, or Jews, are, generally speak ing, very despotic, and they take care to force the poorer classes, to pay much more than the richer, or to exact more than the legal amount. The assessment of the “verghi,” or tax on property, may serve as an example. A Tchorbadji (Chris tian) or a Bey, owning a farm of about 250 acres, pays in proportion much less than a peasant who holds 30 acres. The former may pay about £ 7 , while the latter would pay £ 2 lOs. The Greek Primates in this city levy a great deal more than the legal quota; the surplus falling almost exclusively on the poorer class. W hat they do with this surplus is a secret. They pretend that they employ it in support of the schools in this place. If this is true, Adrianople should have a greater number of schools and pupils than the other cities in the Vilayet, which is not the case. . . . The same abuses and arbitrary acts committed by the Greek Primates in assessing and collecting the taxes are more or less experienced by all the other communities. Turkish Beys, Armenian Elders, and Rabbis and Hahambashis are equally hard and unjust to their respective correligionists. The arbitrary assess ment of the taxes has more sway in the district towns and villages. When a vil lage, Christian or Turkish, is very slow in paying the taxes, the Tchorbadjies and M uhtars call in the police to enforce the payment of the amount due, and some thing more besides. The police generally perform this duty with little lenity, and frequently with unjustifiable severity. This is done at the instigation and with the sanction of the Tchorbadjies or Muhtars.7
This basic feature of Balkan politics and of the O ttom an reform ques tion has been well analyzed by Professor R. H. Davison. After a careful study of available materials he has concluded: “The Turk was no worse than the C hristian. T he true distinction betw een oppressor and oppressed is not to be draw n on religious lines. . . . chiefly it was a m atter of ruling class against those under its control.” The evidence he presents in support of this con clusion is revealing:
The chief form of oppression to be corrected was that ^of the Armenian and Greek hierachies over their own people. Their rule over the Christians was similar to that of the effendis over the Turks. Simony was usual, and to recoup themselves the bishops and lower clergy squeezed their flocks. . . . Religion had becomc essentially politics and business. In pursuit of this policy the people were kept as ignorant as possible. It was the ordinary peasant or artisan in the Greek millet who suffered from clerical misgovernment. The primates and hodja-bashis of a village, themselves not clerics, were part of the system. In Patmos the Greek people found the Turkish sub-governor much more just than the Greek primates and the archbishop. In Salonica the clergy and primates were more rapacious than the Turks, extorting money by overtaxation and falsifying the village accounts. In Smyrna “the Christian population have far more reason to complain of grievances emanating from their own clergy and primates than from the Turks.” Bulgaria constituted a special case. European travellers and residents there likened the Greek clergy to clerical tax-farmers, bent only on monetary gain,


Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire: 1856-1877 385
in order to make a substantial profit on the presents they paid to their superiors for investiture. It was not unknown for Greek clergy to lend the Bulgarian peas ants money at sixty per cent interest. Villages tried to avoid having a resident priest because of the expense entailed by this spiritual luxury. . . . In the Gregorian Armenian millet the situation was as bad. . . . The Armenian sarrafs, or moneylenders, were in league with the effendis of the cap ital to cheat the government. . . . In the provinces conditions were not different. There the Armenian notables were in league with the Turkish officials to oppress the people. . . . At Bandirza the [Armenian] hodja-bashis formed “an unholy league with the Turkish governors, judges, and authorities of the neighboring places, and the Armenian bishop, whoever he might be. . . . All in office, eccle siastical and civil, of all religions, unite in one object and in one only, to oppress and fleece the people and cheat the government.” 8
FAILURE OF REFORM IN THE BALKANS
T he significance of the above testim ony is th at it dem onstrates that reform was needed within the millets as well as in the empire as a whole. R eform decrees in C onstantinople would have m eant little for the C hristian peoples so long as their relations with their· own ruling class rem ained un changed. This fact was recognized in the Hatti-Humayun of 1856. It specifically provided for the reorganization of the millets as well as for the protection of the rights of Christians and the reform of various branches of the administration. Two O ttom an statesmen, Aali Pasha and Fuad, attem pted persistently and sincerely to fulfill the reform prescriptions of the Hatti-Humayun. W ith few interruptions they controlled the affairs of the em pire until 1871. They tried to help the Balkan Christians in three ways: by enforcing the existing legislation and supplem enting it with new decrees and with inspection tours; by reforming the Orthodox millet, and by issuing the 1864 vilayet law re organizing provincial administration. A ppreciable progress was made tow ard enforcing existing laws, though the record rem ained far from perfect. Also, beginning in May, 1858, Christian delegates were appointed, in questions of general interest, to sit on the G rand Council composed of the ministers and dignitaries. M ost of the value of this innovation was nullified by the fact that the Christian representatives were selected from among those families whose interests were closely identified with those of the effendi class. One of the first issues facing the Council was the perennial problem of Christian military service. In the belief that this would be an advantage for the Christians, European pressure had forced the inclu sion in the Hatti-Humayun of a provision for Christian military service. In actual fact, most Christians preferred to continue under the old arrangement by which they paid a modest tax in lieu of military service. The Council de cided, probably as a gesture to E u ro p ean opinion, to prepare a census of all non-M oslems eligible for military service. W hen this was done, it was found that some two million Christians were eligible for service. But popular opposi


386 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
tion to the measure was obvious, and the whole m atter was eventually buried, to the satisfaction of both Christians and Moslems. In contrast to this shadowboxing, definite results were derived from the prom ulgation of a new penal code in 1858. It was based on the 1810 French code and was gradually enforced throughout the empire. Within the next few years other codes having to do with the regulation of commerce were adopted, though they were not as im portant as the penal code. A nother device employed for the benefit of the Balkan Christians was periodic tours of inspection. Outstanding was that of a new grand vizir, Mehmet Kibrisli Pasha, who personally toured M acedonia and Bulgaria in 1860. One reason for the trip was the m arked discontent in those areas after the Crimean W ar. A nother was the pressure of the great powers, which were demanding fulfillment of the promises made in the Hatti-Humayun. Kibrisli and his en tourage, which was half C hristian in com position, spent four m onths in the provinces. T he grand vizir received m any petitions in person and, like H arun al-Rashid, dispensed justice himself on the spot. Among the conclusions reached by the investigators were that the system of tax farming was unjust and gener ally unsatisfactory; that a num ber of the Turkish officials were corrupt; that the evidence of C hristians was frequently rejected in lawsuits; that there was no systematic oppression of Christians by Moslems, either officially or unofficially; and that the Greek O rthodox hierarchy was often tyrannical and extortionate. KibrisliV tour was followed by others in later years, particularly because the investigations were very popular with the peasantry. Commissions visited Bul garia again in 1861, 1862, and 1863, while others investigated Bosnia in 1861 and 1863. These tours did not produce fundam ental reform but they did cor rect certain abuses, they stimulated the local authorities to improve conditions, and they provided the central government with a mass of information which formed the basis for reform measures. One of the m ost im portant of these reform measures affecting the B alkan peoples was the reorganization of the O rthodox millet. A total of six millets existed in the O ttom an Em pire. In order of num ericaH m portance they were the Greek Orthodox, Gregorian Armenian, Jewish, Rom an Armenian, Rom an Catholic, and Protestant. Only the first three were reorganized, the re mainder being comparatively small, of recent origin, and therefore not requir ing outside ministrations. One reason for the millet reform was that the HattiHumayun had stated specifically that the millets were to be reorganized to suit “the progress and enlightenm ent of the tim es.” Also, K ibrisli’s to u r had re vealed the existence of Greek O rthodox corruption in Bulgaria. However, millet reform was by no means imposed exclusively from above by the Turkish gov ernment. Lay elements within each millet were also agitating for reorganization to end the traditional domination by ecclesiastical prelates. The Turks took advantage of this cleavage to force the adoption of new and more democratic constitutions by the three millets. The Orthodox millet, which concerned the Balkan peoples most, had fallen to a considerable degree under the control of five m etropolitans who


Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire: 1856—1877 387
selected the Patriarch of Constantinople.* U nder Turkish prodding, a series of changes were effected between 1860 and 1862 which provided for lay partici pation in the election of the patriarch and the adm inistration of the secular affairs of the church. Changes of a similar nature were adopted by the Arm e nian and Jewish millets in 1863 and 1865, respectively. The Turks had hoped that these reforms, by minimizing clerical con trol, might lower the barriers separating religious groups and encourage them to think of themselves as fellow O ttom an citizens rather than as Jews or as Christians of various denom inations. This change in attitude did not occur because of the rising nationalist sentiments that were separating rather than bringing together the peoples of the empire. The Jews, who had no national aspirations, constituted the only exception. As for the Greeks, the strengthen ing of the lay elem ent in the O rthodox C hurch made that institution m ore sus ceptible to Greek nationalist influence. This made it correspondingly more dif ficult for Greek and Bulgarian nationalism to reach a compromise within the structure of the church, and thus led eventually to the establishment of the separate B ulgarian exarchate, as described in C hapter 19. Provincial administration was reorganized by the vilayet law of 1864. This divided the empire into vilayets or provincès, which in turn were subdivided into sanjaks and other still smaller adm inistrative units. These were to be ad ministered on the principle of greater decentralization and greater popular par ticipation. The vilayets were larger in area than the form er provincial units or eyalets, and the governors of the vilayets were given considerable authority. Also, they were assisted by advisory bodies known as mejlisses, whose mem bers were partly appointed and partly elected by a complex indirect procedure. Similar advisory bodies functioned in the smaller administrative units. One vilayet was set up in 1864 to test the new law. It consisted of three former eyalets and covered a large part of the central Balkans, including most of the Bulgarian lands. Midhat Pasha was appointed governor and he proved to be extraordinarily successful. He himself was of a Pom ak or Moslem Bulgarian family. With characteristic energy and uncompromising honesty he transform ed his vilayet into a showplace and won the support of both Chris tians and Moslems. As noted in Chapter 19, he built bridges, roads, schools, and public buildings. He established agrarian banks to lend to the peasants at low interest rates, and curbed brigandage to a large degree. But at the same time he ruthlessly crushed all revolutionary tendencies in the country. From his Balkan province M idhat was transferred to Baghdad, where his efforts proved equally fruitful. M id h at’s success encouraged the governm ent to apply the vilayet law throughout the empire. But the results were not as fa vorable everywhere as in M id h at’s province. T he w orking of any adm inistrative system depends on the adm inistrators. A n d since they were of poor caliber in the empire, government in the vilayets remained correspondingly poor. The Baghdad vilayet, for example, did not again receive a governor approaching
* See C hapter 15.


388 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
M idhat’s stature until 1911. W hen an honest and energetic official did appear he was likely to be frustrated by the governm ent’s policy of shifting officials frequently. This lack of capable and conscientious administrators was particu larly serious because an essential feature of the vilayet law was the increased authority and responsibility entrusted to the governors. Thus Professor Davi son has reached the following negative conclusion concerning the vilayet law:
The existing [vilayet] law, though it could be improved in many respects, was fundamentally sound. Two conditions were necessary for its successful ful fillment. The first was an enlightened and patriotic ministry in the captital which should have power to curb the caprices of the Sultan. The second was a group of administrators with enough education, patriotism, and enthusiasm for progressive measures to make them truly devoted to hard work in the public service. Until such men could be developed, . . . a system of Westernized offices and councils filled only by the typical effendis would be far worse than government by fewer, more tyrannical derebeys |literally “lords of the valleys,” or insubordinate local lords who had been crushed by Mahmud II] who were nevertheless sincerely in terested in efficient rule.9
This judgment outlines the reasons for the eventual doom of the O tto man Em pire. The essential failure of O ttom an reform efforts in the Balkans m eant that the imperial status quo could have no attraction to counteract the centrifugal force of Balkan nationalism. Neither millet reform nor vilayet re organization had succeeded in inducing among the subject Balkan peoples a sense of loyalty to Constantinople strong enough to neutralize their growing feeling of national consciousness.
REVOLUTION AND REACTION IN THE EM PIRE
The awakening of the Christian peoples of the O ttom an Empire has attracted considerable attention. But the Turks themselves experienced a similar aw akening beginning in the 1860’s. T he reason for this developm ent is th at the W estern world at this time was undermining on all fronts the O ttom an old order. The Suez C anal was com pleted in 1869. Railroads were being built in Asia M inor and in the Balkans. Foreign-owned banks were appearing in the principal cities. The O ttom an government itself was becoming dependent on foreign loans and rapidly coming under W estern financial control. Even in the field of religion the W est was impinging upon the M oslem N ear East. Missionaries were preaching and founding schools throughout the empire. Also, the Turks themselves by this time had established several insti tutions of higher learning, including the School of M edicine (1867), the Im perial Lycée (1868), the University of Constantinople (1869), the School of Law (1870), and the School of Political Science (1878). The Turkish press, too, was developing rapidly during these years. In 1859 there were only one official and one semiofficial weekly in the em pire. By 1872 there were three daily papers and several weeklies. In addition, six F rench dailies appeared in


Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire: 1856-1877 389
cities such as Constantinople, Smyrna, and Alexandria, and were read by edu cated Turks. The effect of all these developments cannot be m easured precisely. But there can be no doubt that they gradually cracked the hitherto impregnable and monolithic Islamic structure. Canals, railways, banks, missionaries, schools, and newspapers constitute the background and also the explanation for the literary and intellectual awakening of the Turks. The best-known leaders of this awakening were Ibrahim Shinassi, Namik Kemal, and Abdul Hamid Ziya. These men did not agree on all issues, but they did have certain common experiences and they did share certain funda m ental principles. All had lived in W estern E urope and all had been trem en dously impressed by the thought and literature as well as the m aterial achieve ments of the West. They returned to Constantinople determ ined to sweep away what they now considered to be the deadweight of their classical literary and intellectual heritage. In other words, these men wished to do for their people w hat O bradovich had done for the Serbians, Korai's for the G reeks, and A prilov for the Bulgarians. These pioneers of the Turkish renaissance differed as to the degree to which the West should be imitated. But they were agreed that W estern ideas · and institutions could not be ignored and that they could be reconciled with Islam. These early reformers did not organize a political party. The only real parties in the O ttom an Em pire at this tim e were the “ ins” and the “outs” gath ered about individual political leaders. But by 1865 a fairly well-defined group of young W estern-minded writers had formed about the newspaper Mushbir, or Herald of Glad Tidings. The paper championed Turkish literature and lan guage against the traditional Persian-dominated O ttom an culture; favored the introduction of some form of constitutional representative government; and also advanced the concept of a Turkish nation and Turkish nationalism as dis tinct from the O ttom an dynasty and empire. The latter concept owed a good deal to the new European science of Turkology, which threw light on the histor ical role of the Turkish peoples scattered from Central Asia to Central Europe. The articles published in Mushbir proved too m ilitant for the govern m ent, and the paper was suppressed in 1867. T he editor and his supporters fled abroad, where, after the m anner of the Russian exiles, they continued their journalistic attacks from London and Paris. While they were in the foreign capitals they acquired the name “Young Turks.” It was coined by W estern writers, partly because the Turkish reformers were predominantly young and partly to distinguish them from the older and more conservative Turkish lead ers. The name persisted and it was used thereafter in a rather loose fashion to refer to any antigovernment Turkish groups. While these exiles were issuing their challenges from abroad, the government at home was sinking into reaction and bankruptcy. W hen Aali Pasha, the reform statesm an, died in 1871, Abdul Aziz declared that at last he was a free man. A fter years of obscurity he now took the reigns of govern ment into his own hands. The results were unfortunate because the sultan


390 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
was an eccentric given to strange and unpredictable acts. W ithin fourteen m onths after A ali’s death tw enty-three vilayets received seventy-two gover nors, or, on an average, a governor every three and a half months. The sultan was especially fond of M ahm ud Nedim, whom he made his grand vizir. Opponents accused the new chief minister of excessive partiality tow ard the Russians and gave him the nickname “M ahm udov.” They also attacked the reckless expenditure of m oney and the m ounting governm ent debts. It is significant that these criticisms were directed not at the ministers, as in the past, but at the sultan, who now was held personally responsible. T he 1870’s were also years of w idespread econom ic distress and in creasing financial difficulties culm inating in outright bankruptcy. One reason for this is to be found in the basic econom ic structure of the em pire, which was primitive and unsound. The chronic financial difficulties of the Ottom an government were accentuated by the cost of the Crimean War. The Turks contracted their first foreign loan in 1854. They discovered that borrowing on the international money m arket was easy. They lavishly spent the money that came so easily and borrow ed more. Being inexperienced in the ways of high finance, the Turks paid little attention to the problem of how they were going to repay these sums. The international bankers not only failed to cau tion the Turks but in some instances brought pressure to bear upon them to borrow more. The net result was that by 1875 the O ttom an government had contracted fourteen loans of various kinds with a nominal capital of about £ 2 0 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 sterling. This required some £ 1 2 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 sterling a year to meet annuities, interest, and sinking fund, a sum which am ounted to a little more than half the total annual revenues of the empire. Such was the situation when the government suffered three serious economic setbacks, one after the other. The first was widespread drought and famine in Asia M inor in 1873-1874, for the relief of which the govern ment did next to nothing. At the same time the international financial panic of 1873 affected Constantinople, breaking several banks and making money scarce. Then the revolt that broke out in Bosnia-H erzegovina'in July, 1875, spread to the other Slavic provinces and added to the burdens of the imperial treasury. By November, 1875, soldiers, sailors, and civil officials had not been paid for eight m onths, and had to cash the governm ent’s prom issory notes at a twenty-five per cent discount in order to eat. W hen the government tried to raise additional revenue from the peasantry it m et fierce resistance. The traditionally compliant Turkish peasants of Asia Minor had been alien ated by the triple burden of drought, heavy taxation, and conscription for the Balkan front. They were particularly incensed because the sultan was con tinuing his reckless expenditures during this crisis, including the erection of a costly mosque. Thus the personal regime of A bdul Aziz lost support at home as well as abroad. W hen revolt cam e in 1876 most foreigners were surprised and interpreted it as a staged affair designed to forestall European intervention.


Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire: 1856-1877 391
Actually, it was the natural outcome of widespread unrest and reflected the sentiments of a large proportion of the population. The natural leader of the revolt was M idhat Pasha. He had the sup port of progressives who recalled his model adm inistration in Bulgaria and Iraq, of conservatives who knew him as the scourge of the Bulgarian revolu tionaries, and also of unpaid army men and officials who hoped for a more efficient and solvent government. On M ay 11, 1876, A bdul Aziz yielded to the clamor and dismissed M ahmud. But the agitation continued unabated. For some weeks M idhat had been planning a coup with the cooperation of the minister of war and high military officers. They had the support of the Sheik-ul-lslam, who issued a favorable fetva or legal pronouncem ent. Armed with this fetva the conspirators struck on M ay *29 late at night. By four the next morning a cannonade from the warships announced to the sleeping populace that the empire had a new sultan, M urad V. M urad remained on the throne only three months before his mental instability compelled M idhat to replace him with his younger brother, Abdul Hamid II. This was a critical time for the empire because Turkish troops had suppressed the Bulgarian uprising with wholesale atrocities, and public opinion in Europe was deeply stirred. Midhat', who had been a model gover nor in Bulgaria, was the person to mollify the indignant Europeans. Abdul Hamid appointed him grand vizir on November 25, 1876. The following month the representatives of the E uropean powers met in Constantinople to arrange a settlement of the Balkan crisis that was threatening to develop into a general European war.* W hen the first plenary session opened on Decem ber 23 the deliberations of the delegates were interrupted by the booming of cannon. The Turkish foreign minister, who was present, immediately rose and declared, “Gentlemen, the cannon that you hear notifies the commence ment of the promulgation by His M ajesty the Sultan of a Constitution guar anteeing equal rights and constitutional liberties to all the subjects of the Em pire alike; and in the presence of this great event I think our labors be com e superfluous.” 10 The very first article of the new constitution stipulated that the O tto man Em pire formed “an indivisible whole” and that no part could be de tached “for any reason whatsoever.” This was a defiant answer to those diplomats who were urging autonomy or independence for certain provinces. The constitution also provided for an elected parliament, a bill of rights, an independent judiciary, and considerable provincial decentralization. Midhat was largely responsible for this document, though he had been forced against his will to leave m uch pow er in the S ultan’s hands. A bdul H am id retained authority to appoint ministers, convoke and prorogue Parliam ent, exile any individual he considered to be dangerous to the state, and prevent any bill from becoming law by withholding his signature. Despite these provisions Abdul Hamid refused to abide by the con
* See C hapter 21.


392 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
stitution. T he basic reason is th at he was determ ined to be m aster in the empire. M idhat, on the other hand, believed strongly that a representative assembly was needed to check the sultan’s pow er now th at the traditional janissary and derebey counterweights no longer existed. Obviously this view point could not be reconciled with that of the sultan. Furtherm ore, M idhat was notoriously brusque and even dictatorial in his manner. He regarded the constitution as his handiwork and was resolved to put it completely into effect. On January 30, 1877, he sent a letter to Abdul H am id in which he set forth his constitutional principles in an extraordinarily undiplomatic manner. Abdul Ham id replied by dismissing M idhat and banishing him from Constantinople. The only signs of protest were a few placards on the walls. Mass discontent had made the revolution possible, but more than discontent was needed to preserve the constitution. There was still the hope that the Parliam ent, which met on M arch 9, 1877, might survive M idhat’s dow nfall. It was the first representative as sembly in Turkish history and many bizarre scenes occurred. The presiding officer was an arbitrary old Turk who was im patient of parliam entary niceties and who on one occasion abruptly stopped a long-winded deputy with the stentorian shout “Sus eshek!”— “ Shut up, you donkey!” 11 D espite such in cidents, the representatives conducted their work with surprising courage and intelligence. They did not split along racial or religious lines but con sidered each issue on its merits. They uncovered much evidence of govern mental corruption and voted to summon certain ministers for questioning. Such earnestness was too much for the sultan. Using the outbreak of war with Russia as a pretext, he adjourned Parliam ent and unceremoniously packed off the deputies to their respective constituencies. It was typical of Abdul Hamid that he never formally abolished the constitution. He even had it published regularly each year in the Government Year Book. But Parlia ment did not meet again until the revolution of 1908.


2 1 . B a l k a n C r is is a n d th& T r e a t y o f B e r lin : 1 8 7 8
T
JL h e B a lk a n c r isis concluded by the Berlin Treaty
of 1878 represents a milestone in both European and Balkan history. For E urope it m arked the disintegration of the newly form ed T hree E m perors’ League of Germ any, Austria, and Russia. This in turn m eant the renewal and intensification of the A ustro-Russian rivalry in the Balkans which started with the Crim ean W ar. It also m eant the re-emergence of Britain as an active force in E uropean affairs after years of splendid isolation under Gladstone. For the Balkans the Berlin settlement involved major changes in frontiers and in political status. Bulgaria became autonom ous, and Serbia, Montenegro, and Rumania gained complete independence and additional ter ritory. The European powers also helped themselves to portions of European Turkey. A fter this reshuffling, the map of the Balkans was to remain virtually unchanged until the Balkan W ars of 1912-1913 completed the process of liberation from Turkish rule.
EUROPEAN BACKGROUND: THREE
EMPERORS’ LEAGUE
The O ttom an Em pire was left in a very com fortable position at the end of the Crimean W ar. The Treaty of Paris admitted the empire into the E uropean concert of nations and explicitly guaranteed its integrity and inde pendence. But this favorable situation did not last long. The protective diplomatic wall was demolished by a series of explosions that followed one another in quick succession. These explosions were the four wars that broke out in Europe in little more than a decade— the French-Austrian W ar over Italy in 1859, the A ustrian-Prussian attack upon D enm ark in 1864, the un expected Prussian victory over A ustria in 1866, and the still more unex pected Prussian victory over France in 1870. These wars disrupted the Crimean bloc of nations that had guaran teed O ttom an integrity in 1856. In fact, they completely demolished the E uro
393


394 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
pean balance of power. For centuries France and Austria had struggled for Continental supremacy with Central Europe as their battleground. The events of 1859 to 1871 abruptly ended this struggle and created an entirely new setting. A ustria no longer was the dom inant power in Italy and Germany, while France was left shorn of Alsace-Lorraine and burdened with an in demnity and military occupation. England under Gladstone was engrossed in domestic affairs and anxious to avoid Continental entanglements. This left the new Germ an Em pire under Bismarck the first power on the Conti nent. “E urope,” as someone put it, “had lost a mistress and gained a m as ter.” 1 Bismarck after 1871 had every reason to be satisfied with his ac complishments. He now wished only to preserve the status quo. France with her revanche policy was the most dangerous disruptive force on the Conti nent. Accordingly, he sought to isolate France and to keep her powerless. His instrum ent for accomplishing this was the Three Em perors’ League, or Dreikaiserbund. The bloc of eastern empires, Russia, Prussia, and Austria, had preserved the Treaty of Vienna for over a generation. Bismarck now endeavored to perpetuate his own achievements by reviving this bloc. The heads of the three em pires m et in 1872 and 1873 and agreed to cooperate in the preservation of peace. In case war threatened, they were to consult to gether “in order to determine a common course of action.” As for the Balkans, the two countries directly interested were Russia and .AustriaHungary. Both emphatically denied any intention of expansion into the peninsula and both undertook to refrain from any intervention and to main tain the existing situation. T he significance of these com m itm ents is apparent. T he bitterness that had characterized Austro-Russian relations since the Crimean W ar at last had given way to reconciliation. But the agreement to freeze the status quo in the Balkans was easier to undertake than to enforce. Bismarck soon discovered that the Balkans were the “Achilles heel” of his League. A revolt broke out in Herzegovina in 1875 and, despite the efforts of the League members, it spread and created international complications until eventually it disrupted the Dreikaiserbund and brought Europe to the brink of war.
BALKAN BACKGROUND: FIRST
BALKAN ALLIANCE SYSTEM
The Balkan states came of age during the years following the Crimean W ar. For the first time they joined in a series of bilateral pacts to free themselves from Turkish rule. A t the center of this alliance system was the prince of Serbia, Michael Obrenovich. M ichael was not as forceful a personality as his patriarchal sire, M ilosh, whom he succeeded in 1860. But he was better fitted to meet the current needs of his country. Milosh had ac complished much, but he belonged to the past. Serbia no longer could be governed as a private pashalik. A more modern state administration was


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 395
needed and M ichael was well suited for the task. He had a good education, was familiar with W estern institutions, and possessed the drive and strength of character necessary for leadership. W hen M ichael ascended the throne he found the South Slavs thor oughly aroused by the events in Italy. Just as the Italians were uniting into one nation, so the Yugoslavs dream ed of freeing themselves from Austrian and Turkish rule and uniting to fornj a great, independent, South Slav state. Prince M ichael shared these aspirations. His ambition was to make Serbia the Piedm ont of the Balkans. But since Serbia was too weak to act alone, Michael devoted himself to the task of bringing the Balkan states together for a war of liberation. The Greeks to the south were ready to cooperate. They also had been aroused by the success of the Italians. They followed avidly the vic tories of G aribaldi in Sicily and Naples, and imagined themselves sweeping in similar fashion through Epirus and M acedonia. In fact, a revolution did break out in the sum m er of 1866 on the island of Crete. The islanders con voked a general assembly and proclaim ed their union with M other Greece. Immediately Greco-Turkish relations became strained and the Greeks eagerly sought an alliance with their Serbian neighbors. T he E uro p ean diplom atic situation in the 1860’s was also favorable for close Balkan ties. A ustria was the great opponent of revolution and change in the Balkans, but her defeats in Italy and G erm any tem porarily re duced her influence. On the other hand, Napoleon, the cham pion of the nationality principle, actively favored the liberation of the Balkans. Tsar Alexander II took the same position, in part for dynastic reasons because he wished to arrange a marriage between King George of Greece and the R us sian Princess Olga. Accordingly he supported Greece on the Cretan question and urged the Balkan states to band together for common action against Turkey. This combination of favorable domestic and international conditions made possible the series of alliances that Prince M ichael concluded with Rum ania (M ay 26, 1865, and January, 1868), with M ontenegro (September 23, 1866), with a Bulgarian revolutionary society (M ay 22, 1867), and with Greece (August 26, 1867). The most im portant was the Serbi^n-Greek pact which allocated Thessaly and Epirus to Greece and Bosnia-Herzegovina to Serbia. The signatories undertook to propagandize and arm the Christians of European Turkey and also to oppose any great power that sought to annex Balkan territory. A coordinated Balkan revolt against the Turks was planned for March, 1868. These ambitious plans came to nought for various reasons. One was that the pacts were concluded too late. The logical m om ent to strike was in 1866, w hen the w ar w ith Prussia h ad tied A u stria’s hand and the C retan insurrection had distracted the Turks. But the Balkan countries were not ready for action then. By the time they had increased their armaments and negotiated their alliances the opportunity had passed. The Austro-Prussian


396 A ge of Nationalism: 1 8 1 5 -1 8 7 8
W ar lasted only seven weeks; after that, Austria was free once m ore to watch the Balkans. Also, the Turks had been able to pacify Crete before the signing of the Greek-Serbian pact. In fact, the Greeks were becoming in creasingly anti-Slav because of R ussia’s support for a Bulgarian church inde pendent of the Patriarchate. A n anti-Slav society was organized in A thens in 1869 for the purpose of blocking the expansion of the Slavs in the Balkans. It will be recalled from C hapter 19 th at w hen the B ulgarian E xarchate church was established on M arch 11, 1870, the Greeks reacted violently. M any ad vocated rapprochement with the Turks, whom they considered to be “ less dangerous for the expansion of the G reek spirit than is Slavism.” 2 The final blow to the plans for a coordinated revolt was the assassina tion of Prince Michael on June 10, 1868. This was a tragic setback, partic ularly because his cousin and successor, Prince M ilan, was utterly incapable of taking his place. Although highly intelligent, Milan had been thoroughly debauched in an unsavory family environm ent and had become a frivolous and unprincipled neurasthenic. Thus the first Balkan alliance system disintegrated almost overnight. This became apparent during the Franco-Prussian War, when the Balkan peoples once more had an opportunity to strike without fear of intervention. But by this time united action was out of the question. The Russian am bas sador in Constantinople, C ount Nicholas Ignatiev, described the state of interBalkan relations in 1870 as follows:
If the Franco-Prussian conflict had started immediately after Sadowa, during the Cretan insurrection, the Greeks and the Serbs probably would not have hesitated to march against the Turks and to accomplish this gathering of the Christian shields which they so often dreamed of and discussed. Undoubtedly the very existence of the Ottoman Empire would have been in question. In 1870 the situation was drastically changed and one did not need to be a prophet to see that the complications of this period would not exercise the same fascination on the minds of the Eastern peoples. . . .3
REVOLT IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
D espite the apathy and disorganization of the Balkan peoples in 1870, the revolt in Bosnia and H erzegovina only five years later found im mediate response and spread from the Adriatic to the Black Sea. The ex planation is to be found in the local conditions prevailing in B osnia-H erzegovina and also in the effect of certain ideologies and foreign propaganda upon the South Slavic people. Bosnia-Herzegovina, the two westernmost provinces of the Ottoman Em pire, were held in a state of semifeudal serfdom by a unique Moslem Serbian landowning class. At the time of the Turkish invasion four centuries earlier, the native Serbian nobility accepted Islam and retained their lands. But the bulk of the population remained Christian, of both Catholic and O rthodox varieties. At the time of the revolt, out of a total population of


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 397
1.2 million in the two provinces, 40 per cent were M oslem, 42 per cent O rthodox, and 18 p er cent C atholic. Only a handful of the Moslems were large landowners, the rem ainder being peasants who were exploited in the same m anner as their Christian counterparts. But the Christians were more susceptible to foreign influences and were more dissatisfied with their lot. In practice, though not in law, they were bound to the estates of the Moslem landowners. They had the right to own landed property but the difficulties in the way of acquiring land were so formidable that few were able to surm ount them. Peasants paid one third to one half of their crop to the landowner and also one eighth to the tax farmer. The latter also collected petty taxes on animals and on specific pro duce. In fact, as elsewhere, these tax farmers were a grievous burden because they paid a cash sum for the privilege of collecting the taxes and then pro ceeded to fleece the peasants mercilessly in order to secure a large return on their investment. It made no difference to them if the crops were poor and the peasants were in difficulty. Indeed, the immediate cause for the 1875 revolt was the crop failure of the previous year and the unrelenting pressure of the tax farmers. These conditions had existed in Bosnia-H erzegovina for centuries. By themselves they do not explain the wide ramifications of the 1875 up rising. It is necessary to take also into account certain currents of thought and foreign influences. The most im portant of these were Pan-Serbism, PanSlavism, and Hapsburg expansionism. Pan-Serbism persisted despite the assassination of Prince Michael. It is true th at M ilan had little sym pathy for revolutionary m ovem ents. He looked to Vienna for support and followed the A ustrian policy of opposing agitation among the South Slavs under foreign rule. But the popular senti ment for liberation and national unity was too deep-rooted to be banished by disapproval from above. Baron von Kallay, the Austrian diplomatic rep resentative in Belgrade, warned his government in 1873 that “the mistaken notion th at Serbia is called upon to play the role of Piedm ont am ong the Slavs of T urkey is so strongly rooted th at the Serbs no longer can under stand that the Slavs of the different Turkish frontiers should seek aid and protection from any state except Serbia.” 4 The following year .the Serbian national assembly, or Skupshtina, voiced the national aspiration as follows in its address to the throne: “To direct the scattered forces of our people toward a serious and common action, to reach an understanding with and to draw closer to our fellow peoples who have the same objectives, the same interests, and the same dangers, th at is the road on which the national Skupshtina ardently wishes to see always its illustrious sovereign.” 5 Thus Pan-Serb agi tation continued despite the opposition of Milan. There can be little doubt that it had significant influence on the unredeem ed brothers across the fron tier in Bosnia-H erzegovina. Pan-Slavism was also a m ajor factor in Balkan affairs during these years. Its origins go back to the Slavophil cultural movement which stressed


398 A ge of Nationalism: 1815—1878
the intrinsic value of Russian as against W estern European culture. Political overtones soon appeared and Slavophilism gradually was transform ed into Pan-Slavism. The emphasis now was on the unity of all Slavs under the aegis of Russia. In 1858 the Slavic W elfare Society was established in Moscow, where a Slavic Ethnographic Congress was held in 1867. The cause was also furthered by the extremely popular books published by two prom inent PanSlav leaders, G eneral Rotislav Fadeev (Opinion on the Eastern Question, 1870) and Nicholas Danilevski ( Russia and Europe, 1871). The general thesis advanced was that the Slavs were young and vigorous in contrast to the decadent W estern Europeans, and that with the aid of Russia they should free themselves from Turkish and A ustrian dom ination and unite in a great confederation of which Russia would be the leader and Constantinople the capital. Of particular importance for the Balkans was the well-known PanSlav diplomat, Count Nicholas Ignatiev, who represented Russia at Constan tinople between 1864 and 1877. Ignatiev believed firmly in the principle of Slavic unity, which was to take the form of com m on action against the arch enemy, A ustria-H ungary. “The A ustrian and Turkish Slavs m ust be our allies, the weapons of our policy against the G erm ans.” These views, it should be noted, were quite different from those of Ignatiev’s superiors in St. Peters burg. The contrast was particularly noticeable regarding the future of BosniaHerzegovina. The Russian foreign minister, Prince Alexander Gorchakov, was of the opinion that “the Turkish Slavs can be made happy at the hands of the G overnm ent of V ienna, th a t R ussian interests will not suffer from the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina by A ustria.” Ignatiev, on the other hand, considered it preferable to “postpone all thoughts o f solving the Eastern Question, of liberating Bosnia and Herzegovina from Turkish domination, rather than surrender these provinces to A ustro-H ungarian rule and sacrifice the future of the Serbian nation.” 8 Being the person that he was, Ignatiev had no com punction about working toward his Pan-Slav goal despite the official policy laid down by his superiors in Petrograd. ^ It is im possible to estim ate how m uch influence Pan-Slav doctrines had on the Balkan peoples. A French expert reported in 1876: “I have visited the Turkish Em pire several times. I have had occasion to see Slavic, Serbian, M ontenegrin and Bulgarian patriots on the Danube or on the Adriatic. I always found them very dissatisfied with the O ttom an regime but determined not to substitute Russian domination for it.” 7 This and other evidence of a similar nature suggest that the “M other Russia” approach of the Pan-Slavs was not too popular in the Balkans. On the other hand, PanSlavism cannot be ignored, especially during the thirteen years when Ignatiev was in Constantinople. He was undoubtedly the best-inform ed am bassador in the Balkan Peninsula, and, after 1870, he was so influential in Turkish government circles that he became known as the vice-sultan, The Pan-Serbs and the Pan-Slavs were not alone responsible for the 1875 crisis. C ertain elem ents in A ustria-H ungary also were involved. It is


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 399
true that only a few years earlier Count Julius Andrassy, the Hapsburg for eign minister, had promised his Russian counterpart, Prince Alexander G orchakov, th at A ustria would refrain from intervening in B alkan affairs. This com m itm ent accorded with A ndrassy’s personal inclination as a M agyar. The Slavs already constituted the largest ethnic bloc in the H apsburg Em pire and he did not wish to increase their preponderance by annexing any part of European Turkey. On the other hand, he was determined that Serbia should not take over Bosnia-Herzegovina and he was ready to have A ustria take over the two provinces herself rather than see them absorbed in a large South Slav state. Certain groups in A ustria-Hungary disagreed with Andrassy and favored a more aggressive policy. M any South Slavs who were already under Hapsburg rule wished to include all their fellow Slavs in the empire, which was then to be transform ed from a dual Austro-Hungarian state into a triune A ustrian-Hungarian-Slavic state. But the most influential exponents of expan sion into the Balkans were the military men. Their argument was that pos session of Bosnia-Herzegovina was essential for the defense of Dalmatia, the narrow province stretching down the length of the A driatic coast. These mili tary leaders persuaded Emperor Francis Joseph to spend a month traveling in D alm atia in the spring of 1875. During his journey the em peror received many petitions from the Christians of Bosnia-Herzegovina complaining of Turkish oppression and asking him for protection. The avowed object of the trip was to stimulate unrest in the Turkish provinces and in this it was suc cessful. F rancis Jo sep h ’s tour was to a considerable, degree responsible for the conflagration that began in Herzegovina in July, 1875. The em peror, on his part, was convinced by the end of his tour that the occupation of BosniaHerzegovina could not be long delayed. In fact, orders were issued to the imperial forces in Dalm atia to be prepared for a m arch across the frontier. We may conclude that several factors explain the outbreak and the course of the revolt in Bosnia-Herzegovina. In the background were the centuries-old religious conflict and economic oppression. A more immediate im pulse was provided by the extortionate tax farm ers and by Francis Joseph’s tour in Dalm atia. Once the revolt began, it was sustained by A ustrian and Russian officials, who sought to exploit it for their own purposes. Hapsburg officials in Dalm atia, m any of whom were Serbo-Croats by race, gave aid and com fort to the rebels and provided asylum for the refugees. Similarly, the Russian consul in Ragusa, the ardent Pan-Slav A lexander Ionin, frankly ad mitted: “I did not create the situation but I profited by it. It began as a small stream, which might have been lost for want of direction; so I put up a stone here, and a stone there, and kept the water together.” 8


400
*
Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
FAILURE OF MEDIATION
In mid-July, 1875, Andrassy and Gorchakov received reports that the Christian peasants of Herzegovina had risen in revolt. Neither statesm an was pleased by the news. Both were anxious to preserve the Dreikaiserbund and both knew that trouble in the Balkans could easily create a rift between their countries. For this reason they took the initiative, together with their partner, Bism arck, in dealing with the disturbance. They persuaded the Turks to send a commissioner to Herzegovina to investigate the situation and at the same time they instructed their consuls to attem pt m ediation. These efforts came to nothing. The Turks were lavish with promises of reform but the rebels were not impressed by promises that had always proved valueless in the past. They demanded either autonomy under a Christian prince or occupation by foreign powers until their grievances had been redressed. So the insurrection continued and it spread rapidly throughout Herzegovina and into Bosnia. Andrassy now prepared a reform program which provided for com plete religious freedom, abolition of tax farming, agrarian improvements, a guarantee that provincial revenues should be spent on provincial needs, and the establishment of a mixed M oslem-Christian commission to supervise the working of these reforms. This Andrassy Note, as it was called, was approved by the other powers and accepted by the Turks early in February, 1876. But the rebels again frustrated the attem pt at mediation. They rejected the con cessions on the ground that they were useless without a firm guarantee by the powers. M eanwhile the fighting had become more widespread and savage. By March, 1876, approximately 156,000 refugees from Bosnia and Herze govina had crossed the frontiers into Serbia, M ontenegro, and AustriaHungary. Public opinion in Serbia and M ontenegro was demanding inter vention in behalf of the unfortunate fellow Slavs. Princ^ M ilan in Belgrade and Prince Nicholas in Cetinje were both anxious to keep the peace. They were not prepared for serious campaigning and they had received strong w arnings from V ienna and St. Petersburg to rem ain neutral. But the popular clamor was becoming so insistent that there was danger of a general Balkan conflagration. Faced with this critical situation, the foreign ministers of the Dreikaiserbund met in Berlin in M ay, 1876. They prepared a new reform program, the so-called Berlin M emorandum, which was an extension of the earlier Andrassy Note. The Turkish government was to provide funds to settle the refugees in their homes, the Christians were to retain their arms for the time being, and the consuls of the powers were to supervise the ap plication of the reforms and the repatriation of the refugees. The M emoran dum was submitted to the French, Italian, and British governments for ap proval. The first two sent positive replies. But the British refused to follow


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 401
the others, and in doing so they ended the possibility of an early and peace ful settlement of the crisis. To understand the British action it is necessary to recall that a C on servative governm ent under Disraeli had come to power in 1874. Disraeli had long criticized the “splendid isolation” policy of his predecessor G lad stone. A t the time when Prussia was overwhelming the Second French Em pire he had delivered a famous speech warning Parliament of the far-reaching repercussions of the war.
This war represents the German Revolution, a greater political event than the French Revolution of last century. . . . Not a single principle in the manage ment of our foreign affairs, accepted by all statesmen for guidance up to six months ago, any longer exists. There is not a diplomatic tradition which has not been swept away. You have a new world, new influences at work, new and un known objects and dangers with which to cope. . . . The balance of power has been entirely destroyed, and the country which suffers most, and feels the effects of this great change most, is England.”
Soon after assuming office, Disraeli dem onstrated the new spirit be hind British foreign policy. In 1875 he purchased the Suez Canal shares of the khedive of Egypt. The following year he arranged a series of magnificent celebrations in India, culm inating in the proclam ation of Q ueen V ictoria as Em press of India. It was in keeping, then, th at Disraeli should bristle when the Dreikaiserbund confronted him with the Berlin M em orandum. He ob jected to specific provisions, but above all he balked at the highhanded m anner in which the M em orandum had been handled. It had been prepared w ithout B ritain’s being consulted and now it was presented for approval with . the request for a reply in two days. Disraeli sarcastically observed that Britain was being treated as though she were Montenegro or Bosnia. This he refused to tolerate, and he rejected the proferred M emorandum. D israeli’s action proved a decisive turning point in the developm ent of the crisis. During the same m onth of May events of far-reaching signifi cance were occurring in the Balkans. O n M ay 10 the Turkish reform er, M idhat Pasha, assum ed office in C onstantinople. On M ay 30 A bdul Aziz was deposed in favor of M urad V. And in the same month the Bulgarians rose in revolt and were immediately suppressed with barbarous brutality by Turkish irregular troops. We shall see that the “ Bulgarian H orrors,” as they were called at the time, aroused a wave of indignation in Europe and helped to magnify a Balkan disturbance into a European crisis. It was at this critical juncture that Disraeli rejected the Berlin M emorandum and temporarily dis rupted the efforts at collective mediation.
WAR IN THE BALKANS
While the struggle raged on in Bosnia-Herzegovina, M ilan and Nicholas were slowly giving way to the growing clamor for war. On August 16, 1875, elections were held in Serbia. T he opposition Liberal party headed


402 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
by Yovan Ristich won a substantial victory over the Conservatives. This rep resented a popular vote in favor of war. “I regret to have to report to Y our Lordship,” wrote the British consul in Belgrade, “that the affairs of Servia have assumed a much more critical aspect. . . . W henever a decided ad vocate of a Revolutionary W ar against Turkey was confronted by a doubtful candidate, the preference was given by the electors to the form er one. . . 10 M ilan fought hard to restrain his bellicose subjects. A coalition cabinet was form ed, and when it showed signs of yielding to the popular clam or he sum m arily dism issed it. T he succeeding m inistry failed to stand m ore firmly. “ 1 find very little difference am ongst public men here, whether Radical or Conservative,” the British consul reported; “of whatever shade of opinion, all are equally imbued with the desire to see Servian aggrandize m ent accom plished. . . 11 M ilan's insistence on neutrality m ade him in creasingly unpopular in the country. Hostile dem onstrations convinced him that if he did not accept war he would face revolution. Furtherm ore, the Russian consul, who was an ardent Pan-Slav, officially transm itted his gov ern m en t’s dem ands for peace but unofficially advised M ilan to go to war. Finally, on May 5, 1876, Milan gave way and accepted a new ministry in cluding Ristich. Ristich was by no means an irresponsible firebrand. He was fully aw are of Serbia’s lim ited resources and of the real possibility of defeat. B ut he calculated that the combination of Pan-Slav pressure and Russian inter ests in the Balkans would force the tsar eventually to wage war on Turkey. His calculation proved correct, but he failed to foresee the diplom atic diffi culties that Russia would have to overcome before being allowed to take up arms. He did not anticipate that Russia would be obliged to concede BosniaHerzegovina to Austria-Hungary, and that Serbia consequently was about to undertake a futile struggle irrespective of the outcome of battle. N ot being able to foresee these complexities of great-power diplo macy, Ristich finally decided to risk intervention. On June 30, 1876, M ilan proclaimed war against Turkey. He was immediately followed by Nicholas of M ontenegro. The two rulers were rivals for the leadership of the South Slavs; hence one could not remain inactive after the other had entered the fray. So Nicholas also declared war, and on July 2, 1876, his troops invaded Herzegovina while the Serbs crossed over into Bosnia. Ristich made every effort to win the support of R um ania and Greece and thus to present a united Balkan front against the Turks. He sent representatives to Bucharest and Athens and made repeated appeals. But the Rumanians and the Greeks had no interests directly involved in BosniaHerzegovina and refused to abandon their neutrality. The British consul in Belgrade sent a report which threw revealing light on the extent to which M ichael’s B alkan alliance system had disintegrated by this time.
My Greek Colleague has often spoken to me of the way in which the Servians had kept aloof from all participation during the Cretan Insurrection and


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 403
he has frequently repeated to me that the lesson of 1867 [in Crete] has not been lost on his Government, which had no reason to disturb their good relations with the Porte, and would certainly discourage by every means, any disturbance in Turkish Provinces largely inhabited by Greeks, unless they saw first the Slavs fairly committed and the conflagration assuming a general character and one presenting a reasonable chance of success.12
Despite the lack of allies, the Serbians and M ontenegrins began the w ar with wild enthusiasm. “The idea which animates everyone,” wrote the R um anian representative in Belgrade, “is to free from Turkish dom ination their Yugoslav brothers inhabiting the Balkan Peninsula. T heir aim is re union, temporarily under two sceptres and eventually under one. . . . This is a w ar to the death betw een the South Slavs and the T urks. It is a w ar of race and of religion.” 13 B ut the T urks were also excited and determ ined. M ore volunteers flocked into Constantinople than the army could use. They, too, regarded the war as one of “race and religion.” The outcome of the struggle was a crushing defeat for the Serbs. Not only did they receive no aid from the Greeks and the Rumanians, but the Montenegrins insisted on fighting only in Herzegovina, where the T urkish forces were negligible. Thus the M ontenegrins were able to advance some distance, but on the decisive Bosnian front the Serbs were defeated with heavy losses. Before the fighting ended Serbia mobilized one sixth of her total population, of which one tenth were killed or wounded.
CONSTANTINOPLE CONFERENCE
The spreading of the war in the Balkans increased the complexity of the problem facing the great powers. No longer was it merely a question of arranging a satisfactory settlement in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Now Serbia and M ontenegro were belligerents, while in Bulgaria the large-scale atrocities had so aroused European public opinion that the restoration of Turkish rule no longer was feasible. The English were particularly sensitive to the “Bul garian H orrors” because they had fought the Crimean W ar to preserve the O ttom an Empire. In June, 1876, the first reports began to reach England of the depredations of the bashi-bazouks, the Turkish irregulars who had destroyed dozens of villages and m assacred rebels and innocent alikfe. D is raeli at first summarily rejected the charges because his diplomatic repre sentatives were slow in sending reports. But a mass of detailed inform ation began pouring in from various trustworthy sources, including British corre spondents, the Am erican consul-general, Eugene Schuyler, President George W ashburn of Robert College, and several American missionaries. It became clear that well over ten thousand Bulgarians had been massacred and several dozen villages destroyed. A great storm of moral indignation swept over England. The high point was G ladstone’s passionate indictm ent of T urkish rule in his pam phlet, “B ulgarian H orrors and the Q uestion of the E ast,” of which it is said fifty thousand copies were sold in a few days. Gladstone did not call for outright


404 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
partitioning of European Turkey. Rather, he demanded autonomy for the subject Christians so that they might be freed from the oppression of Turkish adm inistrators and soldiers. “Let the T urks now carry away their abuses in the only possible m anner, namely by carrying off themselves. Their Zaptiehs and their Mudirs, their Bimbashis and their Yuzbachis, their Kaimakams and their Pashas, one and all, bag and baggage, shall, 1 hope, clear out from the province they have desolated and pro fan ed.” 14 So great was the furor that one of the cabinet members, Lord Salis bury, wrote to Disraeli that concessions would have to be made to public opinion.
It is clear enough that the traditional Palmerstonian policy is at an end. We have not the power, even if we have the wish, to give back any of the re volted districts to the discretionary government of the Porte. . . . I should like to submit for your consideration whether the opportunity should not be taken to exact some security for the good government of the Christians generally through out the Turkish Empire. The Govt, of 1856 was satisfied with promises. . . . We must have something more than promises. . . .15
This statem ent is quite significant. It suggested the possibility of fundam ental changes in E uropean Turkey. Russia could be counted on to press for “something more than promises.” Bismarck from the beginning had urged wholesale partitioning of the O ttom an Empire as a means of satisfying both the Balkan peoples and the great powers. But Disraeli refused to con sider any drastic measures. He was convinced that the agitation in England was a momentary aberration and that the country soon would come to its senses. Also, he was determined, for reasons of prestige, to pursue an inde pendent policy rather than follow behind .the Dreikaiserbutld. The result was that now, as in the time of the Crim ean W ar, Britain emerged as the de fender of the O ttom an Empire. The Balkan crisis became more and more a duel between Britain, the supporter of the status quo, and Russia, the selfappointed champion of Balkan liberation. The remainder of the year 1876 was characterized by intense diplo matic activity. The most im portant consequences were the Reichstadt Agree ment reached by Russia and Austria on July 8, the Russian ultimatum to Turkey which resulted in an armistice on October 31, and the international conference held in C onstantinople in D ecem ber, 1876, and January, 1877. The background of the Reichstadt Agreement was the mounting PanSlav agitation in Russia for assistance to the em battled Balkan Slavs. This agitation reached such proportions that the Russian diplomats had to con sider the possibility of intervention even against the wishes of the govern ment. In that eventuality a prior agreement with A ustria would be essential. Otherwise the Russian army would run the risk of being ordered out of the Balkans, as had happened during the Crim ean W ar. So Andrassy and Gorchakov met at Reichstadt and agreed that the prewar status quo should be restored if Serbia and M ontenegro were defeated. But if the two Balkan


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 405
states were victorious, Austria and Russia were to cooperate to regulate the territorial changes. They agreed that no large Slavic state should be set up in the Balkans, but m isunderstanding existed from the start regarding the details of the new frontiers. Gorchakov understood that in case of victory Serbia and M ontenegro would annex the larger part of Bosnia-Herzegovina and that Austria would receive only a small part of Bosnia. Andrassy, on the other hand, thought that the larger part of Bosnia-Herzegovina would fall to the Hapsburg Em pire. This m isunderstanding was to cause difficulties be tween the two powers before the crisis was resolved. Meanwhile, it was the Turks who were winning over the Serbs and drawing closer to Belgrade. The Pan-Slavs redoubled their agitation and whipped up popular indignation in Russia. Finally, the tsar took action and dispatched a forty-eight-hour ultimatum to Constantinople demanding an armistice of six weeks for the Serbs. The Turks yielded and accepted the armistice on October 31, 1876. This was the last opportunity for a peaceful settlement. The powers agreed to send representatives to a conference in Constantinople to work out terms. The conference opened on D ecem ber 12. T he British delegate was L ord Salisbury, one of the ministers who had less fear of Russia and more sym pathy for the Balkan Christians than did Disraeli. Salisbury got along well with Ignatiev and the conference quickly reached a compromise agreement. The main provisions were that Bulgaria should be divided into an eastern and western province, Bosnia-Herzegovina united into one province, and each of the three provinces to have a considerable degree of autonomy, including a provincial assembly and a local police force. Also, Serbia was to lose no territory and M ontenegro was to be allowed to keep the areas she had over run in Herzegovina and northern Albania. These terms were presented as the “irreducible minimum” which the powers would accept. The Turks nevertheless rejected them. This was the celebrated occasion, described in the last chapter, when the sultan pro mulgated the constitution which provided for reforms and which stipulated that O ttom an territory was inalienable. Under the circumstances the work of the conference became irrelevant and the delegates were so informed. The latter tried to salvage something from the wreckage by reducing their demands from the original “irreducible m inimum” to what they now described as the “ quintessence.” 10 B ut the T urks rem ained adam ant in their refusal to grant concessions to the rebels. The Turks took such a strong stand because they knew they had strong popular backing. Public opinion was aroused and articulate in C onstan tinople as well as in L ondon and St. Petersburg. Also, there is little doubt that the Turks were encouraged to stand firm by the British am bassador, Sir Henry Elliot, who effectively underm ined Lord Salisbury in Constanti nople. Elliot considered the terms laid down by the conference as “impos sible dem ands.” He criticized them severely to his government and apparently he did not hide his views from the Turkg, Salisbury asked that E lliot be re


406 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
moved from Constantinople. The request was denied because both Disraeli and Foreign M inister L o rd D erby shared E lliot’s views. In fact, L o rd Derby had informed the Turkish ambassador the day before the conference opened that England would not “assent to, or assist in coercive measures against T u rk ey .” 17 Likewise, D israeli was criticizing Salisbury severely for conced ing too much to Ignatiev. “Sal. seems most prejudiced,” he wrote to Lord D erby on D ecem ber 30, “ and not to be aw are, th at his principal object, in being sent to C onst., is to keep the Russians out of Turkey, not to create an ideal existence for T urkish X tians. H e is m ore R ussian than Ignatieff. . . .” 18 The Turks were aware of these views in high places in England and therefore expected substantial assistance in case of war with Russia. Under these cir cumstances they naturally refused to make serious concessions. Russia had anticipated the failure of the Constantinople Conference and had opened negotiations with Austria beforehand in order to clear the way for action against Turkey. Russia had no choice in this m atter because she could not wage a campaign in the Balkans w ithout the consent of Aus tria. O n January 15, 1877, the two powers signed the so-called Budapest Convention. This provided that if the C onstantinople Conference failed and war ensued between Russia and Turkey, A ustria would remain benevolently neutral and in return could annex Bosnia-Herzegovina. Russia was to regain the Bessarabian area lost in 1856. Like the Reichstadt Agreement, this convention stipulated that no large state should be created in the Balkans. These terms m eant that in case of war Russia would do the fighting and Austria would derive most of the advantage. Russia therefore made a final effort for a peaceful settlement. She persuaded the powers to sign the London Convention (M arch 31, 1877), which merely asked Turkey to in troduce those reforms which she herself had already proposed. The powers were to w atch the operation of the reform s, and if conditions rem ained un satisfactory they reserved the right “to declare that such a state of things would be incompatible with their interests and those of Europe in general.” The “irreducible minimum” had been reduced virtually to the vanishing point. But the Turks felt themselves in a strong position and rejected the proposal on the grounds that it violated the. Treaty of Paris. Finally, on April 24, 1877, after nearly two years of futile negotiations, Russia declared war upon Turkey.
RUSSO-TURKISH WAR
Russia began the war against Turkey under exceptionally favorable diplomatic circumstances. Both A ustria and Germany were benevolently neutral while France and Italy were noncomm ittal and reserved. This left only Britain, but that country was distinctly unfriendly. Disraeli was con vinced that the Russians would be in Constantinople in nine weeks and that “it w ould take nearly th a t tim e for us to reach and entrench ourselves in the D ardanelles.” 19 A ccordingly, he proposed that Britain should occupy Gallipoli for the duration of the war. The cabinet rejected the proposal, fear


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 407
ing that it would lead to an alliance with Turkey and to speedy involvement in the war. Instead, a note was issued warning Russia against attacking or occupying Constantinople, the Straits, the Suez Canal, or Egypt. Meanwhile, the Russians were making spectacular progress into the Balkans. They had traversed Rum ania at a leisurely pace, not crossing the Danube until June 23. But then they pushed rapidly southward to the Balkan M ountains. O n June 19 they occupied the Shipka Pass, opening the way to southern Bulgaria. The further the Russians advanced the higher the tension m ounted in Britain. Bismarck was gravely concerned with the danger of a general conflagration and again advanced his favorite scheme for a whole sale partition of the O ttom an Empire. But Disraeli distrusted the German chancellor and refused to consider his proposal. Instead, he persuaded his cabinet to vote on July 21 that war should be declared if the Russians oc cupied Constantinople and did not make arrangements to retire immediately. The gathering tension subsided for some time when the Russians met an unexpected reverse at Plevna, a Turkish fortress located close to the Russian bridge over the Danube. The Russians made repeated attempts to take the fortress but were repulsed with heavy losses. Finally, General Todleben, the hero of Sebastopol, arrived upon the scene and established a com plete blockade. But a regular siege required time, and in the meanwhile the Russian wings could not advance farther. This stalem ate allowed the summer of 1877 to pass without incident. The unexpected reversal in Russian fortunes produced an amusing shift in the relations between Russia and the Balkan states. When the R us sians were forging ahead all the Balkan countries eagerly offered their serv ices in order to be eligible for a share of the booty. Russia rejected the offers because she assumed she would not need assistance and because she feared that, if all the B alkan peoples intervened, the w ar would take on the appear ance of a general Balkan revolutionary movement and would antagonize Britain and Austria-Hungary. Then, after the setback at Plevna, the Russians urged the Balkan states to enter the war at once. But the latter now held back, discouraged by the unexpected resistance of the Turkish forces. Only R um ania entered, and that country, it should be noted, had already been half involved because its territory was being used by the Russians for transit p ur poses. In taking up arms the Rum anians had no illusions regarding the future. They were quite aware that a victorious Russia would demand the cession of southern Bessarabia lost in 1856. But they calculated that by intervening they would get some compensation elsewhere. And besides, intervention for them was not as risky as for the other Balkan states located to the south of the Danube. Plevna finally was starved out and forced to surrender on December 10. The Russians resumed their advance and by January 4, 1878, reached Sofia. The Turks appealed to England to mediate. The tsar refused m ediation and referred the Turks to the Russian com m ander in the field. Armistice negotiations began on January 19. By that time the Turkish defenses were


408 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
crumbling. Reports reached London that Adrianople could not’be held and that the road to Constantinople was wide open. Disraeli again fumed and stormed while Queen Victoria swamped him with a deluge of almost hysteri cal letters dem anding im m ediate action. “T here is not a m om ent to be lost or the whole of our policy of centuries, of our honour as a great European Power, will have received an irreparable blow! . . . O h, if the Queen were a man, she would like to go and give those Russians, whose word one cannot believe, such a beating! We shall never be friends again till we have it out. T his the Q ueen feels sure of.” E ven D israeli was m oved to rem ark, “It is som ething to serve such a sovereign.” 20 Disraeli tried to prod the Austrians to mobilize but they were com mitted by the Budapest Convention and refused to move unless the Russians actually violated its provisions. Disraeli finally persuaded the cabinet on January 23 to order the fleet to Constantinople, though the foreign minister, L ord Derby, resigned in protest. Then, in anticlimactic fashion, the order was recalled upon the receipt of reassuring reports, which later proved to be completely erroneous. Meanwhile the Turks and Russians concluded an armistice agreement on January 31. The terms provided that the Russian forces should occupy Turkish territory almost to the outskirts of Constantinople. The British were not informed of this provision, so that war fever mounted once more as the Russians drew closer to the capital. By this time the “Bulgarian H orrors” and the bashi-bazouks had been forgotten, and, instead, the crowds in Eng land enthusiastically sang,
We don’t want to fight, But, by Jingo! if we do, We’ve got the ships, We’ve got the men, We’ve got the money too!
O n February 12 Disraeli again ordered the fleet to steam to Con stantinople. This time the orders were carried out, though, on the request of the sultan, the ships anchored on the Asiatic side of the Sea of M armora. Thus Russian soldiers were quartered at San Stefano, ten miles from Con stantinople, while British warships rode at anchor across the Straits less than fifty miles away. Peace hung in the balance in this precarious m anner until finally the Turks and the Russians signed the Treaty of San Stefano on M arch 3, 1878.
TREATY OF SAN STEFANO
The Treaty of San Stefano provided that Bosnia-Herzegovina be granted the reforms proposed by the Constantinople Conference, though with some modifications. Serbia and M ontenegro were to be made independent and somewhat enlarged. Rum ania was also granted full independence and was to receive p a rt of the D obruja in return for southern Bessarabia, which


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 409
went to Russia. Russia was to acquire, in lieu of the greater part of the financial indemnity which she claimed, Batum, Kars, Ardahan, and Bayazid in eastern Asia Minor. Bulgaria was to be established as an autonomous principality with an elected prince. The most significant provision of the treaty had to do with the territorial extent of the new principality. W ith the exception of Constantinople, A drianople, and Saloniki, it included virtually all the territory between the D anube in the north, the Black Sea in the east, the Aegean Sea in the south, and Lake O hrid and beyond in the west. Thus a greater Bulgaria was created and European Turkey virtually annihilated. Leaving aside for the moment the volcanic question of M acedonian ethnology, it is clear th at from the diplom atic viewpoint the San Stefano T reaty was bound to arouse opposition in all quarters. A ustria com plained with justification that the new Bulgarian principality violated the stipulation in the B udapest T reaty th at no large Balkan state was to be established. Disraeli was convinced that the principality would be merely a Russian out post and that it would give Russia access to the Aegean and virtual control over C onstantinople. He also feared that Russia’s acquisitions in Asia M inor would culm inate eventually in a Russian base on the Gulf of A lexandretta. Both the Greeks and the Serbs also were opposed to San Stefano. The Greeks had attem pted to enter the war after the fall of Plevna but, being vulnerable to sea power, they were forced to remain neutral by the threat of a British blockade. Naturally they were bitter when the war ended with Bulgaria becom ing the largest state in the Balkans while they received noth ing. The Serbs found San Stefano equally distasteful. They had re-entered the war two days after the surrender of Plevna. A ustria warned them to strike south toward Macedonia rather than west into Bosnia. They heeded the warning and occupied a considerable area while the Turks were fleeing before the Russians. But now all this territory was to be incorporated in the Bulgarian principality. The Serbians protested to St. Petersburg, but were inform ed bluntly th at R ussia’s interests came first, Bulgaria’s second, and Serbia’s last. T he Belgrade governm ent naturally was indignant and decided to hold the land it occupied, even to the point of resisting the Russians by force. The Russians undoubtedly expected this opposition. Probably they took more than they expected to keep in order to have some surplus for bargaining. They had long recognized the right of the other powers to pass upon such articles as infringed upon the 1856 settlement. They now agreed to attend a congress in Berlin to reconsider these articles. But they did not anticipate the degree to which San Stefano would be mutilated before a set tlement could be arranged that was satisfactory to all the great powers. Before the congress met, much diplomatic activity occurred. Britain and Russia tried to win the support of A ustria-Hungary but both failed to pin down the evasive Andrassy. So the new British foreign minister, Lord Salisbury, approached the Russians directly for a preliminary agreement be fore the congress. The Russians were ready to compromise bccausc their


410 Age of Nationalism: 1815—1878
army was in no condition for more fighting and the revolutionary movement at home was becoming serious. On M ay 30 the two powers signed an agree ment covering the general lines of settlement. The most im portant modifica tion of San Stefano was the splitting of Bulgaria into two parts divided by the Balkan M ountains. The Austrians were now afraid that they would be isolated at the congress; hence on June 6 they also concluded an agreement with the British. They undertook to support Britain on various points con cerning Bulgaria, and the British in turn were to back any proposal regarding Bosnia-Herzegovina that A ustria might present. A fter these preliminaries the congress convened at Berlin on June 13.
TREATY OF BERLIN
An impressive galaxy of diplomats gathered in Berlin to reconsider the San Stefano Treaty. Bismarck was elected president in accordance with customary practice. By this time he had lost some of his old vigor, and ac cording to his own account he downed a tum bler of port every few hours to keep going. Y et he dom inated the congress, and time and again his energy and decisiveness kept it from breaking up. Disraeli was another outstanding personality. He suffered from asthma and gout and hobbled around on a stick. But Bism arck was sufficiently impressed by him to rem ark, “The old Jew, he is the m an.” D israeli’s associates were on tenterhooks lest he address the congress in his barbarous French. They coped with the delicate situation by informing him that the entire gathering eagerly waited to hear a speech from “the greatest living m aster of English oratory.” No one ever quite knew whether Disraeli took the hint or accepted the compliment. The Russian foreign minister, Prince Gorchakov, could not resist attending, though he was eighty and had to be carried upstairs to the chamber. He did not contribute much to the work of the congress with his artificial graces, inordinate vanity, and passion for bon mots. In addition to these and other diplomats representing the great pow ers, there were delegates from Turkey and from the Balkan states. The latter were at least politely heard before being ignored. But the Turks were both ignored and insulted. “If you think the Congress has met for Turkey,” Bis m arck bluntly told them, “disabuse yourselves. San Stefano would have re m ained unaltered, if it had not touched certain E uropean interests.” 21 E ven the British, who supposedly Were the cham pions of the T urks, gave them orders and suffered no back talk. The British am bassador in Constantinople, Sir Henry Layard, assured Salisbury that he had made certain of the coop eration of the chief Turkish delegate, Caratheodory Pasha. “I have given C aratheodory to u n derstand th at if I find him playing false I will leave no stone unturned to break his neck, and as he knows I can do it, it is to his interest to keep well with us.” 22 T he congress was not a m eaningless rubber-stam p affair. It is true that agreements had been reached beforehand but these were of a general nature. On several occasions the congress almost foundered over specific is


Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin: 1878 411
sues, such as the amount of territory that Russia should obtain in eastern Asia M inor and the degree of control that Turkey should keep over the south ern Bulgarian province. Finally satisfactory terms were arranged and the treaty signed on July 13, 1878. The essential difference between the Treaty of Berlin and that of San Stefano has to do with Bulgaria. The large autonomous principality orig inally established now was divided into three parts: Bulgaria proper, north of the Balkan M ountains, to be autonom ous with its own elected prince, though tributary to Constantinople; Eastern Rumelia, south of the Balkan M ountains, to be under a Christian governor appointed by Constantinople but approved by the powers; and M acedonia, which was to remain under direct Turkish administration. Thus the Bulgaria of Berlin was only one third that of San Stefano and was completely cut off from the Aegean. Serbia and Montenegro were declared independent and given addi tional territory, though not as much as stipulated at San Stefano. Rumania also became independent and acquired part of the Dobruja, though, as ex pected, she was forced to surrender southern Bessarabia to Russia. Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the crisis originated, were handed over to Austria to occupy and administer though not to annex. 'A ustria was also authorized to garrison the strategic Sanjak of Novi Bazar located between Serbia and M on tenegro. This provision was designed to forestall a development that Austria always feared— a large, united Yugoslav state that might attract the South Slavs under H apsburg rule. Greece claimed Crete, Thessaly, Epirus, and a part of M acedonia, but received nothing. The powers had so many other interests to prom ote that they evaded the Greek case by inviting the Turkish government to come to terms with Greece concerning the rectification of frontiers. Bismarck rem arked cynically that with thousands of years of his tory behind them the Greeks could afford to wait a few more to fulfill their am bitions. Russia received Batum, Kars, and A rdahan in addition to southern Bessarabia. The British had prepared for this Russian advance in Asia M inor by concluding earlier, on June 4, the Cyprus Convention with the Turks. This committed the British to resist any further Russian expansion in Asia M inor; in return they were to occupy and administer the island of Cyprus for as long as the Russians retained Kars and Batum. W hen the French de m urred at this new British foothold in the eastern M editerranean, Bismarck told them, “Why do you not go to Carthage?”— a hint that the French acted upon three years later by occupying T unis.23 This Berlin settlement aroused strong reactions from the outset. Upon returning to London Disraeli boasted that he brought with him “Peace with H onor.” The phrase was adopted and repeated by his admirers. But many at the time bitterly criticized “the peace that passeth all understanding and the honour th at is com m on am ong thieves.” 24 Any estimate of the Berlin Treaty depends in the final analysis upon o n e ’s viewpoint. If it is considered purely within the context of E uropean


412 Age of Nationalism: 1815-1878
diplom acy, then D israeli’s boast is fully justified. The Berlin T reaty was in deed a resounding trium ph for Britain. Russia had fought a costly war, but other powers won most of the prizes. Britain now was entrenched in Cyprus, and A ustria in Bosnia, Herzegovina, and the Sanjak. Bulgaria was cut down and partitioned and most of European Turkey was preserved. Russia nat urally was humiliated and indignant, and she turned against her Dreikaiserbund partners for failing to support her. This breakup of the Dreikaiserbund represented another great victory for Britain. She no longer was faced with the massive coalition of the three eastern empires that hitherto had domi nated the Continent. “Next to making a tolerable settlement for the Porte,” Disraeli justifiably boasted a few years later, “our great object was to break up and permanently prevent the alliance of the three Empires, and I main tain there never was a great diplom atic result more com pletely effected.” 25 If the peace settlem ent is considered from the B alkan viewpoint, then one must emphasize the disregard of ethnic and nationalist considera tions. Disraeli from the beginning m ade it clear that he was interested in checking Russia, and not, as he put it, in creating “an ideal existence for Turkish X tians.” As a result, every one of the Balkan peoples was left thoroughly dissatisfied. The Bulgarians were em bittered by the partition of their country, the Serbians by the advance of Austria into Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Rum anians by the loss of southern Bessarabia, and the Greeks > by their failure to obtain any territorial compensation. This situation was particularly unfortunate because it provoked dissension and strife among the Balkan peoples. The establishment of the exarchate church had pitted Greek against Bulgar in M acedonia. Now, with Bosnia-Herzegovina in the hands of the Austrians, the Serbs also were forced to turn southward to Macedonia. The result was a suicidal three-cornered conflict which poisoned inter-Balkan relations and fom ented anarchy and bloodshed in M acedonia until W orld W ar I and even later. For the Balkan peoples, then, the Berlin Treaty meant not peace with honor but rather frustration of national aspirations and future wars. The di rect and logical outcome of the Berlin settlement was the Serbian-Bulgarian W ar of 1885, the Bosnian crisis of 1908, the two Balkan wars of 1912-1913, and the m urder of Archduke Francis Ferdinand in 1914.


1878 1914
Part V. Agis of Imperialism and Capitalism
22. D y n a m i c s o f B a l k a n P o l i t i c s : 1 8 7 8 - 1 9 1 4
T
h e f ir s t t h r e e o u a r t e r s of the nineteenth century constituted the revolutionary age of nationalism during which all the Balkan peoples, with the exception of the Albanians,' gained their independence or autonomy. The period from 1878 to 1914 proved to be an equally revolution ary age— the age of imperialism and capitalism which, so far as the everyday life of the Balkan peoples was concerned, had deeper and more far-reaching repercussions than the age of nationalism. We saw in C hapter 13 that the three most im portant factors deter mining the course of events in the Balkans during the age of nationalism were the continued decline of the O ttom an Empire, the awakening of the subject nationalities, and the increasing intervention of the great powers. These fac tors continued to operate during the years after 1878, but the emphasis shifted from the awakening of the nationalities to the rapidly increasing ac tivity of the great powers. This activity manifested itself not only in the usual diplomatic channels but also, and most dramatically, in the economic realm. During these years at the turn of the century the dynamic and expanding civilization of W estern Europe impinged upon the Balkan Peninsula and underm ined the la tte r’s self-sufficient natural econom y. This traditional econ omy gave way to a money or capitalist economy, which in turn led to funda m ental changes in the social organization and daily life of the B alkan peoples. These manifold changes w arrant the use of the term “the age of imperialism and capitalism ” for these decades between 1878 and W orld W ar I. It does not follow that other forces at work at this time were no longer of consequence. The state of the O ttom an Em pire was still a prime factor, though not quite as central as in the past. The O ttom an Empire after 1878 did not control as much of the Balkans as it did early in the nineteenth century. Also, nothing of great significance occurred within the empire be cause, as we shall see, Abdul Ham id was the autocratic ruler until 1908 and lie tolerated no opposition. Similarly, B alkan nationalism was still a potent
413


414 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
force in the peninsula and its influence was to spread into areas hitherto un affected, such as Albania, M acedonia, and the South Slavic provinces of the Hapsburg Em pire.* B ut this did not represent something new. It was simply the continuation and completion of a movement that had begun a century earlier. By contrast, the impact of the dynamic West upon the Balkan Pen insula was unprecedented in nature and revolutionary in effect. Accordingly, in this chapter we shall examine this new imperialism of the W est which was impinging on the Balkan world, as well as the new capitalist order which was developing within the peninsula with a greater disruptive effect than the winning of national independence in the preceding decades.
THE NEW IM PERIALISM
Imperialism has been defined in a recent study as “the rule or con trol, political or economic, direct or indirect, of one state, nation or people over other similar groups. . . . ” 1 Taken in this sense, imperialism obviously has been practiced by the great powers in the Balkans and throughout the N ear East for centuries. One can begin with the medieval period, when the Crusaders invaded the Holy Land, and trace imperialist activities down to m odern times, when Catherine the G reat attem pted to win for her grandson an imperial throne in Constantinople, and when Britain acquired Egypt, Cyprus, and the Ionian Islands. Although imperialism has been a constant factor in Balkan affairs, it is generally agreed th at it changed in character decisively at the end of the nineteenth century. It became more dynamic and more pervasive. It produced sharper and more frequent conflicts among the imperialist powers themselves. A nd it had a far greater impact on the territories subject to its influence, w hether in the Balkans or anywhere else in the world. This change in char acter was sufficiently m arked to w arrant the use of the term “new im perialism .”
The roots of this new imperialism go back to certain economic de velopments that occurred in W estern Europe earlier in the century. During the first three quarters of the nineteenth century Britain was the unchallenged “workshop of the world.” The entire globe was an open m arket for her manu factured goods. This was also the period when free trade was in its heyday and when colonies were regarded as expensive nuisances— as “ripe fruit” that would drop off sooner or later. This situation changed abruptly during the last quarter of the nine teenth century, when the Continental countries in turn became industrialized. A t the same time these countries began to adopt protective tariffs in order to safeguard their “infant industries.” Thus the Continental markets were closed to. British m anufactured goods at the same time that European manufactures
* See C hapters 24, 27, 28.


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1878-1914 415
were beginning to invade British markets overseas and even the British home m arket itself. The leading European powers com peted with one another not only in selling the output of their factories but also in finding m arkets for their rapidly accumulating capital. The more capital piled up at home the lower the returns fell and the greater the need for more profitable investment m ar kets abroad. Vast amounts of capital were, in fact, invested in foreign coun tries, especially by Britain, France, and Germany. Britain, for example, had invested by 1914 4 billion pounds abroad, a sum amounting to one fourth of her total national wealth. By the same date France had invested 45 billion francs, or one sixth of her national wealth. Germany, a late-comer who was using most of her capital for domestic industrial expansion, had invested overseas between 22 and 25 billion marks, or one fifteenth of her national wealth. Thus Europe by 1914 had become the banker as well as the workshop of the world. The tremendous outpouring of capital and of m anufactured goods was inevitably accom panied by a sharp struggle for foreign m arkets. This in turn led to a race for empire because colonies were considered to be the most secure of all possible m arkets. In fact, many E uropean statesm en at this tim e believed that B ritain’s econom ic prim acy was derived from her vast colonial possessions. So they set out to acquire colonies for their own coun tries, and this in turn induced the British to prize more highly their own empire and even to add to it when possible. These economic factors leading to expansion gained effectiveness from other sources, particularly the current vogue for social Darwinism, with its doctrines of struggle for existence and survival of the fittest. These led naturally to ideas of race superiority and of the white m an’s destiny to rule over the “inferior” colored peoples of the earth. The net result of these economic and intellectual-psychological fac tors was the greatest land-grab in the history of the world, unequaled even by the conquests of Genghis Khan. The table on page 416 illustrates the fantastic territorial expansion of the Western European states by 1914. It should be noted that well over one half of the colonial possessions listed below were acquired after 1878. The influence of the dynamic W estern European states was not con fined to the colonial territories that they owned outright. It also extended to other areas which were economically and militarily weak but which, for one reason or another, were not actually annexed. This was the case with the O ttom an Empire, whose ventral core remained intact because the great pow ers could not agree upon the details of partition. B ut even though the sultan’s lands did not suffer dismemberment, they did experience, nevertheless, the disruptive impact of the new imperialism. Both the O ttom an Empire and the new Balkan states were subjected to intensive W estern economic penetration, the principal manifestations being government loans, which caused financial


416 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
Colonial Empires of the World in 1914
AREA (SQUARE M IL E S ) POPULATION
Countries having colonial or non- Number contiguous of colonies, Mother
Colonies and other non contiguous Mother
Colonies and other non contiguous territory etc. country territory country territory
United Kingdom 55 120,953 12,043,806 46,052,741 391,582,528 France 29 207,076 4,110,409 39,602,258 62,350,000 G erm any 10 208,830 1,230,989 64,925,993 13,074,950 Belgium 1 11,373 910,000 7,571,387 15,000,000 Portugal 8 35,500 804,440 5,960,056 9,680,000 N etherlands 8 12,761 762,863 6,102,399 37,410,000 Italy 4 110,623 591,250 35,238,997 1,396,176
Total TÎ5 707,116 20,453,757 205,453,831 530,493,654
Source: Compiled from Encyclopedia Americana, 1943 éd., VII, 297. Statistics concerning the colonies acquired between 1876 and 1900 are given in F. Sternberg, Capitalism and Socialism on Trial (New York, 1951), p. 57.
dependency, and railway building, which increased the foreign indebtedness and also led directly to an influx of W estern machine-made goods. Governm ent loans, railway building, and all the other modes of W estern economic penetration in the Balkans started as early as the mid nineteenth century at the time of the C rim ean W ar. But in the late nineteenth century, under the pressure of the new imperialism, this penetration changed significantly in degree and in character. It changed in degree because it be came much more forceful and pervasive. Not only British·and French but also Italian, Austrian, and especially Germ an financiers appeared on the scene, eager to gain a return on their money in excess of the 2 or 3 per cent procurable at home. They invested their capital in unprecedented amounts, most of it being expended on military establishments and on railways, but some also being used to transform the Balkan scene with roads, ports, docks, tramways, irrigation works, and lighting and power plants. This was a far cry from the beginning of the century, when economic intercourse with the West was virtually limited to foreign ships calling at the seaports. W estern economic penetration changed not only in degree but also in character, the reason being the growing tendency to identify private and national interests abroad. This meant in practice that private investors felt free to call on their governments to protect their foreign investments or to bring pressure to bear to make foreign investments possible. Conversely the European governments encouraged loans to states considered friendly and discouraged loans to states deemed hostile. This development created a much more tense situation because considerations of national prestige now were introduced in a field hitherto regarded as beyond the realm of government concern. The appearance of this new imperialism, according to one authority, transform ed the Balkans and the Middle East “from what had been regarded


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1878-1914 417
as a profitable field for investment and speculation into a cockpit of interna tional rivalry.” 2 In the following chapters we shall note the operation and the effect of the new imperialism in each of the Balkan countries and in Turkey. A t this point a brief over-all survey of railway building and of government loans will give a general impression of the new imperialism in practice. Railway building started in the Balkans after the C rim ean W ar, w hen British interests built two lines from Constantsa and V arna on the Black Sea to Cernavoda and Ruschuk respectively, on the Danube. These were only local lines de signed to enable the British to tap the commerce of the Danube Valley. Preparations for large-scale construction began when Sultan Abdul Aziz in 1868 gave a concession for the building of a main stem to run from Constantinople through Adrianoplc, Philippopolis, Sofia, Nish, Sarajevo and on to the Austrian border to connect with the A ustrian southern railways and so with Vienna. The concession was given to a certain Baron Hirsch, who was influential with the southern A ustrian system. Construction did not begin till 1872, and by 1875, when the N ear Eastern crisis intervened, the project was far from completed. Only two lines had been built: one from Saloniki to (jskiib and Mitrovitza, and the' other from Constantinople to A drianople and Sarambey in Eastern Rumelia, with a branch connecting this line with Dedeagach on the Aegean. All these lines ran from the coastal ports into the Balkan interior, thus giving British commerce an opportunity to penetrate the peninsula. For this reason the Austrian government was anxious to connect the Balkan rail ways with its own network. Specifically, it wished to see the ConstantinopleSarambey and Saloniki-Oskiib lines continued to Nish, whence Serbian lines could be built to Belgrade and on to Semlin on the Austrian border. For this reason the Berlin Treaty included provisions requiring Bulgaria and Serbia to build the necessary connecting links running through their terri tories. This was done after m any delays, and on A ugust 12, 1888, the first through train rumbled over the tracks from Vienna to Constantinople. During the following decades numerous proposals were advanced for additional railway construction. Very few went beyond the planning stage because of the conflicting political interests that were involved. Several chan cellories scrutinized carefully every proposal for new track and did not hesi tate to oppose it vigorously if their respective interests were not safeguarded. A good example was the proposed seventy-mile line connecting Saloniki with the Greek network to the south. The Turkish government vetoed the pro posal, presumably for strategic reasons. As a result, the Greek railways were kept isolated from the rest of E urope until the eve of W orld W ar I. A more significant example was the rivalry between the Austrian in terests that favored a north-south line through Bosnia and Novi Bazar to Saloniki, and the Serbian-Russian interests that wanted an east-west line between the Danube and the Adriatic. Proposals for such trans-Balkan lines were advanced periodically from the 1870’s on. But A ustria was determ ined


418 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
to prevent Serbia and Russia from gaining access to the Adriatic through an east-west line, while Serbia in turn opposed a north-south line that would compete with her own railways and give A ustria free access to the Aegean through purely Turkish territory. The net result was that neither one of these trans-Balkan lines had been even started by the beginning of W orld W ar I. Similarly, in Asiatic Turkey the European powers competed with each other for railway contracts, the most spectacular manifestation of this competition being the “Berlin to Baghdad” railway concession granted to Germ an inter ests in 1903. This concession at once became an international football until 1913-1914, when the great powers adjusted their claims and literally divided Asiatic Turkey into spheres of economic influence. Governm ent loans were closely related to railway building as a means of W estern economic penetration in the Balkans and in the rest of the N ear East. Government loans, in fact, were necessitated by the heavy cost of rail ways as well as of other construction, such as roads and ports. Also, the burgeoning military establishments contributed substantially to the growing indebtedness of the various governments. W hen the latter turned to the money markets for loans, the reception they received depended largely on political considerations, especially by the turn of the century. Bulgaria provides a good example of the m anner in which foreign offices intervened in interna tional financial transactions. On M arch 13, 1912, Bulgaria signed an alliance with Serbia which became the cornerstone of the Russian-sponsored Balkan alliance system. Immediately thereafter Bulgaria turned to the Paris market for a substantial loan. A n earlier application in 1909 had been turned down, but Bulgaria now had the backing of Russia. “ You know ,” the Russian m inister in Paris w rote to his governm ent on June 7, 1912, “he [France’s Prem ier Poincare] said to me th at the French G overnm ent is disposed to facilitate the Bulgarian loan in Paris only because the Russian Governm ent declared to it that Bul garia, after forming a secret agreement with Serbia, had firmly decided to ally itself with the E ntente.” 3 Poincare, who had opposed the original Bulgarian application for a loan, now reversed his position and gave his agreement in principle. But a few weeks later he returned to his earlier opposition because Ferdinand m ean while had visited Vienna and Berlin, where he was received with conspicuous honors. W hen the Balkan Wars ended in 1913 Bulgaria again sought a loan on the Paris market. The French government was still opposed, suspecting with justification that Ferdinand was drifting toward the Central Powers. But when Ferdinand received some advances from Vienna banks, the French government became concerned and offered to support a loan if the Radoslavov cabinet were replaced by one less favorable to Germany. Now G er m any in turn offered a loan on condition that a tobacco export monopoly be established under her control as security for the loan. France countered by dropping the condition concerning the Radoslavov cabinet, whereupon Germ any waived her dem and for loan security. Ferdinand finally accepted


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1878—1914 419
the Germ an offer in 1914, a step that contributed to his decision the follow ing year to join the Central Powers. Throughout this episode financial con siderations were subordinated to political, and the loan was used as a pawn to attain diplomatic objectives. Under these circumstances the Balkan and Turkish governments borrowed heavily on the European markets. The Balkan states, which had negligible debts in 1878, were all in serious financial difficulties by 1914. In the latter year the Bulgarian public debt amouted to 850 million francs, the Serbian 903 million francs, the G reek 1.25 billion francs, and the R um anian 1.7 billion francs. Bulgaria was better off financially th an most of her neigh bors, yet by 1914 30 per cent of her total government revenues was needed to service her debts. The Turkish debt in 1914 am ounted to 3.9 billion francs, of which 2.4 billions were held by French interests, 900 million by Germ an, and 600 million by British. Finally, it should be noted that the Turkish gov ernm ent and all the Balkan governm ents, with the exception of the Rum anian, had to accept arrangem ents whereby their creditors were given a measure of control over the revenues pledged to the payment of the bonds they held. In each case this foreign control was accepted to avoid bankruptcy or as a consequence of it. The impact of the new imperialism upon the Balkans was much more profound than this brief survey would suggest. Thus far we have observed W estern economic penetration from the outside. We have analyzed it in terms of loans and railways provided by the West. Now we shall reverse our pro cedure and look at the process from the inside out. We shall examine the specific effects of W estern economic penetration upon institutions and prac tices and everyday living within the peninsula. We shall note that the dynamic civilization of the W est affected the Balkan peoples in myriad ways and operated as a powerful catalyst in stim ulating the new capitalist order that was now appearing and which we shall next examine.
THE NEW CAPITALISM
The Balkan peasants in the late nineteenth century were experiencing uncom fortably rapid change in virtually every field of life. Subsistence farm ing was giving way to commercial farming. T raditional customs were chang ing as communications between neighboring towns became more common. New political institutions were emerging with the rise of modern state struc tures of the W estern type. W hat were the roots of these far-reaching changes and what was the general pattern of the new Balkans that finally took form? One source of change was the winning of political independence by many of the Balkan peoples during the first three quarters of the nineteenth century. Those peasants who had been in feudal bondage now won their freedom, while many who had been landless were able to acquire plots. In general, political liberation created a more fluid social structure that was more susceptible to outside forces and to innovation. Political liberation also led


420 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
to the appearance of the modern state, which took the place of the old feudal lord. The state was not as arbitrary as the lord had been, but it was fully as exacting, if not more so. The state rapidly created a large bureaucracy and army, which in turn involved heavy expenditures and a rising public debt. F o r the peasant this m eant heavy taxes, burdensom e service in the arm y, and periodic forced labor on roads and fortifications. In return for these burdens the peasant received very little from the state. Little wonder that he regarded this new impersonal master as something foreign and fearful. The hatred that he formerly held for the feudal lord he now turned against the bureaucrat, the tax collector, and the gendarme. As significant as the appearance of modern state structures was the unprecedented increase of population in the Balkans during the nineteenth century. G reater security probably explains the growth of population in the early part of the century. The more rapid rate of increase after 1878 was caused by a fall in the death rate, usually explained by spreading m edical knowledge and improved hygienic conditions. Thus the population of Serbia rose from 1.7 million in 1878 to 3.02 million in 1914, while that of Bulgaria, including E astern Rum elia, increased from 2.82 m illion in 1881 to 4.33 m illion in 191 1. O ver a longer period the population of M oldavia and W al lachia rose from 1.5 million in 1815 to 7.2 million in 1912, and that of G reece increased from 750,000 in 1829 to 2.75 million in 1912. Since the area of Greece during those years grew only slightly from 18,346 to 24,558 square miles, it follows th at the population per square mile jum ped from 41 to 114. This represents an alm ost threefold increase in less than a century. The rapid growth of population had many im portant consequences. First, it compelled the Balkan peasantry to shift from a predominantly pas toral economy to an agricultural economy in order to increase their produc tivity. Instead of raising livestock, the average peasant now grew corn, grains, and potatoes in the interior of the peninsula, and currants, tobacco, citrus fruit, olives, and grapes in the coastal M editerranean areas. This shift to agriculture made possible the support of a much larger population than here tofore. Yet by the end of the century the soaring birth rate created a serious problem of agricultural overpopulation at the existing technological level. In Serbia the census of 1897 showed th at over 11 per cent of all rural house holds were landless. And this was1in a country which had suffered from de population at the beginning of the century and which never had had large estates in any appreciable num bers. In R um ania, where land distribution was less equitable, 60 per cent of the peasants at the turn of the century either had no land at all or else owned less than seven acres. This overpopulation had unhappy consequences for the Balkan peas ants. The majority were landless or else owned tiny plots incapable of sup porting their families. The situation steadily deteriorated because the con stantly growing population led to progressive fragmentation of peasant properties. This land hunger in turn forced the prices of agricultural land to rise ever higher. In some areas the mounting pressures were relieved by


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1878-1914 421
large-scale emigration overseas. It is notew orthy that the heaviest emigration was from regions with poor soil, such as certain parts of Greece, or from regions where much of the land was held in large estates, such as Slavonia and the Voivodina. By contrast, there was comparatively light emigration from Serbia and Bulgaria, where land distribution was more equitable. Those regions that lost a large proportion of their young men do not seem to have experienced a labor shortage— an indication of the degree of their overpop ulation. Rather, these regions experienced unprecedented prosperity because of the remittances of the industrious and thrifty emigrants. Greece, as we shall note in Chapter 25, represented the extreme case of a country whose entire national economy rested heavily on the golden flow of rem ittances from fabulous America. The Balkan peasants were affected not only by the increase in their numbers but also by the steady, inexorable shift from the traditional natural economy to a money economy. Money had been used in the earlier economy but only in a peripheral m anner. Production had been carried on by the peasant households primarily to satisfy family needs. A few commodities were sold in the local m arket, but not with the purpose of making profit. R ather the aim was to secure enough money to meet taxes and other obliga tions, as well as to buy a few essentials such as salt, a little iron, and perhaps a few pieces of cloth. In the latter part of the century this pattern changed radically. An increasing num ber of peasants began to produce primarily for the m arket in order to m ake a profit. In doing so they became dependent upon the growing market economy and fell subject to its all-pervading dynamics. W hat persuaded the peasant to abandon his traditional m anner of earning a livelihood? T he truth is that he had little choice in the m atter. T he new economy was the product of forces which he could not control and which he probably did not comprehend. One was the building of railways, which had two direct effects. The money spent in the process of construction undermined the traditional self-sufficient economy of the regions immediately affected. M oreover, the railways, when completed, made possible the im portation of large quantities of foreign machine-made goods. These goods were cheap and were bought to an increasing degree by the peasants, who thereby became correspondingly less self-sufficient. Another factor responsible for the new money economy was the growing European demand for Balkan agricultural products such as Ru m anian grain, Serbian livestock, and Greek currants and tobacco. Railway and steamship transportation now enabled the Balkan peasant to produce for the European market, and he did so to an increasing extent as the century progressed. If he had any hesitation about availing himself of the opportunity, he was soon forced to bestir himself by the growing demands of the tax collector. The new state apparatus, with its m ushrooming bureaucracy and army, everywhere caused taxes to soar. This tax burden, together with the cost of the new manufactured goods now made available, compelled the peas


422 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
ant to earn a money income by increasing his production or by getting butside work or both. This spread of the money economy had far-reaching social conse quences, many of them uncomfortable and unsettling for the peasants. The m anner of everyday living changed considerably. Tea, coffee, sugar, and sim ilar commodities passed out of the class of luxury goods into more common use. Town-made lamps replaced the home-molded candles, and the more prosperous peasants also bought furniture and household utensils. Iron and steel plows became more common, though the poorer peasants still used the hom e-m ade ironshod variety. A few households bought some ready-made clothing but the majority wove their garments from purchased yarn. In some peasant homes even a few books began to appear that were not exclusively religious. The num ber of purchased articles may appear insignificant by urban standards, but they represented, nevertheless, a radical departure from the self-sufficiency of earlier decades. The diffusion of the money economy also increased village contacts with the outside world and thereby affected the traditional pattern of village life. The peasant sensed that literacy was essential under the new order if he were to be able to deal with the townsmen. Hence he readily accepted elemen tary schooling for his children whenever it was made available. Once reading and writing became reasonably common, new ideas and ethics, new tastes and ways of living, began to alter the age-old peasant traditions. The younger gen eration was soon questioning the assumptions and attitudes upon which peas ant life had been based. Age no longer was regarded as sacrosanct. A new spirit of individualism and a desire for self-advancement and for personally owned possessions underm ined the solidarity of village life' and even of the family. Village solidarity was also shattered by the development of economic stratification. The peasant was frequently unable to meet his obligations be cause he lacked the knowledge and the capital to increase his productivity and because opportunities for outside em ploym ent were scarce. As his debts m ount ed he was forced to turn to a new figure in the village— the well-to-do peasant who was turning m erchant and moneylender. Being unfamiliar with money m atters, the peasant frequently overburdened himself with debts at usurious rates ranging from 10 to over 100 per cent. Peasant indebtedness early became a serious problem in each of the Balkan countries. The governments made some efforts to free the peasants from the usurers by providing credit at low rates. But the peasants usually were unable to provide the required security or else found the formalities and legal expenses excessive for the small sums they needed. Thus it was the usurers who borrowed the government funds at around 6 per cent and reloaned them to the peasants at double, triple, or several times that rate. Finally, the spread of the money economy made the Balkan peasants subject to the vagaries of the national, and even the international, market and credit mechanism. No sooner did they begin to produce for the European m ar


Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1878—1914 423
ket than they felt the crushing competition of overseas agricultural products. The Balkan peasants by no means escaped the effects of the long depression which all European agriculture experienced from 1873 to the mid-nineties. Purely national factors also affected the economic well-being of the Balkan peasants. Here too, they felt helpless before something they could not control. T hat something they symbolized as the city. It was the city that was the center of political, commercial, industrial, and financial power. Try as they might, the peasants were unable to insulate themselves from its influence and control. The railway, the local usurer and storekeeper, the governmentappointed teacher, tax-collector, and gendarm e— all subjected the peasants to the new urban centers with inseverable bonds. The peasant reacted by turning against the om nipotent city and all th at it stood for. “T he natural consequence of this situation,” states one authority, “was an increasing political and, espe cially, economic antagonism between the urban and the rural populations. It replaced the centuries-old antagonism between the peasantry and the feudal class. The struggle between the town and the village has rem ained the chief characteristic of the whole political, social and economic life in the South Slav lands up to the present day.” 4 Precisely the same point was made by a Bul garian novelist writing in 1892:
The peasant has but the vaguest idea of our transition from servitude to independent life; for him it matters little whether he pays tax to A khm ed or Ivan. In fact, Ivan is often more distasteful to him than A khm ed, for A khm ed could be more easily fooled or bribed; Akhm ed did not take his son off as a soldier w hereas Ivan does; A khm ed was naïve and spoke Turkish, while Ivan is to all appearance a Christian like him, speaks Bulgarian, yet exacts more from him than did Akhmed. The meaning of state, rights, and duties for the peasant add up to tax-payment and sending his son off as a soldier. His attitude to nature, life and livelihood are still those of fifty years ago.5
In conclusion, what pattern emerges from this survey of the rise of a m arket economy in the Balkan countries? We have seen that the transition from a natural to a money economy occurred because of the operation of do mestic factors such as population increase and political change, and also be cause of the intrusion of the new imperialism with its loans and railways and machine-made goods and markets for Balkan raw materials. The end result was the emergence in the peninsula of what may be termed a new money economy or capitalist economy. This capitalism, needless to say, was quite different from the advanced industrial variety th at prevailed in W estern Europe. All the Bal kan countries still rem ained overwhelmingly agrarian. Industries were few and were usually financed and operated by foreigners. Nevertheless, the new capi talism in the Balkans represented a fundam ental break with the past. It affected profoundly not only the economies of the Balkan countries but also their polit ical institutions and their traditional social patterns. Such disruptive change inevitably created a host of new problems— rural overpopulation, fragmenta tion of peasant properties, peasant indebtedness, and strife between the city


424 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
and the village. These problem s persisted not only to W orld W ar I biat also to W orld W ar II and even to the present day. Thus the late nineteenth century is a particularly significant period because it is the seedtim e of the basic p ro b lems that still beset the Balkans, and, indeed, the underdeveloped regions of the world in general.


23. Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914
L 1878, after five centuries of T urkish dom ination, an autonom ous Bulgarian state was established. Its domestic development during the decades up to W orld W ar I was basically similar to that of the other Balkan countries. Western political institutions were adopted, but these did not prove altogether successful, as indicated by the political instability, fragm entation of parties, low political m orality, and recurring conflict between the foreign-born rulers and the elected assemblies. The economic development of the country also corresponded to what was happening in the peninsula as a whole. The national econom y grew rapidly, but at· the cost of painful dislocation and re adjustment. For the traditional, agrarian, self-contained economy gradually gave way to a m arket economy under the impact of the industrialized and constantly expanding W estern world. The foreign relations of Bulgaria were dominated by two all-important issues, relations with Russia and the M acedonian problem. Russia had been primarily responsible for the winning of Bulgarian autonomy. To this day the outstanding landm ark in Sofia is the m onum ent to Tsar A lexander II, the lib erator of Bulgaria. Yet obligation and gratitude d d not lead to dependence and servility. F o r alm ost tw o decades the m ost popular political party in Bul garia battled against Russian intervention and looked to the W estern powers for support. And when W orld W ar I broke out, Bulgaria was to be the only Balkan country to ally itself with the enemies of Russia. Bulgaria also had a pressing irredentist problem, so that the Bulgari ans, like the Greeks, Serbians, and Rum anians, devoted much of their wealth and energy to liberating their unredeemed brothers remaining under Turkish rule. In 1885 they successfully incorporated Eastern Rumelia. But when they pressed on to M acedonia they collided not only with the T urks but also with the Greeks and the Serbians, who also had aspirations in that area. Thus the question of what was to be done with M acedonia provoked a furious conflict which involved all the Balkan states and, ultimately, the European powers.
425


426 Age of Imperialism, and Capitalism: 1878—1914
DYNAMICS OF BULGARIAN PO LITICS
O ne of D israeli’s proudest boasts was th at he had disrupted the Dreikaiserbund at the Berlin Congress. This claim was indeed justified. Tsar A lexander II referred wrathfully to the congress as a “E uropean coalition against Russia under the leadership of Prince Bism arck.” So disgruntled were the Russians that it seemed quite possible at one point that they might ally them selves with the French. This aroused B ism arck’s old fears of a C ontinental coalition against Germany similar to that which had almost overwhelmed Frederick the Great. In order to forestall this menace Bismarck concluded on October 7, 1879, his epoch-making alliance with A ustria. This proved to be the beginning of an expanding and self-perpetuating system of alliances and counteralliances which ultimately culm inated in W orld W ar I. Tsar Alexander was jolted by the A ustro-Germ an alliance. He was not ready to go so far as actually to conclude an alliance with republican France as a counterweight. But neither did he wish to rem ain isolated in E astern E u rope. The only alternative was to revive the Dreikaiserbund, and this was done, largely on A lexander’s initiative, on June 18, 1881. So far as the B alkans were concerned the renewed alliance provided that A ustria should be free to annex Bosnia-Herzegovina whenever she chose and that the unification of Eastern Rumelia and Bulgaria should not be opposed when produced by force of cir cumstances. The alliance also stipulated that modifications of the territorial status quo in the Balkans should be preceded by consultation and agreement among the signatories. This pact regulated the relations between Austria and Russia in the Balkans but it did not eliminate their rivalry. It was essentially a truce while the two powers watched each other suspiciously and sought to strengthen their respective positions in the Balkans. In this contest Austria was by far the more successful. She concluded alliances with Serbia and Rum ania in 1881 and 1883. Russia counted heavily on Bulgaria, expecting that her influence in that coun try would be accepted and unchallenged. But the Bulgarians took their new found independence seriously and reacted strongly against outside interference. W ithin a few years they had broken openly with Russia and were looking to the West for support. T he failure of the R ussians is surprising because T sar A lexander sin cerely wished to help the country which his armies had liberated. The Berlin Treaty had provided that before a prince was elected, an Assembly of Notables was to meet “under the superintendence of a R ussian im perial commissioner” in order to prepare a constitution. The tsar selected Prince A lexander DondukovKorsakov to go to Bulgaria. He was a com petent adm inistrator with liberal inclinations and was well liked by the Bulgarians. On February 22, 1879, Dondukov officially opened the Assembly of Notables at Tirnovo. Of the 231. deputies, 21 were appointed by Dondukov, 89 were elected, and the rem ain ing 121 came ex officio as members of the church hierarchy, the Moslem and Hebrew faiths, and the provincial and district councils.


Making of Bulgaria: '1878-1914 427
Dondukov presented a draft constitution to the Assembly with the ex planation that it was designed only to facilitate their work. “The final decisive w ord,” he assured the gathering, “belongs to you and to you alone.” 1 This affirmation was scarcely needed. Disraeli had assumed all along that the liber ated Bulgarians would become the tools of the Russians. But now the British consul who was observing the proceedings at Tirnovo reported to London that there did not “exist any Pan-Slavistic tendency, or even sympathy, among the Bulgarians, whether leaders or mass. Their tendencies are remarkably, I might almost say unamiably, exclusive; and may not incorrectly be defined as PanBulgarian; nothing more. As to their Servian and Russian cousins, they make no secret of their hearty dislike of the former, and of their wish, gratitude apart, to be well rid of the latter.” 2 As soon as the Assembly began discussion a rift manifested itself and soon crystallized into the Liberal and Conservative parties. This represented a continuation of the differences that had divided the Bulgarians under Turkish rule. During the struggle for ecclesiastical independence the conservative Bul garians had favored compromise with the Patriarchate while the radicals had dem anded a com plete break and an autonom ous church. Similarly, in the strug gle against Turkish rule the conservatives had wanted reform while the radicals worked for revolution and independence. Now that the country had been liber ated this cleavage persisted. Many of the Conservative party leaders had been educated in the West, were convinced that their illiterate countrym en were not ready for democratic self-government, and believed that political power should be entrusted to substantial citizens through an indirect system of voting or through a judiciously selected upper house. Also, they were inclined to look favorably toward Russia as the cham pion of conservative principles. By con trast, many Liberal leaders had received their education in Russia but returned with an assortment of nihilist-revolutionary doctrines and with a strong dislike for the tsarist autocracy. In domestic affaits they insisted on full popular sov ereignty and opposed any artifice which limited the participation of citizens in government. The British consul, William Palgrave, defined the issues separating the two parties as follows: “The so-called Conservative has in view the exten sion of the Administrative or Executive Power, and, though covertly, of the Princely Prerogative; the so-called Liberal, that of the Legislative or Repre sentative authority. . . . Personal motives, love of power or place, and the like, have doubtless much to do in the struggle now comm encing; but below all these there is a real divergency of principles at w ork, and it is likely to widen as time goes on. The general feeling of the country is certainly with the L iberals.” 3 The Liberals not only com m anded popular support, as Palgrave re ported, but also dom inated the Asseihbly of Notables. Consequently, the consti tution which was adopted on April 29,1879, was an extremely liberal document. It guaranteed civil liberties and delegated large powers to an assembly elected by universal suffrage. A n attem pt by the Conservatives to create an upper house was easily defeated. Alexander of Battenberg was elected Prince of Bulgaria the day after the constitution was adopted. He was an ideal choice so far as


428 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
background was concerned. He was a Germ an prince, he was related by m ar riage to the English royal family, he was a favorite nephew of the tsar, and he had fought as a volunteer in the Russian army against the Turks. Furtherm ore, he was an attractive young man, tall and imposing, of military bearing, and with a pleasant personality. But it soon became evident that Alexander not only was inexperienced but lacked discernment and statesmanship. He repeat edly misjudged the diplomatic situation; moreover, he persisted in trying to transform his primitive peasant country into a strong military and aristocratic state of the type that he was familiar with in Germany. His family background and military training led him to regard the Tirnovo constitution as “ridiculously liberal.” This attitude was bound to end in conflict with the Liberal leaders, who refused to compromise on their principle that “the National Assembly makes the laws, the Prince proclaims them .” 4 The Russian representatives in Bulgaria were another disruptive force. Some followed their foreign office policy of m aintaining good relations with England and A ustria and adhering strictly to the Berlin Treaty. Others were ardent Pan-Slavs who thoroughly despised the treaty and openly disregarded it. Still others followed the orders of the Russian w ar ministry, which wanted to train a strong and dependable Bulgarian army and to build a strategic rail way from the D anube to Sofia. In order to attain these ends the w ar ministry was prepared to support and to work through the majority Liberal party. The turbulence that characterized the early years of the new Bulgarian state is com prehensible in the light of these conflicting forces: a people who were generally suspicious of all foreigners and resolved to govern themselves; a popular party that had adopted an ultralibéral constitution and was deter mined to enforce it; a likable but inexperienced and tactless prince who knew little of his adopted country except that he could not abide its constitution; and a great power with supervisory authority but with no clearly defined and gen erally accepted policy.
RUSSIA FAILS IN BULGARIA: 1878-1885
Prince Alexander arrived in Bulgaria early in June, 1879. The elec tions for the Assembly, or Sobranie, were held on O ctober 12, 1879, and the Liberals won a large majority. A deadlock ensued because Alexander had ap pointed a Conservative prime minister who now faced a preponderantly Lib eral Assembly. A lexander finally ordered new elections for January 25, 1880, but again the L iberals won an overw helm ing victory. T he prince’s position appeared to be hopeless. The Liberals dom inated the Assembly while a R us sian general, Peter Parensov, com m anded the arm y and, in accordance with the w ar m inistry’s instructions, was supporting the Liberals on the constitutional issue. The only way out for Alexander was to appeal to the tsar, with whom he had cordial personal relations. A n opportunity presented itself when he vis ited St. Petersburg in February, 1880, for the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of A lexander II’s reign. T he tsar agreed to replace G eneral Paren


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 429
sov, but he refused to approve the immediate suspension of the Tirnovo consti tution. He insisted instead that the Liberals be allowed to hold office in order to determine whether or not the constitution was a practical instrument of gov ernm ent. Prince A lexander accepted this decision with satisfaction because he had no doubt about the outcom e. “It is im possible,” he declared in St. P eters burg, “to rule with the absurd Bulgarian constitution, for it makes no differ ence w hether the Conservative or the L iberal party is in pow er, as both are equally democratic and unreliable.” 3 T he Liberals form ed a m inistry on A pril 5, 1880, and rem ained in office one year. Their record was, on the whole, creditable. They passed constructive legislation and were restrained and correct in their relations with Alexander. B ut in retrospect it is clear th a t there never existed a real possibility th at the constitution would rem ain in force and the Liberal party would rem ain in power. T he reason is th at A lexander had convinced him self that, regardless of elec tion returns, the Liberal party did not represent the people. He was certain that his subjects looked to him rather than to the Liberal politicians, and that it was his duty to abolish the constitution which stood between himself and his people.
I have travelled through Bulgaria this year, and have again been able to satisfy myself how good, diligent, and thoroughly loyal my people are, and how slightly the idea of the Constitution has made its way among the real body of the people. They address themselves directly to me in the m ost trivial m atters, and by so doing express their distrust of the Ministers, and at the same time their conviction that I both ought to and can help them directly. . . . This very last session has again clearly proved to me that the present C onstitution is not suited to the country. It places the person of the Ruler in continual opposition to the National Assembly, and this must constantly become more acute, and culminate in tim e in open enm ity. Besides this the people lack the most elem entary requi sites for constitutional life. T he nation suffers under it, and only a few aspiring com m onplace men profit by it. 1 wish, above all things, for an organization that will allow me the possibility of guiding and interfering in a lawful and effective manner, and, at the same time, bestow on me the necessary authoritative powers for preventing measures and deeds that run counter to the interests of the State, and so enable me to fulfil my duty towards my new country. . . . 1 do not see how I am to com ply with Russia’s dem ands and wishes in the face of the antiRussian current in my nation and the arm y. . . ,6
The assassination of Tsar Alexander II in M arch, 1881, gave Prince Alexander the opportunity to have his way. The new tsar, Alexander III, was a strong opponent of liberalism and constitutionalism. Also, he was preoccupied with the domestic crisis and unlikely to concern himself with what might happen in Bulgaria. Prince A lexander took advantage of this situation to execute his coup on M ay 9, 1881. He dismissed the Liberal ministry and demanded, upon the threat of abdication, that he be given extraordinary powers for a period of seven years and that at the end of that period the constitution be amended in the light of the experience acquired in the interim . The outcom e of this bold


430 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
m ove depended upon the tsa r’s reaction. This proved to be favorable. T he tsar was presented with reports depicting the Liberal party as the Bulgarian counter part of the Russian nihilists and terrorists. W hen he received a telegram from the Liberal leaders requesting support, he wrote on the margin: “I will not consider any telegram from revolutionaries, and these Liberals are nothing other than socialists. The Bulgarian people will, I am sure, support the prince— for these are only a band of rowdies and cowards.” 7 Alexander now proceeded to hold elections under conditions which, as the British consul reported, made the outcome a “foregone conclusion.” The Liberal press was muzzled and uniform ed officers at the polls openly ques tioned and intim idated the voters. W hen the Assembly met on July 31, 1881, it voted unanim ously to accept all of A lexander’s dem ands. The A ustrian diplo matic representative reported to his governm ent that Bulgaria now had “a dic tatorship but not a dictator.” 8 This shrew d analysis suggests why A lexander’s troubles henceforth increased rather than lessened. The basic difficulty was that neither Alexander nor the Conservatives had enough popular backing to rule the country w ithout leaning upon Russia. Yet they were not willing to pay the price for this support. Russian contractors wanted to build a railway from the D anube to Sofia while Russian speculators and concession-hunters regarded Bulgaria almost as a new imperial province opened for exploitation. But the Conservative leaders were unwilling to accept this semicolonial status and re served lucrative investment openings for themselves and their friends. Thus Alexander and his associates were asking for both Russian protection and for full independence— two mutually exclusive conditions. The outcome was a deadlock between the Russians on the one hand and Alexander and the Conservatives on the other. Relations became embit tered as Russian officials disregarded A lexander and declared publicly that they were taking their orders from the tsar. In fact, Bulgarians of all political com plexions reacted against these foreign taskm asters and wished above all else to be rid of them. Finally, after much negotiating and jockeying, Alexander and the two political parties of Bulgaria form ed what was in effect a national front against the Russians. A new Liberal-Conservative coalition government took office and, on the insistence of the Liberals, the Tirnovo constitution was restored with the understanding that it would remain in force for three years before any amendments were considered. “The real common basis of this com prom ise,” reported the A ustrian consul, “is the prodigious hatred th at has de veloped . . . of the R ussian yoke w hich is becom ing increasingly intolerable. . . . The program of the government may be summarized quite simply in the Italian form ula: La Bulgaria fara da se [“Bulgaria will do it herself”].9
U NIFICATION OF BULGARIA: 1 8 8 5 - 1 8 8 6
Alexander took a momentous step in deciding to break with Russia. A pparently he assumed that the other powers would give him enough support to m aintain his independent position. The assumption proved unjustified. Eng


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 431
land was unwilling to involve herself in the northern Balkans, while Bism arck ’ told Alexander with brutal frankness that he need not look to Germany. Bis m arck w ent further and actively opposed A lexander’s courting of Princess V ic toria, daughter of the German Crown Prince Frederick. The German chancellor acted as he did because of diplomatic considerations. W hen Prince Alexander visited Berlin in May, 1884, Bismarck told him frankly, “G ermany has no in terest in Bulgaria, our interest is: Peace with Russia.” Bismarck explained that he could not allow the m atch with Princess V ictoria because St. Petersburg would interpret it as m eaning that G erm any was opposing Russia in the Bal kans. The original Dreikaiserbund had been disrupted in 1878 because of a crisis in the Balkans and Bismarck was determined that the revived League should not founder from the same cause. Finally, Bismarck warned Alexander, prophetically as it turned out, that if he continued to act independently of Russia he would eventually be forced to abdicate. “ But if you wish to remain in Bulgaria, then give yourself up to Russia unconditionally. . . . In St. Peters burg they know our view. So I advise you to seize any opportunity to restore good relations with R ussia.” 10 A lexander apparently took B ism arck’s lecture to heart. In A ugust, 1885, he met the Russian foreign minister, Nicholas Giers, and discussed at length the possibility of reconciliation. But nothing came of this because the following month an insurrection broke out in Eastern Rum elia which was to provide Alexander with his greatest trium phs and also, to force his abdication. The revolution occurred suddenly on September 18, 1885. The rebels had no difficulty in arresting the governor, G avril Pasha, who was a C hristian in accordance with the provisions of the Berlin Treaty. Gavril offered no re sistance, declaring, “ I am a Bulgarian and shall not call in the Turks. I wish happiness to the B ulgarian people.” 11 T he rebels form ed a provisional govern ment and issued a grandiloquent manifesto proclaiming the union of Eastern Rum elia with the principality of Bulgaria. It had been common knowledge that the people of Eastern Rumelia had wanted unification and that plots with this end in view had existed. Even the members of the Dreikaiserbund had recognized this situation and had agreed that they would not oppose unification. Nevertheless, Prince Alexander was seriously embarrassed by the timing of the revolution because he had just as sured Giers that there w ould be no disturbance in E astern Rum elia. Thus if A lexander now accepted union he would almost certainly alienate the Russians irrevocably, but if he refused to accept union he would alienate his own sub jects and make his position in Bulgaria impossible. A lexander was urged by Stephen Stambulov, a rising young Bulgarian politician, to throw in his lot with his people. “Sire,” he said, “the U nion is m ade— the revolt is an accom plished fact, past recall, and the tim e for hesitation is gone by. Tw o roads lie before your Highness: the one to Philippopolis, and as far further as God may lead; the other to Sistova, the D anube, and Darm stadt. I counsel you to take the crown the nation offers you.” A fter a little reflection Alexander answered, “I choose the road to Philippopolis.” 12


432 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
The question now was how the powers would react to this violation of the Berlin Treaty. The tsar made his position unmistakably clear by recalling all Russian officers serving in Bulgaria. This virtually decapitated the Bulgarian army, whose officers above the rank of lieutenant had been Russians. T sar A lexander revealed the reason for his opposition when, in reply to a Bulgarian petition, he stated: “There can be no question whatever of dissolving the Union, but as long as you keep your present Government, expect from me nothing, nothing, nothing!” When Stambulov heard of this response he requested the Russian consul for clarification. If by “present Governm ent” the tsar referred to the Bulgarian ministry, then it was ready to resign immediately. The consul replied that the phrase referred to Prince Alexander, and that so long as he rem ained in Bulgaria R ussia would do nothing for h er.1:i Thus Russian policy may be described as being opposed not to unification per se but to unification under Alexander. Britain, by contrast, now favored unification, so that Britain and Russia had completely reversed their positions on Bulgarian unity between 1878 and 1885. The reason for the British reversal was that Eastern Rumelia had not proven the anti-Russian barrier that had been planned at Berlin. The Turks had not garrisoned the passes in the B alkan M ountains; in any case, Bulgaria had Sofia and Varna, which outflanked the Balkan passes. Under these circum stances Britain decided that an unfortified and disaffected Eastern Rumelia was not likely to be as effective a barrier against Russia as a united Bulgaria, par ticularly in view of the strong anti-Russian sentiments that the Bulgarians had m anifested. B ism arck, as usual, was interested only in preserving the Dreikaiserbund. For this reason he wished to settle the unification issue as speedily as pos sible and was ready to support any arrangem ent that was acceptable to Austria and Russia. A ustria found herself in a difficult position because she preferred to rem ain on the side lines but could not do so because of her commitments to Serbia. H er 1881 alliance with Serbia com m itted her to support th at state if it attem pted to expand to the south. The sudden enlargement of Bulgaria had provoked a public clam or in Serbia for expansion. Prince Milan felt impelled to heed this clamor for fear of losing his throne. In fact, his scandalous private life and his complete unconcern for the welfare of his country had made him so unpopular that he was almost overthrown by a revolt in 1883. Accordingly, M ilan now decided to m ake some m ove, he cared not w here, as long as it allayed the agitation. The A ustrians reluctantly advised him to m arch, if he must, against Bulgaria rather than against Turkey, because they wished to keep open the route from A ustria to the Aegean. Meanwhile, Russia had proposed an informal conference of ambassa dors in Constantinople. This was held in November, 1885, but a deadlock en sued because Britain favored acceptance of unification while the Dreikaiserbuntl powers, on the insistence of Russia, were opposed. At this point Milan laid vio lent hands on the course of events. H e decided th at the impasse in Constant! nople ended any possibility of obtaining territorial compensation through diplo


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 433
matic means. Accordingly, he declared war on Bulgaria on November 13,1885. A quick Serbian victory was generally expected. N ot only had the Bul garians lost their officers; their main forces were concentrated along the T urk ish frontier. Only weak detachm ents had been left to guard Sofia, but these were able to hold off the Serbians until A lexander came up from Rum elia in a series of forced marches. The decisive engagement was a three-day battle fought at Slivnitza, twenty-five miles from Sofia, on Novem ber 17-19. The Serbians were routed, and by November 26 Alexander had entered Serbian territory. The trium phant Bulgars won further victories until the road to Nish and Belgrade lay open before them. The Austrians now intervened, warning A lexander that if he advanced farther he would be confronted with A ustrian troops. Alexander naturally accepted an armistice, and on March 3, 1886, the Treaty of Bucharest was signed restoring the prewar status quo. The victory of the Bulgarians ensured that the union of Eastern R u melia and the Bulgarian Principality would not be undone. Even Russia recog nized this fact and accepted a compromise arrangem ent providing for the per sonal union of the two areas. Because of R ussia’s insistence, Prince A lexander was not mentioned by name. Instead, the agreement reached on April 5, 1886, stipulated that the prince of Bulgaria be named governor of Eastern Rumelia for five years. Thus the violation of the Berlin T reaty was concealed by this legal fig leaf.
ABDICATION OF ALEXANDER: 1886
The Russians had insisted that Alexander should not be specifically named the new governor of Eastern Rum elia because they were as determined as ever to drive him out of Bulgaria. On August 20, 1886, their wish was sud denly fulfilled when A lexander was m elodram atically kidnapped in his palace and hustled across the border. The'deed was not the work of a few hired mis creants, as is often claim ed. T he fact is that half of the regim ental com m anders and m any higher officers participated in the plot. Some had decided that the unrelenting hostility of the tsar required that Alexander be removed for the good of the country. Others had personal grievances against Alexander involv ing promotions and discipline. Still others were dissatisfied with the terms of the personal union by which A lexander’s legal status was virtually th at of a Turkish pasha. In any case, a band of conspirators burst into the palace in the dead of night and dem anded, with loaded pistols in hand, th at A lexander abdicate. A captain tore a page out of the visitors’ book which lay in the hall and sat down to draw up the deed of abdication. Drink and excitement prevented him from scrawling more than a few unintelligible words, so a young cadet took the pen and completed the document. A lexander signed it on the back of a stoop ing officer and added the words “God protect Bulgaria.” H e was then conducted under guard to the Danube, put aboard his yacht, and landed several days later on Russian soil, where he was released. The leaders of the revolt did not have definite plans as to what to do


434 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
after Alexander had been removed. A provisional government was formed under the Russophil church leader, M etropolitan Clement. But it soon became ap parent that the public by no means approved of the coup. This gave Stambulov his chance, and he rose to the occasion brilliantly. He declared the members of the provisional government to be outlaws and organized a counterrevolution. W ithin a few days the provisional government had collapsed and Stambulov was master of the country. The next step was to find Alexander. After sending telegrams all over Europe he was finally located at Lemberg, A ustria. Stam bu lov sent him a telegram imploring him to return and assuring him that all Bul garia awaited him. Alexander promptly accepted and started back. W hen he arrived at Ruschuk he was met by the Russian consul, who made clear the uncompromising opposition of his government. Deciding on a direct appeal to the tsar, Alexander sent an abject telegram placing himself at his mercy: “Russia gave me my crown: I am ready to return it into the hands of her sovereign.” Alexander hoped to win over the tsar by his humbleness, but he was soon disillusioned. “Cannot approve your return to Bulgaria,” Tsar Alexander replied, “foreseeing disastrous consequences to country already so severely tried. . . . Y our H ighness will judge w hat is your proper course.” 14 The ultimatum was perhaps veiled but ultimatum it was nonetheless. Stambu lov attem pted to persuade A lexander to ignore the tsar’s threats and to rem ain on the throne. B ut the prince was overw helm ed by the tsar’s relentless enmity as well as by the defection of his army officers. The odds seemed to him im possible, so on September 7 he formally abdicated and left Bulgaria. A lexander failed partly because he did not heed B ism arck’s advice to “give yourself up to Russia unconditionally.” Instead, he vacillated back and forth between defiance and obsequiousness. Also, his inflated notion of royal prerogative antagonized a good many of his own subjects. Thus lacking solid support within his country, openly rejected by Bismarck, and receiving only moral backing from England, Alexander was doomed to succumb to the weight of Russian pressure.
FERDINAND AND STAM BULOV. 1887-1894
When Alexander departed from Bulgaria the tsar announced that he was sending General Nicholas Kaulbars as special commissioner to help the Bulgars elect a new prince. Immediately upon his arrival Kaulbars began giving “advice” on all matters. But the real leader of the Bulgarians now was Stam bulov. H e had engineered A lexander’s retu rn after the kidnapping and he had done his utm ost to persuade Alexander to rem ain on the throne. A fter these events Stambulov was in no m ood to listen to any “advice” from the Russians. Kaulbars insisted that the election of a new Assembly be postponed, but Stam bulov paid no attention and held the election as scheduled on October 10,1886. Despite the brazen intervention of Kaulbars, who toured the country urging the peasants to boycott the elections, the returns gave Stam bulov’s N ational party an overwhelming majority. The Assembly, or Sobranie, met and voted to offer the crown to Walde


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 4 35
m ar of D enm ark. T he tsa r’s opposition caused W aldem ar to reject the offer. The Sobranie then named a commission of three to search the European courts for a ruler. Serious consideration was given for a while to a proposal for the personal union of Bulgaria and Rum ania under King Charles. But Russia again intervened successfully by threatening to sever relations with Rum ania if Charles accepted the Bulgarian throne. This hostility of Russia, together with the fresh memory of w hat happened to Alexander, sufficed to scare off potential candi dates. F o r six m onths the crown of Bulgaria went a-begging. When the three commissioners reached Vienna one of them spent an evening drinking beer at R onach er’s well-known circus. H ere, at one of the marble-topped tables, he met a gentleman who professed to know the very man they were looking for. The delighted commissioner told his colleagues, and next day all three w aited upon Prince F erdinand of Saxe-Coburg and offered him the throne. A t first he stipulated that all the powers approve his candidacy. But he was too anxious for the post to insist on this condition. W hen the Sobranie elected him unanimously he accepted the throne and was crowned on August 14, 1887. H e estim ated that he had a sporting chance to keep the crown on his head. “A fter all,” he rem arked, “ if I am only the flea in the ear of the [Russian] bear, the experience ought to be nohe the less am using.” 1B Stambulov was the natural choice to serve as premier under the new ruler. T he m inistry which he form ed rem ained in office from Septem ber 1, 1887, to May 31, 1894. Bulgarian history during those seven years revolved around the two men, Prince Ferdinand and Prem ier Stambulov. At the outset there was no doubt that the prince had the junior status. He was young, inexperi enced, and ignorant of his country. H e possessed none of A lexander’s charm and dash. He had no taste for military affairs and he never assumed comm and at m aneuvers. It is not surprising that his subjects did not respond to him as they had to his predecessor. Stambulov, on the other hand, had already earned and established his reputation. Born the son of an innkeeper, he had behind him by this time, at the age of thirty-three, an extraordinary career as a revolutionary leader during the Turkish period, a brilliant statesm an under Alexander, and a successful lawyer in Sofia. F or sheer ability and force of character he towered above his contem poraries. M ore than once he dem onstrated his courage and decisiveness under trying circumstances. N ot w ithout reason was he referred to as the Bul garian Bismarck and considered to be one of the two or three really “strong m en” of E urope. B ut with all his great gifts Stambulov also had great faults. He believed that the end justified the means, and he never hesitated to employ force and even brutality in order to have his way. In his personal relations he rem ained a peasant— rough, im patient, and offensively blunt. N ot only did he dominate Ferdinand in the early years but he treated him like a puppet. On one occasion he revived the plan that had been proposed earlier for a personal union of Bulgaria and Rumania. He pointed out the advantages of the union to a Rum anian diplomat, who replied by asking what he proposed to do with


436 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
F erdinand. Stam bulov laughingly said, “I will see to it th at he is packed out of Bulgaria w ithin fifteen days.” 16 Stambulov grossly underestim ated his adversary. Ferdinand was per haps unimpressive in appearance, but he had a highly developed capacity for political and personal intrigue as well as a consuming am bition. He was deter mined to be undisputed m aster in his country and to make his country the dom i nant power in the Balkans. Numerous stories have been told of incidents illus trating his ambition. On one occasion the French consul, M aurice Paleologue, was kept waiting for ten minutes in a room in which was hung a panoram ic painting of Constantinople, the Bosphorus, and the Asiatic shores, all of which were overshadowed by a majestic m ounted figure designated as “T sar Ferdi n a n d .” 17 Paleologue had m any other opportunities to observe the com plex ch ar acter of the Bulgarian ruler, and in 1907 he dispatched to Paris a brilliant pen portrait which explains better than any other docum ent the vicissitudes that later befell the Bulgarian nation.
Refined to excess, enamored of art and given to whim, very proud of his origins, as disdainfully aristocratic as a prince of ancient G erm an blood can be, he has com e to live in a prim itive and rough country w ithout tradition and w ith out culture. After twenty years of rule he has become attached neither to the people nor to the country. In private he calls his subjects “my Bulgarian wolves.” He has made some of them his servants and others his adherents but not. one of them is his friend. His court is em pty; he never receives. . . . H e detests Sofia and was not em barrassed to tell me so. H e does not live in his capital m ore than three or four m onths a year. The rest of the tim e he shuts himself in his beautiful E uxinograd villa on the shores of the Black Sea, or in his Ebenthal castle near Vienna, or else wanders between Paris, Lpndon, Carlsbad, Coburg; he moves about ceaselessly. He does not like the army, he ignores financial matters, and he has little taste for adm inistration. In domestic affairs he concentrates all his attention and skill upon dom inating the political parties and keeping his ministers divided and insecure. His pride suffers continually from everything that reminds him of his status as vassal of the Sublime Porte; he disagreeably tolerates the presence of an im perial Turkish Com m issioner at Sofia; he is hum iliated by the title, “general aide de camp of the Sultan,” which the G otha A lm anac includes in the list of his titles. None of the courts he visits renders him sovereign honors. . . . W hat is particularly discouraging for him is that his am bition is not shared by the nation. The Bulgarians do not care to form a kingdom. Ottoman sovereignty does not weigh upon them; in fact, they enjoy complete autonomy and since they are very realistic souls they are satisfied with this regime. . . . They are also profoundly egalitarian and democratic; they know that a sovereign court would cost them dearly, and they are not at all impressed by monarchial trapping. This is one m ore contrast, and not the least curious, between the Prince and his p e o p l e . 18
Despite his aspirations Ferdinand had no choice but to lean upon Stam bulov at the outset. The two could not possibly establish a congenial relation


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 437
ship, given the aspirations of the aristocratic Ferdinand and the intolerance and imperiousness of the plebeian Stambulov. But Ferdinand bided his time and m eanwhile exploited Stam bulov’s talents to the full. Stam bulov’s greatest service was in repulsing the Russian attem pts to unseat Ferdinand and to set up a Russophil regime. A t first the Russians employed diplom atic pressure, though without success because Stambulov was supported by Britain and to a lesser extent by Austria. Finally, Tsar Alexander III decided to adopt a policy of nonintervention in Bulgaria, though he was resolved not to recognize Ferdi nand under any condition. T he other powers followed the tsa r’s lead, and F e r dinand remained unrecognized. Despite the tsa r’s decision against further intervention, various R ussian diplom atic officials with Pan-Slav tendencies attem pted to foster revolts in Bul garia. Invariably the conspiracies were unearthed and the ringleaders summarily executed on orders from Stambulov. The Russian agents and their accomplices next tried assassination. They killed a num ber of governm ent officials, but their principal intended victims, Ferdinand and Stambulov, escaped unharmed. Stambulov resorted to measures as ruthless as those of his opponents. He rounded up suspects and used torture to extract information. His critics ac cused him of instituting a reign of terror but he did succeed in stam ping out the conspiracies. A t the sam e time Stam bulov countered Russia’s diplom atic boycott by effecting a rapprochement with Turkey. This paid handsome dividends because the sultan reciprocated by granting several bishoprics in M acedonia to the Bul garian exarchate church. This and other concessions enabled the Bulgarians to achieve an extensive peaceful penetration of Macedonia. Neighboring countries that also had designs upon this area reacted vigorously to Stam bulov’s success, and the result was the bitter struggle for Macedonia which was to dominate Balkan politics to W orld W ar I and beyond.* F erd in an d ’s position in B ulgaria was also strengthened by his m arriage to Princess Marie Louise of Parm a (April 20, 1893) and by the birth of a son and heir. Complications were encountered at first because the princess was Catholic and the children were to be raised as Catholics, whereas the Bulgarian constitution provided that the heir to the throne should belong to the O rtho dox Church. Stambulov dem onstrated his strength in the country by passing through the Sobranie the necessary constitutional amendment despite strong opposition from Russia and from certain Russophil ecclesiastical functionaries within Bulgaria. Stambulov now was at the height of his power, as was made clear when the elections held in the fall of 1893 returned only 15 or 16 O ppo sition deputies in a house of 160. A few m onths later, on M ay 31, 1894, the world learned with surprise that Ferdinand had dismissed his Bulgarian Bismarck. And the following year, on July 15, 1895, Stambulov was assassinated, the victim of a foul and tragic murder. The factors behind this sudden downfall are clear, Ferdinand had al
* See Chapter 28.


438 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
ways disliked his overbearing m inister and had w anted to be the actual as, well as the titular ruler of the country. Now for the first time he felt that he could dispense with Stam bulov’s services, partly because he had acquired experience and personal followers during the past years and also because his m arriage had strengthened his position. Furtherm ore, Ferdinand was desperately anxious to secure recognition from Russia in order to assure the future of his dynasty. But Stambulov was the leader of the anti-Russian forces in Bulgaria and as long as he rem ained in office a rapprochement with Russia was out of the question. These considerations led Ferdinand to decide to dismiss Stambulov. Having reached this decision, Ferdinand now revealed the dark side of his character. He deemed it prudent not to dismiss Stambulov outright, so he resorted to petty intrigues and annoyances to force his resignation. Then, after Stambulov had resigned, mobs were allowed to gather about his house shout ing threats and imprecations. The police played their part by keeping him under what almost amounted to house arrest. This torment had continued for three months when the correspondent of the Frankfurter Zeitung called upon him on August 14, 1894. Stambulov unbosom ed himself in a violent diatribe in which he held Ferdinand up to contem pt by relating various incidents of a personal nature. H itherto Ferdinand had been content with petty persecution. Now he was bent upon complete destruction. H e instituted legal proceedings for defam a tion and dismissed Stam bulov’s adherents from every public post. A law was enacted “for the prosecution of governm ent officials who appear to possess more wealth than they ought.” A nother law abolished the existing pension sys tem and reduced the families of former ministers to beggary. Most of Stambu lov’s p roperty was sequestered, and he was even refused a passport to go abroad to recover his health. The end came one evening when three assassins fell upon Stambulov in the street and mutilated him fearfully in the face, head, and arms. The police in the vicinity appeared unconcerned. Three days later, on July 18, 1895, Stambulov breathed his last. The veteran London Times Balkan corre spondent, Jam es Bourchier, reported these tragic events to his paper as follows:
A heavy responsibility rests with those who refused Stambulov permission to leave (he country, and who, detaining him here like a prisoner, neglected the measures necessary to ensure his safety. . . . Stambulov was a thorough Bulgarian — a thorough Oriental perhaps— with the virtues and failings of his kind. With little of the veneer of civilization, with little distinction or refinement of manner, he concealed beneath a rough exterior a natural tenderness and delicacy of feel ing which only those who knew him intimately could appreciate. There was noth ing of humbug or affectation about him; he was a man— a great man. Whatever his defects may have been, of his patriotism and devotion to his country there could never be any doubt.19


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 439
BULGARIA UNDER FERDINAND: 1 8 9 4 - 1 9 1 4
Ferdinand at last was the unchallenged m aster of his country. He re mained the m aster throughout his long reign until his abdication in 1918. His success was based on two maxims: “Divide and rule” and “Every man has his price.” In order to forestall the rise of another Stambulov, Ferdinand purpose fully set political leaders against each other and disrupted political parties into warring factions. As a result, Bulgaria soon had more political parties than any other country in the Balkans. Ferdinand also gained effective control over the small class of educated and politically active people by developing a highly organized system of “spoils.” R. W. Seton-W atson, the British historian, who witnessed the system in operation, described it as follows:
“Enrichissez-vous” became the scarcely veiled invitation to every public man. . . . The secret of Ferdinand’s power has lain in his skill in calculating the psychological moment for driving each batch of swine away from the trough of power, and, still more, in his policy— pursued with a relentless and uncanny mas tery of detail— of supervising their diet. In other words, he has made it his busi ness to pry into the personal activities of his ministers, and his dossier of com promising documents is the envy of every criminal investigation department .in Europe. . . . Ferdinand set himself to create a system by which the individual might grow rich and prosper exceedingly, so long as he remained the faithful servitor of the throne, but risked immediate disgrace and ruin if he ventured to assert his independence. Thus there was always a waiting list for the post of Premier, and whenever Ferdinand had had enough of one politician and his fol lowing, he merely had to turn to a rival group and entrust it with the “making” of an election and a majority.20
Under these circumstances the identity and the party label of the poli ticians that were allowed to hold office at various times are not as significant as might ordinarily be expected. When Stambulov resigned, Constantine Stoilov form ed a cabinet which included all the elem ents form erly in opposition. The cabinet rem ained in pow er to 1899, when it fell, partly because of F erdinand’s intrigues among the ministers. The next cabinet worthy of notice was headed by Vasil Radoslavov, and lasted from 1899 to 1901. Its only claim to fam e is that it provoked the organization of the Agrarian party when it attem pted to reintroduce the tithe in 1900. T he peasants had suffered heavily from a series of bad harvests during the preceding years. They refused to pay the new levy and resorted to arm ed resistance in several districts. The disorders which ensued not only forced the government to resign but also stimulated the peasants to form their own A grarian party. This grew slowly but steadily until W orld W ar I discredited the other parties and enabled the A grarians to assume office in 1919. Two elections were held in 1901 and the outcome was a ministry under Stoyan Danev. Its chief characteristic was its extrem e Russophilism . Danev is reputed to have declared, “W e have no secrets from R ussia.” 21 In the fall of 1902 G rand Duke Nicholas and num erous Russian officers attended the consecration of a Russian church and m onastery in the Shipka Pass, the occasion


440 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
being the twenty-fifth anniversary of the taking of the pass by Russian troops. No basic issues or principles distinguished the various ministries that held office during the years 1894-1914. Only on the question of relations with Russia were there meaningful differences, so that the cabinets that passed in kaleidoscopic succession may be classified as being either Russophil or, as the other school was termed, Stambulovist. The Russophil Danev cabinet lost popu larity because of the failure of Russia to support Bulgaria actively in M acedonia. In M ay, 1903, it gave way to a Stam bulovist governm ent, which rem ained in office under various leaders until 1908. D uring these years international rela tions impinged more and more upon domestic affairs. The Stambulovist min istry concentrated much of its attention on the 1903 insurrection in M acedonia and the complications that followed. Similarly, the succeeding governments concerned themselves with the Young Turk Revolution, the proclam ation of Bulgaria as a fully independent kingdom, and the negotiations leading to the Balkan League of 1912. Turning to these international relations of Bulgaria, we find that two issues stand out above all others: relations with Russia, and the problem of M acedonia. As noted above, one of F erd in an d’s motives in dismissing Stam bulov in May, 1894, was to clear the way for a rapprochement with Russia. This was made easier by the death of A lexander III later in the same year. Ferdi nand sent condolences to the new tsar, Nicholas II. In July, 1895, he dispatched _ to St. Petersburg a deputation headed by the m etropolitan of Tirnovo to place a gold wreath on the tom b of A lexander III. Ferdinand went so far in his recon ciliation cam paign as to rebaptize his son, Crown Prince Boris, in the O rtho dox faith. Tsar Nicholas responded by standing as the godfather of the crown prince and sending a special envoy to represent him in the fceremonies held in February, 1896. The tsar went further and took the initiative in procuring for Ferdinand the recognition of the great powers. The reconciliation between Russia and Bulgaria was complete, and Ferdinand at last had secured the rec ognition he so long had desired. During the following years the relations between Russia and Bulgaria were not always close and cordial. The high point of friendship was reached with the secret military convention concluded between the two countries in 1902. This was directed against an A ustrian-Rum anian pact of the previous year and provided that Russia should aid Bulgaria in case of attack by R um a nia. Despite these close ties the Bulgarians were not altogether satisfied. Russia extended her favors to Serbia as well, and at times this affected Bulgarian in terests. Russia displayed interest in Serbia particularly after the Austrophil King A lexander O brenovich was overthrown in June, 1903, and replaced by Peter Karageorgevich. Also, Russia refused to support actively Bulgarian aspirations in M acedonia because she wished to avoid another Balkan crisis. This desire was understandable at a tim e when R ussia was busily engaged in the F ar Easl. N evertheless, Bulgarian am bitions in M acedonia rem ained unsatisfied and many held Russia responsible. F o r these reasons Russian-Bulgarian relations were by


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 441
no means uniformly close, and in the end Bulgaria was to be the only Balkan state to align itself against Russia during W orld W ar I. Turning to the M acedonian question, we find that here also Stambulov’s downfall led to a basic shift in B ulgarian policy. Stam bulov’s strategy had been to cultivate friendship with the Turks in return for concessions and peaceful penetration in M acedonia. This had proved highly profitable; yet certain elements remained dissatisfied and dem anded more aggressive meas ures. They received the green light when Stambulov was removed. Ferdinand was resolved that M acedonia should follow the path of Eastern Rumelia. He was careful to deplore publicly the activities of the secret committees that fom ented revolution and created anarchy and bloodshed in M acedonia. In actual practice the committees carried on their work with little interference. One reason was that tens of thousands of M acedonians had settled in Bul garia as immigrants or refugees and Ferdinand dared not antagonize them for fear of an antidynastic movement or even assassination. Also, there was the fact that Ferdinand and his subjects did want M acedonia and were not willing to make a serious effort to curb the committees unless the diplomatic situation at a given moment called for such a gesture. The details of the M acedonian problem and its effect on B ulgarian and general Balkan diplo macy will be considered in C hapter 28. Suffice it to note here the following excerpt from the report of the British consul in Sofia reviewing the events during the period from 1897 to 1907:
During the decade under review each successive Government was con fronted by the issues raised by the Macedonian question. . . . The attitude of successive Bulgarian Governments towards the insurrectionary movement differed only in degree. While condemning the criminal practices of the Committees, they one and all sympathized with their aims and were powerless to suppress them al together. Measures were, indeed, from time to time taken to prevent the passage o f bands and the sale of arms, but the wooded hills near the frontier always re mained the centre of the reeruiting operations of the bands, while rifles were oc casionally abstracted from the military stores.22
E C O N O M IC D E V E L O P M E N T TO 1914
Bulgaria was almost exclusively agrarian under the Turks and it re m ained overwhelmingly so between the winning of independence and the out break of W orld W ar I. Toward the end of the Turkish period the peasants were granted the right to own land and some of them did buy plots from the Turkish landholders and from the state. But the great majority remained landless and in a state of feudal or semifeudal dependence on the Turkish lords. This dependence varied from region to region, the most onerous being in the western part of the country, which could not be supervised adequately from Constantinople. Here the lords collected a heavy stipulated rent rather than a tithe, and they had complete authority over the villages, including the right to sell them when they wished. In other areas the peasants were


442 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
much better off, being provided with houses, seed grain, and fodder, and sharing the crops equally with the landowner. Tax payments to the state also varied greatly. Tax farming prevailed to the end, with the exception of brief interludes when the government tried unsuccessfully to collect taxes directly. T he tithe of 10 to 15 per cent on grain was collected in kind and the taxes on other produce usually in money. The grain tax in Bulgaria, as in other Balkan countries,* was collected in such a manner that the peasants were left vulnerable to extortion by the tax farmers. In the years just before liberation the Bulgarian lands north of the Balkan M ountains paid the equivalent of 36 to 37 million francs yearly in taxes, and an additional 3 million in customs duties. Of this total, 32 million francs were sent to Constantinople. Thus the Turks drained the wealth of the country through their tax levies in addition to the dues collected by the Turkish landowners from the peasants. The Turkish feudal system began to disintegrate in June, 1877, as the Turks fled south before the advancing Russian armies. The exodus had two im portant results: it left the peasants freed of the personal dependence and obligations of the past, and it enabled them to seize the Turkish-owned lands which they previously had worked. W hen the peace settlement was arranged in Berlin in 1878 a provision was included recognizing the property rights of the Turkish landowners. Legally they now had the right to return to Bulgaria and take possession of their estates, but in practice they were effectively prevented from doing so. The Russians had no desire to see the Turks return, fearing that British influence would return with them. Accordingly, the Russians issued a directive on August 2, 1878, stating that any returning "Turks charged with crimes of m urder, robbery, arson, rape, or destruction of villages would be immediately tried before a military court. Two landowners who did return were in fact tried and sentenced to death, though the tsar commuted their sentence to exile from Bulgaria. O ther Turks who might have wished to re turn now decided otherwise. The Turkish landowners were not able to take physical possession of their estates but they were given financial compensation. The funds were ob tained from the Bulgarian peasants, who were forced to pay for the lands they had seized. Some had to go into debt to do so w hile'others were obliged to sell their stock. Despite this burden, the fact rem ains that a sig nificant agricultural revolution occurred in Bulgaria in 1877-1878. Feudalism was abolished and so were the large estates. Bulgaria became a country of small peasant proprietors. O ne of the m ain problem s in the following years, as elsewhere in the Balkans, was the continual fragmentation of the peasant plots. One reason for this was the rapid increase of the population from about 2,825,000 in 1881 (in both B ulgaria and E astern R um elia) to about 4,330,000 in 191 i.
* See Chapter 15.


Making of Bulgaria: 18 78-1914 443
M oreover, the inheritance law adopted in 1890 provided for the equal dis tribution of land among the children in contrast to the previous Turkish law which favored the sons over the daughters. These factors explain the follow ing landholding statistics for the year 1908 (a decare equals approximately a fourth of an a c re ):
Percentage of total Percentage of area Size of holding number of landholders of private holdings Very small (less than 20 decares) 45.52 6.9 Small (20 to 100 decares) 41.44 42.3 Medium (100 to 300 decares) 11.96 36.5 Large (300 to 1,000 decares) 0.98 8.8 Very large (over 1,000 decares) 0.10 5.5
Source: L. Pasvolsky, Bulgaria’s Economic Position (W ashington, D. C., 1929), p. 25.
H oldings und er twenty decares or five acres were considered below the minimum necessary to provide a livelihood, yet 45 per cent of all land holders were in this category. This was so despite the fact that, in contrast to Rum ania, very few large estates existed. Thus the land hunger of the Bul garian peasant arose not from maldistribution of land but rather from the growth of population and the dependence of 80 per cent of that population upon the soil for livelihood. The revolutionary changes in landholding and in land tenure did not produce a corresponding change in agricultural techniques. The reason was that feudalism was abolished not by the operation of economic forces, as had occurred in England, but rather by political developments. These develop ments did not uproot the peasants, who, in most cases, continued to till the same soil as in the past and in the sam e m anner. As late as 1911 agricultural machinery was used only on a few large estates and even the common plows were mostly made of wood. In the whole of Bulgaria at that time there were 114,000 iron plows as against 420,000 wooden ones. The peasants grew wheat as their cash crop and maize for home consumption. Before W orld W ar I Bulgaria had a greater per capita acreage in wheat than any other E uropean country. Consequently, exports depended on the wheat crop and the welfare of the peasants depended on the world wheat markets. In the late nineteenth century the peasants began to feel the competition of the wheat that was beginning to reach Europe from the New W orld and from Australia. They were ill-prepared to meet this competition because their productivity was almost the lowest in Europe: 11.8 quintals per hectare in 1911, com pared to 13.5 in Rum ania, 14 in Hungary, 22.2 in England, and 38.1 in D enm ark.23 W heat obviously offered no future, so the peasants began to specialize during the years before 1914. Increased exports of poultry, eggs, attar of roses, and tobacco reflected this trend. A fter W orld W ar I tobacco production rose until it became by far the most valuable export.


444 Age oj Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
Finally, it should be noted that throughout this pre-1914 period Bul garia rem ained overwhelmingly agrarian. It is estim ated that in 1911 agricul ture and livestock accounted for 65 per cent of the total national income, compared to 14 per cent for industry and handicrafts. Industry and handicrafts were of some significance during the Turkish period. They were concentrated mostly in m ountain villages, where streams provided power and where the livestock formed the basis for the woolen and leather crafts. Textiles were the chief product, Bulgarian woolens cloth ing most of the Turkish army. W ater power was used for Hour mills, iron forges, sawmills, and some machine spinning. These crafts flourished so long as they operated within a large free-trade empire. Independence brought dis location and in some cases extinction. Some of the handicrafts had declined even before liberation. Improve m ents in D anubian navigation in the 18 40’s had led to increased im ports of A us trian m anufactured goods, though the poor land transportation facilities still pro vided some protection against this influx. But the building of railways from the 1860’s on left the country open to A ustrian, British, and other m anufac turers. This com petition was ruinous in many fields, and nothing could be done to curb it because the Berlin Treaty forbade import tariffs above 8 per cent ad valorem. Thus in Sofia there were 20 soap factories in 1876, but twenty years later there were only 5 left even though the population had in creased greatly in the meantime. In Stara Zagora, 2,500 looms had'w oven woolen cloth before independence, but by 1913 only 30 remained. In 1876 Pirdop had 7 0 0 -8 0 0 spindles, by 1896 only 2 0 -3 0 were left. During the same period the knife makers of Kazanlik dropped from 25 to 3, and the saddlers of Panagyurishte from 100 to 5 or 6.-4 It should be noted that the handicrafts which were going under were those that faced direct competition from the West. But other trades flourished as the national economy became more complex and required more auxiliary services. This was the case with blacksmithing, tinsmithing, locksmithing, and construction work. The proportion of people engaged in artisan industry probably did not decline, the number totaling about 150,000 in 1911. F actory industry was very slow in developing in Bulgaria because of the restricted im port tariff. W ith the fall of Stambulov in 1894 the govern ment adopted a new and more aggressive economic policy. Legislation in 1894 and 1897 raised im port tariffs to 25 per cent ad valorem. Large indus tries were given positive encouragement in the form of tax exemptions, free dom from duties on certain imported machinery, lower rates on Bulgarian railroads, and guaranteed state purchases even if their prices were higher than for imported articles. The earliest factory industries were in textiles, tanning, flour milling, and food and agricultural processing. L ater came factories for chemicals, ceramics, metals, paper, wood, and sugar refining. . All these, of course, were on a small scale. Both handicraft and factory in dustries, as we noted above, accounted for only 14 per cent of the national income in 1911, as com pared to 65 per cent from agriculture and livestock.


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 445
The building of railroads profoundly affected the economic develop ment of Bulgaria. Railroads were primarily responsible for the W estern eco nomic penetration of the country and for the transform ation of the subsistence economy which traditionally had prevailed there. Before liberation the only railroads were the R uschuk-V arna built by an English com pany in the 1860’s to speed traffic down the Danube to Constantinople, and the 697 kilometers of the main Vienna-Constantinople line which had been constructed on Bul garian soil. In 1885 legislation was passed requiring that all railroads should be state-owned. The government then bought these lines and proceeded to build others with the assistance of borrowed foreign capital. One reason for this new construction was the provision in the Berlin T reaty requiring both Bulgaria and Serbia to complete the sections of the Vienna-Constantinople line running through their territories. By 1912 Bulgaria had 1,948 kilometers in operation. This construc tion was an immense burden on government finances. As in the western United States, these lines were built ahead of the traffic, hoping thereby to stim ulate it. But this did not occur in Bulgaria. One reason was the poor layout of the network, pork-barrel motives having determ ined some of the construction. But more im portant was the fact that the Bulgarian economy was too poor and insufficiently specialized to w arrant a complex grid of rail roads. Thus the return from the lines was never enough to cover the interest on the capital invested, the return in 1911 being 3.56 per cent in contrast to the interest charge of 7 per cent. In the field of public finance the central fact was the chronic and increasing indebtedness of the government, due to the heavy expenditures on the army and on internal improvements, such as port development and rail road construction. U nfortunately, the growth of the country’s productive capacity did not keep pace with its m ounting debt obligations. The percentage of the state budget allocated for payments on the public debt increased from 4.3 in 1887 to 19.7 in 1911. The result, as in other B alkan countries, was a certain degree of foreign control over national finances. In 1902, for ex ample, the governm ent gave its creditors control over the revenue from a special tobacco tax in o rder to secure a consolidation lo an .25 The general pattern that emerges from this survey of Bulgarian eco nom ic developm ent is typical o f w hat was to be found throughout the penin sula at this time. The traditional agrarian subsistence economy was disinte grating under the impact of the dynamic industrial economy of the West. The repercussions of this impact were varied and ever-expanding until they affected virtually every phase of the national economy. Change produced still m ore change in a never-ending chain reaction. W estern loans made possible the building of railroads; railroads led to the im portation of W estern machine-made goods; these goods undermined many traditional handicraft industries; W estern loans also created a rising national debt and heavier public taxes; and, finally, at the base of the pyramid, were the peasants who were forced to shift from their traditional subsistence farming


446 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
to commercial farming in order to pay the new taxes and to buy the new W estern manufactured goods. Change was not limited to the economic sphere. The everyday life of the peasants was also affected in innum erable ways. Im proved transport facilities made the villages more susceptible to the influence of the neighbor ing towns. The new state education system left its im print throughout the country. M oreover, the new national army was a potent leavening force, broadening the horizon of the peasant recruits and giving them new ideas on food, clothing, and sanitation. Political institutions underwent corresponding changes and the re sults were by no means always positive. The pashas, the agas, the bashibazouks, and the other representatives of O ttom an authority that Gladstone had excoriated were now gone. W ith them went the inefficiency, the arbi trariness, and the extortion that characterized Turkish adm inistration at this time. In its place was established a W estern type of state structure with the usual bureaucracy, centralized administration, and party system of govern ment. This did not fit well with the historical traditions and existing insti tutions of the country. The com m unal self-government allowed by the Turks withered under the centralism of the modern nation-state. The peasants re garded the new political structure with the same suspicion that they had learned to look upon all governm ental authority. Their attitude did not change with time because they generally felt that they received 'little in return for the military service and the mounting taxes which they paid. Thus the cleavage between rulers and ruled that characterized the Turkish period persisted after independence to a considerable degree. The new rulers were Bulgarian bureaucrats rather than Turkish pashas or Greek prelates. They usually were peasants by origin and yet they frequently tended to look down upon their illiterate countrymen and to have little rapport with them. The peasants reciprocated by regarding the cities with mingled fear, aversion, and contem pt. Their attitude tow ard Sofia illustrates this point. U nder the Turks Sofia was a squalid little provincial town with â predom i nantly alien population— Turkish, Greek, Jewish, and Armenian. Bulgarians did not feel at home there and kept away. A fter liberation Sofia became the capital of the country. It grew rapidly in size and became overwhelmingly B ulgarian in population. Y et for m any peasants Sofia rem ained som ething alien and to be feared— a symbol of the exploitation and injustice under which they felt they suffered. Alexander Stambuliski, leader of the Agrarian party and prime minister after W orld W ar I, voiced this antiurbanism of the peasants when he referred to Sofia as “Sodom and G om orrah.” The famous Bulgarian poet-philosopher, Stoyan Mihailovsky, expressed the same senti m ent through one of his characters:
D o you see this pretty, coquettish Bulgarian capital? It is built out of plunder and robbery! D o you recollect what a dirty village it used to be some


Making of Bulgaria: 1878-1914 447
twenty-five years ago? N ow it shines, it attracts like a Parisienne. . . . Well, to me, it is a thousand times filthier, filthy in the purity of its atmosphere, foul in the cleanliness of its streets and courtyards, foul because it is a living proof that the history of young Bulgaria has begun by spoliation.26


24. Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878-1914
T
J . H E s t r u g g l e between Russia and Austria for con trol of Serbia determined to a considerable degree the development of that country throughout the nineteenth century. N ot only Serbian foreign rela tions but also Serbian domestic politics were influenced profoundly. Political leaders were classified as being A ustrophil or Russophil. The former usually were admirers of W estern culture, regarding Russia as an Asiatic and semibarbarous state. Accordingly, they were convinced that Serbian national in terest dem anded close relations with Austria. The Progressive party was the most im portant in the Austrophil cam p and after 1878 it was supported strongly by Prince Milan. The Russophils, on the other, hand, were to b6 found mostly in the Radical party. It also derived its ideology from the West but its leaders were strongly influenced by the Russian exiles in Switzerland, ranging from the anarchist Bakunin to socialists of every complexion. As time passed, the Radical party leaders dropped their socialism and republicanism for na tionalism and monarchism, and thereby became more acceptable to the con servative Serbian peasantry. In foreign affairs, the Radicals, in contrast to the Progressives, regarded Russia as the leader of the Slavic world and the protector of the Slavic peoples against their traditional enemies, the G er mans and the Turks. This position appealed to many Serbs and constituted the basis for the strong popular following of the Radical party. U ntil M ilan’s abdication in 1889 Serbia was firmly com m itted to a p ro-A ustrian course. M ilan’s hapless son and successor, A lexander, vacillated between A ustria and Russia in a futile effort to find support for himself and his unpopular queen. The m urder of both Alexander and his queen in 1903 led to a change of dynasty and to a change in general national policy. Sub servience to Vienna gave way to a more independent and nationalistic course. One repercussion was the so-called Pig W ar, an economic conflict with strong political overtones. The political com ponent became more pro
448


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1 8 7 8-1914 449
nounced as the new regime in Belgrade made Serbia increasingly attractive to the South Slavs under H apsburg rule. The struggle came out into the open with A ustria’s annexation of B osnia-H erzegovina in 1908. T henceforth A ustria was the m ortal enemy of the South Slavs, and Serbia an intolerable menace to the H apsburg Empire. Sarajevo and W orld W ar I were the logical outcome of these decades of irrepressible conflict.
AUSTRIA’S T U N IS
The outstanding factor in the history of Serbia after 1878 was the subservience of that country to Austria-Hungary. This relationship was due in part to Russian policy. Serbia was rebuffed at the Berlin Conference by Russia, who showered her favors instead upon her new Bulgarian protégés. Serbia’s representative, Jovan R istich, had no alternative but to seek the support of A ustria’s foreign m inister, C ount A ndrassy. The latter took ad vantage of Serbia’s predicam ent to drive a hard bargain. He backed up Ristich at the conference and enabled him to gain certain territories as well as full independence for Serbia. But in return A ndrassy required Ristich to sign an agreement on July 8, 1878, promising certain railway construction in Serbia to link up with A ustrian lines', and prom ising also to conclude a tariff treaty with A ustria with the ultimate aim of a customs union between the two countries. Ristich was not an Austrophil and apparently had no intention of fulfilling these commitments. He repeatedly postponed negotiations for the proposed tariff treaty and he turned the Skupshtina against a customs union by pointing out its dangers for Serbia’s independence. B ut A ustria was able to have her way by making use of Milan. Not only was the prince bitter against the Russians and the Bulgarians because of the experiences during the recent war; he needed A ustrian financial and diplom atic support in order to assure his position on the throne. Accordingly, M ilan was ready to oblige the A ustrians by discharging Ristich in O ctober, 1880, and replacing him with a Progressive ministry headed by Milan Pirochanats and M ilutin G arashanin. On April 24, 1881, the new government negotiated a trade treaty providing for such low duties on Austro-Serbian trade that it came close to being a customs union. This was favorable for the Serbian peasants, who were provided with an almost limitless market in the H apsburg Em pire. On the other hand, no protection could be afforded to Serbian industry against the competition of A ustrian manufacturers. Also, the entire Serbian economy now became dangerously dependent upon Austria. Between 1884 and 1892 approxim ately 87 p er cent of Serbia’s export trad e and 66 per cent of her im port trade was with her northern neighbor. Much more serious than the trade treaty was the political pact which M ilan concluded on his own authority while visiting in Vienna in June, 1881. When he brought the document back to Belgrade, Pirochanats and G arashanin threatened to resign in protest against its terms. A nd well they might,


450 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
for the text required Serbia to prevent intrigues on her territory against Aus tria (including the Slav provinces of Bosnia, Herzegovina, and the Sanjak of Novi B azar) and to conclude no treaties with foreign countries without A u stria’s perm ission. In return for these extraordinary com m itm ents A ustria undertook to recognize M ilan as king if he decided to assume that title, and also to support Serbia if she attem pted to expand southward, excepting into the Sanjak of Novi Bazar. Upon reading the text of this pact Pirochanats commented that “by such a convention Serbia would stand in the same rela tion to Austria-Hungary as Tunis to France.” 1 In order to appease his ministers Milan returned to Vienna to secure modifications of the terms. He was able to get a statem ent on O ctober 30, 1881, providing that the treaty “cannot impair the right of Serbia to nego tiate and conclude treaties, even of a political nature, with another govern ment. It implies for Serbia no other engagement than that of not negotiating and of not concluding any political treaty which would be contrary to the spirit and the tenor of the said secret treaty.” 2 This forthright statement satisfied the Serbian ministers and the political crisis passed. But in actual fact the statem ent was worthless. In order to obtain it M ilan had secretly signed a letter a week earlier, on October 24, in which he recognized the full validity of the original treaty. “I hereby assume the formal engagement on my honour, and in my quality as Prince of Serbia, not to enter into any negotiations whatsoever relative to any kind of political treaty bet\veen Serbia and a third state without com m unication with and previous consent of Austria-H ungary.” 3 In this m anner M ilan double-crossed his ministers and relegated his country to the role of A ustria’s Tunis. The assurance of A ustrian support did not solve M ilan’s problem s. In fact, his position became increasingly precarious because of mounting opposition to his rule. One reason for his unpopularity was his pro-A ustrian policy, which necessitated acceptance of what most Serbians considered to be an utterly unacceptable status quo in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in the Turkish-held provinces to the south. A nother reason was his treatm ent of his queen, Nathalie, the daughter of a Russian colonel. M ilan was anything but a faithful husband, and since Nathalie was beautiful and spirited, public sympathy was on her side. Furtherm ore, she was naturally pro-Russian, which increased her popularity in the country. Thus the royal estrangement assumed a political aspect, with M ilan being definitely the unpopular party in the dispute. More and more frequently talk was heard that Serbia would be better off if M ilan were replaced by Prince Nicholas of M ontenegro or by Peter Karageorgevich, who was living quietly in Geneva. On M arch 6, 1882, Milan assumed the title of king and raised Serbia to the dignity of a kingdom. But the glamour of the new title did not make Milan popular. In fact, a local peasant insurrection broke out the following year with the rebels threatening to m assacre all governm ent officials. About the same tim e the opposition R adical party won a m ajority of the seats in the Skupshtina. This party was by far the best organized in the country, with


committees functioning in each district and a national committee in Belgrade providing over-all leadership. The effectiveness and popularity of the Radicals m ade M ilan’s position correspondingly m ore difficult since he was forced, because of his foreign policy, to rely upon the Austrophil Progressive party. The last blow came when M ilan declared war on Bulgaria on November 14, 1885. Bulgaria had just incorporated Eastern Rumelia, and M ilan decided that it was essential for his personal prestige to obtain corre sponding com pensation for Serbia. A t first he thought of attacking Turkey and expanding to the south. But he feared that the Turks might repeat their victory of 1876, so he turned against the Bulgars. Instead of winning an easy victory, M ilan suffered the series of humiliating defeats described in the preceding chapter. The Bulgarians were marching trium phantly on the road to Belgrade when the Austrians intervened and forced the victors to accept a peace restoring the status quo ante bellutn. Defeat at the hands of the Bulgarians was shameful enough for the Serbians. But the fact that the Aus trians rescued them from their ignoble plight was unbearably mortifying. M ilan’s position had becom e impossible. H e appears to have been aware of this, for he now sought to gain public approval by adopting on January 2, 1889, a new and liberal constitution to replace that of 1869. This gesture failed; hence two months later, on March 6, he made the supreme sacrifice in behalf of his dynasty by abdicating in favor of his son, A lexander. M ilan still was only thirty-five years old, although he had been on the throne twenty-one years. He was a man of far above average ability who had squandered his talents and opportunities. His departure was greeted generally with a sigh of relief despite the lingering affection of some of his subjects for their genial monarch.
THE LAST OBRENOVICH
If M ilan’s reign was depressing, th a t of A lexander was pathetically tragic. The only son of his father, and without near relatives, Alexander was the last hope of the house of Obrenovich. His childhood had been spent in an unhappy atmosphere of domestic strife. When he came to the throne at the age of thirteen he was a quiet, introspective, and melancholy boy, a lonely and pitiful figure in his exalted position. His divorced parents con tinued to keep the capital in a ferm ent with their unceasing bickering. On one occasion a mob of townspeople and students clashed with the police when the latter attem pted to expel Nathalie from Belgrade. A t length the royal parents agreed to live abroad in order not to damage the prestige of the dynasty further. But Alexander completed the destructive work they had begun. In his search for the affection and security denied him in his boyhood A lexander contracted a marriage which was violently opposed by his subjects and which was to prove fatal to himself, to his queen, and to his dynasty. W hatever his failings, Alexander early dem onstrated that he had a will of his own. O n A pril 13, 1893, when he was still only seventeen, he got rid of his regents and took pow er into his own hands. This move was gen
Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878—1914 451


452 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
erally acclaimed because the regents were unpopular. But Alexander soon came into conflict with the predom inantly Radical Skupshtina. On the advice of his father, who now returned from Paris, he abrogated the liberal consti tution of 1889 and restored that of 1869. M ilan ensconced himself in the palace and became com m ander in chief of the army. In that capacity he did excellent work, devoting his time and talents to a complete overhauling of the arm ed services. But the press was bitterly hostile, so M ilan retaliated by promoting legislation restricting the press and the right of association. In July, 1899, an attem pt m ade on M ilan’s life led to m ore repressive m easures, particularly against the Radical party. Meanwhile, A lexander was being urged from all sides to find a wife and assure the future of his dynasty. He expressed willingness to accommo date, but set very high conditions. His bride, he declared, must be “young, beautiful, and lovely. . . . politically well connected . . . at least have family relations with one of the first-class Courts of Europe; further, she ought to be a highly cultured and gifted wom an; and, last but not least, very wealthy.” Count Goluchowski, the A ustrian foreign minister, who was naturally con cerned about the future of the O brenovich dynasty, considered A lexander’s expectations to be excessive. “Please tell the King,” he said to a Serbian diplom at, “that a Princess who possesses all these conditions could do better than m arry King A lexander of Servia and spend her life in Belgrade! T here fore he ought to be satisfied if we succeed in finding for him a Princess who possesses some of his stipulations. . . . I think we are in a position to recom mend to him one of the most charming and most cultured Princesses in Europe.” 4 T he princess in question was of. a m inor princely G erm an family. A lexander adm itted th at she looked attractive in photographs shown to him. “Certainly by the end of the year, if not sooner,” he prom ised his father, “you will see me a m arried m an.” 5 But A lexander did not have the G erm an princess in mind when he made this pledge. Unknown to his parents, to his ministers, and to everyone else, he had already found his true love and future queen. She was M adame Draga Mashin, widow of a Bohemian engineer and form er lady-in-waiting to his mother. W hen A lexander announced his inten tion to marry her a major crisis broke out. His entire cabinet resigned. The press made clear the public indignation. M ilan warned his son prophetically that “the dynasty would never recover from the impossible marriage for which you have decided.” 0 But Alexander would not be dissuaded. He was unmoved by the weighty arguments that Draga was considerably older than he, that she was probably sterile, and th at her past was not above reproach. His reply to all this is revealing of the inner forces th a t im pelled him to sacrifice himself and his dynasty:
I have had neither childhood nor youth like other men. The eternal quarrel between my parents made my life bitter, undermined my health in gen


Serbia ancl the South Slavs: 1 8 7 8 -1 9 1 4 453
eral, and my nerves more especially. Such a life killed in me every sentiment. . . . In the whole world there is only one woman who can make me forget the bitter ness of my past life, and make me feel happy. . . . There is no power on earth which could prevent my marrying Draga, whatever the consequences may be. . . . If I cannot marry Draga as King, I will leave Servia for ever, and marry her as a private individual.7
A lexander might have found the happiness he was seeking if he had carried out his threat to abdicate before marrying Draga. Instead, he re mained on the throne and made her his queen on July 23, 1900. From then on life was almost a continuous nightm are for the unfortunate Alexander. Draga, according to the Austrian minister, “revealed herself as ambitious, avaricious, greedy; and persecuted unmercifully any who did not at once hurry to C ourt to do her homage or who did not believe in her ability to bear children.” HA lexander tried frantically to have D raga accepted, even to the point of naming regiments, schools, and villages after her, and designating her birthday a state holiday. But many Serbians continued to look down upon her as the disreputable widow of an obscure foreign engineer. Equally galling was the social ostracism of the European courts, which refused to receive the royal couple. The crowning humiliation was the fantastic “false expectancy.” In August, 1900, only a month after the wedding, the government announced that the queen was an expectant mother. Alexander was overjoyed and ordered the news to be made public despite the obvious inference of pre marital relations. He hoped thereby to arouse sympathy for Draga and to check the widespread rumors of her sterility. Gifts were beginning to shower the court when the news broke that the queen was not pregnant at all. The Russian government had been dubious of the reported pregnancy and had sent three obstetricians to examine the queen. They discovered that she was not pregnant and signed a protocol to that effect. The “false expectancy” as it was called, aroused widespread popular resentment. Many believed, and not without justification, that Draga had been deliberately deceitful and that she had planned to adopt the child of her sister, who was pregnant at the time. It also appears that this was not her first “false expectancy,” and that she had feigned others before her m arriage in order to inveigle the naive Alexander.
Alexander was now in an even worse position than his father had been after the disastrous Bulgarian adventure. The opposition movement grew rapidly to revolutionary proportions. In the elections of July 22, 1901, the Radical party won a substantial majority of the seats in the Skupshtina. Propaganda literature in favor of the Karageorgevich dynasty began to circu late in all parts of the country. O n M arch 23, 1903, students dem onstrated in Belgrade and were dispersed only after police had killed several partici pants and arrested over a hundred. Alexander met the gathering storm with severe restrictions on the press and on civil liberties. O n M ay 19, 1903, he held new elections but under such intimidation and police terror that the


Radicals refused to participate. The Skupshtina that was elected was properly subservient but as inconsequential as it was unrepresentative. Such was the situation in Serbia when a group of army officers or ganized a conspiracy to m urder Alexander. The plotters enlarged their circle to include various political leaders. But the conspiracy remained essentially apolitical, the aim being simply to get rid of Alexander. Participants included not only Karageorgevich supporters but also traditional Obrenovich adherents and even a num ber of republicans. The government got wind of what was afoot and began to make arrests. The conspirators decided to strike at once before it was too late. O n June 10, 1903, at tw o o ’clock in the m orning a group of tw entyeight officers forced their way into the palace. Someone turned off the elec tricity and the conspirators rushed through the palace hallways in confusion. They dynam ited door after door in their search for Alexander and his queen. Finally they found the royal chamber, only to discover their quarry gone. The officers knew that they were hiding somewhere in the building, so in desperation they prepared to raze the palace to the ground with dynamite and artillery. Finally one of the conspirators stumbled on to a door concealed behind draperies and leading to a secret alcove where Alexander and Draga were hiding. In a moment the king was riddled by thirty bullets and the queen by eighteen. Then the two corpses were put to the saber. A t 3 :5 0 a .m . the jubilant officers rushed out on the palace balcony shouting, “T he T yrant is no m ore!” “L ong live P eter K arageorgevich!” Troops lined up below on the palace grounds responded enthusiastically, roaring for Peter and shooting their revolvers in the air. Bullets rained every where and general pandemonium ensued. In the midst of the din two young officers hurled the bodies of the king and queen out of a palace window into the garden below. Before the bloody night was over the queen’s two brothers were also killed, as well as the prime m inister, the minister of interior, and several officers who had rem ained loyal to Alexander. Twenty-four hours after the carnage a provisional government was form ed consisting of four conspirators and six representatives of the political parties. This government summoned the Skupshtina of 1901 rather than that which had been elected two weeks before the royal tragedy. The Skupshtina voted to restore the liberal constitution of 1889 and then elected Peter K ara georgevich king of Serbia. Some of the younger conspirators favored a re public, but it was realized that such a form of government would not have been recognized or even tolerated by the European powers. On June 24, 1903, Peter returned to Belgrade after forty-five years of exile.
REVOLUTION AND REVIVAL
Peter was sixty years of age at the time of his accession. During his long sojourn abroad he had attended the military school at Saint-Cyr, fought in the Franco-Prussian W ar of 1 8 7 0 -1 8 7 1 , and been decorated witli
454 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878—1914 455
the Cross of the Legion of H onor. In 1877, on the outbreak of the revolt in Herzegovina, he had organized a band of volunteers and fought against the Turks. Though a soldier by training and inclination, he was also a m an of scholarly taste and achievement, having translated into the Serbian language John Stuart M ill’s Essay on L iberty. T his rich background m ore th an bal anced his lack of experience with Serbian affairs. Furtherm ore, his queen was a daughter of Nicholas of M ontenegro and most Serbians welcomed this dynastic tie with the neighboring sister state. The first problem facing the new regime was to secure recognition from the foreign powers. T here was no question about the regim e’s popular ity and control of the country. Only a week after the m urder the British minister ruefully reported that “Belgrade had resumed its ordinary life and not only forgotten, but apparently rejoiced in, the murderous extinction of the royal fam ily.” 1' Y et regardless of the popular reaction, the chancellories of Europe were profoundly shocked and were most reluctant to accept the regicides. Oddly enough, the first powers to recognize Peter were Russia and A ustria. T he explanation given by the Russian foreign m inister is revealing: “ . . . the risk of seeing a republic proclaim ed could not be incurred.” 10 T he example of the eastern empires was followed by'other states, including France and Germany. But Britain refused recognition unless all the regicides were ousted from official positions. Because of the unsettled international situation the Serbian government finally decided to accept this condition. On the third anniversary of the palace murders, diplomatic relations between Serbia and Britain were renewed and the new regime in Belgrade thus gained general international recognition. Meanwhile, elections had been held on September 8, 1903. The over whelming majority of the seats were won by the Radicals, who were divided into two factions which alternately split off and joined together. The most durable cabinets were led by Nikola Pashich, who later was to become the political boss of the new Yugoslav state. The outstanding characteristic of Serbian political life during the years after 1903 was the consolidation of civil liberties and of democratic freedoms. Irregularities did occur during elections and at other times, but the king and the politicial leaders generally kept within the bounds of the law. F or the first time Serbia enjoyed true con stitutional government, and the relations between government and people became much healthier than in the past. In its foreign relations the new regime faced two m ajor problem s: the struggle for M acedonia, which will be considered in Chapter 28, and the so-called Pig W ar, which was fought with Austria. The basic cause of the “Pig W ar” was A u stria’s attem pt to continue h er econom ic and political domination over Serbia. We have seen that on April 24, 1881, Serbia was constrained to sign a tariff agreement with A ustria which established a virtual customs union. Serbian agricultural goods and Austrian manufactures were to be exchanged with very low custom duties or none at all. Thus Serbian


456 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
industry continued to be stifled while Serbian agriculture remained depend ent on the Hapsburg markets. This tariff agreement was renewed in 1892 on essentially the same term s, with the result th at A ustria continued to dom inate Serbia’s commerce. For the five-year period preceding 1906, Austria-Hungary supplied 53.35 per cent of Serbia’s im ports and absorbed 83.66 per cent of Serbia’s exports. This economic dependence was especially irksome for the Serbians because it also meant political dependence. A ustria could, and did, bring political pressure to bear whenever she wished by closing her border to Serbian live stock on the pretext that it was diseased. With the accession of the new dynasty, Serbian policy became m ark edly nationalistic and anti-Austrian. This manifested itself when the AustrianSerbian trade treaty expired in 1905. It was extended to M arch, 1906, with the understanding that a new treaty would be concluded during the interim. But the negotiations bogged down, partly because the Serbians wanted more independence but also because Hungarian agricultural interests were de manding protection against Serbian products. An impasse ensued; whereupon the Serbians concluded a far-reaching economic pact with Bulgaria. It estab lished virtual free trade between the two countries; it allowed citizens of one country to work and live in the territory of the other; and it foresaw the establishm ent of a custom s union on M arch 1, 1917. It was speculated at the time that the pact might lead eventually to a united Serbo-Bulgarian state that would be strong enough to block A ustrian influence in the Balkans. Austria countered by demanding that the Bulgarian treaty be voided. Serbia refused, so Austria “discovered” that the Serbian livestock was dis eased and closed her border to further imports. In this manner the “Pig W ar” began between the Serbian David and the Austrian Goliath. The Vienna press warned Serbia that she was economically dependent on the Hapsburg Empire and predicted th at she would “ suffocate in her own sw ine-fat.” 11 The question of tariffs was now complicated by that of armaments. Serbia had bought military equipment earlier from the Austrian Skoda works and had found it to be unsatisfactory. Now she began negotiations» for French arms, but Austria again objected. The Austrian foreign minister informed the Serbian am bassador in Vienna th at “ we shall certainly determ ine the extent of the concessions under the new commercial treaty by the extent to which the state contracts now. under discussion are given to A ustria-H ungary.” 12 Serbia ignored this pressure; indeed, she could scarcely do other wise. If she had placed her order with the Skoda works the A ustrian govern ment would have obtained valuable inform ation about Serbian armaments and also would have had control over munition supplies in the future. On Novem ber 7, 1906, Serbia gave her arms contract to the French firm of Schneider-Creusot. Having crossed the Rubicon, Serbia looked desperately for new markets. Her search was surprisingly successful. From Turkey she obtained railway transit and a loading zone in Saloniki. In Egypt she discovered a


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878-1914 457
large m arket for her cattle. Also, she concluded trade agreements with numerous European countries, including Germany, France, Britain, Russia, and Italy. The net result was that Serbia did succeed in lessening her eco nomic subservience to A ustria. The two countries finally signed a customs pact on July 27, 1910. But whereas Serbia before the “Pig W ar” had shipped about 90 per cent of her exports to Austria, henceforth she sent only about 30 per cent. Also, Serbia was now beginning to process her agricultural products because of the greater distance to her new markets. In place of cereals, for example, she now exported flour, and in place of cattle she shipped fresh and salt meats and animal products of various types. Serbia also had sub stantially increased the import duties on certain manufactured goods, thus giving protection to her industries for the first time. Finally, the Serbian army was now provided with French rather than Austrian artillery, a change that was to prove of the greatest im portance less than a decade later. We may conclude that during the years following the accession of the new dynasty Serbia experienced a marked recovery. The political at mosphere was healthier, the national economy was sounder, and the interna tional prestige of the country rose immeasurably from the dark days of the Bulgarian war and the Draga buffoonery. The revival came none too soon, for Serbia now was faced with a series of life-and-death tests— the Bosnian crisis of 1908, the Balkan wars of 1912-1913, and the Sarajevo m urder of 1914, which precipitated W orld W ar I. These great events constitute a part of Balkan and general E uropean diplom acy and will be considered later in that context.*
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT
Serbia remained an overwhelmingly agricultural country during the period from 1878 to 1914. By the latter year 84 per cent of the population was engaged in agriculture, 7 per cent in industry, 5 per cent in govern m ent em ploy or in the professions, and 4 per cent in trade. Belgrade, the capital, had a population of only 9 0 ,000 in 1910, and the next largest city, Nish, had 25,000. Conditions in the countryside were changing rapidly during these decades. O ne reason was the sharp increase in population from 1.7 million in 1878 to 2.9 million in 1910, a growth of 71.3 per cent in 32 years. Serbian industry did not expand rapidly enough to absorb this population increase. Also, Serbia did not have an em igration safety valve as did areas like C roatia and the Voivodina, the reason probably being that latifundia did not exist in Serbia and consequently there was not as much pressure upon the Serbian peasants to emigrate. The net result was a mounting population pressure upon the land which led to increased fragm entation of peasant prop erty. This is revealed in the following statistics on the size of farm s in Serbia in 1897. Since 7 to 8 hectares of land were needed to support a family of
* See C hapters 28 and 29.


458 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
five, by the end of the nineteenth century about 60 per cent of the Serbian peasants did not have sufficient land to support their families.
Distribution of Farms by Size in Serbia, 1897
Size in hectares Number Percent of total
Rural households without land 34,952 1 1.34 0 to 1 hectare 19,173 6.22 1 - 2 31,368 10.18 2 - 5 93,627 30.39 5 - 2 0 117,939 38.29 2 0 -5 0 10,277 3.33 50 - 100 710 0.23 1 0 0 -2 0 0 68 0.02 Above 200 6 0.00
Total 308,120 100.00
Source: J. Tomasevich, Peasants, Politics and Economic Change in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1955), p. 206.
A nother im portant change in the Serbian countryside was the shift from livestock raising to cereal cultivation. The shift occurred because the population increase forced the peasants to put more land under cultivation, leaving insufficient land for pasture. Also, the demand for grain rose with ' the growth of population. As a result, the num ber of livestock per thousand inhabitants fell from 1,498 head in 1859 to 695 in 1895. The drop in the num ber of pigs was even more sharp, from 1,061 per thousand inhabitants in 1866 to 416 in 1890. Serbia had a more varied agricultural production at the beginning of the twentieth century than either Rum ania or Bulgaria. The peasants grew mostly corn, eating it themselves and also feeding it to their pigs. They grew less wheat but consum ed little of it, about a quarter to a third of the crop being exported. The peasants also grew barley for the cattle, for the beer industry, and for export. Tobacco crops were limited by the state, but enough was grown to meet domestic needs. Sugar beets were introduced about 1900 and a German concern established a refinery. About 1850 the Serbs began to dry plums into prunes for foreign markets. The government controlled the quality carefully and a lucrative export trade resulted. The m ost im portant developm ent affecting Serbia’s econom ic prog ress at the turn of the century was the “Pig W ar” with Austria, which began in 1906. We noted above that as a result of the war Serbia found new outlets for her agricultural goods in W estern Europe and elsewhere, thereby reduc ing her dependence on the Austrian market. The “Pig W ar” also aided Ser bian industry. A protective tariff was adopted in 1906, and by 1910 Serbia had 470 factories with a production valued at 74.4 million francs in contrast to 270 factories in 1905 with a production worth 29.4 million francs. Milling was the most im portant industry, accounting for a third of the total value


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878-1914 459
of the industrial output. Other im portant branches were meat packing, sugar refining, brewing, woolen textiles, and mining. Serbian industry, like that of the other Balkan countries, was devoted almost entirely to the processing of local raw materials and agricultural products. Despite the increased indus trial production in the early twentieth century, only 7 per cent of the pop ulation were engaged in industry on the eve of W orld W ar I. The growth of industry was also helped by the improvement of trans portation facilities. The first stage was road building, which got under way intensively in the 1860’s. R ailroads followed about two decades later. In this, as in other respects, Serbia lagged far behind the South Slav provinces under H apsburg rule. From 1846 onward, railroads were being built from A ustria and Hungary through Slavonia and Croatia to the ports of Trieste and Fiume. By contrast, no railroads were built on Serbian territory before 1878. The O ttom an government had let contracts a few years earlier for a main line from Constantinople to Zemun on the Austrian border. Sections had been built running northward into the Balkan interior from Constantinople, Dedeagach, and Saloniki. But none had reached the Serbian frontier by 1878. The Berlin Treaty stipulated that Austria, Turkey, and Serbia make the necessary arrangements for constructing the gaps on Serbian territory. The three countries reached agreem ents in 1880 and 1883, and the first through train from Vienna to Constantinople passed through Serbia in 1888. The Serbian section of the Orient Express, as the main line was called, had been built by a French firm and was 461 kilometers in length. The Serbian governm ent was dissatisfied with the service provided by the French company and bought it out between 1889 and 1892. By 1912 the government had built another 400 kilometers of railroad, mostly narrow gauge. The govern m ent also organized the Royal Serbian Shipping C om pany in 1890 to chal lenge the foreign monopoly of shipping on the Danube. By 1913 the company had thirteen river steamers in operation but the foreign com panies were still in control of most shipping on the D anube. One of the most significant features of Serbian economic development in the late nineteenth century was the rapid rise in governm ent expenditures and debts. This reflected the growth of a money and credit economy as well as the mounting cost of the state bureaucracy and the armed forces. Govern m ent expenditures rose from 12.5 million francs in 1869 to 46.2 million in 1890, to 76.3 m illion in 1900, and to 120.1 million in 1911. Increasing expenditures m eant increasing debts. The first foreign loan came from Russia in 1867 for military equipm ent. L ater borrowings were made in A ustria, G er many, and, after the “Pig W ar,” in France. Thus the public debt rose from 2.3 million francs in 1867 to 16.5 million in 1880, to 414.0 million in 1895, and to 903.8 million in 1914. Increasing indebtedness was accompanied by increasing foreign control over national finances. Debt payments were guar anteed by the Monopolies Administration comprising two representatives each from the Serbian finance ministry, the Serbian N ational Bank, and the


460 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
foreign bondholders. This body was given control over the revenue from the taxes on such commodities as tobacco, salt, petroleum, and liquor. Reviewing the economic development of Serbia during the nineteenth century, we find the pattern sim ilar to th at in other B alkan countries. The peasant had freed himself from Turkish landlords and feudal obligations but he had then to contend with usurers and merchants and to support an expen sive state bureaucracy and army. He found that he needed money to pay taxes and to buy the manufactured goods that now were made available to him. This compelled him to produce more and to sell his output on the m ar ket. Thus he became dependent on the domestic and international market and, all too frequently, on the village usurer. These far-reaching economic developments were paralleled by equally far-reaching social changes, and the connection between the two was intimate. W e noted in C hap ter 14 that the zadruga was giving way to the individual family unit. A nother social trend was the continuation of the gulf between the city and the country. The cleavage was understandable during the T urk ish period, when the cities consisted of Turkish officials and soldiers and of assorted foreign merchants and artisans. But it persisted for some time after independence had been won. One reason was the rise of a bureaucratic class which was not very efficient, which was frequently corrupt, and which was generally regarded by the peasants as an expensive and dispensable luxury. Indeed, a common peasant attitude was that independence should mean at least no more interference and exactions from the city. The rift between city and country existed also because of the cul tural difference between the two. The countryside was largely illiterate. Three fourths of Serbian peasant children in the early tw entieth ceptury did not at tend school. On the other hand, the bureaucrats who were in contact with the peasants had an academic training and tended to despise illiterates and to regard themselves as being superior. T he final social developm ent to be noted is the growing class strati fication within the village itself. The successful peasant who turned money lender and m erchant made his appearance in the m id-nineteenth century. It was he who borrowed money from government institutions' at a low rate while most peasants were unable to do so because they could not provide security. Thus the moneylender borrowed at 6 per cent and lent to the peasants at 12 per cent, 36 per cent, even 120 per cent. The wealthy peasant-usurer could send his sons to secondary school, perhaps even to the university. Then the doors were open to a career in the army and to positions of au thority in the city. This naturally reflected prestige upon the family in the village. But the poor peasant families found it alm ost im possible to achieve such distinction. This class differentiation caused considerable tension in the villages. The usurer-m erchants tended to be shrewd and ruthless, and were generally hated by the poorer villagers. “ O u r ow n lice eat us,” was the latter’s grim commentary. In conclusion, these economic and social developments were typical


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878—1914 461
of the Balkan countries during these decades. Serbia, like the rest, w as c h a n g ing from a closed and static natural economy to a dynamic money a n d m ar ket economy. M ost peasants found the change uncomfortable and in c o m p re hensible.
We live in a time of wonders. Wise people tell me that carts roll without horses to pull them, That proud ships sail fast as an arrow without sail or wind, That wonder-doctors can cut off legs or hands and one feels no p a in or utters any cry, That, on a wire stretched across the earth, news can travel a ro u n d the world faster than one counts to three, That, of itself, the scythe mows, the spinning wheel runs, and th e plow cuts a furrow, And still the hunger for bread is among us as it has ever been.18
HAPSBURG SLAVS
The most im portant development among, the Hapsburg Slavs betw een 1878 and 1914 was the increasing cooperation between the Serbs a n d the Croatians and the growing tendency for them to look to Belgrade ra th e r than to V ienna or Budapest. But this occurred only in the later years. D u rin g the period immediately following the 1867 Ausgleich the South Slavs w ere di vided among various leaders and parties, and the A ustro-Hungarian au th o ri ties carefully fostered these divisions in order to strengthen their rule. One of the outstanding personalities among the South Slavs th ro u g h out the second half of the nineteenth century was the Catholic bishop, Joseph George Strossmayer. Though of G erm an ancestry, he early became a ch am pion of C roat national rights. His aim was to establish within the H apsburg framework an autonomous Croatia which would serve as the nucleus of an all-inclusive Yugoslav state. Although the Croats and Slovenes and the Serbs and Bulgarians were divided by religion and culture, he considered them all to be of one nationality. His efforts in behalf of South Slav culture were as sig nificant as his work for South Slav unity. Strossmayer subsidized scholars, built schools, and established in A gram (Z agreb) a sem inary, an a rt gallery, a national university, and a learned academy. Q uite different from Strossm ayer’s genuine Yugoslavism was th e p ro gram of the Party of the Right, an extremist nationalist group led by Ante Starchevich. On his death in 1896 the party split into two factions, the larger one being led by Joseph Frank and known as the Party of Pure Right. Its program was Pan-Croatian rather than Yugoslav and its aim was Croatian hegemony rather than union on equal term s with the other South Slavs. It was a Catholic-oriented party which tended to regard Serbians as being de generated Croats who had adopted the Orthodox religion and Byzantine culture. In fact the word “ Right” in the p arty ’s title stood not for conscrva


462 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
tive leanings but for the avowed righteousness of its claims for the creation of a Greater Croatia. H ungarian officials exploited this situation by pitting Croatians against Serbians. The kingdom of Croatia, according to the 1910 census, included 1,630,354 Croats and 644,955 Serbs, together constituting 90 per cent of the total population. Khuen-Hedervary, governor of Croatia from 1883 to 1903, fostered the latent antagonism between the two people by granting special concessions to the Serbian minority. He opened Serbian schools, appointed Serbs to public office, and granted privileges to the Ser bian Orthodox Church. The tactic proved quite successful, physical clashes between Croatian and Serbian patriots being very common in the eighteen nineties. The situation began to change with the turn of the century. In 1903 Khuen-Hedervary left Croatia to become premier of Hungary. His successor lacked finesse and resorted to naked force, which drove the Serbs and Croats to cooperation in self-defense. In the same year the new Karageorgevich dynasty succeeded to the Serbian throne. It was anti-A ustrian and it encour aged the H apsburg Slavs, with considerable success, to look to Belgrade as their hope for the future. Also, a younger political generation of Serbian leaders in Croatia now began to see that periodic support of their claims by the Magyars was designed to serve Hungarian rather than Serbian interests.. Finally, the outright annexation of Bosnia-H erzegovina by the H apsburgs in 1908 greatly accelerated the trend toward Serbo-Croatian cooperation. The Hapsburgs had first occupied Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1878 in accordance with the terms of the Berlin Treaty. The population of the provinces at the time comprised 43 per cent Orthodox* Serbs, 39 per cent M oslem s, an d 18 p er cent C atholic C roatians. T he M oslem s were the privi leged group. Six to seven thousand Moslem begs owned the large estates and wielded political power. This ruling class exploited 85,000 serf families of which 60,000 were Serbian, 23,000 Croatian, and 2,000 Moslem. In addi tion, there were 77,000 free peasant families which were almost exclusively M oslem . The Hapsburgs decided not to challenge the Moslem ruling class and allowed the existing feudal system to continue. The serfs were perm itted to buy their freedom but comparatively few were able to do so by 1914. The A ustrians did make im portant contributions in certain fields. They organized an efficient administrative system, built railways, conducted reforestation and agricultural research, and established flourishing mining, timber, and chem ical industries. But their failure to change the feudal land tenure system held back agriculture in which the great majority of the population were engaged. The large domains of the begs were not cultivated efficiently as single units after the m anner of English and Prussian estates. Rather, a multitude of serfs tilled small individual plots, using the traditional implements and tech niques. The result was not only low productivity but also agrarian unrest. The fact that an exceptionally strong revolutionary movement existed in


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878—1914 463
B osnia-H erzegovina before W orld W ar I is to be explained by the com bina tion of this agrarian unrest with the religious cleavage between Moslem over lords and Christian tenants, and the political conflict between the imperial authority and the growing Serbo-Croatian nationalist movement. All these factors account for the almost continual crisis in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina during the decade before 1914. Disorders in Croatia in 1903 forced the authorities to proclaim a state of siege and to arrest hun dreds of demonstrators. In 1905 a group of Croat politicians adopted the historic Fium e Resolutions, asserting the right of every people “to decide its own life and destinies freely and independently,” and dem anding franchise reform , free elections, and civil liberties. L ater in the same year Serbian politicians from Croatia met in Zara (Z ad ar), endorsed the Fium e Resolu tions, and appealed for Serbo-Croat cooperation throughout the empire. During the winter of 1905 most of the opposition parties combined to form the Serbo-Croat Coalition. The only im portant parties that abstained were Joseph F ra n k ’s Party of Pure Right and a new P easant party headed by Stjepan and A ntun Radich. T he Serbo-C roat C oalition dem onstrated its popularity by winning a plurality of the seats in the C roatian Diet in the 1906 elections. In January, 1908, the Hungarian government appointed a new vice roy, Baron Paul Rauch, to tame C roatia and its Diet. Rauch was greeted in Agram (Zagreb) with catcalls and a shower of rotten eggs. He dissolved the D iet and held new elections in F ebruary of the sam e year. A lthough the C roatian franchise was extremely restricted, not a single delegate was elected who could be relied upon to support Rauch. The Diet was again dissolved and Rauch governed by decree for two years. The Hapsburg annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina in October, 1908, heightened the crisis. South Slav nationalists regarded the two provinces as the Alsace-Lorraine of the Balkans and vowed to recover them at any cost. This was the atmosphere in which the notorious treason trials were conducted at A gram in 1909. R auch arrested some fifty C roatians and Serbians on vague charges that they were conspiring to unite Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina with Serbia. Although no conclusive proof of treasonable activities was pre sented, the court found over thirty of the defendants guilty and sentenced them to prison at hard labor. The condemned men appealed their case to a higher tribunal, which annulled the sentences on the ground that the evidence was inadequate. The entire Slav press denounced the affair as a case of ju dicial persecution and this charge received wide circulation and acceptance abroad. Before the Agram trial had closed, another cause célèbre, the Friedjung affair, had crowded to the fore. Heinrich Friedjung, an eminent historian and patriotic Hapsburger, published an article accusing certain Croatian and Serbian politicians of seditious relations with the Serbian government. The accused individuals brought libel suits and a sensational trial ensued. Before it was over Friedjung was forced to acknowledge that his “ incrim inating doc


464 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
um ents” were forgeries. The affair seriously damaged the reputation of the A ustrian government because it was obvious that Friedjung had received the documents from official sources. As for the politically conscious among Hapsburg Serbs and Croats, the Friedjung suit, coming as it did on the heels of the Agram trial, intensified discontent with the existing scheme of things. New elections were held in C roatia in 1912. Again the Serbo-Croat Coalition won a majority and again the Diet was dissolved and the country ruled by decree. The University of Agram, which was a hotbed of antiM agyar agitation, was bolted and barred. A Bosnian student, Tukich, who had attended the university, attem pted to assassinate the viceroy. In the trial that followed it was shown that Tukich was a member of the notorious* “Black H and” society of Belgrade, a city he had visited a month before the crime. The evidence did not disturb Serbian patriots, who hailed Tukich as a m artyr to the cause of G reater Serbia. “We have ten million Tukiches now,” a Belgrade new spaper exulted. “We are firmly convinced that through his prison window he will see the final shot for freedom .” 14 T he boast did not appear farfetched at the time. W hen the Balkan w ar broke out in 1912 C roatian youths stream ed across the border to fight in the Serbian army. A nd when they were reviewed by King Peter they shouted enthusiastically, “Long live our King!” This discontent in C roatia had its counterpart in Bosnia-Herzegovina. We have seen that a combination of factors made the situation there par ticularly explosive, including the deep-seated agrarian problem, the MoslemChristian conflict, and the growing nationalist sentiment for Yugoslav unity. At the turn of the century the situation became steadily worse because of the influence and activities of a new generation of Serbian intellectuals in BosniaHerzegovina. H itherto the Serbian intellectuals had been very limited in num bers and had originated from a small middle class of lawyers, doctors, and officials. B ut now there appeared a new generation of intellectuals, many of them the product of a cultural society known as the Prosveta, or “Enlighten m ent.” This organization was established in 1902 for the purpose of enabling peasant and lower middle-class children to get an education. Thus Serbian intellectuals of a new type made their appearance. They derived from the “small and insignificant classes”— from peasants, teachers, journeymen, and village priests. They were usually penniless and unemployed because of the traditional preference in bureaucratic circles for Croats over Serbs. Also, they were very radical in their views, partly because they had no vested in terest in the status quo and partly because they knew at firsthand the plight of the mass of the people. W hen Archduke Francis Ferdinand was struck down in Sarajevo in 1914, his assassin, the student Gavrilo Princip, declared defiantly in court, “I have seen our people being steadily ruined. I am a p easan t’s son and know w hat goes on in the villages. T h a t is why I m eant to take my revenge and I regret nothing.” 1S The new generation constituted the backbone of the M lada Bosna, or “Young Bosnia.” This was an amorphous nationalist movement rather than


Serbia and the South Slavs: 1878—1914 465
a definite political organization. Its adherents were not gathered in one body, being scattered in various groups such as agricultural cooperatives, choral societies, and numerous student associations. They shared a common aspira tion for liberation from Hapsburg rule and for social reform. But they were not agreed as to just how these objectives were to be attained. Most of them were inspired by Russian revolutionaries in whose works they read widelyrevolutionaries like Kropotkin, Herzen, Bakunin, Stepniak, Gorky, Chernishevsky, and Plekhanov. With such tutelage the young Bosnian radicals naturally reacted enthusiastically to the great Russian Revolution of 1905. They tended m ore and m ore to think in term s of revolution rather than of reform within the existing framework. They turned their backs on the old political leaders who were satisfied with slow change by “legal” methods. Instead, they developed the “cult of the individual deed.” Only by acts of terrorism , they believed, would they be able to rid themselves of Hapsburg rule and set up their own nation-state. The first notable expression of this new cult was the “deed” of Bog dan Zerajich, a Serbian from Herzegovina. On June 15, 1910, he attem pted to assassinate the governor, General Vareshanin, at the opening of the Bos nian Parliament. Zerajich failed and committed suicide on the spot. In doing so he became a national hero, the “first m artyr” of the Serbian cause. The Bosnian youth were inflamed by the oft-repeated story of the general scorn fully spurning with his foot Z erajich’s body as it lay sprinkled with m ud and blood upon the bridge at Sarajevo. Z erajich’s exploit was glorified by a pam phlet entitled “The D eath of a H ero” and written in 1912 by V ladim ir G achinovich, the son of a H erze govinian priest. T he pam phlet quotes Z erajich’s own phrase, “ I leave it to Serbdom to avenge me,” and concludes with the pointed question, “Young Serbs, you who are rising from the ruins and foulness of to-day, will you produce such men?” Gachinovich then went to Belgrade, where he joined a new secret revolutionary organization, the U jedinjenje ili Smrt, or Union or Death, better known as the Black Hand. This was the society which engi neered the m urder of A rchduke Francis Ferdinand in 1914. Before th at date Gachinovich exploited his prestige among the Bosnian youth to organize many terrorist groups which were directed by the Black Hand in Belgrade. Little wonder that the H apsburg officials cracked down hard on this revolu tionary agitation. Between 1909 and 1914 they tried 166 persons in Bosnia for treason or espionage, and convicted the majority. A Serbian diplomat stationed in Vienna at this time testified: “The year 1913 in Bosnia was the year of revolutionary organization. . . . ‘A ction, action, enough of w ords’ was the cry on all lips. The young dream ed of nothing but bombs, assassinations, explosives to blow up and destroy everything.” 17 A n A ustrian diplom at sim ilarly described the atm osphere on the eve of the war:
All who knew the country had the impression that an explosion was im minent. Especially in the schools Pan-Serb propaganda had created such chaotic


466 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
conditions that a regular continuance of instruction hardly seemed to be any longer possible. . . . Not only in Serbia itself but also in the Austro-Hun'garian territories inhabited by Southern Slavs, the conviction took root that the collapse of Austria-Hungary was near at hand.18


25. Greece: 1878-1914
f
r e e k e n e r g i e s in the first half of the nineteenth cen tury were largely dissipated in squabbles over the prerogatives of the auto cratically minded Bavarian monarch. With the revolution of 1862 the Greeks acquired a new king and a democratic constitution. Now they were masters in their own house, at least as m uch as any small nation could be. But it was still a house from which the majority of the national family was excluded. This fact determ ined the course of G reek history for the next fifty yearsyears of frustration during which domestic progress was sacrificed to largely futile efforts to extend the frontiers. The low point was reached at the end of the century with national bankruptcy in 1893, humiliating defeat by the Turks in 1897, and imposition of foreign financial control in 1898. Recovery began with the revolt of the M ilitary League in 1909, which ended the dom ination of the inadequate political oligarchy. This enabled a young Cretan politician, Eleutherios Venizelos, to rise to power and to effect sweeping re form s in the adm inistration and in the arm ed forces. T hus G reece was pre pared for the decisive events that began in 1912 with the outbreak of the Balkan Wars.
PURSUIT OF IRREDENTISM
Irredentist goals were foremost in the public mind and were univer sally referred to as the “Megale Idea” or “G reat Idea.” This national mania is natural and understandable. The islands and the provinces to the north were in fact Greek lands, and the aspiration of the Greek people to incor porate them in the m otherland differed in no respect from the similar aspira tion of the G erm an and Italian people during this period. Theodore Deligiannes was the great spokesman of this irredentism, in contrast to his rival, Charilaos Trikoupes, who was more interested in domestic reform and re construction. These two men might be com pared to John Kolettes and Alex ander M avrokordatos of the previous generation. Although the Megale Idea was understandable and inevitable, it was
467


468 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
not an unmixed blessing for Greece. In some circles it was extended and distorted into a program for the restoration of the Byzantine Empire. In this form it was avowedly imperialistic, involving, implicitly or explicitly, the subjugation of other Balkan peoples to Hellenism. Irredentism was also un realistic because of the fantastic disproportion between national strength and national ambitions. Furtherm ore, the Megale Idea too often was exploited in a demagogic manner to distract attention from domestic problems. A t a time when bankrupt Peloponnesian peasants were uprooting their currant bushes, when tens of thousands of young men were leaving their homeland in search of a livelihood overseas, and w hen control of the country’s finances was passing into foreign hands, Greek politicians, with their eyes fixed upon Constantinople, delivered themselves of speeches on how to “take the City.” Greece could expand in two directions, southw ard over the islands and northward into Thessaly, Epirus, and M acedonia. The most concern was felt for M acedonia because, whereas the other areas were indubitably Greek and could be counted upon to pass to Greece sooner or later, M acedonia was a region of mixed ethnography to which Bulgaria and Serbia, as well as Greece, were laying claim. T he first blow to G reek aspirations in M acedonia was the sultan’s firman of M arch 11, 1870, establishing the B ulgarian exarchate church, dis cussed in C hapter 19. A rticle X of this act stated th at new dioceses could be added to the exarchate upon the vote of two thirds of the inhabitants. This ' opened the way to the indefinite expansion of the exarchate in M acedonia. The Greeks reacted sharply to the setback. An anti-Slav society was organized in Athens, while Greek crowds shouted in the streets of Constantinople, “We w on’t be absorbed by the Slavs; we w on’t let our children be bulgarized.” 1 The next blow to Greek hopes' occurred during the N ear Eastern crisis of 1875-1878. The original Bosnian uprising of 1875 had spread to include the Bulgarians, Serbians, and M ontenegrins, and finally had culmi nated in the arm ed intervention of Russia. The spectacle of the Balkan Slavs fighting for their liberation with Russian support naturally caused much excitem ent in Greece. A t first a coalition governm ent with Trikoupes as foreign minister was strong enough to keep the hotheads in'check. But when the Russian armies neared Adrianople the clamor for war became irresistible. A new governm ent with Deligiannes as foreign m inister took office and an nounced its intention of “occupying provisionally” the G reek provinces of Turkey. But before the Greek army could move, the Russo-Turkish armistice was signed and the war ended. The Treaty of San Stefano of M arch 3, 1878, shocked the Greeks with its provisions for a “G reater Bulgaria” including almost the whole of M acedonia. T he W estern powers also found this unacceptable, so a new set tlement was negotiated at Berlin later in the same year. But the Greeks were still far from being satisfied. The other Balkan nationalities gained additional territory together with independence or autonomy. Britain was authorized to occupy the G reek-populated island of C yprus. But the Greek claims, by


Greece: 1878-1914 469
contrast, were passed over with merely an “invitation” to Turkey to cede parts of Thessaly and E pirus to G reece. This was all th at G reece received at Berlin, beyond the gratuitous advice from Disraeli to the effect that Greece was a country of such antiquity that she could afford to wait for a few more years to satisfy her territorial aspirations. The Turks naturally did not rush to accept the invitation to surrender their territory. Instead, their military experts argued that the new GrecoTurkish frontier proposed at Berlin was not a defensible line. Also, the A l banians now gave signs of national consciousness for the first time in cen turies, and they organized an “Albanian League” to contest the Greek claims to Epirus. Under these circumstances the Greeks were unable to persuade the Turks to accept any frontier adjustment. Two international conferences also proved futile because the powers were unable to agree on measures of coercion. A t length a settlem ent was reached in 1881 at a conference in Constantinople between representatives of Turkey and the great powers. Greece was not represented, and although Britain supported the cessions orig inally proposed in Berlin, the final aw ard was substantially less. Greece ob tained nearly the whole of Thessaly but in Epirus she received only the dis trict of Arta. These acquisitions represented the sum total of Greek expansion to 1912. Greece made another attem pt to extend her frontier northw ard in 1885, when Bulgaria absorbed Eastern Rumelia. The Athens government at that time unfortunately was headed by the jingoist Deligiannes. His cus tom was to pander to the nationalism of his people w ithout considering whether there was adequate supporting force. Deligiannes now began mobili zation, arguing, not w ithout reason, that if Bulgaria was to be allowed to keep Eastern Rumelia, then Greece should at least receive the Epirus terri tory proposed at Berlin. The powers peremptorily demanded that the mobili zation cease. When Deligiannes refused, they blockaded the Greek coast on M ay 8, 1886. Deligiannes then resigned and Trikoupes returned to office and withdrew the troops from the border. The powers thereupon lifted the block ade, which had been in force nearly a month. The crisis thus passed, but G reece was left with a large deficit and nothing to show for it. Only eleven years later Deligiannes was to repeat this folly, and with consequences far graver for his country. The occasion was one of the inter minable crises between Grpece and Turkey over the island of Crete. Through out the nineteenth century the attention of the Greeks had been diverted periodically from M acedonia to Crete, where recurring revolts attested to the strong feeling for enosis or union with Greece. The root of the trouble went back to the W ar of Independence, when Britain, for strategic reasons, refused to allow the inclusion of Crete in the new Greek kingdom. Instead, the island was ruled from 1824 to 1840 by Mehemet Ali of Egypt and then reverted to the sultan. The situation within Crete was roughly comparable to that in Bosnia. A t the end of the nineteenth century one out of every four or five inhabitants


470 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
was a Moslem. These M oslems were almost all Greeks who had apostatized to Islam and who had therby gained material advantages, including control of the fertile plain lands. T hus the revolutionary m ovem ent in Crete, as in Bosnia, was fed from several sources: from the nationalist aspiration of the Greek majority for enosis with the m other country; from the antagonism of the Christian majority against the renegade Moslem minority; and from the conflict between a small landlord class controlling the fertile plains and the rem ainder of the population left with hillside plots or none at all. The inevitable result was recurring insurrection— in 1841, 1858, and 1866-1868. By the “Organic Statute” of 1868 the Porte gave the Cretan Christians a share in the government and lightened their tax burden. During , the 1875-1878 crisis the Cretans again revolted and again were given addi tional concessions by the so-called Halepa Pact of October, 1878. This pact provided for the election of an annual general assembly in which the Chris tians held the majority of the seats. Despite this favorable arrangem ent new disturbances broke out in 1889. This time the sultan issued a new firman which rescinded many of the concessions embodied in the Halepa Pact. D ur ing the following years Crete was ruled by a succession of Moslem governors who did not even bother to summon the general assembly. M oslem-Christian relations deteriorated to the point of large-scale clashes in February, 1896. Faced with the prospect of another full-scale Cretan revolt, the powers persuaded the sultan to grant very extensive con-' cessions which went considerably beyond those of the Halepa Pact. The C retan leaders at first accepted these term s, but a lasting settlem ent depended as much upon public opinion in Greece as upon developments in Crete. Unfortunately, the propaganda of nationalistic organizations in Athens had created an atm osphere in which almost' any arrangem ent short of enosis was regarded as a national betrayal. Also, the premier at this moment was Deligiannes, who was not likely to restrain the mounting passions of his people despite the complete unpreparedness of the country for any serious trouble. In February, 1897, lurid reports reached Athens of Turkish soldiers massacring Cretan civilians. Huge mobs gathered in the streets shouting for immediate intervention. Any government that attempted' to stem the tide would quickly have been swept away. On February 6 the insurgents in Crete decreed union with Greece. A week later an expeditionary force of fifteen hun dred men reached Crete from the mainland. Now only the European powers could have halted the drift to war by imposing a naval blockade upon Greccc. T his might even have been welcom ed by the king and by Deligiannes, for ii w ould have enabled them to back dow n before force majeure w ithout loss <>l prestige. B ut strong anti-T urkish public opinion at hom e prevented the Bril ish government from accepting a blockade. So the drift to war continued even though the unpreparedness of G reece was apparent to all. Deligiamu;·. ordered mobilization on M arch 15, 1897. Greek irregulars crossed the bon In on April 10 and attacked Turkish outposts in Thessaly. A week later Greek regulars also crossed over and war began.


Greece: 1878-1914 471
The Thirty D ays’ W ar that ensued was a war in name only. The Turkish army, which had been recently reorganized by a German mission, was incom parably superior in training, in equipment, and in leadership. M ore over, warned by Russia and Austria against intervention and conciliated by the Porte with timely concessions, Bulgaria and Serbia remained neutral. Thus the Greeks were left alone, and within two weeks their army was scat tered and demoralized. Prince Constantine abandoned Larissa without at tem pting resistance. Two further setbacks on the plains of Thessaly left the road to Athens open to the victorious Turkish armies. The powers now intervened, if for no other reason than to save the G reek dynasty, which was under heavy fire in Athens. An armistice was signed on May 20, 1897, and a peace treaty on December 4. The Turks re turned Thessaly except for a few strategic points and a single village. But the Greeks had to pay an indemnity to the victors and the powers established an International Financial Commission of Control over G reek finances. The na ture of this foreign financial control will be considered later in this chapter. The paradox of the w ar is th at the C retans gained the substance of their demands despite the ignominious defeat of Greece. The powers, who had occupied the island in February, 1897, sought a governor to organize an autonom ous regime. The sultan m aintained that this official should be an O ttom an subject chosen by the O ttom an government with the approval of the powers. But Russia and Britain proposed for this post the second son of the G reek king, Prince George. The sultan finally had to give way and in November, 1898, Prince George was named commissioner of Crete with a m andate from the powers to organize an autonomous regime. From the viewpoint of international law, this settlem ent was patently absurd. Professor William Langer has aptly observed: “After the exchange of thousands of despatches and notes between the powers, after the most flagrant breach of international law by the Greeks, after the intervention of Europe and a crisis that threatened a general conflagration in the Balkans and pos sibly a E uropean war, the Greeks, totally defeated on the field of battle, secured what they had started out to get.” 2 A Greek nationalist undoubtedly would reply that this inconsistency of the great powers in 1898 was merely the inevitable consequence of their original inconsistency at the beginning of the century when they refused to allow the Cretans to join the motherland.
CRISIS AT HOM E
Despite the favorable settlem ent in Crete, the prestige of Greece was at low ebb at the turn of the century. In addition to the crushing defeat at the hands of the Turks, the domestic situation was dreary and unpromising. Charilaos Trikoupes, the only political leader of stature during these years, was continually underm ined by electoral reverses and financial crises. In contrast to the romanticists of irredentism, Trikoupes strove to lessen cor ruption in political life and to develop the country’s resources by m eans of


472 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
extensive public projects. M ore specifically, he reorganized the police system, raised civil service standards, strictly enforced the law concerning irrem ova bility of judges, and in general freed adm inistrative officials from the m ore brazen political pressures. His most lasting work was the building of roads, railroads, and harbors on a scale unprecedented in Greece. This construction, which will be discussed later in the chapter, broke the transportation bottle neck which hitherto had retarded the development of agriculture and in dustry. Despite these achievements, Trikoupes was not a favorite of the populace. He was reserved by temperament, being commonly called “the Englishm an.” In contrast, his rival Deligiannes was a consummate politician who played upon the popular irredentist aspirations to win elections. Thus Trikoupes was defeated in the 1885 election after having been in office since 1882. T he following year he returned to pow er, but in the interval the fi nancial situation had deteriorated dangerously because of D eligiannes’s m o bilization measures. From now on, Trikoupes was plagued by financial diffi culties which eventually proved his undoing. The basic trouble was that Greece was borrowing heavily on the in ternational money m arket during these years, obtaining no less than six loans between 1879 and 1890. The sums borrowed totaled 630,000,000 gold francs. But the price of issue ranged from 25 to 30 per cent below par, so Greece received only 458,622,000 francs. And of this am ount only about 100,000,000 gold francs actually reached the country, the rem ainder being spent abroad to purchase armaments and to meet the charges on the rapidly mounting national indebtedness. Furtherm ore, most of the 100,000,000 francs that did reach Greece were used to cover the re.curring budgetary deficits. Thus a quite insignificant portion of the borrowed money went for productive enterprises within the country. Under these circumstances the national debt rose sharply despite mounting taxes. In 1875, the per capita tax burden was 15.16 drachm as and the per capita debt burden was 102.75 drachmas. In 1893, the correspond ing figures were 37.63 and 363.20. Thus in less than two decades taxes had m ore than doubled; yet the national debt had more than tripled. By 1893, G reece’s foreign indebtedness was consum ing 33 per cent of her budgetary receipts. Such was the situation when the international m arket for Greek cur rants collapsed. The circumstances of this catastrophe will be noted later in this chapter. Suffice it to note there th a t currants, w hich hitherto had far surpassed in value all other Greek exports combined, dropped in price 70 per cent during the year 1893. The effect of this blow may be gauged from the fact that Greece had always suffered from an unfavorable balance of trade. The value of exports during the 1880’s h ad run betw een two thirds and three fourths of the value of imports. Now with currant prices falling precip itously and remaining at a depressed level, the Greek economy became hope lessly bankrupt.


Greece: 1878-1914 473
Faced with this emergency, Trikoupes tem porarily reduced interest payments on loans by 70 per cent. This caused an uproar in foreign financial circles and diplomatic representatives in Athens protested officially. N ego tiations followed between representatives of the foreign bondholders and of the Greek government. The talks failed but were resumed when Deligiannes replaced Trikoupes in January, 1895. A fter protracted bargaining, a satis factory compromise was reached in February, 1897. But unfortunately for Greece, the w ar with T urkey intervened before the agreem ent could be offi cially ratified. The creditors then took advantage of the helpless position of Greece following her defeat and imposed terms much more severe than those they had just accepted. The Greeks found themselves in a desperate economic position at the end of the war. International trade was at a low ebb while the treasury was again beggared by the expenses incurred during the military operations and by the burden of crowds of destitute refugees. On top of this, the Turks were dem anding a large indem nity in lieu of territorial claims. The representatives of the great powers, whom Greece had entrusted with the negotiation of peace, became concerned lest a heavy indemnity force the Greeks to cease further payments to the foreign bondholders. Because of this complication the debt question was now tied to the peace settlement. Greece was required to pay four million pounds as indemnity to the Turks and also to accept an International Financial Commission of Control. This commission was authorized to collect certain specified taxes and to use the revenue to service past debts as well as to service a new “ Indemnity L o an ” which G reece was to receive in order to pay the T urks. W hen a bill legalizing this com m ission was presented to the G reek parliam ent it was bitterly criticized by all parties as a disgraceful and unjust measure which violated the independence of the country. But there was no alternative, and Greece was forced to accept foreign financial control on top of humiliating military defeat. The decade following the Turkish war was one of demoralization and petty party strife. T rikoupes had retired from public life in 1895. He was succeeded by George Theotokes, who continued the duel with Deligiannes. Cabinets fell frequently during these years and on the most frivolous pre texts. In 1905 Deligiannes was killed by an assassin and his party split into two factions led by Demetrios Rhijlles and Kyriakoules Mavromichales. Neither of them was particularly distinguished; nor was Theotokes, for that m atter. In fact, none of these party chiefs was capable of providing the coun try with the leadership it sorely needed. Furtherm ore, the dynasty was under a cloud at this time because of the failure of Prince Constantine during the war. All in all, the turn of the century was one of the most depressing periods since the winning of independence.


474 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
RECOVERY U N DER VENIZELOS
In August, 1909, a military revolt in Athens broke the grip of the old political leaders and cleared the ground for the remarkable national recov ery under the leadership of the outstanding statesman of modern Greece, Eleutherios Venizelos. The insurrection was preceded by a significant literature of criticism and revolt, the targets of which were the parliam entary system, the old politicos, and the dynasty itself. V arious factors explain this deep-seated and widespread discontent. One was the patent failure of Greece in both her international relations and in her domestic progress. A nother factor was the aspiration for political pow er on the p art of the rising middle class. It is sig nificant that the intellectual and political ferment was confined largely to the cities. W hen the revolt occurred it was supported most strongly by the trade guilds, the more advanced intelligentsia, and the mercantile and professional classes. And the effect of the revolt was to bring to the top a younger generation of mostly middle-class politicians who replaced the form er political oligarchy that had depended on local clan control. The immediate origins of the revolt can be traced to the Young Turk revolt and to the international repercussions that followed it. The Young Turks won power in July, 1908. On October 5 the Bulgarians took advantage of the resulting confusion to proclaim their full independence. The next day Austria announced the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Two days later, on-October 8, the Cretans proclaim ed their union with preece and Appointed a committee to conduct affairs in the name of King George. If the Athens government under Theotokes had responded immediately and presented the Turks with a fait accompli, the long-sought enosis probably would have been, attained. The Brit ish am bassador in C onstantinople reported on O ctober 13 that “ the C retan question does not touch the Turks very closely . . . and if they could get a nice sum down for it that would satisfy them .” 3 But the memory of the disas trous 1897 w ar was still fresh in Athens, and Theotokes made no move. The showdown came when the European powers withdrew their re maining troops from Crete on July 26, 1909. Three days later the Cretans hoisted the blue-and-white flag of Greece. By this tim e the Young Turks were in a stronger position than that of the year before, so they dem anded from the Greek government “a written disavowal of the C retan agitation for union.” Prem ier Rhalles, who had just assumed office, had no choice but to subm it to the ultimatum and to give the required assurance. But the Turkish government was not satisfied. A fortnight later it dem anded immediate disavowal of the activities of G reek officers who allegedly were fomenting rebellion in M acedo nia. Again Rhalles submitted and assured the Turks that Greece would refrain from any move prejudicial to Turkish sovereignty. In addition to this humiliat ing experience, the Greeks suffered severely from an economic boycott which the Young Turks organized and continued even after the assurances had been received from Athens. And in the m eantime the powers had sent to Crete a detachm ent of m arines who solemnly cut dow n the offending G reek flag.


Greece: 1878-1914 475
These simultaneous blows to the national pocketbook and the national pride aroused the Greeks as much as the loss of Bosnia-Herzegovina did the Serbs. T he general indignation found expression in the coup d ’état of a M ili tary League which had been organized by younger army officers in M ay, 1909. U nder the leadership of a Colonel N. K. Zorbas, these officers made a show of force outside Athens and compelled Premier Rhalles to resign. His place was taken by the docile M avromichales while the League ruled. T he L eague’s officers w anted to reorganize drastically the arm y and the political system. *But they lacked the necessary experience and did not know how to attain these ends. In a moment of inspiration they decided to obtain the counsel of a rising young politician in Crete by the name of Venizelos. Some of the officers had met him earlier and had been impressed by his abil ity and character. George Clemenceau also had made his acquaintance during a visit in Crete and on his return to France he told a friend: “In Crete I have discovered a phenom enon m uch m ore interesting than the excavations. It is a young advocate, Mr. Venezuelos— M r. Venizelos? Frankly, I cannot quite re call his name, but the whole of E urope will be speaking of him in a few years.” 4 Venizelos, who was born in Crete in 1864, was prophetically given the nam e of Eleutherios, signifying freedom. He Studied law at the University of A thens, whence he returned to his native island where he soon made his name at the bar. He took an active part in the 1896 revolt against Turkey; when Crete gained autonomy, he was elected to the assembly and quickly rose to be m inister of justice. W hen Prince George, who had been appointed commissioner of Crete by the powers, began to take too much power into his own hands, Venizelos boldly defied him by establishing a rival provisional government and proclaiming the union of Crete with Greece. Prince George was finally obliged to resign and was succeeded as commissioner in 1906 by a conservative G reek politician, A lexander Zaïm es. U nder the latter’s regime Venizelos becam e the leading statesm an of Crete and the idol of his fellow countrym en. This career on his native island prepared him admirably for the larger political stage on the mainland, where he played the leading role for many years. Venizelos accepted the invitation of the M ilitary League to serve as its political adviser and arrived in Athens on January 23, 1910. He perceived at once the anomalous state of affairs in which the army had deprived the old political leaders of any real power but had failed to set up a new political sys tem in their place. He proposed, therefore, that a national assembly be sum m oned to revise the constitution. His advice was followed and the Assembly convened on Septem ber 14. Am ong those elected was Venizelos himself, who was able to take his seat because he was technically a Greek subject. W hen he returned to Athens he was wildly acclaimed by huge crowds as a national hero. This surprising reception reveals the political vacuum that existed in Greece at this time. Venizelos’ past deeds and writings were noteworthy but certainly not so dazzling as to w arrant such a fervent welcome. T he explanation is th at he appeared at a moment when the Greek people, disgusted by the ineffectiveness of the old politicos and by the humiliations of the past decade, were psycho


476 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
logically ready to accept unreservedly a fresh political figure who had confidence in himself and in his country. The Assembly that was elected m irrored the cleavages within the coun try and the deep-seated problems that had to be faced. Forty-five Agrarian deputies arrived from Thessaly pledged to work for the expropriation of the feudal estates in that province, to be discussed later in this chapter. Ten social ist deputies appeared for the first time, with their usual program for social re organization. There was also a body of eighty independent deputies represent ing the extreme wing of the M ilitary League. They were strongly antidynasty, and their chief demand, significantly enough, was that the Assembly should be constituent rather than revisionist. This issue dom inated the proceedings of the Assembly from the begin ning and was decided largely by Venizelos. He had proposed originally that the Assembly be revisionist and he insisted on this after he became prem ier on O ctober 18, 1910. M any of his adm irers were disappointed, having expected the Cretan revolutionary to lead the fight against the Danish dynasty, which had become unpopular in many quarters. But Venizelos persisted in his revi sionist position and was able to have his way. The result was that he diverted a potentially violent movement into constructive channels. He led the way to reform and reconstruction and avoided a feud over the dynasty question which would have fatally divided the nation. Venizelos did not assume com m and without opposition. The old party leaders naturally resented the rise of this o’utsider from Crete. They resorted to the old trick of boycotting the Assembly and thus preventing a quorum. Veni zelos countered this obstructionism by submitting his resignation to the king. Immediately the trade guilds and the university students organized great pro test meetings in Athens, shouting against the old politicians and demanding that Venizelos be retained. King George bowed to this pressure and kept Venizelos in office. The latter, perceiving that the party leaders had discredited them selves, dissolved the Assembly and set new elections for December 24, 1910. The returns represented an overwhelming personal trium ph for Venizelos, 300 of the 364 new deputies being members of his Liberal party. The way was now clear for the work of national regeneration. The As sembly passed fifty-four amendments to the Constitution of 1864 and adopted the revised constitution on June 11, 1911. These am endm ents, together with the legislation passed during the following year, affected every phase of na tional life. T he quorum for the Assem bly was reduced to one third of its m em bers in order to check obstructionism. Elem entary education was made free and compulsory. M ilitary men, mayors, and other public servants were declared in eligible for election to the Assembly. Security of tenure was enjoined for gov ernm ent officials in place of the spoils system, which hitherto had plagued public administration. A ministry of agriculture was established, and plans were made to disseminate m odern agricultural techniques through model farms under for eign experts. E xpropriation was defined in the constitution in order to prepare


Greece: 1878-1914 A ll
the way for the division of the large Thessalian estates. And, finally, foreign officers were made eligible for state service. The purpose of the last provision was to legalize the calling of foreign missions to reorganize the Greek military establishment. A British mission was engaged for the navy and a French mission for the army. This military revival came none too soon; a year later Greece, together with her allies in the Balkan League, was* involved in w ar against T urkey. T he story of the form ation of the League and of the ensuing campaigns constitutes a part of general Balkan diplomatic and military history and will be considered later in C hapter 28 in that context.
ECO N O M IC D EV ELO PM EN TS
The period from 1878 to 1914 was one of steady economic growth in Greece. The progress made was certainly unimpressive in com parison with that of Western Europe at the same time. Yet the Greek economy by 1914 had reached a level far above that of the m id-nineteenth century. One of the most important achievements was the development of a land transportation system where virtually nothing had existed before. The first paved road worthy of the name was built in 1852 and was 100 mil6s in length. By 1867 only another 150 miles had been com pleted. B ut great spurts forw ard cam e in the 1880’s under Trikoupes and under Venizelos on the eve of W orld W ar I. By 1914 Greece had a network of 3,500 miles of paved roads. Railroad building fol lowed the same pattern of growth. The first line was built in 1870 between Athens and Piraeus, a distance of 7 miles. By 1914 several other lines had been completed, totaling 1,000 miles. A nother im portant achievement in transporta tion was the completion in 1893 of the Corinth Canal between the Peloponne sian Peninsula and the mainland. Thousands of small craft use the canal each year to avoid the treacherous journey around the peninsula. The improvement of transportation facilities helped agriculture by m aking it possible for the peasants to ship their produce to urban centers. Agri culture was also helped by the abolition in 1880 of the tithe, which, as noted in Chapter 15, had hitherto seriously retarded productivity. As for the types of crops grown, the emphasis continued to be on currants, grapes, olives, citrus fruits, and tobacco. Also, there was the same dependence on large-scale im ports of grain. Until the end of the century the cost of the imported grain was met by currant exports. W hen the phylloxera blight ruined French vineyards in 1878 there was a great dem and for G reek currants to meet the needs of French wine m anufacturers. The value of currant exports exceeded by far the value of all other Greek exports com bined. But eventually the blight was brought under control and in 1892 the French government adopted a high protective tariff against Greek currants. Exports to France dropped off from a maximum of 70,000 tons in 1889 to 3,500 in 1893. The effect of this blow may be gauged from the fact that the French m arket in the past had absorbed one third of G reek cu rrant exports. T hus the F rench tariff now caused a disastrous price slum p, the price quotation in the


478 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
London produce market tumbling during the year 1893 from twenty-one shill ings per hundredw eight to six shillings. The growers increased their output in order to make up for the drop in price. The effect, of course, was to widen the gap between supply and dem and and to depress the price level further. The government tried to help with various measures, such as setting a minimum price, prohibiting new acreage in currants, and subsidizing growers who shifted to other crops. These devices alleviated the distress slightly, but the fact re mained that currants no longer could be depended upon to pay for the bread of the nation. Fortunately for Greece, tobacco exports began to mount at the same time that currant exports were declining. Land devoted to tobacco cultivation increased from 6,500 acres in 1860 to 10,000 in 1875, 16,000 in 1889, and 38,750 in 1911. The great jum p in tobacco exports came after W orld W ar I, when Greece was able to exploit the rich tobacco-growing regions of M acedonia and Thrace which had been newly acquired. Thus during the period between the two world wars tobacco took the place of currants as the breadwinner for Greece. The acquisition of Thessaly in 1881 raised the hope that the burden of grain imports would be eased somewhat because the chief products of the fertile Thessalian plains were wheat, barley, and maize. But the hope was not realized, the reason being that the land tenure system curtailed production. Most of the land in Thessaly was held in large estates or chifliks owned by Moslem landlords and by a few wealthy*Greek families. The Moslems left when Thes saly passed to Greece, and their chifliks were bought by local G reek families and by wealthy Greeks in Constantinople, Smyrna, Alexandria, and other for eign centers. Thus the chiflik system remained unchanged, particularly in the plains areas. The chifliks varied in size from the small ones, averaging 250 acres, to the medium estates, averaging 750 acres, and to the large ones, running as high as 10,000 acres. Tenancy arrangements differed greatly, depending upon the locality and upon the num ber of oxen owned by the tenant. But the important point to note is that the proprietor received a stipulated percentage of the crop, usually from a third to a half. This arrangem ent did not encourage the tenant to increase his output because the landow ner continued to receive his full share of the crop; hence the cost of any improvements made was hard to recover. Also, it should be noted that only a third of the cultivable land of Thessaly was cropped each year. T he explanation for this is to be found partly in the primitive fallow system of farming and partly in the preference of the land owners, especially those in hilly areas, to lease their property to nom adic shep herds who descended from the Pindus M ountains each autum n as they had done for centuries past. This chiflik system generated much agrarian unrest, particularly be cause in the rest of Greece most large estates had disappeared by this time. Before W orld W ar I a certain am ount of progress was made in dividing the T hessalian chifliks. In 1881, out of 658 villages in Thessaly, 466 were chillik


Greece: 1878-1914 479
villages and only 198 were kephalochoria, or free villages. By 1918 the num ber of chiflik villages had been reduced by a third, the decrease being due to land purchases made by the peasants and by the Agricultural Bank of Thessaly. The latter was established by the government in 1907 under the pressure of rising peasant unrest. It is apparent that the land problem in Thessaly was still • far from solution when it was com pounded by the acquisition of the new prov inces of M acedonia, Epirus, and Thrace following the Balkan W ars and World W ar I. The choicest lands in these new territories were held as chifliks, so the Greek governm ent found it necessary to adopt the sweeping land reform meas ures during and following W orld W ar I to be discussed in Chapter 34. Turning from agriculture to industry, we find that the industrial devel opment of Greece did not really get under way until the last quarter of the nineteenth century. In 1877 Greece had 136 industrial establishments with 7,342 workers. By 1917 these had increased to 2,213 establishm ents and 36,124 workers, of which 622 establishm ents and 9,227 w orkers were to be found in the newly acquired provinces in the north. The big spurt in industrial growth cam e in the 1880’s under the stimulus of tariff protection, the influx of consid erable foreign long-term capital, and T rikoupes’s railroad building and public works program . In the 1890’s industry was slowed down by the bankruptcy of the government and by the defeat inflicted by Turkey. But rapid progress was m ade after 1900 and was accelerated by the B alkan W ars and W orld W ar I, which added greatly to the resources of Greece. The industries were largely of the consumer goods variety. By far the most im portant were flour milling and textiles, the latter including cotton, wool, and silk. O ther industries were pottery, glass, shipbuilding, tanning, soap m ak ing, and the processing of olives and grapes. M ost industries were located in the Athens-Piraeus m etropolitan area, the rem ainder being in provincial towns like Volos, Patras, K alam ata, and, after 1913, Saloniki. Despite the growth at the turn of the century, Greek industry remained primitive in com parison with that of W estern Europe. One reason for this back wardness was the scarcity of coal, iron, and other essential raw materials. Also, the supply of motive power was inadequate. Furtherm ore, the typical Greek capitalist p referred to invest his m oney in a business th at was safe, that re quired little capital, and that he could personally manage. This led him to the consumer goods industries rather than to heavy industries, which involved more risk and required technical m anagerial skills and a heavy capital outlay. I oi eign capital did not go into G reek industry, preferring mining and railway con struction, which offered higher returns. The country did possess an abundance of labor, but it was unskilled and averse to industrial employment. The prevalence of small landholdings held potential industrial workers to the soil, particularly because going to the city and becom ing a day laborer was regarded as a step down in the social sealc. When G reek peasants were forced by overpopulation and by the currant crisis to leave their ancestral villages, they sought their fortune in glam orous Am er ica rather than in a nearby city.


480 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
Shipping was an industry in which these limiting factors did not oper ate and which therefore has always flourished in Greece. The num erous islands provided an abundant supply of skilled seamen, while Greek craftsm en con structed sailing ships that were widely admired for their seaworthiness and trim lines. The m erchant marine consequently was an im portant element in the national economy both before and after the Greek W ar of Independence. Most of the sailing vessels were run cooperatively, with the carpenters, lumber m er chants, seamen, and captains all pooling their skills and capital to construct and operate the ships. The advent of steam navigation seriously affected the Greek merchant marine. N either the skills nor the funds were available for the construction or purchase of the new steamships. The shipping industry declined so drastically that the islands lost much of their population. The crisis was overcome when w ealthy overseas G reeks began to purchase old steam ships in E ngland and to lease them to captains in Greece. Large profits were made during the South A frican W ar, and the capital was used to buy still more steamships. Thus the merchant marine experienced a renaissance and for the first time the blue-andwhite flag of Greece was carried all over the world by tram p steamers owned and operated by Greeks. The following figures make clear the decline of the sailing fleet and the advent of the steam ships:
SAILING SHIPS STEAM SHIPS
Year Number Tonnage Number Tonnage 1834 2,891 . . . ... 1845 3,581 164,103 . . . . . . 1875 5,410 253,781 37 , 1,241 1895 1,059 246,196 107 144,975 1915 884 107,466 475 893,650
Source: Ch. Evelpides, Oikonomike kai koinonike istoria tes Ellados [Economic and Social History of Greece] (Athens, 1950), p. 96.
One of the most important and spectacular developments affecting the Greek economy at the turn of the century was the large-scale emigration over seas. Overpopulation was the basic factor behind this emigration, as was the case in the other Balkan countries. Between 1829 and 1912 the area of Greece increased from 18,346 square.miles to only 24,558 square miles, whereas the population jum ped from 750,000 to 2,750,000. The population per square mile consequently rose from approximately 41 to 114, an increase of almost three times in less than a century. The modest expansion of industry during that period was quite insufficient to absorb the growing population. Since ancient times the pressure of population has driven Greeks to seek their livelihood in foreign lands. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centu ries many emigrated to neighboring countries such as Russia, Rum ania, and Egypt. A t the>end of the nineteenth century the tide of em igration rose im m eas urably and shifted its direction to the U nited States. The character and the role of the emigrants also changed fundamentally at this time. Those who had em i


Greece: 1878-1914 481
grated in the previous decades to neighboring countries were usually superior in business capacity to the native population and were able to make fortunes out of Egyptian cotton and Russian and Rumanian grain. In contrast, those who went to the United States found themselves at first in an inferior status in regard to education and capital. The great majority were virtually illiterate and possessed less than fifty dollars upon their arrival. A ccordingly, instead of em ploying native unskilled labor as did the Greek immigrants in Egypt, Russia, and other Eastern countries, they themselves constituted an unskilled labor force. But the United States was vast and rich, and the Greek immigrant who shined shoes or sold flowers, or worked in a factory or in a railroad gang, was able to earn sums that appeared to him to be fabulous. He sent back to his village glowing accounts of the Eldorado of the West. The money which he enclosed in his letters spoke even more eloquently of the opportunities aw ait ing in the New W orld. Thus the exodus started, and the currant crisis of the 1890’s swelled it to startling proportions. A ccording to A m erican im m igration statistics, 3,773 Greek immigrants arrived in 1900 and 12,144 in 1905. Then between 1906 and 1914 a total of 283,851 immigrants poured in, or an aver age of 31,000 a year. During the war yeais emigration fell sharply because of the recruiting of young men for military service. And then, before the exodus could reach its form er proportions, the American immigration restriction laws adopted in 1921 abruptly set a quota of only one hundred Greek immigrants a year. The flood tide of emigration during the pre-1914 period left many G reek villages with alm ost no able-bodied young males. B ut in return Greece received a golden stream of remittances from her thrifty emigrant sons. The high point occurred in 1921, when the rem ittances totaled no less than 121 m illion dollars. T he flow of dollars from A m erica rectified the extrem ely un favorable balance of trade that followed the collapse of the currant market. This in turn strengthened the position of the drachm a, which rose to parity by the time of the Balkan W ars. The remittances also enabled many peasants to pay off their debts, so that whole districts were freed from mortgage encum brances. As early as 1906 a Greek government commission investigating the effects of the em igration reported: “N o one can deny th at it is to them [the emigrants] in great measure . . . that we owe the rise in the value of our paper currency almost to par. . . . Everyone mentions . . . that in these provinces, par ticularly in Peloponnesus, which are the oldest and most prolific sources of emi gration to the U nited States, there has been a striking fall in the rate of interest and a proportionate rise in the value of agricultural real estate. . . .” 5 There remains the question concerning the influence of the emigrants who returned to their homeland. M any did return for a variety of reasons, in cluding economic pressure during slump periods in the United States, desire to resume family ties or to marry and raise a family in the native land, and also preference for the more fam iliar and easygoing life of the m other country. It is estim ated that of the more than half million G reeks adm itted into the United


482 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
States by 1931, about 40 per cent, or 197,000, went back as repatriates. Upon their return many of them found adjustm ent difficult. They were oppressed by the poverty and the slow tem po of life. They found that, apart from their money, they had gained little social prestige by their stay in America. A popular say ing was, “He left as a young donkey and returned as an older one.” Also, the repatriates were usually besieged by poverty-stricken relatives and sometimes fleeced in shady business deals. On the other hand, many repatriates were able to settle down in towns and villages and contribute to their communities out of the new skills and experiences that they had acquired in America. A t the time of W orld W ar I Arnold Toynbee foresaw the leavening influence of these repatriates:
It is a strange experience to spend a night in some rem ote m ountainvillage of G reece, and see A m ericanism and H ellenism face to face. H ellenism is represented by the village schoolmaster. He wears a black coat, talks a little French, and can probably read Homer; but his longest journey has been tothe norm al school at Athens, and it has not altered his belief that the ikon in the neighbouring m onastery was m ade by St. L uke and the Bulgar beyond the m oun tains by the Devil. On the other side of you sits the returned emigrant, chatting irrepressibly in his queer version of the “Am erican language,” and showing you the newspapers which are mailed to him every fortnight from the States. . . . His greatest gift to his country will be his A m erican point of view.6
Following W orld W ar II a systematic study was made of the effect of the repatriates upon their hom eland. Thfc findings are particularly significant because they are probably also applicable to the other Balkan countries which likewise received a stream of returning emigrants:
The repatriates who returned from the United States could not help . . . bring to Greece some of both the material and the intangible qualities of Am er ican life. In going from an advanced to a retarded social economy, they took with them money, higher standards of living, a spirit of optimism, reform ist attitudes, and pronounced pro-American sentiments. They had come into contact with a different language, with different customs and attitudes. They could hardly have failed to acquire new skills and techniques; their tempo of life had quickened; they had seen people worship in different churches; for better or for worse, they were exposed to the American press, periodicals and literature; they had seen women treated differently; and they had sensed the pulsating effects of living in a strong and wealthy country. W hat they brought back often filtered down into the poverty-stricken areas of the country, and many of the services they and the ex patriated rendered were of a character normally furnished by local governments in America. Even though their names failed to appear on the façades of the li braries, museums, and schools of Athens, their contributions were nevertheless genuine. Their devotion to Greece was more altruistic than that of their voluble critics or of the Athenians who flocked to the sidewalk cafes.7


26. Rumania: 1878-1914
mN 1906 an exhibition was held in R um ania to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the arrival of King Charles in his adopted country. Visitors saw many signs of the impressive progress that had been made during the preceding four decades. R um ania had acquired all the external attributes of W estern civilization. Two thousand miles of railroads facilitated travel where, at C harles’s coming, there had not been a single train. T he Iron G ates had been blasted, opening the Danube River to large steamers. Also, a splendid bridge spanned the Danube at Cernavoda, connecting the D obruja to the rest of the kingdom. Rapidly mounting oil production was modifying the purely agricul tural character of the economy. The Rumanian government commanded such confidence in international financial circles that it was able to borrow at a trifle over 4 per cent. Despite this substantial progress, the more perceptive visitors in 1906 might have noted th at the foundations of political and econom ic life were far from secure. Eighty per cent of the population depended on the land for its livelihood, but half of this land belonged to a handful of large proprietors. The great bulk of the Rum anian peasants existed at an appallingly depressed stand ard of living. The peasants were also effectively excluded from parliam entary representation by a complicated and artificial electoral system. Rum anian poli tics consisted to a large degree of barren squabbles between “Liberals” and “Conservatives”— meaningless party labels without underlying principles. These realities behind the façade of material progress explain the para doxical history of R um ania in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries — a richly endowed country that was m aking notable advances in m any fields but which was rent by social fissures that underm ined the national edifice and finally precipitated a veritable jacquerie in 1907.
483


484 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
A FT E R M A T H OF 1878: T H E 1883
SECRET ALLIANCE
The R um anians fought on Russia’s side in the B alkan W ar of 18771878. D uring the critical days of the siege of Plevna they gave valuable assist ance to the hard-pressed Russian army. Their reward was the loss of southern Bessarabia, which Russia recovered by the terms of the Berlin Treaty, discussed in Chapter 21. As compensation the Rumanians were given the Dobruja, an exchange which they considered to be far from equitable. The Russians added insult to injury by informing the Rumanian delegates at Berlin that the cession of the Dobruja was “an act of generosity on the part of Russia.” The Russians further alienated Rumania by supporting Bulgaria on the question of the Do bruja frontiers. Rum ania demanded the inclusion of the key fortress of Silistria on the grounds that it was essential for the defense of the province. But R us sian diplomacy at this time strongly favored Bulgaria on the assumption that the new Balkan state would serve as a com placent tool in the future. Thus Silistria, on R ussia’s insistence, was aw arded to Bulgaria in June, 1880. The unhappy Rumanians were further antagonized by the intervention of the great powers on the issue of Jewish disabilities. Since the beginning of the nineteenth century many Jews had migrated to Rumania from Russia and Russian-held Poland. A t the outset they settled mostly in northern M oldavia, so that in 1859 there were 118,000 Jews in M oldavia but only 9 ,2 0 0 'in W al lachia. G radually they increased in num bers and spread southw ard, until by 1900 they num bered 201,000 in M oldavia and 68,000 in W allachia. A quarter of a million Jews in a country with a total population of live millions would not appear to be a cause for alarm and discriminatory legisla tion. But these Jews were concentrated alm ost exclusively in the cities, and since the total urban population in 1900 am ounted to only 700,000, the Jews com prised about two fifths of all the urban inhabitants. M oreover, the Jews had developed financial and commercial skills to a high degree, and, it should also be noted, were more industrious and thrifty than the native Rumanians. As a result they gained control over much of the trade, industry, and finance. In tim e they even acquired a foothold in agriculture by leasing the large estates of absentee landlords and extending loans to improvident landowners. The growing economic power of the Jews explains in large part Article V II of the 1866 constitution denying them the privilege of naturalization: “ . . . only foreigners belonging to a Christian confession can obtain naturaliza tio n .” This inability to gain citizenship m eant also inability to participate in political affairs and to hold public office. T hese disabilities becam e an interna tional issue after 1878 because of Article X LIV of the Berlin Treaty, which provided: “In Rum ania the difference of religious creeds and confessions shall not be alleged against any person as a ground for exclusion or incapacity in m atters relating to the enjoym ent of civil and political rights, admission to public employments, functions, and honors, or the exercise of the various pro fessions and industries in any locality whatsoever.” 1


Rumania: 1878-1914 485
This provision aroused widespread indignation in Rum ania. The assem bly refused to repeal the discriminatory article of the constitution despite strong pressure from the powers. Finally, on O ctober 18, 1879, the assembly decreed that naturalization could be obtained “without distinction of religion.” B ut it also stipulated that a special act ofparliam ent was required for each individual case of naturalization, and a formal petition and ten years’ domicile were de manded in all save exceptional cases. Furtherm ore, it expressly provided that only Rumanian citizens could own land, though lack of citizenship did not carry with it exemption from military service. These provisions were designed as a gesture to appease the powers which were withholding recognition of Rum ania as an independent state pending settlement of the Jewish issue. The powers pointed out th at the assem bly’s legislation fell far short of their original re quirements. But they were anxious to settle the protracted dispute, so in Febru ary, 1880, they extended recognition to Rum ania as a full sovereign state. The following year Prince Charles was crowned King of Rum ania in the cathedral at Bucharest. in the light of R um ania’s experiences during and after the R ussoT urkish W ar it is understandable th at there should have been considerable re sentment against the great powers and particularly against Russia. The Rum ani ans felt that Russia had used them for the realization of her aspirations in the Balkans, and that after they had made their contribution at Plevna they were forgotten and ignored. It would have been natural, therefore, for the Rum anians to turn to Austria after 1878. But various obstacles stood in the way of a rapprochement with the Dual Monarchy. One was the large bloc of unredeemed R um anians in T ransylvania. A nother was the econom ic dom ination of A ustria over Rumania. Between 1875 and 1882 over 50 per cent of Rumanian imports came from Austria-Hungary, and about 32 per cent of her exports went to the same country. Very naturally there was in Rum ania, as in Serbia, much con cern over this economic subservience to a foreign power. Being repelled by both Russia and Austria-Hungary, the Rum anian statesmen attem pted after 1878 to draw closer to Germany. Bismarck did not encourage them at first because he did not consider a R um anian alliance worth the risk of alienating Russia. It will be recalled from C hapter 23 that it was not until the sum m er of 1883, when the situation in Bulgaria had deteriorated to the point where Russian military intervention was a real possibility, that Bism arck opened serious discussions with the Rum anians. He explained to them that Germany and her ally, Austria, were anxious to avoid a conflict with Russia. Accordingly, he proposed that R um ania first conclude a purely defen sive pact with A ustria, which Germany then would be ready to join. The R u m anians agreed, and on October 30,1883, they signed an alliance with Vienna to which Germany acceded on the same day. The alliance provided that the two contracting parties should not enter into alliances directed against one another, that A ustria-Hungary should come to the assistance of R um ania if the latter were attacked w ithout provocation, and th at R um ania in return should aid A ustria if she were attacked w ithout


486 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
provocation in a portion of her states bordering on Rumania. This last phrase was a circumlocution inserted because of the German emperor, who insisted that Russia should not be specifically nam ed as the country against which the alliance was directed. T he treaty was to be in effect for five years and was to be kept strictly secret. It was renewed several times and rem ained effective until the outbreak of W orld W ar I. Secrecy was so well maintained that during the entire period to 1914 only a few party leaders in Rum ania were even aware of its existence. T he pact greatly strengthened R um ania’s international posi tion. Two great powers guaranteed her against aggression, and a third was added with the participation of Italy in 1888.
POLITICAL EVOLUTION
The political institutions of Rumania resembled those of the Western E uropean countries in form but not in substance. The 1866 constitution, which rem ained in force with minor changes until W orld W ar I, was based on the Belgian C harter of 1831. The legal system, taken from the Napoleonic Code, specified certain abstract principles, such as liberty of conscience, of instruc tion, of the press, and of assembly. Also, the two-party system of government prevailed, with the C onservatives and L iberals alternating in office. Rum ania had all the trappings of a W estern parliamentary democracy. But the reality beneath the surface was very different. The franchise rested upon a complicated and artificial system of electoral colleges which assured the po litical preponderance of the landowners and wealthy urban elements. The two parties tended to be coteries grouped about prominent political personalities or families. The constant factionalism usually reflected personal rivalries rather than public issues. Both parties depended primarily upon the landowners and virtually ignored the peasants, who constituted four fifths of the total popula tion. The only significant difference between the two parties was that the Con servatives were the more explicit spokesmen of the landed interests, whereas the Liberals were becoming increasingly interested in commercial and indus trial expansion and occupied the leading positions in the growing financial in stitutions. The influence of King Charles on Rum anian politics should not be overlooked. He played a role comparable to that of King Ferdinand in Bul garia. He appears to have been more likable as an individual and more popular as a ruler than the Bulgarian king. But his political goal and methods were very much the same. He kept a firm grip on the political balance of power by making full use of his constitutional authority of appointing and dismissing ministers. The party ministers generally were dependent upon him and could be persuaded by one means or another to do his bidding. A British authority has described C harles’s receipe for ruling the country as “the old panacea of G overnm ent by ‘In s’ and .‘O uts,’.retaining in his own h and the pow er to drive each successive drove from the trough of office when its appetite seemed to him sufficiently appeased.” 2 For all practical purposes this represented governm ent by and for an entrenched oligarchy. Bism arck, who was scarcely liberal in his political


Rumania: 1878-1914 487
views, w arned on one occasion that C harles “ is making a false calculation. . . . in seeking the friendship of the aristocracy instead of winning the devotion of the peasantry. . . . ” 3 During the decade following 1878 Rumanian politics were dominated by Ion Bratianu, the leader of the Liberal party. Bratianu started his career as a revolutionary, having participated in the events of 1848. L ater he played a leading role in the selection of Charles as the successor to Prince Cuza. Bratianu and Charles were able to work together closly because both agreed upon an anti-Russian orientation in foreign affairs. They did so for different reasons, Charles because of his Hohenzollern family ties and Bratianu because of his revolutionary background. Nevertheless, both looked toward the Central Pow ers and both were responsible for the 1883 secret alliance which determined R um anian foreign policy until W orld W ar I. B ratianu’s close partnership with Charles is also explained by the fact that he modified his earlier revolutionary views and adjusted to the realities of R um anian political life. He was generally regarded as being a m an of principle and character in his own personal affairs. But in building up his party machine he did not hesitate to accept and practice the spoils system. The rapid expan sion of the Rum anian economy at the turn of the century offered many oppor tunities for the accumulation of private fortunes, and Bratianu never inquired too closely how these fortunes were acquired.· His main concern was to make sure of the election returns, and in this he left little to chance. In the 1883 elections, for example, only 12 opposition deputies were elected to face 134 Bratianu Liberals. But Bratianu, it should be noted, had no monopoly on po litical opportunism . It was alm ost a principle of R um anian political life that election returns depended more upon which party conducted the elections than upon the views of the voters. But in this respect Rum ania differed from the other Balkan countries only in degree. In M arch, 1888, B ratianu resigned his office and withdrew from public life despite the fact that the elections in the previous year had returned the usual government majority. Bratianu retired partly because of advancing age and partly because of charges of malversation brought against high army of ficers— a scandal that particularly concerned the military-minded Charles. After several months of frequent cabinet changes a stable Conservative government was form ed in January, 1889, and rem ained in office until 1895. This govern ment, which was headed by Lascar Catargiu, passed a num ber of im portant measures. It adopted the gold standard, improved the currency, negotiated sev eral commercial treaties, and established the irremovability of judges, a meas ure which erased a dark blot on R um anian public life. Generally speaking, the domestic record of the Conservative government was a creditable one. In the field of foreign affairs the advent of the Conservative govern ment created a serious dilemma. The 1883 alliance had been kept so secret that only King Charles and a few of the form er Liberal ministers were aware of its existence. Charles now hesitated to inform the new ministers of the pact be cause he was uncertain what their reaction might be and because he did not


488 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
expect them to rem ain long in office. T hus a fantastic situation prevailed in which responsible governm ent officials pledged themselves publicly and ill good faith to a policy of neutrality, without any inkling of the fact that their prede cessors had already concluded a full alliance with the Central Powers. In fact, only one copy of the treaty existed in R um ania and th at was in the king’s pri vate safe. No copy was to be found in the archives of the Rumanian foreign office. This anomalous situation became serious as the time approached for the expiration of the pact. Finally, in M arch, 1892, Charles informed the for eign minister of the existence of the alliance and, two months later, he took Prem ier Catargiu into his confidence. Now it was possible to renew the treaty, and this was done in July, 1892. With the leaders of both parties informed of the com m itm ent, the treaty was renewed without difficulty on later occasionsin 1896, 1902, and 1913. But to the very end it was kept a secret from the parliam ent and the public. During the years at the beginning of the century Rum anian politics proceeded in the customary m anner of the “Ins” and the “O uts.” The German foreign minister observed caustically that the king acted on the maxim “To the most vicious dog the juiciest m orsel.” 4 In accordance with this principle the parties took their turn in office at appropriate intervals. The Liberals followed the Conservatives in 1895 and remained in power until 1899, their leader at the time being Dem eter Sturza. Then came the Conservatives from' 1899 to 1901, the Liberals from 1901 to 1904, and finally the C onservatives from 1904 until 1907, when the great storm of the P easant Revolt broke in upon this halfunreal world of the Bucharest politicians.
THE PEASANT REVOLT
The great Peasant Revolt of March, 1907, was indeed a thunderbolt out of a clear blue sky. The government was caught by surprise, even though well-informed Rumanians had repeatedly made ominous predictions of the fu ture: “ a volcano is trem bling under our feet,” “ a day will come when fire will devour the palaces, the granaries and all the property of those who exploit the peasantry,” “if no reform s are introduced the A grarian question will be solved by a dreadful jacquerie.” 5 Despite these warnings, little attention was paid by responsible officials to the plight of the peasantry and the explosion was a rude awakening for them. The insurrection began in northern M oldavia near the R um anian fron tier. A t first it appears to have been partly anti-Semitic in character, the peas ants sacking Jewish houses and stores. But the movement quickly developed into a full-scale agrarian revolt. All large tenant farmers and absentee land owners became the objects of peasant fury. Troops were called out, but the conflagration spread rapidly southward, reaching all the way to the Danube River. The peasants not only dem anded an adjustm ent of their contracts with the landowners but in some districts seized land and organized revolutionary bands.


Rumania: 1878-1914 489
The Conservative governm ent in office was unable to cope with the crisis, so the Liberal leader, Sturza, took over on M arch 25. He adopted the policy of the carrot and the stick. On the one hand, the king prom ised various reforms— the abolition of middlemen on the state lands, extension of small holdings, and restriction of agricultural leases to a maximum of eight thousand acres. On the other hand, the minister of war, General Alexander Averescu, launched regular military operations to crush the uprising. Flying columns with m ounted artillery were dispatched to the affected areas. Ruthless measures were employed wherever the peasants refused to lay down their arms. Certain vil lages were bom barded and com pletely destroyed. By the end of A pril the u p rising had been quelled by a force of 120,000 troops. At least 10,000 peasants were killed in the process. T he full facts of the revolt will never be known be cause the official dossiers in the ministries of war and the interior have been removed and presumably destroyed. Although the revolt was crushed within a month, it was nevertheless a sobering experience. The government made allusions to foreign agitators, but the fact remained that the movement was a purely Rum anian affair reflecting the unhealthy state of Rum anian society. Its roots were to be found in the agrar ian history of R um ania during the preceding'century, as described in C hapter 18: in the failure of Prince C uza’s land reform m easure of 1864 and, more generally, in the disruptive im pact of the W estern E uropean m arket economy upon a formerly self-sufficient natural economy. By the time of the revolt the inequality of land distribution was probably more pronounced in Rumania than in any other European country, not excluding Russia. A bout 85 per cent of the Rum anian peasants either had no land at all or had so little that they were forced to work part time for the landlords to support their families. By con trast, five thousand large estates covered about half of all the arable land. The Peasant Revolt induced the R um anian parliam ent to pass in D e cember, 1907, four decrees designed to curb the exploitation of the peasantry. The first regulated agricultural contracts; the second created a state-supported R ural Office to prom ote the transfer of land to the peasants; the third limited the size of leases to 4,000 hectares of cultivable land; and the fourth estab lished cooperatives for renting land. This last measure proved to be the most successful, the amount of land rented by cooperatives increasing from 133,000 to 410,000 hectares between 1908 and 1916. But taken as a whole, these de crees merely scratched the surface. The plight of the peasantry remained al most as desperate as ever. The basic reason appears to have been that the appli cation of the reforms was entrusted to those who stood to lose the most if they were actually enforced. The net result under such circumstances was under standably negligible. A n authority on R um anian agriculture has concluded:
The men who were to interpret and apply them [the reform decrees] remained the same, and, beyond a passing flush, the tem per and habits of R u manian public life were hardly affected by the peasants’ show of despair. . . . In a peculiarly agrarian and peasant country the last issue that seemed capable of enlisting political zeal was the problem of the peasants’ fate. How strange it


490 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
is, e.g., that the wise King Carol (1 8 6 6 -1 9 1 5 ), who had the welfare of the people truly at heart, should not have used his great influence to bring about a solution of the rural problem; unless it be that he knew that, like Cuza, he would be faced with the ruthless opposition of all political factions.9
Such was the position of the Rum anian peasants when their eyes were opened by the course of events during the Balkan W ars. Peasant recruits ob served that across the Danube River, in Bulgaria, peasants had their own small holdings with no great landowners or extortionate middlemen. Only a tenth of 1 per cent of the arable land in Bulgaria was in estates of 500 hectares or larger, as com pared with 40 per cent in Rum ania. The R um anian peasant soldiers also observed that the Bulgarian villages were better built and the fields more suc cessfully tilled than at home. This revelation of what existed across the Danube impelled the Liberal leader, Ionel Bratianu (eldest son of the first Bratianu), to advocate in 1913 expropriation of large estates. This was a significant step, since both parties hitherto had declared themselves strongly against such a drastic procedure. W hen the elections were held in February, 1914, the Liber als gained a m ajority of the seats. The new assembly voted in favor of the principle of revising the 1866 constitution to permit expropriation of private property. But W orld W ar I broke out before anything concrete could be ac complished. During the course of that war revolutionary forces were unleashed which far surpassed those of 1907 and which were to culminate at last in the long-awaited distribution of land.
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT
Turning from agriculture to industry, we find that Rum ania was as underdeveloped in this field as the other B alkan countries. It is estim ated th at in 1914 only 1.5 per cent of the national wealth was invested in industry. Similarly, Rum anian exports comprised 75.7 per cent of agricultural products and only 3 per cent of industrial goods. The usual factors lay behind this back wardness— lack of local capital and shortage of skilled labor and trained m an agement. At an early date the government endeavored to stimulate industrial growth. In 1887 it decreed that anyone founding an industrial establishment with a capital of at least 2,000 pounds or employing at least 25 workmen (of whom two thirds should be Rum anians), would be granted 12 acres of state land, exemption for a term of years from all direct taxes, freedom from cus toms dues for machinery and raw material imported, reduction in cost of trans porting materials on the state railroads, and preferential rights in supplying m anufactured articles to the state. Despite this encouragement Rum anian in dustry remained feeble and was confined largely to the processing of local raw materials. The principal industries were oil refineries, iron foundries, distilleries, · flour mills, sugar refineries, sawmills, paper mills, chemical and glass factories, and soap and candle works. A part from grains, the only other exports of any significance before


Rumania: 1878—1914 491
1914 were lum ber and oil. Both these commodities were produced largely by foreign-financed and foreign-operated enterprises. The forests of Rumania were long either neglected or exploited in the most reckless fashion. Nevertheless, in 1910 there were 2,760,000 acres under forests, chiefly in the m ountains of northwestern Moldavia. M ore than 1,000,000 acres were state property. The lum ber was floated down the rivers of the Carpathian watershed to the Danube and thence exported to Turkey and Bulgaria. Also, casks, shaped planks, and petroleum drums were sold to A ustria and Russia. King Charles, who was an ardent forester, halted the destruction of forest resources by signing a law in 1886 making private wooded properties liable to state control. The oil industry developed around the Ploesti fields to the north of Bucharest. As early as the sixteenth century the peasants used the crude oil as lubricant and medicine and the boyars burned it for fuel. In 1844 the first con cession was granted to a Russian firm, and by 1857 the first refinery had been built in Ploesti. Production rose steeply at the turn of the century, jumping from 50,000 tons in 1890 to 1,885,000 tons in 1913. In the latter year invest m ent in the oil industry totaled 7 7 ,200,000 dollars. Only about 1 per cent of this sum was Rumanian capital, the rem ainder being Germ an, British, Dutch, Am erican, French, and Belgian. In 1917 British engineers blew up the oil wells to prevent their falling to the Central Powers. Production did not reach prewar levels again until 1921. The first railroad in Rum ania was built in 1869, running from the capital to Giurgiu, its port on the D anube. O ther lines followed rapidly, some built by private enterprise and others by the state, which in 1888 bought the entire system. By 1914 the total mileage am ounted to approximately 2,500. The main line ran from Bukovina south through the whole length of M oldavia and then turned westward through W allachia to the Hungarian frontier. Branch lines extended on one side up the lateral valleys of the Carpathians and on the other to Jassy and to the principal Danube and Black Sea ports. Rapidly increasing emigration to the New W orld was occurring in R u m ania as well as in the other Balkan countries at the turn of the century. By 1 9 1 0 a total of 70,217 had left M oldavia and W allachia, but of these, 67,301 were Jews and only 2,916 Gentiles. Discrim ination against the Jews as well as the greater mobility of the Jewish urban dweller presumably explains these figures. On the other hand, the Rum anians in Transylvania did not hesitate to emigrate; in that province they were the victims of exploitation by Hungarian landowners and of M agyarization by the state. Thus, 76,755 Transylvanian Rum anians had migrated to the United States by 1910. Rum ania, like her Balkan neighbors, borrowed heavily in the last quar ter of the nineteenth century in order to support her army and to build railways and other public projects. A t first she had difficulty in meeting paym ents for interest and amortization because her imports consistently exceeded her exports. But the balance of trade became favorable in 1900 and rem ained so until 1913. Thus the credit of the Rumanian government on the eve of W orld W ar I was higher than that of any other Balkan government, and no foreign control was


492 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
exerted over R um anian revenues. In 1914 R u m ania’s external debt was about 1.7 billion francs, of which 52 per cent was held in Germ any, 32 per cent in F rance, 5 per cent in Belgium, and 11 p er cent in Rum ania.
IRRED EN TISM AND FOREIGN POLICY
The position of the Rum anian minorities in A ustria-H ungary and Russia was becoming increasingly difficult in the late nineteenth century. This was especially true of the Transylvanian Rum anians, who were subjected to severe and unrelenting M agyarization following the Ausgleich of 1867. As discussed in Chapter 18, that agreement had transform ed the Hapsburg Em pire into the Dual M onarchy and left Transylvania under Hungarian domination. The new masters were determined to Magyarize the various peoples of the province. When certain Rumanian leaders demanded autonomy for Transylvania, a H un garian spokesm an replied arrogantly: “D o n ’t provoke us to em ploy tow ards the other nations the methods of total extermination employed by the AngloSaxons towards the Red Indians of N orth Am erica.” O ther Rumanian objec tors were met with such answers as “Be silent and pay,” “Go to Bucharest.” 7 Theoretically, m inority groups in Hungary, such as the Rum anians, Ser bians, and Slovaks, were represented in the H ungarian parliam ent. But in prac tice they were effectively barred by the Electoral Law of 1874, which ensured the return of government-approved candidates through such time-honored pro cedures as gerrymandering, unequal distribution, a highly com plicated franchise, public voting, and inadequate legal checks upon corruption. All this enabled K olom an T isza’s Liberal party to acquire an alm ost autom atic control of the 250 constituencies in the non-M agyar districts. Paradoxically enough, the Liberal party was the most intolerant tow ard the minorities, so that, in effect, the non-M agyar constituencies were being utilized to enforce a program of M agyarization. Some Rum anians wished to resist actively this campaign of dena tionalization. But they were overridden by Andrew Shaguna, m etropolitan of the O rthodox Church of Transylvania and the outstanding leader of the Transylvanian Rum anians in the second half of the nineteenth century. Sha guna had played a leading role in the struggle against the Hungarians in 1848. Yet now, after the 1867 Ausgleich, he opposed agitation and violence. He believed that the A ustro-H ungarian partnership was too strong to be challenged openly and directly. Instead, he developed his church organiza tion to such a point that it becam e a highly effective instrum ent for national representation and national defense. He used his influence to secure from the H ungarian parliam ent in June, 1868, a church constitution which was to be come an important bulwark of Rumanian nationality during the next half century. The constitution emphasized democratic elections and lay repre-. sentation at all levels, from the m etropolitan at the top to the village priests at the base. This made it possible for the clergy and the laymen to work to gether intimately and harmoniously for the interests of the nation.


Rumania: 1878-1914 493
Shaguna also made essential contributions in education and learning. He established a printing press, issued liturgies and religious books, reor ganized the theological seminary, and, above all, founded num erous prim ary and secondary schools. By the time he died in 1873 his strategy of peaceful and constructive work had been thoroughly vindicated. His services to the Rumanian national cause were no less outstanding than those of his great contem porary, Bishop Strossm ayer (discussed in C hapter 2 4 ), to the cause of Yugoslav culture and unity. The first im portant developm ent after Shaguna’s death was the o r ganization of the R um anian National party in 1881. Its aim was reform within the em pire rath er than union with Rum ania. T he party’s program included the restoration of T ransylvania’s autonom y, revision of the electoral law, autonomy for the Rumanian churches, and the use of the Rum anian language in the adm inistration of R um anian districts. T he R um anian N ational party lasted until 1894, when it was dissolved in the afterm ath to the spec tacular “ M emorandum Trial.” This trial arose out of a memorandum which the Rumanians prepared, listing their grievances and presenting their de mands. When Emperor Francis Joseph refused to receive the document, the Rum anians made it public and circulated it widely. The H ungarian govern ment thereupon arrested the entire committee of the Rumanian National party on the charge of “incitement against the Magyar nationality.” The Rumanians took advantage of the trial to appeal for world support:
W hat is under discussion here is the very existence of the Rum anian people, and the national existence o f a people is not discussed, but affirmed. . . . There can be no question of judgement: you can condemn us as individuals, but not as the representatives of our people. . . . But though you are not competent to judge us, there is none the less another tribunal, larger, more enlightened, and assuredly more im partial— the tribunal of the civilised w orld, which will condem n you yet more severely than it has hitherto done. By your spirit of medieval in tolerance, by a racial fanaticism which has not its equal in Europe, you will, if you condem n us, simply succeed in proving to the world th at the M agyars are a discordant note in the concert of E uropean nations.8
Under such circumstances the outcome of the trial was a foregone conclusion. The defendants were given jail sentences and the Rum anian N ational party was ordered dissolved. But the most im portant result of the trial was that it attracted international attention to the Rum anian question in the same manner that the Agram (Zagreb) treason trial was to publicize the Croatian question fifteen years later.* The Rum anians hoped for some improvement in their position when the Hungarian Liberal party was defeated in the elections of 1905. But the new government continued the policy of M agyarization as zealously as did the old. It passed an education bill in 1907 that established state control
* See Chapter 24.


494 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
over the Rum anian denominational school system and attempted to Magyarize this m ajor stronghold of Rum anian nationalism. In the 1910 elections the Liberal party, now known as the Party of National W ork, came back to power in Budapest. Its new leader was Count Khuen-Hedervary who had governed C roatia with an iron hand for two decades. Now, as premier, he stated publicly that “our non-M agyar fellow-citizens must first of all reconcile them selves to the fact th at they here belong to a national state, which is not a conglomerate of different races, but which one nation has conquered and founded, upon which one nation has stam ped the ineradicable impress of its individuality.” The prem ier specifically warned the Rum anians not to form parties on the basis of nationality, for “in that moment they are already deny ing the political unity of the Magyar nation. With this shade of opinion there can be no negotiations: it must be fought, and if we conquer, we must de stroy it.” 0 The reaction in Rum ania to this unceasing campaign against the Transylvanian Rumanians was not as vigorous as might be expected. Cer tainly it did not approach the intensity and violence of the Serbian reaction against Hapsburg rule in Bosnia-Herzegovina. One reason for this difference is th at the Serbians could count on Russian support against A ustria-H ungary, whereas the Rum anians had strained relations with Russia and could not turn to any other great power for assistance against the Dual Monarchy. Fur thermore, the Rum anian government was bound to Vienna by secret alli ance which precluded any serious or p rotracted cam paign in behalf of the Transylvanian R um anians. It is true th at there were certain m anifestations in Rum ania in support of the hard-pressed brethren in Transylvania. M ost im portant was the organization of the R um anian Cultural League in 1891 by a group of teachers and students in the two universities at Bucharest and Jassy. The League carried on propaganda work to enlist public support within Rum ania and also abroad. The fact remains, however, that public opinion in R um ania was not as agitated over the irredentist issue as that in Serbia. Similarly, the Rum anian government at the turn of the century was much more concerned with the growing strength of Bulgaria than with the Rum anians in Transylvania. Premier lonel Bratianu stated repeatedly during these years that his principal aim was to prevent Bulgaria from expanding into M acedonia and upsetting the balance of power in the Balkans. The con cern of the Rum anians with what was happening to the south of the Danube is evident in the extravagant interest they show ed in the fate of the Vlachs. They claimed as kinsmen this race of shepherds and traders scattered through the central Balkans.* Each year the Rumanians spent considerable sums subsidizing Vlach schools, the am ounts reaching half a million francs by 1900 and one million by 1912. Needless to say, no one in Bucharest was so naive as to imagine that the Vlachs could ever be incorporated into Rumania. They were regarded rather as a sort of speculative investment to be used for
* See Chapter 1.


Rumania: 1878-1914 495
bargaining purposes whenever an opportunity presented itself. W hen the A us trian foreign m inister inquired in Bucharest, “O f what use is a R um anian group in the Pindus M ountains?” he was told, “The time will come when it will serve as a device for com pensation.” 10 T he point to note here is th at the Rum anian government lavished more official attention upon the com para tive handful of Vlachs than it did upon the massive bloc of Transylvanian Rumanians. The explanation was the secret alliance with Vienna and the strength of the Dual M onarchy com pared to the flabbiness of European Turkey. A nd on the other side of the Carpathians the leaders of the Transyl vanian Rumanians did not look to Bucharest for delivery. Rather, they looked to Budapest and Vienna for reform. They tended to be anti-M agyar rather than anti-Hapsburg. As late as 1913 a leading spokesman for the Transylvanian Rumanians denounced the notion of an all-inclusive Rumanian state as a “beer-table fantasy.” M any Rumanians had high hopes in A rch duke Francis Ferdinand, who was known to be anti-M agyar and sympathetic to the minorities. But these hopes were dashed by the Sarajevo crime, which removed the archduke and released forces that brought into being precisely that state which a few years earlier had beeh regarded as a fantasy.


27. Albanian Awakening to 1914
J I l b a n ia is t h e s m a l l e s t c o u n t r y in the B alkan
Peninsula, being approxim ately the same size as the state of Massachusetts. It is a country with meager resources, consisting merely of a small strip of the mountainous western coast of the peninsula. This probably explains why the Albanians cannot look back to an earlier period of glory and greatness. Their homeland has been too poor and restricted to enable them to expand and to found an empire com parable with those of the medieval Byzantine, Serbian, and Bulgarian em perors. A t th e'tim e of the Turkish invasion in the fifteenth century the Albanians did attract attention momentarily because of their gallant resistance under their famous leader Skanderbeg. But during the following centuries of Turkish rule they lived in un6ventful obscurity in their remote mountains. Even after neighboring Balkan peoples began to awaken in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the Albanians slept on, oblivious to w hat was happening about them. Only in the late nineteenth century did they begin to stir, prodded by a new sense of national conscious ness as well as by the increasing pressure of acquisitive neighboring powers. With the opening of the twentieth century Albania ceased to be merely a geographic expression and came to be recognized as the homeland of a dis tinct people with specific claims and aspirations, and resolved to take their place in the family of Balkan nations.
ALBANIA U N D ER TH E TURKS
The Albanians are generally considered to be the most ancient ethnic group in Southeastern Europe. They are the descendants of pre-Hellenic stock that was pushed back into the m ountains of the western Balkans by the Hellenes and the Slavs. In this respect the A lbanians may be com pared to the Celts of the British Isles who were forced into the m ountains of Wales, Scotland, and Ireland by the Anglo-Saxon invaders. The Albanian language is organically distinct from the neighboring Slavic and G reek languages in
496


Albanian Awakening to 1914 497
the sam e m anner that the Celtic language is different from the Germ anic. It should be noted, however, that the Albanians use a considerable number of words that are of foreign origin— Latin, Italian, Turkish, Greek, and Slav. This linguistic borrowing represents the cultural residue of a long series of invaders— Rom ans, Goths, Slavs, Norm ans, Venetians, and, finally, Turks. The latter conquered A lbania only after a bitter struggle. For once the A l banian chieftains rallied behind a single leader, the celebrated George Kastriotis, who so distinguished himself that he acquired the name Skanderbeg after Alexander the Great. During the years 1444 to 1466 he fought thir teen campaigns against the Turks and successfully held them at bay while Christian Europe applauded. After his death the Turks were finally able to prevail and to impose their rule, which was to last for four and a half cen turies. The Turks never governed Albania as closely as did the Rom ans. This was particularly true in the north, where the Turks doubtlessly calcu lated that the wild and rugged countryside would never repay the cost of thorough subjugation. But Turkish rule was prolonged, even though super ficial, and in the course of the centuries it effected a num ber of fundam ental changes. In the first place, it caused many Albanians to emigrate to foreign countries. Even before the appearance of the Turks there had been a con siderable Albanian exodus southward into Greece because of Serbian pressure in the north. These A lbanians settled in many parts of Greece, both m ain land and islands, and some of them played leading roles in the G reek W ar of Independence. With the Turkish invasions more Albanians left their coun try, many of them crossing over to southern Italy and Sicily. Franceso Crispi, twice premier of Italy, was a descendant of these emigrants. The Italian census of 1901 reported a little over 200,000 A lbanian-speaking citi zens in the country. These A lbanian colonies in Italy were m ore advanced culturally than the homeland under Turkish rule and therefore were able to contribute substantially to the national awakening in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In addition to stimulating emigration, the Turks accentuated and perpetuated religious and social differences among the Albanians. These differences existed before the appearance of the Turks. Traditionally there has been the division between the Ghegs in the north and the Tosks in the south, the Shkumbi River being the line of dem arcation. The two peoples speak dialects that differ as much as those of northern and southern Italy. The Ghegs are typical m ountaineers— tall, rough, and warlike, and prefer ring, until recent times at least, to pass their days shining their guns or using them in their interminable feuds. The Tosks are shorter, more sober, some w hat mellowed by centuries of contact with Byzantine culture, and more am enable to discipline, perhaps because their physical environm ent is not as wild and as conducive to defiance of central authority as that in the north. Religious differences also existed before the coming of the Turks. Originally all Albanians had belonged to the Eastern O rthodox Church, to


498 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
which they had been attached at the time of the schism between the church of Rome and that of Constantinople. Then the Ghegs in the north adopted Catholicism, apparently in order better to resist the pressure of the Orthodox Serbs. Thus the Albanians were divided between the Catholic and Orthodox churches before the time of the Turkish invasion. Finally, it should be noted that feudalism prevailed in Albania when the Turks appeared, particularly in the regions along the coast. The first and most im portant effect of the Turkish conquest was the conversion of the majority of the population to Islam. M any of the Catholics in the north embraced the new religion, the reason apparently being their fear and hatred of the Slavs. By becoming Moslems they became the allies and the equals of the Turks and thereby obtained security against the neigh boring Christian Slavs. In southern Albania, where Turkish rule was more of a reality, the ruling Albanian families apostatized in order to retain their lands. M ost of the common people soon followed their example. Islam also spread in the center of the country, where the most solid Moslem bloc now is to be found. As a result of these mass conversions A lbania today is the only E uropean country th at is predom inantly M oslem , approxim ately 70 per cent of the population being Moslem, 20 per cent O rthodox, and 10 per cent Catholic. A nother effect of the Turkish conquest was the freezing of social divisions. The Albanian feudal lords accepted Islam and the suzerainty of the sultan and thus retained their lands, and their authority. In northern Albania the tribal chiefs were the de facto rulers of the country. The Turkish governor could do little without their consent and cooperation. W ithin each tribe the chief was assisted by a council of elders and, on special occasions, by a general assembly to which every family sent a delegate. In southern A lbania the countryside was dominated by large landowners or beys, rather than by tribal chiefs. M embers of this landowning class were also prominent in the Turkish service, thereby buttressing their economic position with po litical power. W hatever the titles or the forms, Albania during the Turkish period was ruled by a handful of feudal families. Some produced outstanding states men who made notable contributions to their country. Outstanding among these was Ismail Kemal Bey, who began a distinguished career in the O tto man service in 1860 and remained to contribute substantially to the winning of Albanian independence during the Balkan W ars and W orld W ar I. But on the whole, the Albanian lords were shiftless, unprogressive, and extortionate. This was especially true in the south, where tribal egalitarianism was lacking. Instead, the beys .owned most of the fertile land, and the peasants, who con stituted 95 per cent of the population, were dependent upon them as tenants or as .agricultural laborers. The following accounts bring out the contrast between the lives of peasants and of landlords at the end of the nineteenth century. The first account describes daily existence in the villages of southern


Albanian Awakening to 1914 499
Albania; the second, from the memoirs of Ismail Kernel Bey, recounts his life as the son of a landlord.
The peasant was haunted by a nagging fear that his supply of the prin cipal staple of diet, a coarse bread made of corn mixed with rye and wheat, would not suffice for his needs. . . . To supplem ent the corn bread the peasant might occasionally use barley, ordinarily reserved for horses and mules; and, if times were good, his table might display beans, rice, or green vegetables. Meat, like fish, which was consum ed chiefly by the Christians, was reserved for feast days. A lthough some butter, cheese, and olive oil were usually stored away for winter use, dairy products, including milk, were considered luxuries. M alnutrition and filth brought about a high mortality; consumption, bone diseases, and malaria were ram pant. . . . Several families often lived in two or three rooms. T he usual house, one- or two-storied and constructed of rough stone, had rooms reserved for married couples and for entertaining guests, and a large ashef, or kitchen, which served as living room, dining room, and sleeping quarters for the un married members of the family. The fireplace, center of family life, provided all Ihe heat that was available either for cooking or for fighting the dam p chill of the roughly floored house. In winter, the unglassed windows were filled with old rags, straw, or wooden slabs, in the hope that the bitter wind might be kept out. Sewage systems were unknow n; although a house occasionally boasted its own well, the peasants generally carried their water in earthenw are or copper kettles from streams or troughs. Most houses had several of these kettles, and perhaps a few wooden spoons and copper plates. A wooden chest set against the wall indicated that the woman of the family had some homespun garments to treasure, or a few trinkets garnered from her wedding celebration. N o one had beds. They used home-made mats of wool, cotton, or straw, covered with coarse blankets. In the daytim e they were piled in a corner; too few for cleanliness, the blankets were often infested with lice. It was an evening ritual in many of the houses for members of the family to congregate at the fireplace before going to bed, each one solemnly shaking out his blanket to kill a few of the pests. T he M oham m edans, poorer than the Christians and even less solicitous about cleanli ness, were easy prey for vermin. Directly adjacent to the house were the quarters reserved for horses, mules, donkeys, cows, sheep, and goats. Such were the better homes. In the poorer huts only a scant partition divided the one long room into a house and a barn.1
The chief elements in the education of a young Albanian of the period were horse-riding, shooting, and hunting. At each of the four seasons I was sent to make a horseback tour in the interior of the country, accompanied by my two tutors and by young companions of my age, and with a numerous suite. On these occasions I visited the various villages and was the guest of the notables, and there were all kinds of festivities, especially the perform ance of the national dances, which formed a part of youthful education. In the hunting season I fre quently rode to hounds, every man in com fortable circumstances in those days keeping a pack of dogs. H are-hunting was carried on, especially with a view to exercise in horsemanship. Our principal sport with the gun was shooting wild duck and woodcock. A nother sport was carried on in the m onth of May, when


500 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
we went up in the mountains to catch partridges with nets. . . . My suite consisted of young men of the household service and professional hunters. There were-no paid upper servants. Young men from the families of the notables were attached to the service of the chief family in the country in an entirely honorary capacity as a part of their education or apprenticeship. This practice enabled them to take part in the events of the day, to learn manners and good breeding, and to get an acquaintance with public affairs. . . . A il these young men were dressed in the national costume of rich embroidered cloth or velvet, and armed with pistols and yataghans in silver-gilt, which they carried in em broidered leather belts. M ost of them possessed their own saddle horses, and the Beys at fetes and on other occa sions made gifts to them of arms and similar objects.2
The significance of this social stratification should not be exaggerated. It did not have political repercussions before the twentieth century. Up to that time the peasant accepted his lot as a part of the natural order of things. When he took up arms it was not against the landowning beys but rather under their leadership and at their instigation. As a rule he fought not for social reform , which was beyond his ken, but in order to pillage neighboring Christians or to resist sultans who tried to impose conscription or to levy taxes or to curb the power of those same beys or chieftains that the peasant unquestioningly followed. The religious divisions in A lbania were also not as significant as might be assumed. The A lbanians never have been fanatics in religious m at ters. Most Moslem Albanians belonged to the bcktashi sect, an extremely un orthodox and tolerant order that preached a pantheistic universalist creed. Moslem and Christian A lbanians lived side by side for centuries, and, al though quarrels between tribes and individuals were only too common, reli gion was rarely the issue in dispute. Tolerance went so far that members of the same family not infrequently professed different religions. M ore than one traveler reported that infants were both baptized as Christians and circum cised as Moslems, and that adults who had begun life in that fashion used two names, one Christian and the other Moslem, depending upon the circle in which they happened to be moving at the time. Even though the Albanians did not take any religion too seriously, the fact remains that three religious com m unities did exist in their country. This m eant that whereas religion, was a unifying force amongst other Balkan peoples, with the Albanians it was a disruptive factor, even though mildly so. Moslem Albanians felt a genuine reverence for the sultan in Constantinople, a sentiment that their Christian brothers could not share. In education and general culture the divisive influence of the three religions was most apparent and m ost serious. It is true that throughout the country, schools were con spicuous mostly by their absence. Only in 1860 did the imperial government begin to open schools but these were reserved for Moslems and used Turkish as the language of instruction. In addition there were a considerable number of O rthodox church schools in the south, which used the Greek language in their teaching and were pro Greek in their orientation. Only a handful of


Albanian Awakening to 1914 501
Catholic and Protestant schools used the Albanian language, and they were able to do so only because they were under foreign protection. The O ttom an governm ent used its authority to suppress the A lbanian language wherever possible. It forbade the publication of any works in Al banian and it also forbade the use of Albanian for instruction. This was contrary to the usual practice of the Turks, who normally did not concern themselves with schools and languages. The explanation for this deviation is that the A lbanians, divided as they were by religion, had only their lan guage in com m on. Only the A lbanian language could unite M oslem, O rth o dox, and Catholic Albanians. And a common language could lead, as it had with the other Balkan peoples, to a common literature, to the discovery of a common historical past, and, eventually, to the growth of an active and all-embracing national consciousness. The Turks naturally wished to forestall this development, particularly because the Albanians traditionally had constituted the backbone of their fighting forces in E urope. T he G reek ecclesiastical authorities also opposed the rise of Albanian national consciousness because it would interfere with the Hellenizing work of Greek schools and Greek churches. Thus the O tto man governm ent and the G reek church officials purposefully exploited the religious divisions among the Albanians to foment discord and to prevent the growth of a unifying national sentiment. A lbanian leaders were well aw are of the separatist influence of the three religions. “Awake, Albanians, Awake!” exhorted the pioneer national ist, Vassa Pasha. “Let not mosque and churches divide you. The true religion of the A lbanian is his national ideal.” 8 But this appeal evoked no response for many decades. Albania rem ained only a geographic expression until the late nineteenth century. The Albanians followed far behind the other Balkan peoples in their national awakening. The reasons for this lag were many and weighty. The Albanians had no schools of their own, no national church, and no national literature. They were not even oppressed by the Turks or goaded to revolt by real or fancied grievances. On the contrary, the position of the Albanians in the Ottom an Em pire was comfortable and advantageous. Most of them were of the same faith as their Turkish overlords. They all enjoyed a large degree of autonomy. A nd those who wished for a career had opportunities open to them in the imperial army and bureaucracy which far surpassed anything available in their poverty-stricken homeland. M any A lbanians did take advantage of these opportunities in the imperial service. O ut of forty-nine grand vizirs in the period 1453 to 1623, eleven were A lbanians, eleven were South Slavs, only five were T urks, one each were Italian, Georgian, Armenian, and Circassian, and the remaining ten are of undeterm ined origin. Likewise, in the late nineteenth century Abdul Hamid depended to a great extent upon the Albanians, whom he trusted above his other subjects. The Palace G uard and the First Arm y Corps, which garrisoned the capital, consisted largely of Albanians. The


502 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
grand vizir for many years was the A lbanian Ferid Pasha. O ther Albanian leaders also received favors and high posts from Abdul Hamid. This advan tageous position of the A lbanians in the O ttom an Em pire, together with their lack of means for defending and fostering their national culture, ex plains why for centuries they accepted O ttom an rule without question and remained oblivious to the appeal of nationalism that was arousing their Balkan neighbors.
ALBANIAN LEAG UE
The first manifestations of Albanian nationalism appeared not within A lbania itself but rather in the A lbanian colonies abroad, where the restraints of Turkish officials and G reek prelates did not prevail. Conditions were particularly favorable in Italy, where a large num ber of A lbanians lived in separate communities with full freedom to conduct their own schools and to preserve their own language and traditions. The two great pioneers of Al banian nationalist literature both hailed from these settlem ents in Italy. O ne was Dem eario Cam arda, who published in 1864 a scientific study of the A lbanian language dem onstrating its antiquity. The other was G irolam o de Rada, whose poem “Skanderbeg” (1872) extolled the struggle of the Al banian people against the Turkish invader. In other works De Rada sought to revive memories of past achievements and glory and thereby to stimulate national consciousness and pride. Meanwhile the Albanians at home remained asleep until awakened by a shock from the outside. This took the form of the San Stefano and Berlin treaties concluded at the end of the Russo-Turkish W ar of 1877-1878. The San Stefano Treaty gave extensive lands to Serbia, M ontenegro, and Bulgaria which A lbanian nationalists regarded as their own. As described in C hapter 21, the W estern powers were not satisfied with the terms of San Stefano and they called the Berlin Congress (June 13-July 13, 1878) to consider a new settlement. The Albanian leaders of the period, being apprehensive of the decisions that might be made, organized on July 1 the “Albanian League for the Defense of the Rights of the A lbanian N ation.” The aim of the League was twofold, to “resist until death” any attem pt to annex Albanian territory, and to obtain an autonomous status within the O ttom an Empire. The Porte encouraged the Albanian League, hoping that it might be successful in checking the expansionism of the Slavic Balkan states. The League did resist the Slavs valiantly and with considerable success. B ut its true significance is th a t it represents the beginning of the A lbanian national movement. In fostering the League the Turks unleashed a force which, within three decades, was to grow beyond their power to control. The Berlin Congress assigned much less territory to the Balkan Slav states .than they had received at San Stefano. But the leaders of the League· were still dissatisfied, claiming that A lbanian territory in the north was being handed over to the Slavs. The League sent a resolution to the powers at Berlin protesting against the new frontiers and proclaim ing the unity of all


Albanian Awakening to 1914 5 0 3
Albanians regardless of religious differences. Bismarck, as usual concerned only with the power relationships of the great states, commented curtly, “There is no A lbanian nationality.” But the Albanians, now aroused and organized for the first time, were not to be dismissed so lightly. They decided to go beyond protests and to take up arms in defense of what they considered to be their homeland. They could do nothing about the lands assigned to the Serbs because the latter had already occupied them. But when the Montenegrins tried to take over the towns of Podgorica and Antivari (B ar) and the surrounding areas, the Albanians resisted fiercely and successfully. The M ontenegrins, having been repulsed, appealed to the great powers. A compromise settlement pro posed by the Italian Count Corti was accepted by the Porte in April, 1880. But the Albanians refused to consider any territorial cessions to Montenegro and defied both the powers and the Porte. The latter gladly exploited this Albanian resistance as a means of stalling on the cession of territory. But the powers finally decided to intervene decisively in order to settle the dan gerously prolonged controversy. Hence they brought sufficient pressure to bear in C onstantinople to force the sultan to take adequate measures against his obstinate subjects. In November, 1880,'a Turkish army dispersed the Albanian forces and delivered the disputed territories to the Montenegrins. The Albanian League opposed not only the M ontenegrins in the north b u t also the G reeks in the south. T he latter were dem anding the provinces of Thessaly and Epirus to balance the expansion of the South Slavs. The Albanians claimed Epirus as their own and mustered a considera ble force to stop any G reek advance. In the negotiations that followed be tween the Greek and Turkish representatives, the latter argued that Epirus could not be ceded because of the armed opposition of the Albanian League. Finally, after protracted negotiations, Greece was given most of Thessaly but only the A rta region of Epirus. With the frontier question settled, the Albanian League turned to its other objective, th at is, an autonom ous status within the em pire. It is significant that at no time did the A lbanian leaders dem and full independ ence. The reason was that they knew that the Albanian people were not ready for independent statehood and they feared that if European Turkey were partitioned, the Albanian lands would be divided along with the rest. Thus the Albanians, unlike the other Balkan peoples, favored the continua tion of O ttom an rule in the Balkans and preferred the security of autonomy to the dangers of independence. The League demanded specifically that the four vilayets— Yanina, M onastir (B ito lj), Uskiib (S k o p lje), and Shkodra (S c u ta ri)— which it con sidered to be Albanian, should be united into one province; that the Turkish governor of the province should be advised by an A lbanian Council elected by universal suffrage; that a national militia should be organized with Turkish officers; and that A lbanian should be made the language of administration. The T urks had favored the League to this point, but now they rejected its


504 A g e o f Im perialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
demands. Autonomy invariably had been the prelude to independence in the rest of the Balkans, and the Turks did not care to risk a repetition. -The Albanians, with their customary boldness, forced the issue by ousting Turkish officials in various parts of the country and assuming full control. The Turks responded by sending an arm y which dispersed the L eague’s forces and as serted the sultan ’s authority throughout A lbania. In conclusion, the significance of the League should not be exag gerated. It by no means had a united and informed people behind it. The L eague’s program had been largely the w ork of southern leaders who had held posts in the imperial service and who thereby had acquired sufficient background and perspective to think in terms of the nation as a whole. By contrast, m ost n orthern leaders hitherto had been isolated and engrossed in purely local affairs. Consequently, they were more interested in autonomy as a means of getting exemption from taxes and from military service than as a step toward national unity and ultimate independence. Nevertheless, the League did accomplish a good deal. Its deter mined stand undoubtedly saved certain territories from foreign rule. Also, it gave the A lbanian people their first national organization and national program. Finally, it compelled the great powers to take note that Albanians did exist and that they could not be ignored with impunity. The following significant dispatch sent by the British am bassador in C onstantinople on July 26, 1880, would never have been w ritten were it not for the League and its work. ,
I venture to submit to your Lordship, as I have done before, that the Albanian excitement cannot be passed over as a mere manoeuvre conducted by the T urks in order to mislead E urope and evade its will. N b r can it be denied that the Albanian m ovement is perfectly natural. . . . the A lbanian nationality is an clem ent which ought not to be overlooked in any future political com binations. . . . I would recommend that the formation of a united Albanian province should at least always be kept in view.4
NATIONAL AWAKENING
The years following the collapse of the Albanian League witnesesed a steady growth of Albanian national culture and consciousness. W hen the League was form ed in 1878 the; T urks expressed their approval and support by removing the ban which they had previously imposed on Albanian schools and on printing in the A lbanian language. F or some reason they did not reimpose the ban when they suppressed the League in 1881. It was not until 1886 that the old restrictions were again put into force. During the interval Albanian nationalists eagerly seized the opportunity to found schools and to print the books and newspapers necessary to arouse the people from their centuries’ long slumber. Hitherto almost all Albanians had been illiterate. On the rare occa sions when they wished to send written messages they had turned to Turkish professional letter writers or to Greek O rthodox priests. These scribes wrote


Albanian Awakening to 1914 505
the messages in Arabic or Greek characters. Albanian youths who aspired for education had a choice of O rthodox Church schools, where instruction was in Greek, or O ttom an governm ent schools where instruction was in Turkish. Only a handful of Catholic and Protestant schools used the A lba nian language, but these schools could not even be considered by the m ajor ity of Albanians, who were Moslems. A decisive step forward in the growth of national culture was taken in 1879 in C onstantinople, where a group of A lbanian intellectuals organized the “Society for the Development of the Albanian Language.” The aim of the society was to publish readers and other educational texts in the Al banian language. The first task was to prepare a standardized alphabet that would be generally acceptable. This was accomplished by three members of the Society— a Moslem, an Orthodox Christian, and a Roman Catholicwho worked out an alphabet consisting of Latin and a few Greek letters. The first book published by the Society was the Abetare or ABC of the Albanian language. The Society also issued a literary journal, the Drita or Light. In addition to its w ork in C onstantinople the Society conducted schools and prom oted literary work within A lbania and also in foreign centers, such as Bucharest and Sofia, where Albanian colonies were to be found. The M oslem Frasheri family was especially prom inent in this cul tural activity, its members publishing patriotic poems and histories of the Albanian people. Naim Frasheri, the apostle-poet of Albanjan nationalism, w rote in his Notebook of the Bektashis (he himself belonging to this Moslem pantheistic sect): “The Bektashis are brothers not only among themselves but with all hum anity as well. They love the rest of the Moslems and the C hristians as their soul and they get along well with all mer>. But above all they love their fatherland and their countrym en, this being the highest of all virtues.” r> Both the Turks and the Greek Patriarch became alarmed at the rapid tempo of this Albanian cultural revival. Particularly disturbing was the breakdown of religious barriers, Albanians of all three creeds participating enthusiastically in the educational and literary work. Accordingly, in 1886, the Ottom an government reimposed its ban upon A lbanian publications and schools. The Patriarch strengthened the ban by threatening with excommuni cation anyone convicted of reading or writing in the A lbanian language. These measures retarded seriously the growth of a national culture within Albania. But activity did not cease in the A lbanian communties outside the homeland. By 1908 more than thirty Albanian newspapers and periodicals were being published abroad, including seven in Bulgaria, seven in Italy, four in Egypt, four in Rum ania, three in Belgium, and one each in A ustriaHungary, Greece, England, and the United States. The most active community abroad was that in Italy. It consisted of A lbanians who had em igrated to Sicily and southern Italy from the fifteenth century onward. They settled in distinct communities and preserved their language and customs. In the middle of the nineteenth century they began


506 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 18 7 8 -1 9 1 4
to publish linguistic and other studies demonstrating the existence of the A lbanian nationality. By the 1890’s they h ad organized an extensive national ist movement centered around the Albanian National Society with branches in all Italo-A lbanian colonies. The Society had issued more than two hun dred publications by 1900, and in that year the Italian government founded a chair of Albanian language and literature at the Instituto Orientale of Naples. The A lbanian colony in the United States was the youngest but the most rapidly growing. A fter 1900 a considerable num ber of Albanians emi grated to the United States, where they settled along the eastern seaboard. In their new surroundings, and with a variety of foreign nationalities living about them, the A lbanian immigrants for the first time became fully con scious of their national identity. In their native villages they had been much more absorbed by family ties and family feuds than by any conception, of Albanian nationality. But now the bewildered and homesick immigrants thought nostalgically of their hom eland as they worked long hours in stifling textile mills and dingy shoe factories. In this alien and forbidding environ ment they felt keenly that they were different from others and they experi enced a new sense of pride in their native country. The establishment of the weekly K om bi or Nation in Boston in June, 1906, laid the cornerstone of the A lbanian nationalist m ovem ent in the U nited States. M ost of the A lbanian immigrants were illiterate, but usually a “learned one” could be found to read the Kom bi to the others as well as to read letters from home and to write letters in return. As im portant as the K om bi was the A lbanian A utocephalous O rthodox Church founded in 1908 under the leadership of the R everend F an S. Noli. Before this time the im m i grants, who were almost all Orthodox Christians from southern Albania, had attended G reek churches, where the services were naturally conducted in Greek and where the atmosphere was far from friendly to Albanian national ism. In the new church the services were held in the native tongue, while Fan Noli ardently preached nationalistic sermons from his pulpit. A nother im portant step was taken in April, 1912, when various A l banian societies in the United States com bined to form the Pan-A lbanian Federation, V atra (The H earth). V atra published various books and spon sored activities designed to foster the national spirit. In this manner the A lbanians in the U nited States, who num bered perhaps five thousand by 1912, entered the stream of the Albanian nationalist movement. They were well prepared for the im portant role which they were to assume during the Balkan W ars and W orld W ar I, when the future of their country was being decided.
STRUGGLE FOR AUTONOMY
While A lbanian nationalism was being nurtured in the scattered col onies abroad, the hom eland, which for so m any centuries had languished in obscurity, was beginning to show signs of national consciousness and activity.


Albanian Awakening to 1914 507
A fairly clear pattern is noticeable in this m ovem ent, which began in the late nineteenth century and gained momentum thereafter. Most of the revolu tionary activity originated in the north because the Moslems of the Kosovo area and the Catholic mountaineers of Scutari and M irdita had enjoyed au tonom y for centuries and were ready to fight against the centralizing reforms of Constantinople. In southern Albania political activity was more common than armed resistance. One reason was that the means of communication were better developed in the south than in the m ountainous north, thereby facilitating control by the state. Also, education was more widespread among the southern Albanians, who' consequently tended to think more in terms of the over-all national cause than of purely local privileges. Between the north and the south was the bloc of M oslems in the central lowlands. Politi cally they were the m ost backw ard of all A lbanians, not participating in the nationalist movement until the 1912 revolt which brought about the over throw of the Young Turk regime. Various factors explain the inertness of these people. They were mostly peasants completely dom inated by the feudal landowners. Also, they were fanatic Sunnis, in contrast to the liberal Bektashis of the south. And because they were located in the center of the country they were not goaded into national organization for self-protection as were the northerners by Slavic pressure and the southerners by Greek pressure. One of the main tasks of the nationalist leaders was to serve as a link between these disparate and isolated regions of their country. A nother task was to counter the increasing interest of the great powers in Albania. The two powers most directly concerned with Albania were Austria-Hungary and Italy. Each was determined to prevent the other from gaining a domi nant position in A lbania because of th at country’s strategic position at the entrance to the Adriatic Sea. The neighboring Balkan states were also in terested in Albania. Greece had territorial aspirations in the southern part of the country and M ontenegro and Serbia in the north. Fortunately for Al bania, some of these external pressures neutralized each other. The Austrians resolutely opposed M ontenegrin and Serbian expansion in order to forestall a solid wedge of Slavic territory across the Balkans. The Italians likewise did not wish to see Greece becoming large and strong at the ex pense of Albania. Faced with these external dangers, the Albanian leaders decided that the safest course was to accept and support Turkish rule in the Balkans. They calculated that the Albanian people were not ready for an independent existence and that, consequently, if E uropean Turkey were partitioned, all or most of A lbania would suffer the same fate. Accordingly, they strove not to overthrow Turkish rule but rather to obtain reforms and autonomy under its aegis. A. Lorecchio, a prom inent Italo-A lbanian author, wrote in 1904, “ Reform s are the only and continuous goal of this people. T here is no m em orandum . . . sent to the Sultan or the Powers, there is no news


5 0 8 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
p ap er or review . . . there is no com m ittee, congress, assembly, or any other collective m anifestation of Albanian will in which the highest and dom inant note is not one and the sam e: reform s, adm inistrative autonom y to the peo ple of A lbania.” 0 This strategy explains why the Albanians supported Turkey during the 1897 war with Greece. It also explains why many Albanians joined the Young Turks, hoping that the energy and decisiveness of these reformers would forestall the partitioning of European Turkey which seemed at the time to be imminent. The successful revolt of the Young Turks in 1908 and the constitution that they immediately put into effect * were both hailed enthusiastically in A lbania, though few understood precisely what a constitu tion was or what it signified. The Young Turks not only established a constitutional regime but also proclaim ed liberty and equality for all nationalities within the em pire. This unleashed the nationalist forces in A lbania and led to a great outburst of educational and organizational activities. Within ten months the Albanians established 24 night schools with 1,753 pupils, 34 day schools with 1,850 pupils, and a norm al school with 145 pupils and 14 teachers. These schools were supported by 66 national clubs with 10,000 members and were di rected by a National Board of Education established at a National Congress held at Elbasan in August, 1909. At the same time the Albanians founded 4 printing presses and 17 new spapers, as well as several literary and musical societies. , The Young Turk leaders were alarmed by the magnitude of this Albanian awakening. They had strong centralist tendencies, wishing to trans form the various subjects of the empire into loyal O ttom an citizens. Accord ingly, they disapproved of further fragm entation along national lines, par ticularly in the case of the Albanians, who for so long had been the chief pillar of Turkish rule in the Balkans. The Albanians, on their part, were no more willing to accept Ottom anization by the Young Turks than they had been willing to accept it from the sultans. In fact, many A lbanians now began to turn against the new regime in Constantinople. This was especially true of the conservative Moslem peasants, who found it hard to abandon their traditional loyalty to the sultan and who became increasingly distrustful of the Young Turk leaders with their W estern ways and their insistence on uniformity and centralization: These same considerations alienated the nu merous A lbanian soldiers in C onstantinople who com prised the m ajority of the capital’s garrison. Even liberal-m inded A lbanian leaders turned against the Young Turks, the outstanding example being Ismail Kemal Bey. This well-known statesman, who had served the empire in various capacities since 1860, now joined the Liberal Union in opposition to the dom inant Com mittee of Union and Progress. W hen the counterrevolution against the Y oung T urks broke out in
* See Chapter 28.


Albanian Awakening to 1914 509
April, 1909,* it was largely the work of the disaffected Albanian regiments supported by the Liberal Union and by Moslem religious leaders. The Young Turks promptly suppressed the revolt and then proceeded to enforce vigor ously their Ottom anization program. They required Turkish to be the lan guage of instruction in Albanian schools and they imposed compulsory mili tary service and regular taxation upon Albanian tribesmen, who had never been subjected to such exactions.. The minister of interior went so far as to deny in the O ttom an assembly the very existence of an A lbanian nationality but he was immediately challenged by the Albanian deputies present who shouted, “ Var, Effendim, var!” ( “There is, Sir, there is!” ) The mountaineers of the Kosovo area took up arms in March, 1910, against these Ottomanization measures. The Turks speedily crushed the re volt and then closed the Albanian schools throughout the country, suppressed the Albanian newspapers, arrested hundreds of prominent nationalists, and even forbade the printing of the words “Albania” and “Albanians.” The country was treated as conquered territory. Never before had the traditional custom s and practices been flouted in this m anner. Twelve thousand refugees were living under miserable conditions in neighboring M ontenegro as the afterm ath of the abortive uprising. A nother revolt broke out in M arch, 1911, among the Catholic high landers in the north. Nicholas of M ontenegro instigated the uprising, hoping thereby to satisfy his territorial aspirations in that area. The T urks were again able to suppress the rebels, but in June, 1911, the Catholic Albanians once more took up arms. This time they were more successful and by August, 1911, the Turks felt constrained to grant substantial concessions. They under took to grant an amnesty, to open Albanian schools, to recognize the right of Albanians to carry weapons, and to require Albanian recruits to serve only in the E uropean part of the em pire. T he T urks abided by these term s, one reason undoubtedly being that the outbreak of war with Italy on Sep tem ber 29, 1911, made it essential that further troubles in Albania be avoided. The defeats sustained by Turkey during the Italian war created an extremely dangerous situation for the Albanians. The Balkan nations, em boldened by the plight of Turkey, concluded a series of alliances in the spring of 1912. It was an open secret that their aim was to strike at the pre occupied Turks and drive them out of Europe. This raised for the Albanians the old nightmare of partition among their acquisitive neighbors. To fore stall this fate they decided upon a full-scale insurrection in order to establish definitely and indisputably their autonom ous position. Then if Turkish rule in the Balkans collapsed, the Albanians at least would have a viable base upon which to stand and face the victorious Balkan allies. T he Kosovo m ountaineers took the lead, starting hostilities in June, 1912. Revolts followed quickly in other parts of the country. The Turks
* See C hapter 28.


5 1 0 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
were unable to bring in reinforcements, and the movement was soon com pletely out of control. In many cases Turkish troops joined the insur gents. By mid-July of 1912 the rebels were the masters of the entire country. W ith an arm y of fifty thousand at their disposal they perem ptorily demanded on July 30, 1912, that the O ttom an parliam ent be dissolved within forty-eight hours, and that a new government replace the existing one, which was dom inated by the centralist-minded Committee of Union and Progress. The Turks had no choice but to comply, whereupon the Albanians presented their specific dem ands for autonom y: the four vilayets of Scutari, Kosovo, Yanina, and M onastir to be united into one province; Albanian sol diers to serve only in that province; A lbanian to be the language of adminis tration and instruction; local revenues to be expended locally; all Albanians to have the right to bear arms; and certain politicians in Constantinople to be impeached for their past measures against the Albanians. The Ottoman government held back only on the demands for impeachment and limited military service, but the Albanians insisted on acceptance of all their terms. Before these differences could be resolved the Balkan allies one after the other declared war upon Turkey during October, 1912. The beginning of the Balkan W ar created an entirely new situation for the Albanians. Hitherto they had chosen to remain under the aegis of the sultan in order to checkmate the expansionist tendencies of their neighbors. But now the rapid succession of allied victories abruptly ended Turkish rule in the Balkans and compelled the A lbanians to abandon the sinking ship in order to safeguard their own national security. Thus they were forced to give up their traditional autonom ist strategy and to strike out for full inde pendence. A national congress assembled in V alona consisted of eighty-three Moslem and Christian delegates from all parts of the country. On November 28, 1912, the delegates proclaimed the independence of Albania and hoisted the flag of Skanderbeg for the first time in 445 years. They elected a cabinet of seven Christian and Moslem ministers, with Ismail Bey as president. They also sent a telegram to Constantinople and to the great powers announcing the “political independence of A lbania” and requesting protection “against all attacks on their national existence and against any dismemberment of their country.” 7 But the establishment of a new Albanian state required more than mere resolutions and proclamations. Serbia and Greece naturally preferred to divide the Albanian lands between themselves. Nikola Pashich, the Ser bian premier, declared that “an independent Albania was neither desirable nor possible,” while the Greek press announced that “to allow the barbarous Albanians an independent existence amidst G reek civilization was incon ceivable.” 8 The great powers also were by no means agreed on this matter. Austria-Hungary and Italy favored Albanian independence because they feared Serbian expansion to the Adriatic. Conversely, France and Russia, precisely because they wanted a strong Serbia, opposed Albanian aspirations.


Albanian Awakening to 1914 511
Only Britain and Germany dealt with the Albanian issue with any degree of objectivity. G iven these conflicting forces, it is understandable th a t the new Albania for several years should have led a precarious existence amid diplo matic intrigue and armed assault.
W ILLIAM OF W IED
As will be seen in C hapter 28, the Treaty of L ondon term inating the first Balkan war left the status of A lbania to the decision of the great powers. The latter entrusted the problem to the British foreign minister and the am bassadors in L ondon of the other five powers. O n D ecem ber 20, 1912, this Conference of Am bassadors announced their decision in favor of an in dependent Albania. The Conference then appointed two commissions to delim it the new state’s frontiers with G reece in the south and Serbia and M ontenegro in the north. Neither frontier had been definitely settled, at least in regard to details, by the time W orld W ar I began. In addition to delimiting the frontiers of the new state, the Confer ence of Am bassadors undertook to define its political institutions. On July 29, 1913, the Conference decided that Albania should be “an independent, sovereign Principality,” 0 and that the powers should guarantee her neutral ity and select her prince. In accordance with this arrangem ent, the powers, after a long delay, chose William of Wied, a thirty-five-year-old Germ an army captain, to be the ruler of Albania. Prince William, who was the nephew of Queen Elizabeth of Rumania, was tall and impressive in appearance but lacked the political experience and forcefulness necessary for the position he had assumed. On M arch 7, 1914, he landed at Durazzo (D urres), where he was enthusiastically welcomed as the successor to Skanderbeg. Only six m onths later he was to flee the country after vain efforts to assert his au thority. T he chief reason for W illiam’s failure was the dissension am ong the great powers and especially between Italy and Austria-Hungary. These two countries, desirous of keeping the Slavs from the Adriatic, had been largely responsible for the original decision to establish an independent Albania. But now they drifted apart because Italy considered Prince William to be proAustrian and pro-German. Italy therefore decided to checkmate the new prince by supporting Essad Pasha Toptani, an ambitious and unscrupulous feudal lord who aspired to become the ruler of the country. Prince William also failed because of his personal shortcomings. His past experience as an officer of the Germ an army had been narrowly military. He was naive in dip lomatic matters and completely ignorant of the country he had come to rule. Consequently, he made many errors, but when they were pointed out to him he usually lacked the decisiveness to take prom pt corrective measures. W illiam ’s first m istake was to accept a cabinet th at had little popular support. Essad held the ministries of war and interior, a dangerous concen tration of power in a person so covetous. M ost of the remaining ministers had been absent from the country for many years and were representatives of


512 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1 8 7 8 -1 9 1 4
the small class of large landowners. The peasants were keenly disappointed that the prince had surrounded himself with feudal landlords, especially, be cause they had naively expected that the new regime would perform miracles and deliver them from their age-old bondage. Now their disappointment, combined with their ignorance, made them readily susceptible to propaganda. And there were many who were conducting propaganda against the new government. Essad himself, with Italian support, secretly distributed arms to his followers and incited the people against the German prince. Agents of Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece fomented trouble in order to prevent the new state from becoming stable. Finally, Moslem religious leaders and Turkish agents feared that the new regime would discriminate against the Moslem ma jority. Accordingly they worked to restore O ttom an rule or else to obtain a Turkish or an Egyptian prince in place of William. U nder these circum stances it is not surprising that W illiam lasted only half a year. He did take action against Essad when proof was furnished of his machinations. On May 19 Essad was forced to leave the country and em barked on an Italian vessel. But three days later a revolt broke out in the Durazzo region, apparently with Italian backing. The government proved incapable of suppressing the rebels. In fact, it controlled little m ore than the city of Durazzo itself, the rest of the country now coming under the control of various local armed groups. At this point the outbreak of W orld W ar. I ended what little chance W illiam still had of pulling through. Foreign warships began to leave A lban ian waters. Germ an and Austrian volunteers left to join their respective armies. A Dutch military mission which had been attempting to organize a gendarmerie was recalled to Holland. Even food was running short in be leaguered D urazzo. By A ugust 13 the treasury was com pletely em pty and the great powers were too distracted to consider the loan that they had prom ised to William when he assumed the throne. The foreign diplom ats unanimously urged William to leave the coun try. He refused to do so, hoping that assistance would come from some source. But his hopes evaporated as the powers one by one became involved in the war. Finally, on Septem ber 3, 1914, Prince W illiam left the country, though he did not form ally abdicate. Instead, he explained in his proclam a tion that, because of com plications arising from the war, “it is m ore useful if for some tim e I go to the w est.” 10 W illiam never was to have an oppor tunity to return. An Albanian leader aptly observed that “Prince William can be criticized only for being unable to perform m iracles.” 11


28. Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914
T
JL h e C o n g r e s s o f B e r l i n of 1878 rep resen ted a tu rn ing point in both E uropean and Balkan diplom acy. In E urope it had been preceded by thirty years of revolution and constant warfare. It was followed by thirty-four years of almost unbroken peace.' The only violence during those thirty-four years occurred in the B alkan Peninsula with the 1885 SerboBulgarian W ar and the 1897 Greco-Turkish War. These two exceptions point up the fact that, however much the Berlin settlement satisfied the am bitions of certain great powers, it certainly did not contribute to peace and stability in the Balkans. By giving Bosnia-Herzegovina to A ustria it poisoned Serbian-Austrian relations and led directly to the 1908 Bosnian crisis and the 1914 Sarajevo m urder. Furtherm ore, the loss of Bosnia-Herzegovina forced the Serbians to look southward toward M acedonia, where they came into conflict with the Bulgarians and the Greeks, who had also been dis appointed by the 1878 settlement. Thus the fruits of the Berlin Treaty, so far as the Balkans were concerned, were the Austro-Serbian duel over BosniaHerzegovina and the suicidal Bulgarian-Greek-Serbian struggle for M ace
donia. To this disquiet should be added the unsettling influence of greatpower diplomacy. Austria and Russia were particularly disruptive as they com peted with each other in the Balkans for spheres of influence. A good exam ple of this activity was A ustria’s violent opposition to the BulgarianSerbian rapprochement of 1904, an opposition that was carried even to the point of embargo and trade war. This combination of disruptive forces operating within and without the peninsula explains the series of crises and wars that punctuated Balkan history with such tragic frequency between 1878 and 1914.
513


OTTOMAN TERRITORIAL LOSSES IN THE BALKANS------- 1878-1913
1 To Greece, 1881 2 To Bulgaria, 1885 * Full independence, 1908
Boundaries in 1878: Treaty of Berlin mmmmam Boundaries in 1913: Treaty of Bucharest
Contested regions in second Balkan War
514


I
AFTERM ATH OF THE BERLIN CONGRESS
The two powers most interested in the Balkans after 1878 were A ustria and Russia. By contrast, France was busy in N orth Africa, Bis m arck was interested in the Balkan Peninsula only insofar as it affected relations among the great powers, while Britain was more concerned with Asia Minor and Egypt. Austria and Russia, however, were vitally interested in developments in the Balkan Peninsula. In fact, A ustro-R ussian rivalry during the Balkan crisis of 1875-1878 had broken up the Three Em perors’ League or Dreikaiserbund of Austria, Russia, and Germany. Because Bis m arck despaired of being able to persuade his two partners to cooperate m ore sm oothly in the future, in 1879 he selected A ustria as his ally and concluded with her the Dual Alliance that rem ained in effect to W orld W ar I. But Bismarck always took care to m aintain some tie with St. Peters burg; hence, he encouraged the renewal of the Dreikaiserbund, which was accomplished on June 18, 1881. The treaty gave Austria the right to annex Bosnia-Herzegovina whenever she wished, and in return A ustria agreed not to oppose the eventual unification of Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia. Also, the three signatories agreed that modifications of the territorial status quo in Turkey should take place only after agreem ent among themselves, and if any of them should feel compelled to go to war with Turkey, it should con sult its allies in advance as to the eventual results. This arrangement regulated the relations between Austria and Rus sia in the Balkans but it did not eliminate their rivalry. The agreement was regarded primarily as a truce while the two empires watched each other suspiciously and sought to strengthen their respective positions. Fortunately for the Balkan states, neither one of the powers was interested in territorial expansion. Rather, their aim was to extend their political and economic in fluence. Austria, for example, could have annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina at this time without any resistance. But she refrained from doing so because of M agyar opposition to any further acquisition of Slavic territory. Accordingly, A ustria confined herself to pacific penetration. She was most successful in Serbia, where she concluded a com m er cial treaty on May 6, 1881, and a secret alliance on June 28, 1881. It was noted in Chapter 24 that the commercial agreement made Serbia economi cally dependent upon the Dual M onarchy, and that the alliance made her a virtual Hapsburg protectorate. The alliance provided that if Serbia expanded southw ard, “A ustria-H ungary will not oppose herself thereto and will use her influence with the other powers for the purpose of winning them over to an attitude favorable to Serbia.” In return Serbia promised to prevent intrigues on her territory against A ustria and to enter into no treaties with other foreign countries w ithout A u stria’s perm ission.1 T he significance of this rem arkable treaty is obvious. A ustria h ad obtained full control over Serbian foreign policy and had blocked Serbian expansion westward and diverted it expressly toward M acedonia. Only four years were to elapse before
Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 515


516 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
the unfortunate effect of this alliance upon Balkan politics was to be dem on strated by the Serbian attack upon Bulgaria. In addition to this hegemony over Serbia, Austria concluded an alli ance with Rum ania on October 30, 1883. We saw in Chapter 26 that this pact required Austria to go to the aid of Rum ania if the latter were attacked without provocation, and Rumania to go to the aid of Austria if the latter were attacked by Russia. In addition to the Serbian and Rumanian alliances, A ustria during these years enjoyed close relations with G reece. O n June 13, 1885, for exam ple, the G reek prem ier wrote to his am bassador in C onstan tinople that the D ual M onarch “is our m ost sincere and natural ally in all questions which might arise in the O ttom an E m pire.” 2 T hus A ustria estab lished herself firmly in the Balkan Peninsula with her Serbian and Rum anian alliances, with her friendly relations with Greece, and with her occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Sanjak of Novi Bazar. In the meantime Russia had staked everything on the Bulgarians, whom she expected to control and use for her purposes. Chapter 23 de scribed the m anner in which this policy back-fired unexpectedly. The Bul garians elected Alexander of Battenberg as their prince and made clear their intention of being their own masters. The showdown came in September, 1885, when the Bulgarians of Eastern Rumelia revolted against Turkish rule and proclaim ed their union with their brethren to the north. Being a violation of the Berlin Treaty, this move precipitated a E uropean crisis. The Russians turned against their unruly protégés and opposed their unification. The Brit ish and the A ustrians then reversed the position that they had taken a few years earlier at Berlin and supported the union of the two Bulgarias. After long negotiations a compromise was reached whereby the’ prince of Bulgaria was appointed governor of Eastern Rumelia by the sultan for a period of five years. By this m eans the union was effected de facto while nom inally the Berlin Treaty was respected. M eanwhile Prince Milan of Serbia had declared war on Bulgaria in an effort to gain territorial com pensation to balance Bulgaria’s expansion. Serbia was unexpectedly defeated in a fortnight of fighting, after which the Bucharest Treaty of March 3, 1886, restored the prewar status quo. In this m anner the unification of the two Bulgarias was successfully effected despite all obstacles. But Prince A lexander did not enjoy his trium ph for long. U n relenting Russian hostility filially compelled him to abdicate on Septem ber 7, 1886. The following year Ferdinand of Coburg was elected prince in his place.
Thus the Bulgarian crisis ended with far-reaching effects on both European and Balkan diplomacy. By pitting Russia against Austria over the question of unification it disrupted the renewed Dreikaiserbund just as the 1875—1878 crisis had disrupted the original Dreikaiserbund. The Bulgarian crisis was also responsible for the first arm ed conflict between the young B alkan states. And it was om inous for the future that the ruler who now ascended the Bulgarian throne was inordinately ambitious. An English jour


nalist who was granted an interview by Ferdinand, found him standing before a window in a Napoleonic posture with one hand thrust in the breast of his tunic. “ Do you see those m ountains?” asked the prince, pointing to the south. “T hey are the key to M acedonia, and it is I who holds th at key!” 3 F erd i n an d ’s m elodram atic statem ent was not an em pty one. A fter the Bulgarian crisis M acedonia became increasingly the vortex of Balkan and also of greatpower diplomacy.
MACEDONIAN PROBLEM
M acedonia may be defined as the area around Saloniki consisting roughly of the three Turkish vilayets of Saloniki, M onastir (B itolj), and Kosovo. No other area in the Balkans has been the subject of so much dis pute and the cause of so much bloodshed. To a very considerable degree Balkan diplomacy since 1878 has revolved around the explosive question of how Macedonia should be divided among the three neighboring countries, Bulgaria, Greece, and Serbia. One reason for the ruthless struggle for M acedonia is the strategic and economic value of the area. It commands the great corridor route which leads from Central Europe to the M editerranean along the M orava and V ardar valleys, a route which has invited countless invaders, Rom an, Gothic, H un, Slav, and T urkish. M acedonia is also desirable because it includes the great port of Saloniki as well as the fertile plains much coveted in the m oun tainous Balkan Peninsula. As important as these strategic and economic con siderations in explaining the struggle for M acedonia is the ethnic complexity of the area. This provides all the neighboring countries a basis for their as pirations and claims. M acedonia is a border zone where several ethnic blocs m eet and overlap. It cannot be called a melting pot because intermarriage between the several ethnic elements has been rare. Individual villages and even various groups within a single village have retained their identity over periods of centuries. This freezing of ethnic strains explains the extraordinary assortm ent of peoples that have survived to the present day in an area about half the size of the state of New York. Population statistics for M acedonia are virtually meaningless. T urk ish authorities rarely bothered with a census, and when they did the returns were com puted on the basis of religious affiliation rather than language or nationality. A 1905 census of the three M acedonian vilayets produced the following figures concerning the non-M oslem peoples:
Diplomatic D evelopm ents: 1878—1914 517
Greeks (Rum Millet) 648,962 Bulgars (Bulgar Millet) 557,734 Serbs (Serb M illet) 167,601 Miscellaneous (Jews and others) 77,386
These figures are meaningful only for religious affiliation. U nder the heading “G reeks” were included all those who attended patriarchist schools or churches, regardless of whether their speech was' Greek, Slav, Albanian,


518 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
or Vlach. Similarly, the “Bulgars” comprised all those who attended Bulgar ian churches and schools, and the same held for the “Serbs.” It is apparent that so far as national allegiance was concerned, these figures are of little use. In practice they obscured the issue because each party juggled the fig ures to support its case. The Greeks, for example, claimed all those listed under “Rum M illet,” but this was strenuously contested by the other Balkan peoples, who argued that an Albanian, Vlach, or Slav-speaking individual did not necessarily become a Greek simply because he attended a patriarchist school or church. Only a few general conclusions may be safely drawn from the avail able evidence. Those inhabitants of M acedonia who lived close to the Greek, Bulgarian, and Serbian frontiers could be classified as being mostly Greek, Bulgarian, and Serbian, respectively. The rem ainder of the population, with the exception of such distinct minorities as Turks, Vlachs, Jews, and Albani ans, may be considered as being distinctively M acedonian. These M acedo nians had a dialect and certain cultural characteristics which justify their being classified as a distinct South Slav group. The im portant point about these Macedonians, so far as Balkan politics were concerned, was that they lagged behind their neighbors in de veloping a sense of national consciousness. Accordingly, they were claimed by the Serbians, the Bulgarians, and the Greeks. The Serbians pointed to cer tain characteristics of their grammar and to their “slava” festival-as proofs of their Serbian origin. The Bulgarians argued that physiologically the M ace donians were closer to them than to the Serbs and that the M acedonian lan guage was in reality a Bulgarian dialect. Finally, the Greeks emphasized the fact that the M acedonians were O rthodox Christians and that many of them were under the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople. They also claimed that m any Slav-speaking M acedonians considered themselves to be Greeks and therefore they referred to them as Slavophone Greeks. A t the outset the Greeks had no competition in M acedonia. The abolition of the Ipek (Pec) patriarchate (Serbian) and the Ohrid archbish opric (Bulgarian) in 1766 and 1767, respectively,* left all of M acedonia under the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople. This meant Greek education in the schools, G reek liturgy in the churches, and G reek prelates in all the higher ecclesiastical posts. Thus the M acedonians were subjected to an unchallenged process of Hellenization. In fact, they might well have become completely Hellenized were it not for the fact that they were almost all il literate. The few who did acquire a formal education became Greeks to a greater or lesser extent. But the peasant masses of M acedonia were largely untouched by G reek culture in the academic sense and they continued to speak their Slavic dialects. This is significant because so long as they retained their dialects and their custom s they possessed the prerequisites for a national aw akening in
* See C hapters 7, 19.


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 519
the future. It is true th a t language was n o t of great consequence during the prenationalist period. Religious affiliation was then the all-im portant con sideration. The M acedonian peasant did not think of himself as being a Serb or a Bulgarian because he spoke a Slavic language. Rather, he identified himself with his village. A nd if he thought in broader terms he would style himself as an O rthodox Christian in order to set himself apart from his Catholic or Moslem neighbors. This situation changed drastically when the concept of nationalism reached the Balkans from the West and the newly established Balkan nation states began to look covetously toward M acedonia. The Bulgarians, the first to challenge the hegemony of the Greeks in M acedonia, were to a large de gree successful. Their instrument was the exarchate church established by Turkish firman in 1870.* U nder the term s of the firman the exarchate was limited almost entirely to the Bulgarian lands between the Danube and the Balkan M ountains. But Article X of the firman provided that additional ter ritories might adhere to the new church if two thirds o r m ore of the popula tion so voted. This provided an entering wedge. By 1912 seven bishoprics in M acedonia had come under the jurisdiction of the exarchate. The Serbians claimed that this did not signify that the inhabitants were Bulgarians but rather that they were Slavs who disliked the Greek prelates and the incom prehensible Greek service. W hatever the reasons, the fact remains that the expanding exarchate provided an instrum ent for Bulgarian propaganda in M acedonia just as the Patriarchate earlier had served as a means for Greek propaganda. By 1895 the Bulgarians had, according to their own figures, some 600 to 700 schools in M acedonia with 25,000 to 30,000 pupils. The majority of contemporary observers agreed that most M acedonians consid ered themselves to be Bulgarians. The fall of Stambulov in 1894 produced a change in Bulgarian tac tics in M acedonia. Stambulov had followed a policy of peaceful penetration by cooperating with the Turks and receiving concessions in return. This procedure, though very effective, was too slow and undram atic for the M ace donian Bulgarians, thousands of whom had emigrated to Bulgaria proper. They insistently clamored for a more aggressive campaign to liberate their brothers under Turkish rule. In fact, certain disreputable elements among these M acedonian immigrants appeared to have been employed for the m ur der of Stambulov in 1895. E ven before Stam bulov’s downfall a num ber of B ulgarian M acedo nians had gathered in the little M acedonian town of R esna in 1893 and es tablished a secret revolutionary body known as the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization, or IM RO . Its aim was to prepare the people of M acedonia for a great uprising against the T urks in order to gain autonomy. It opposed the partitioning of .M acedonia; instead, it favored a South Slav federation in which the M acedonians, together with the Bulgarians and Ser
* See C hapter 19.


520 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1 8 7 8 -1 9 1 4
bians, would participate. The 1MRO was ably led and spread throughout M acedonia within a few years. Arms were gathered, men were trained,, and plans made for a mass uprising. In April, 1895, a rival organization was established to foment rev olution in M acedonia. This was known as the E xternal O rganization because it was founded outside M acedonia, in Sofia, and ostensibly represented the M acedonian immigrants in Bulgaria. It was organized under the auspices of the Bulgarian crown and was essentially a Bulgarian instrument, in contrast to the IM RO which, at the outset at least, was a M acedonian movement. T he IM R O ’s slogan was “ M acedonia for the M acedonians” but the E xternal Organization wanted M acedonia for Bulgaria. The former body had more popular support within M acedonia, while the latter naturally was more fa vored in Sofia and received more backing there. The IM R O concentrated on organizing the population for a mass revolt and refrained from armed action until 1897, when it was forced to strike back after Turkish authorities un covered a part of its underground network. The External O rganization, on the other hand, resorted to violent measures from the outset, these usually taking the form of assassination or raiding parties across the frontier. Its first major act of violence was in 1895, when a band, which included several former officers of the Bulgarian army, seized the town of Melnik and held it for some tim e against the T urks before being obliged to flee back to Bulgaria. These Bulgarian inroads into M acedonia naturally aroused both the Serbians and the Greeks. Before 1878 tl\e Serbians had concentrated their attention on Bosnia-Herzegovina. But when Austria took over the two prov inces the Serbs were forced to turn to M acedonia. The Austrians encouraged them to do so by undertaking in the A ustrian-Serbian, alliance of 1881 to help the Serbs expand southward. But it was not until the Serbs were defeated by the Bulgars in 1885 that they fully realized that M acedonia might follow the example of Eastern Rumelia and become a part of Bulgaria. The Serbs then took action and organized the Society of Saint Sava in 1886 with the purpose of stim ulating nationalism in all Serbian lands and particularly in Macedonia. The Society trained teachers, printed books, and conducted propaganda activities. Its w ork was taken oyer first, by the m inister of edu cation and in 1889 by the m inister for foreign affairs. The Turks welcomed the appearance of the Serbs in M acedonia and granted them various con cessions in order to create a counterweight to the Bulgarians. By the mid18 9 0 ’s the Serbs had established, according to their account, over 100 schools in the Kosovo vilayet with at least 5,000 pupils. Serbia had become a force in the M acedonian em broglio. The Greeks also took energetic measures to counter the Bulgarians in M acedonia. In November, 1894, they founded in Athens a secret organ ization known as the Ethnike H etairia, or N ational Society. It was supported by three quarters of the officers of the G reek army and by many wealthy and influential G reeks at hom e and abroad. Its ultim ate aim was to liberate all Greeks under Turkish dom ination, but its immediate efforts were directed


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 521
against the Bulgarian challenge. It subsidized Greek schools in M acedonia, and by 1895 these schools numbered, according to G reek statistics, over 1,400 with 80,000 pupils. The m agnitude of this effort is indicated by the fact that the Greeks spent m ore money in proportion to population on schools in the so-called unredeemed territory than they did in Greece proper. The National Society also carried on propaganda work of a general nature and organized armed bands to make forays across the frontier. In all these activities it was assisted by the G reek consuls in Saloniki, M onastir, and other M acedonian cities. In fact, the Serbian and Bulgarian as well as the G reek consuls were all busily engaged in propaganda activities and in ex tending, when feasible, surreptitious aid to their respective bands. The Serbians, Bulgarians, and Greeks were the main contestants for M acedonia, but the Rum anians also attem pted to stake out a claim. As noted in Chapter 26, they based their case on the Vlachs, shepherds and traders who were widely scattered in M acedonia, Epirus, and Thessaly, and who spoke a language akin to Rum anian. In 1879 the Rum anian budget included an appropriation of 14,000 francs for the support of schools for the Vlachs. By 1912 1,000,000 francs a year were being spent for these schools, which reputedly numbered over 30 with an enrollm ent of some 2,000 pupils. Since the Vlachs were scattered over wide areas to the south of the Danube the Ru m anians obviously did not expect to incorporate them within their state. R ather, they made use of the Vlachs as a sort of speculative investment which perhaps could be used profitably for bargaining purposes some time in the future. The over-all effect of this struggle for Macedonia was catastrophic, and the victims were the M acedonians themselves. This explains why the IM R O attracted so m uch popular support with its slogan of “M acedonia for the M acedonians.” The miserable peasants were torn this way and that, and retribution was sure to follow whatever decision they made. If they declared for the exarchate they could expect a visit from the G reek bands. If they re mained under the Patriarchate they were hounded by the Bulgarians as trai tors. A nd the Turkish troops that marched back and forth were almost as great a curse as the bands that they pursued but never banished.
MACEDONIA, THE BALKAN STATES,
AND THE GREAT POWERS
One of the most discouraging features o f the struggle for Macedonia was that it was self-perpetuating. It set one Balkan state against another and made it impossible for them to band together and to attem pt a decisive settle ment of the M acedonian problem in the m anner envisaged by Prince Michael in the 1860’s, nam ely, by driving out the T urks. Between 1889 and 1891 both the Serbs and the Greeks proposed to the Bulgarians an alliance based on a delim itation of claim s in M acedonia and a com bined attack on Turkey. But Stam bulov was then in office and, in accordance with his Turkcophil


522 A ge of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1 8 7 8 -1 9 1 4
policy, he betrayed these proposals to the Turks and received in return addi tional concessions in M acedonia. The dismissal of Stambulov in 1894. did not brighten the prospect for common Balkan action because Ferdinand had equally ambitious designs on M acedonia. The Bulgarians were by no means solely responsible for the rivalry and disunity. In 1892 the Serbs and the Greeks tried to reach an agreement between themselves. Their purpose was to com bat Bulgarian propaganda and, in their words, to “propagate the idea that there exist in M acedonia only Serbs and Greeks.” 4 But when they attem pted to delimit their respective claims they discovered that they overlapped so extensively that an agreement was not feasible. Greece and Serbia made another attem pt in 1899 to reach an agreement concerning Macedonia but again they failed to reconcile their differences. This discord among the Balkan states was fully dem onstrated during the Greco-Turkish W ar, which began in April, 1897, over the Cre.tan question. The Bulgarians and the Serbians stood by unconcerned while the Greeks were quickly and decisively defeated. The attitude of A ustria and Russia at the time was of the utmost im portance for the entire peninsula. The two powers concluded on May 8, 1897, the Goluchowski-M uraviev agreement with the professed purpose of “eliminat ing the danger of a rivalry disastrous to the peace of Europe on the seething soil of the Balkan Peninsula.” The agreement provided that the status quo in the B alkans should be m aintained as long as possible and that, if it-could not be upheld, the two parties should cooperate to prevent any other power from acquiring territory in the peninsula. A u stria’s special interests in BosniaHerzegovina and in Albania were recognized with reservations by Russia, and the question of Constantinople and the Straits was declared to be of an “emi nently E uro p ean ch aracter.” 5 The significance of this agreem ent is apparent. The A ustrians were concerned with domestic problems while the Russians wished to be free to turn to the F ar East. So they joined forces to “keep the Balkans on ice.” The determination of the neighboring great powers to freeze the status quo and the inability of the Balkan states to join for common action ensured the continuation of anarchy and bloodshed in M acedonia. In fact, the situation became steadily worse, particularly after November, 1897, when the Turks un covered a part of the IM RO underground organization. Up to that point the 1MRO had concentrated on gathering arms and perfecting its organization. Now it was forced in self-defense to violent measures. These were reported by the British consul in Sofia as follows:
The period of secret preparation, at which they [the IM RO] had worked for five years, was brought to an abrupt close and a period of action inaugurated. The Committee was now transformed into a terroristic organization, whose de cisions were executed by the bands. Every year which followed witnessed fresh' excesses on the part of the Turks and fresh reprisals on the part of the Com mit tee. Assassination was the only weapon which the latter possessed, and they did not hesitate to have recourse to it. . . . Forced contributions, w hether in


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 523
money or in kind, were exacted from all persons within reach of the bands, and all villages were expected to shelter and protect them. Those Bulgarian villages which still acknowledged the jurisdiction of the Patriarch were the greatest sufferers. If they showed any inclination to join the Exarchate, they were liable to be denounced to the Turks by G reek priests and to lose the immunity from attack by the troops which their Greek patrons secured for them; if, on the con trary, they refused to do so, they were exposed to the vengeance of the Komitajis [IM RO bands]. Though the policy of the bands was to act on the defensive, they had between 1898 and the com m encem ent of 1903 no less than 130 engagem ents with the Turkish troops.0
This wave of terrorism and violence culminated in the IM RO uprising of August, 1903. The rebels seized most of the M onastir vilayet, where they organized a revolutionary council and attem pted to liberate the rest of M ace donia. Bands crossed over from Bulgaria and joined the insurgents. The Bul garian governm ent was taken by surprise and was far from pleased because it was not prepared for war. Yet it dared not close the border to the bands be cause popular sympathy for the insurgents was so strong that it feared an antidynastic movement. This was by no means farfetched because nearly half the population of Sofia at this time consisted of M acedonian refugees or immigrants. The Turks meanwhile were bringing up troops which, in customary fashion, indiscrim inately harried the M acedonian peasantry with fire and sword. It is stated that some 200 villages and 12,000 houses were burned and 70,000 per sons left homeless. The revolt was quickly suppressed, but it did serve to goad the great powers to action. Austria and Russia, the two powers most immediately con cerned, prepared the so-called Murzsteg reform program of October, 1903. It provided that a Russian and an A ustrian civil agent should accom pany the T urk ish Inspector-G eneral on his tours and report on conditions. The gendarmerie was to be reorganized and put under the command of a foreign general and a staff of foreign officers. Also, the judicial system was to be reorganized and financial provisions made for the return of the refugees and for the rebuilding of houses and churches destroyed during the insurrection. The other powers approved this reform plan, and the sultan thus felt constrained to accept it. But it contributed little to the pacification of M ace donia. In fact, it probably worsened the situation. A clause in the Murzsteg program provided that when order was restored a new delimitation of admin istrative districts should be made along ethnic lines. This stimulated more propa ganda and more violence as each side redoubled its efforts in order to improve its position in preparation for the day when the administrative boundaries were redrawn. M ore than ever before the Balkan states were deadlocked in their furious struggle for the control of M acedonia. For a brief while it appeared that the m urder of the Serbian king, A lexander, in June, 1903, and the accession of Peter Karageorgevich might lessen Balkan tensions and lead to an agreement over M acedonia. The new Serbian dynasty was not acceptable to V ienna and it could not expect support


524 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
from Russia because that country was drifting to war with Japan in the F ar East. The alternative left to the Serbians was to turn to Bulgaria, and'they signed two treaties with that country. The first was a military alliance, concluded on April 12, 1904, and providing for mutual aid in case of attack from any quarter. This pact was kept strictly secret and remained unknown until 1929, when its provisions were published. The other treaty, signed on June 22, 1905, established virtual free trade between the two countries and foresaw the estab lishm ent of a customs union on M arch 1, 1917. In fact, it was widely specu lated at the time that this commercial cooperation might lead eventually to a united Serbo-Bulgarian state that would be strong enough to block Austrian influence in the Balkans. We saw in Chapter 24 that Austria violently opposed this SerboBulgarian rapprochement, even to the point of closing her frontiers to Serbian livestock and thus precipitating the famous “Pig W ar” that dragged on until 1910. This Serbian-Austrian estrangement did not lead to durable friendship between Serbia and Bulgaria. The Bulgarian government that negotiated the alliance with Serbia fell from office in 1907. The succeeding m inistries were soon engaged in the usual polemics with Belgrade, the reason being the peren nial M acedonian problem . This was em phasized in a report written on April 2, 1908, by the British representative in Belgrade.
To sum up the whole situation as regards the relations between Servia and Bulgaria, it is clear that they can never be cordial and stable until the com petition between the two nationalities for an eventual acquisition of the Slav countries still under Turkish rule comes to an end. M. Pashitch was in favour of cooperating with Bulgaria for common aims, and of deferring the discussion of the rights of the two nations to the expected inheritage until it should actually fall due, but his intentions were frustrated by the uncompromising claim of the Bulgarians to the whole of the territory awarded to them by the Treaty of San Stefano.7
Such was the situation in the Balkans in 1908 when a totally unexpected event, the Young Turk revolt, suddenly changed the outlook completely.
YOUNG TURK REVOLT
Abdul Hamid became the autocratic ruler of the O ttom an Empire fol lowing his dismissal of the first Turkish parliam ent in 1877. A t first he was generally praised for being industrious and sober in contrast to m any of his predecessors. This favorable attitude gradually changed with the Armenian m assacres of the 1 890’s and the chronic anarchy and bloodshed in Macedonia By the turn of the century Abdul Hamid had become “Abdul the Dam ned” and the “G reat Assassin.” W hether villain or hero, Abdul Hamid was the mastei of the Ottoman Empire for three decades. In his relations with the great powers A bdul H am id’s policy was simply divide and rule, or more accurately, divide and survive. He acquired a reputa


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 525
tion as a consum m ate diplom at in pursuing this policy, though it is doubtful that much skill was required to persuade the British to oppose Russian ambi tions in the N ear East. In domestic affairs Abdul Hamid strove to safeguard his absolutist rule against the disruptive forces of nationalism and constitution alism. To this end he discouraged travel and study abroad, m aintained a great army of informers, and enforced a strict censorship of the press. T hree trouble spots in the em pire gave A bdul H am id the m ost trouble. One was Armenia, where a nationalist awakening similar to that of the Balkan peoples manifested itself in the second half of the nineteenth century. A nother was the island of Crete, where the predominantly Christian Greek population took up arms on every promising occasion in order to attain their cherished enosis, or union with M other Greece. The third area of trouble was M acedo nia, the tinder box of the Balkans, to which Greeks, Serbians and Bulgarians laid claim. In the end Abdul Hamid was overthrown not by A rm enian or Greek or M acedonian revolutionaries, but rather by his own Turkish subjects. And the successful revolutionaries were not the Young Turks in exile who had at tracted international attention as the opponents of the sultan, but rather a com pletely unknown group of conspirators within the empire. We noted in C hapter 20 that from the time of the reign of A bdul Aziz in the 186 0 ’s critics of the O ttom an dynasty fled abroad, where they contin ued their defiance and where they came to be known collectively as the Young Turks. Their numbers increased markedly during the decades of Abdul H am id’s autocracy. N ot only discontented T urks, but also revolutionary lead ers of the subject peoples, M oslem as well as Christian, sought refuge in for eign capitals and especially in Paris. All these O ttom an exiles— Turks, Arabs, Greeks, A rm enians, A lbanians, Kurds, and Jews— held a congress in Paris in February, 1902, with the aim of organizing a common front against Abdul Hitmid. But they quickly discovered that they agreed on nothing except that they all disliked the sultan. One group, led by a veteran Young Turk, Ahm et Riza, stood for Turkish predom inance and centralized rule, while another group led by one of A bdul H am id’s relatives, Prince Sabaheddin, favored a decentralized empire in which the subject people should have full autonomy. While the exiled intellectuals were quarreling in Paris, Turkish army officers were taking decisive measures in Saloniki. One of the earliest leaders of these army officers was M ustafa Kemal, who was to win lasting fame after W orld W ar I as the founder of the Turkish Republic. In 1905 Kemal organ ized in Damascus the secret military society, Vatan, or Fatherland. This was later absorbed by another secret military organization, the O ttom an Society of Liberty, with headquarters in Saloniki. This organization spread throughout the em pire very rapidly. A rm y officers were the backbone of the Society of Liberty, though they were greatly aided by other groups, and particularly by the Jews, who were the most numerous and wealthy element in Saloniki. The Society of Liberty was organized into cells of five so that no one knew more than four fellow members. A new recruit had to be sponsored by a regular member and was observed closely during a probationary period. For


526 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
the purpose of communication each cell contained a “guide” who received the orders of the top central com m ittee from the “guide” of another cell, and .who was required to pass on the orders without delay. The activities of the Society have been described as follows:
To meet the expenses each member was compelled to contribute a fixed percentage of his income to the Committee chest, while rich members, in addi tion to this tax, made generous donations when funds were required. Arm s and ammunition were secretly purchased. A considerable sum was set apart annually to provide for the families of members who lost life or liberty while working for the cause. Their several duties were apportioned to the members. There were the messengers who, disguised in various ways, went to and fro over the Empire carrying verbal reports and instructions. . . . There were the men who had to assassinate those whom the Committee had condemned to death— Government officials who were working against the movement with a dangerous zeal, and Palace spies who were getting on the scent. Other members were sent out to act as spies in the interest of the cause, and the con tre espionage becam e at last so thorough that it baffled the espionage of the Palace. . . . The first and most im portant task . . . was, of course, that of bringing round to the cause the Macedo nian garrison— the Third Army Corps. . . . By degrees a num ber of the young officers were affiliated and received instructions to win over the rank and file. . . . At last the whole Macedonian army was won over to the cause of the Young Turks. . . ,8
This account brings out the glaring contrast between the rootless intel lectuals arguing with each other in Paris and the practical revolutionaries quietly building up their underground organization within the empire. The latter group staged its revolt in July, 1908, partly because the sultan’s agents were begin ning to penetrate its organization and also because the powers were openly con sidering intervention in M acedonia. The British foreign minister, Sir Edw ard Grey, proposed in March, 1908, an autonom ous regime for M acedonia. A little later it was announced that the British and Russian monarchs would meet at Reval on June 10 to discuss reforms for M acedonia. The Saloniki conspirators, fearing that the end result would be O ttom an partition, decided to act at once. Events now moved quickly and according to plan. The Saloniki group telegraphed an ultimatum to the sultan threatening to march upon Constanti nople unless the 1876 constitution was restored within twenty-four hours. The Third Arm y Corps solidly backed its revolutionary leaders. In Constantinople the State Council advised Abdul Hamid to comply with the ultimatum. Also, the Sheik-ul-Islam refused to issue a fetva authorizing suppression of the rebels. On July 24 Abdul Hamid proclaimed the restoration of the constitution. T he new s.of the sultan ’s capitulation was greeted with wild rejoicing. The long reign of repression was at an end. Christians and Turks embraced one another in the streets. The Young Turk leader, Enver Pasha, exclaimed:. “T here are no longer Bulgars, G reeks, R um ans, Jews, M ussulmans. We arc all b rothers beneath the sam e blue sky. We are all equal, we glory in being O tto m an.” 0 This euphoric atm osphere did not last long. The issues that had divided


D iplom atic D evelopm ents: 1878—1914 527
the exiles in Paris now had to be faced as urgent issues of policy rather than differences in theory. Three political groupings began to emerge at this point. The dom inant one comprised the Saloniki leaders, now popularly known as the Young Turks. In general they adopted the position supported by Riza in Paris. They were ready to grant political representation and religious freedom to all peoples of the empire. But in return they required that these peoples should support the imperial structure and accept Turkish predominance. They frequently stated that they wished all citizens of the empire to become O ttom ans in the same m anner that all citizens of France were Frenchm en. But this analogy was unrealistic. It failed to take into account the very different historical background and ethnic composition of W estern Europe and the Near East. Genuine O ttom an nationality might have existed by the twentieth century if during the preceding centuries the Turks had not administered their empire on the millet principle, and if, instead, they had coerced their subject peoples into becoming Moslems. But they had not taken these measures, and as a result their empire remained from beginning to end an aggregate of self-governing communities. Now it was too late to attem pt to fuse them into a homogeneous nation. Nationalist sentiment already had made each one of these communities self-conscious and desirous of an independent existence. The Young Turk pro gram was adopted at least a century too late to have had any hope of success. The second political group that existed at this time was the Liberal Union headed by Prince Sabaheddin. This organization did not agree that cen tralization and Turkish hegemony were necessary to preserve the empire. In stead, it held that only through local autonomy and full development of com munal life could the em pire retain the support of its peoples and thus survive. T here is no way of knowing w hether this proposition was sound because it was never put into practice. It is worth recalling, however, that in the hectic early days of the revolution m any G reeks in Sm yrna unfurled the blue-and-w hite llag of the Hellenic Kingdom rather than the star and crescent of their own empire. In any case, the Liberal Unionists never had a chance to assume office. M any Turks suspected them because of the strong backing they received from the Greeks and other nationalities. M ore im portant was the military power which the Young Turks commanded and which Sabaheddin and his followers lacked completely. Thus the Liberal Union was condemned to the role of an impotent opposition party. The third political group was the League of Mohammed. It professed to support the constitution but was most vocal in demanding strict enforcement of the Sheri, or Sacred Law. It opposed the Saloniki Young Turks, claiming that their leaders were Jews, freethinkers, or W esternized Turks who did not observe the precepts of the Koran and who set a bad example with their ir religious ways. This argument was effective with the devout M oslem popula tion, as the brief counterrevolution of 1909 was to dem onstrate dramatically. On April 12, 1909, a counterrevolution in Constantinople broke the hold of the Young T urks from Saloniki and left the capital in the hands of con servative Moslem forces. The Saloniki leaders immediately assumed that Abdul


528 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
Ham id was behind the counterrevolution. Acting on this assumption they de posed him later in the year when they regained power. But conclusive proof th at the sultan inspired the counterrevolution is lacking. In fact, circum stantial evidence suggests that he was not involved. He remained passive throughout the struggle and made no attem pt to guide the unorganized and leaderless rebels. In any case, the Y oung T urks gathered their forces in M acedonia, m arched upon the capital, captured it after only a few hours’ fighting, and then com pelled Abdul Hamid to abdicate on April 27. The new sultan, M ohammed V, had spent his entire life in strict palace confinem ent and, according to his own account, had not been allowed to read a newspaper for ten years. The Young Turks therefore expected him to be a compliant figurehead, but to make doubly certain they revised the constitution in August, 1909. The sultan henceforth was to name the grand vizir, who in turn selected the other ministers. Also, the sultan was deprived of the pow er to dissolve parliam ent and the cabinet "was made responsible to the parliam ent rather than to the sultan. The Young Turks now were the unchallenged masters of the empire. W ith the exception of a few m onths they rem ained m asters until W orld W ar 1. All opposition having been crushed, they proceeded with their policy of cen tralization and Turkish hegemony. But the m ore they persisted in this policy the more opposition they created. Neither Turkish nationalism nor O ttoman nationalism could exorcise the inexorable awakening of Albanians, Arabs, Greeks, Bulgarians, and other subject peoples. Thus the result was a vicious circle of repression and resistance. Young Turk nationalism , as noted in the previous chapter, was responsible for the Albanian revolt of 1910. And, of m ore concern at this point, is the fact th at the Y oung T u rk revolt affected B al kan diplom atic developm ent in two respects: it encouraged the A ustrian and R ussian foreign m inisters to fish in the troubled B alkan w aters, thereby pre cipitating the grave Bosnian crisis; and it stimulated the Balkan countries to form the Balkan League and, at long last, to drive the Turks almost completely out of Europe.
BOSNIAN CRISIS
When Count Alois Aehrenthal, the Austrian foreign minister, received the news of the Young T urk revolt, he turned to his wife and exclaimed, “Now I m ust bear the odium of doing w hat all my predecessors shrank from doing.” ]0 Aehrenthal was not as reluctant to take the action he contem plated as his state ment implied. In fact, he welcomed the Young Turk revolt because it offered him the opportunity to realize his long-cherished plan for annexing BosniaHerzegovina. A ehrenthal had assumed office in 1906 as the successor to the cautious Count Goluchowski, who for years had cooperated with the Russians in “keep ing the Balkans on ice.” But Aehrenthal was a very different person from G olu chowski. He was an able and well-informed diplomat, but he was also arro gant, vain, im patient, extremely ambitious, and none too scrupulous. His aim was to score a personal triumph by annexing Bosnia-Herzegovina and thereby


Diplom atic D evelopm ents: 1878—1914 529
ending once and for all Serbian expansionist dreams. A t times Aehrenthal even talked of partitioning Serbia with Bulgaria. “We would then,” he maintained, “have an independent Albania under our aegis, a M ontenegro dependent upon our good will, and a G reater B ulgaria bound to us by gratitude.” 11 In the same year that A ehrenthal assumed office in Vienna, a new for eign minister, A lexander Izvolsky, took over in St. Petersburg. Like his A ustrian counterpart, Izvolsky was capable, industrious, widely read, and also inordi nately ambitious. Itching for some dram atic personal success, he proposed to the council of ministers on February 3, 1908, an Anglo-Russian military action against Turkey which, he said, “might lead to dazzling results.” Since Russia had not yet recovered from the losses of the Japanese war, his colleagues em phatically rejected his plan. Undaunted, Izvolsky turned his attention to getting the Straits open to Russian warships. On July 2, 1908, he sent a note to A ehrenthal offering to support the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina by Aus tria if she in return would support R ussian designs on the Straits. A ehrenthal naturally w elcom ed Izvolsky’s proposal. A few weeks later news arrived of the revolution in Turkey. T he m om ent obviously had come to proceed with the annexation of the two provinces. There remained only the question of time and procedure. This question Aehrenthal discussed at length with Izvolsky at a meeting at Buchlau. On September 16, 1908, the two men agreed that Russia would not oppose the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina by A ustria, and in return A ustria would not oppose the opening of the Straits to Russian warships. Unfortunately, a verbatim account of the precise details of this Buchlau Agreement was not drawn up at the time. As a result, it was fol lowed by a noisy and serious diplomatic controversy. The difficulty originated from the failure of Izvolsky and A ehrenthal to set an exact date for the annexation of the two provinces. Izvolsky assumed that nothing would be done immediately, so he went first to Bavaria for a va cation. Then he began a leisurely tour of European capitals for the purpose of obtaining the consent of the powers to changes in the Straits regulations. M ean while Aehrenthal was busy making the necessary arrangements for the annexa tion. In order to be sure that Bulgaria would be on his side he encouraged that country also to violate the Berlin Treaty by proclaiming its independence from Turkey. When Prince Ferdinand visited Budapest on September 23, a week after the Buchlau meeting, Aehrenthal told him that Bulgaria should not hesi tate to realize her legitimate desires. The ambitious Ferdinand, who for years had been chafing under the limitations of O ttom an sovereignty, did not need any further prompting. On O ctober 5 he proclaimed the independence of Bulgaria and assumed the proud title of tsar after the manner of the medieval Bulgarian kings. The next day, apparently by prearrangem ent, Aehrenthal announced the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina by Austria. These moves aroused a storm that brought Europe to the brink of war. The Serbians reacted perhaps the most violently against the incorporation of the two South Slav provinces into the H apsburg Empire. Traditionally they had regarded Bosnia-Herzegovina as their rightful heritage. Now they refused


530 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
to accept the A ustrian annexation as final and they raised the cry for revenge and restitution as the French had done after 1871. In fact, the Serbians re garded Bosnia-Herzegovina henceforth as the Alsace-Lorraine of the Balkans. The foreign minister, M ilovanovich, went so far as to say to the British minis ter in Belgrade that many Serbians “now were of the opinion that a warlike adventure, even with the certainty of defeat, would not place the country in any worse position, from the national point of view, th an it would be if finally deprived of all hope of developm ent.” 12 In Russia also there was a strong popular reaction against the sacrifice of Slavic territory to the Hapsburgs. This feeling extended to the government, particularly because Izvolsky had not consulted his colleagues before conclud ing the Buchlau Agreement. The Russian cabinet now repudiated the unfortu nate Izvolsky, the prime minister going so far as to declare that they should “dismiss Izvolsky and announce publicly that he had acted without the permis sion of his governm ent.” 18 Faced with this painful situation Izvolsky tried to save himself by gaining some concessions at the Straits. But neither his French nor British allies would support him on this m atter. So Izvolsky was forced to change his tactics and to dem and that the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina be submitted to a conference. Aehrenthal retorted that the annexation was a part of the Buchlau bargain and refused to accept a conference unless it met for the purpose of merely registering rather than discussing the annexation. This controversy dragged on into the following year, with the Austrian and Russian foreign ministers accusing each pther of lying about the agreement reached at Buchlau. The situation was complicated by the demand of the Ser bians that they should be given a portion of the disputed provinces as com pen sation. Izvolsky was compelled by Russian public opinion to support this de mand, particularly because he had not been able to win any concessions at the Straits. W hen Aehrenthal refused to hear of compensation, a complete dead lock ensued between A ustria on the one side and Serbia and Russia on the other. The outcome of the crisis was determined by the working of the E uro pean alliance system. Germany backed her Austrian partner through thick and thin. The chief of the Germ an general staff exchanged letters with his Austrian counterpart in which he agreed that Russian intervention “would create the casus foederis for Germany. . At the same moment that Russia mobilizes, G erm any will also mobilize and will mobilize her entire arm y.” 14 Izvolsky, on his part, was unable to obtain any such firm support from France or Britain. Thus his position became increasingly untenable and dangerous. The Serbs were continuing their agitation against Austria, and the latter country, assured of Germ an backing,-was preparing an invasion of Serbia. Izvolsky could not con tinue to stand by Serbia without support from another power, and this support was not.forthcoming. Such was Izvolsky’s dilem m a w hen, on M arch 21, 1909, he received a threatening dispatch from Germany demanding that he make clear whether or not he would accept the annexation. “We expect a precise answer— yes or


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 531
no; we shall have to consider any evasive, conditional or unclear answer as a refusal. We should then draw back and let matters take their course; the re sponsibility for all subsequent events would then fall exclusively on M. Izvol sky.” 15 The R ussian foreign m inister was terrified by this com m unication and promptly gave the affirmative answer demanded. Serbia now was left alone and had no alternative to backing down. O n M arch 31 she addressed a note to the powers (not to A ustria alone) in which she stated that “her rights have not been affected by the fait accompli brought about in Bosnia-Herzegovina.” Serbia also undertook “to refrain from an attitude of protest and opposition in the question of Bosnia-Herzegovina and in addition . . . to change the direction of her policy tow ards A ustria-H ungary in order to live henceforth on term s of good neighborliness with the latter.” lfl Meanwhile the Turks, who theoretically were most directly affected by the annexation and by the Bulgarian declaration of independence, had been largely forgotten amid the tension of the crisis. There was strong popular feel ing in the empire against the loss of further territory, and this feeling expressed itself in a very effective economic boycott against A ustria. B ut the O ttom an governm ent knew full well that it could not hope to defy the decisions of the European powers. So it salvaged what it could, accepting financial indemni ties from A ustria and Bulgaria on February 26 and April 9, 1909, respectively. It is clear in retrospect that the Bosnian crisis had m ost unfortunate consequences in the Balkans. It poisoned Austro-Serbian relations to the point where a peaceful settlement became virtually impossible. The Austrian minis ter in Belgrade reported as early as A pril 3, 1909, that “the Serbian govern m ent will be cautious for some time. B ut the hatred against us and ‘Russian hypnotism’ . . . are too strong for me to have any great hopes for a real change of attitude by Serbia and for a satisfactory development of her relations with us. Everyone here thinks of revenge, which is to be realized only with the help of the Russians. . . 17 The crisis also ended the Austro-Russian cooperation, which for some years had preserved a measure of balance in the Balkans. In place of coopera tion the two powers henceforth engaged in what proved to be a m ortal duel for influence in the peninsula. Russian diplom ats w orked energetically to or ganize a Balkan League which would serve as a barrier against A ustria. Such a league was in fact founded in the spring of 1912. Thus the Balkan League and the Balkan W ars that followed may be said to stem directly from the crisis over Bosnia-Herzegovina. On October 2, 1912, when the Balkan W ars were about to begin, Count Berchtold, the Austrian foreign minister who succeeded Aehrenthal, wrote, “We delude ourselves if we do not face the fact that our procedure in annexing Bosnia and Herzegovina gave the first impetus to the B alkan League. . . .” 18


532 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
BALKAN LEAGTJE
T he first B alkan League was organized in the 186 0 ’s as a result of the efforts of Prince Michael of Serbia, discussed in Chapter 21. The second Bal kan League was largely the handiwork of Russian diplomacy. A nother factor, however, contributed significantly to the form ation of the second alliance sys tem. That was the Turkification policy pursued by the Young Turks after they seized power in 1908. We saw earlier in the chapter that the Young Turks, as disciples of W estern nationalism, attem pted to enforce centralization and T urk ish hegemony upon their polyglot empire. But it was too late in the day to fore stall or to suppress the national awakening of Albanians, Arabs, Greeks, Bul garians, and other subject peoples. The outcome of Turkification was not unity but rather discontent and revolt. The Young Turks antagonized the Balkan peoples and drove them to combine for self-protection. James Bourchier, the L ondon Times correspondent and well-known Balkan authority, reported in December, 1909, that “the question of nationalities in Turkey, which the Young T urks are not approaching in the right way, will prove an insuperable obstacle to the realization of their program m e.” On October 4, 1912, after the Balkan League had been form ed, Bourchier wrote that it was the direct result of “the insensate efforts of the Young Turks to stifle national sentim ent am ong the various races of the E m pire.” 19 The principal factor contributing to the establishment of the 1912 Bal kan alliance system was the reaction in Serbia «and Russia to the Bosnian affair. In both countries it was felt that a B alkan bloc of some sort was needed to keep A ustria in check. This feeling was shared by Russia’s W estern allies, B rit ain and France. As early as Decem ber 25, 1908, Izvolsky made a speech in the D um a in which he openly favored the creation of a Balkan bloc. Sir E d w ard G rey im m ediately w rote that he considered Izvolsky’s speech “ very satis factory,” and he added: “ I am glad he emphasized the need for community of feeling betw een the Balkan States and the com bination of all three of them with Turkey for defence of common interests. I am quite in favour of this and will encourage it, w henever I can .” 20 The league did not materializs until four years after the Bosnian crisis. One reason for the delay was the ever-present M acedonian problem. SerbianBulgarian negotiations in 1909 for an alliance foundered on this issue. A nother reason for the delay was th at R ussia’s diplom ats did not all have the sam e ob jective in the Balkans. Some wanted primarily to open the Straits; others wished to organize a Balkan League including Turkey; while still others preferred to exclude Turkey. A strong stimulus to Balkan unity was provided by the out break of the Italo-Turkish W ar in September, 1911, following the Italian in vasion of Tripoli. This development encouraged the Balkan statesmen to con clude alliance pacts in the hope of being able to take advantage of T urkey’s preoccupation. Negotiations for a Serbian-Bulgarian alliance were pressed seriously after O ctober, 1911, with the energetic encouragem ent·of the Russian minister


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 533
in Belgrade, Nicholas Hartvig. A stalemate was reached at one point because the Bulgarians insisted that the alliance be directed against Turkey rather than Austria, and that M acedonia should receive autonomy. Finally the differences were ironed out and on M arch 13, 1912, the Serbian-Bulgarian alliance was signed. The two states agreed to aid each other in case either was attacked, and to take joint action against any great power which tried to occupy any Balkan territory under Turkish suzerainty even though only one of the signatories considered the attem pt injurious to its interests. This was aimed obviously at Austria. A secret annex of the treaty stipulated that all territory won by the allies was to be administered at first by a condominium but was to be liquidated according to the arrangements of the treaty within three months after the con clusion of peace. The territorial claims were defined as follows: the territory north and west of the Shar M ountains, th a t is, O ld Serbia and the Sanjak of Novi Bazar, was to go to Serbia; the territory east of the Rhodope M ountains and the Struma River to Bulgaria; the intermediate regions of M acedonia “lying between the Shar M ountains and the Rhodope M ountains, the A rchi pelago, and the lake of O hrid” were, if possible, to be formed into the autono m ous province long desired by Bulgaria. B ut if such an organization of this territory appeared to the two parties to be impossible it was to be divided into three zones: Bulgaria was to have the region around Ohrid; Serbia was to get an additional strip in northern M acedonia; and the unassigned portion was to be subject to the arbitration of the Russian tsar. Two months later, on May 29, 1912, Greece and Bulgaria also con cluded an alliance. This was due primarily to the initiative of the Greek premier, Eleutherios Venizelos, who first proposed a pact in the spring of 1911. The alliance did not delimit Greco-Bulgarian claims in M acedonia, doubtless be cause both countries aspired to Saloniki. T he main provision stipulated th a t if either of the signatories were attacked by Turkey the other would give full aid. The last of these Balkan pacts were the alliances of Montenegro with Bulgaria and Serbia concluded in late Septem ber and on O ctober 6, 1912, respectively. By this time the Balkan allies were definitely planning to attack Turkey; hence these M ontenegrin pacts were avowedly offensive in character. The Bulgarian-M ontenegrin alliance required the signatories to begin hostil ities against Turkey, M ontenegro not later than September 20 and Bulgaria not later than one m onth after the M ontenegrin action. The text of the Serbian-M ontenegrin Treaty has never been published, but its provisions apparently were similar to those of the Bulgarian-M ontenegrin pact. M ontenegro also probably reached an agreement with Greece, but it appears to have been of a defensive and oral nature. With these M ontenegrin agreements the second Balkan alliance system was com pleted. O nce before, in the 1860’s, the B alkan states had succeeded in banding together, b u t at th at time circum stances had prevented them from taking action. On this occasion circumstances were m ore favorable. In the first place, the B alkan states were now much m ore pow erful than in the 1860’s,


534 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
while the O ttom an Em pire was relatively weaker. A t the time of the first Bal kan League the Bulgarian state had not yet been formed, the very existence of Rum ania was threatened by internal dissension, and Greece and Serbia had no arm ed forces worthy of the name. By 1912 the Balkan states had built up fairly efficient military establishments; moreover, political and military conditions within Turkey were exceptionally chaotic. The empire was torn by the Albanian revolt within and the Italian attacks from without. Elections were held in April, 1912, and by dint of coercion and bribery the Young Turks, or Committee of Union and Progress, obtained 215 of the 222 seats. But this majority proved valueless. The Albanians, antagonized by the arbitrary measures employed during the election and emboldened by clandestine M ontenegrin aid, revolted once more in May, 1912. This time they were successful, even to the point of forcing the Young Turk government to resign. But the new cabinet was not able to accomplish much because of unrelenting Young Turk opposition. M ore over, the strength and morale of the Turkish army were seriously undermined by these political squabbles. In an effort to get rid of unreliable elements the governm ent conducted a wholesale purge which left about fifty thousand un trained recruits in the army. All these circumstances provided the Balkan coun tries with a rare opportunity which they now lost no time in exploiting to the full. A nother advantage which the Balkan allies enjoyed during this period was their favorable position vis-à-vis the great powers of E urope. In the 1860’s the opposition of a great power, such as Austria, to change in the Balkan status quo was sufficient to check any concerted anti-Turkish action. But by 1912 the diplom atic situation was completely altered. A ustria was still opposed to the partitioning of E uropean Turkey and was still capable, militarily speaking, of keeping the Balkan states in check. But the division of Europe into two hos tile camps m eant that any intervention in Balkan affairs was bound to have Continent-wide repercussions. It now was necessary for every great power to consult its allies and usually the members of the opposing camp before making any move. - ; This immobilization of the great powers became evident at this time, when they tried to prevent the Balkan allies from attacking Turkey. The A us trian foreign minister, Count Leopold Berchtold, proposed on August 13, 1912, that an attem pt be made to secure reforms from Turkey and to restrain the Balkan states. B ut it was O ctober 7 before a program and a statem ent could be worked out that was satisfactory to all the powers. O n the next day A ustria and Russia issued the agreed warning to the Balkan states to the effect that even if they defeated Turkey they would not be allowed to annex any territory. The warning came· too late. On the same day M ontenegro declared war on Turkey. Ten days later she was joined by her allies— Greece, Serbia, and Bul garia. They all knew that the great powers would never be able to cooperate long enough and closely enough to enforce their threat of no annexations. Thus Russia lost control of the Balkan League, which she had sponsored in order to use for her purposes. Instead of following the lead of


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 535
their Russian patron, the Balkan statesmen struck out on their own and turned against the weakened O ttom an Empire. The French premier, Raymond Poin care, described the situation aptly when on O ctober 15, 1912, a week after the outbreak of war, he rem arked th a t “it is too late to wipe out the m ovem ent which she [Russia] has called forth . . . she is trying to put on the brakes, but it is she who started the m o to r.” 21 A half century earlier, when the first Balkan League was form ed, the Russian am bassador in Constantinople, Nicholas Ignatiev, commented as follows:
But we must not have any illusions about the sincerity and stability of the entente. It is inevitable that once the struggle with the T urks is ended, race rivalries will reappear and nothing stable will be built in the Balkan Peninsula until many years have elapsed. But sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.22
Ignatiev’s analysis was am ply justified during the following decades of continued strife over M acedonia. A nd now the second Balkan League was about to prove that Ignatiev indeed had been a prophet. The Balkan states had been able to unite in 1912 only because of the pressure of Russian diplomacy, the shortsighted policies of the Y oung Turks’, and the encouragm ent provided by the Italo-Turkish W ar. M utual trust or any conception of lasting interBalkan organization never entered into the picture. In fact, when the SerboBulgarian Treaty was about to be ratified, the Serbian premier, Nikola Pashich, confided to his colleagues that he had no faith in King Ferdinand and that, de spite the provisions of the alliance, he did not believe that Bulgaria would come to the aid of Serbia in case of an attack by A ustria. N or had the allies definitely settled their divergent claims in M acedonia. Serbia and Bulgaria had left cer tain areas for arbitration by the Russian tsar, while Greece and Bulgaria did h o t even attem pt to delim it their respective claims. It is not surprising th at once the Turks were defeated and the fighting ended, there was nothing left to hold the league together. It quickly disintegrated, as Ignatiev had foreseen, and the second Balkan W ar followed closely upon the first.
FIRST BALKAN WAR
W estern military experts generally believed that the Turks would be m ore than a match for the Balkan allies. But the latter from the beginning were victorious on all fronts. O ne reason for this was the num erical superiority of the allied armies, which totaled about 715,000 men. By contrast, the Turks probably did not m uster m ore than 320,000 in the first few weeks, and such reinforcements as arrived thereafter from Asia failed to compensate for the heavy losses at the front. The Turks dared not weaken their forces in Asia for fear of Russian intervention in the Caucasus or an A rab revolt in the south. Also, they could not transport troops freely to Balkan ports because the Greeks throughout the war had command of the sea. In addition to their numerical advantage, the allies proved to have


536 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
slightly superior arms and equipm ent and better organized staffs. The Turks were thoroughly disorganized by the change in officers and dismissal of trained troops that had accompanied the political convulsions of the preceding year. An A ustrian attaché with the Turkish forces reported that their means of com munication were inferior to those they had employed a century earlier. No tele graphic system existed, so that it took seven to eight hours for the generals to agree on an order and to get it to the troops. Turkish commanders sat on their horses, sending out couriers with orders and waiting for others to come in with news, after the manner of Napoleon at W aterloo. The Bulgarians bore the brunt of the fighting because of their position near Constantinople. In fact, they faced from the outset an insoluble dilemma.. Their political objective was M acedonia and Saloniki, but military considera tions forced them to send the bulk of their army eastward against Adrianople and Constantinople. And while they were thus engaging the main Turkish forces, the Greeks and the Serbians were advancing into Macedonia and occupying that prized region. This was to have tragic consequences later, though at the be ginning the division of fronts among the allies produced splendid results. The Bulgarians won their first great victory on October 22 at KirkKilissa, forcing the Turks to withdraw to the Liile Burgas line. After a week of hard fighting the Bulgarians overran this position also and advanced to the Chatalja lines before Constantinople. After only a m onth of fighting the inhab itants of the O ttom an capital could hear the Bulgarian guns thundering before the Chatalja fortifications. Adrianople and Constantinople alone continued to hold out against the victorious Bulgarians. Meanwhile the Greeks and the Serbians were winning similar tri um phs to the west. O n O ctober 19 the Serbs crossed th e'fro n tie r into M ace donia and five days later they scored a decisive victory at K um anovo. T hen they sent a part of their forces to help the Bulgarians before Adrianople and another part to occupy the Sanjak of Novi Bazar together with Montenegrin detachments. The main Serbian army continued southward, routing the Turks at Prilep, advancing on to M onastir (B itolj) and O hrid, and driving the flee ing T urks into the guns of the Greeks pushing northw ard. Having cleared Old Serbia, western M acedonia and the Sanjak of Novi 'Bazar, the Serbs now turned westward and, with the aid of the M ontenegrins, occupied Durazzo on the A driatic and laid siege to Scutari.
The Greeks in the m eantime had advanced northw ard against com para tively light resistance. They occupied Grevena on October 31, Preveza on N o vember 3, and the great prize, Saloniki, on Novem ber 8. A Bulgarian detach ment had also raced for the Aegean port but arrived there one day after the Greeks. The latter, ifter some demur, allowed their allies to enter the city. But from the outset the Greeks made it clear that they had come to Saloniki to stay and they refused to share their authority with the Bulgarians. Meanwhile smaller G reek contingents had invaded Epirus and began the siege of Y anina on N ovem ber 10. T he m ajor contribution of the G reeks to the allied cause was at sea, where they established complété supremacy and prevented the transpor


Diplomatie Developments: 1878-1914 537
tation of Turkish troops from Asia. The Greeks also used their fleet to occupy num erous islands in the Aegean which they had long coveted. The Turks lost in a few m onths all their European territories except four cities: Constantinople, Adrianople, Scutari, and Yanina. On December 3 Turkey concluded an armistice with Serbia and Bulgaria, the Greeks refusing to join because they wished to continue the siege of Y anina and the blockade of the Ottom an coasts. Peace negotiations opened in London on Decem ber 16. A t first a deadlock ensued because the T urks insisted on retaining all four cities that were still holding out. But by January 22 they had given way and agreed to relinquish all territory west of a line from Midye (M idia) on the Black Sea to Enez (Enos) at the m outh of the M aritsa on the Aegean. In other words, the Turks were to keep only Constantinople and a narrow strip of territory along the Straits. A t this point a coup d ’état occurred in C onstantinople. Prem ier Kiamil Pasha was forced to resign in favor of Enver Bey, leader of the extreme na tionalist Young Turks who refused to accept the loss of most of European T ur key. On January 30, 1913, fighting was resumed on all fronts. The Young Turks proved incapable of redeeming the military situation. It was indeed beyond re demption. On M arch 6 Y anina fell to the Greeks and on M arch 26 Adrianople to the Bulgarians. There rem ained to the Turks, outside the walls of Constan tinople, nothing but Scutari in A lbania. This town now became an international issue. The reason was that the E uropean powers insisted that it be reserved for an autonom ous A lbanian state that was to be created from the wreckage of European Turkey. Furtherm ore, A ustria and Italy wished to make the new A lbania as large as possible in order to counterbalance the Serbians and block them from the Adriatic. But the M ontenegrins defied the E uropean powers, continued their siege of Scutari, and finally starved out the defenders on April 23, 1913. A ustria immediately issued an ultimatum to the M ontenegrins to evacuate the town or suffer the conse quences. The M ontenegrins finally yielded and Scutari was taken over by an international force from warships in the A driatic. Meanwhile an armistice had been concluded between Turkey and the B alkan allies on A pril 16, 1913. Peace negotiations were reopened in L ondon on May 20, and ten days later the Treaty of London was signed terminating the first Balkan W ar. Turkey ceded all territory west of the Enez-M idye line and also relinquished her title to Crete. The status of A lbania and that of the Aegean Islands were left to the decision of the powers.
SECOND BALKAN WAR
W ith the Turks practically ousted from Europe, dissension now devel oped among the allies. The problem was how to divide the spoils. A part of the territory which in the original Serbo-Bulgarian Treaty had been assigned to Serbia was now reserved for the new Albania. The Serbs accordingly demanded a larger share of M acedonia and this the Bulgarians indignantly refused. Simi


538 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878—1914
larly, the treaty between Greece and Bulgaria had said nothing of Macedonia and both states now were laying claim to the Saloniki area. M oreover, Rumania, as recompense for her neutrality, demanded a part of the D obruja which had remained in the hands of Bulgaria after the Congress of Berlin. This question was arbitrated by a conference of the great powers and a very small boundary rectification finally was granted. Rum anian statesmen blam ed A ustria for the failure to obtain greater compensation and they continued their hostility to Bulgaria. The situation was further complicated by the conflicting policies of the powers. Russia, anxious to preserve the unity of the league, was concerned by the differences am ong the allies. The Belgrade and Sofia governments were rem inded of the stipulation in the Serbo-Bulgarian Treaty providing for Rus sian arbitration in case of failure to attain agreement by direct negotiation. In contrast, Austria strove to disrupt the Balkan League by bringing Bulgaria and Rum ania together. This proved unsuccessful, for the Bulgarian government be lieved that its differences with Serbia and Greece could be settled peacefully and therefore refused further concessions to Rumania. Actually, the relations between the allies deteriorated rapidly, with the result that Serbia and Greece drew closer together. Under pressure of repeated reports of skirmishes with B ulgarian forces in M acedonia, the tw o countries on June 1, 1913, signed a treaty of alliance. They agreed that they would not conclude a separate treaty with Bulgaria concerning the division of the newly won lands, and also that they would have a common frontier in the area west of the V ardar River. If there should be disagreem ent with Sofia over, the delim itation of frontiers, the two powers engaged to ask for the mediation or arbitration of the Triple E n tente or of other European powers. Should Bulgaria refuse and w ar thereupon ensue, the two states were to aid each other with all their forces. N ot only did the Serbs and the Greeks negotiate an alliance between themselves, but they also set out in realistic fashion to win the support of the other Balkan states. R um ania refused to commit herself in advance, but the M ontenegrin foreign m inister announced on June 27 that in case of war between Bulgaria and Ser bia, M ontenegro would join Serbia in accordance with alliance obligations en tered upon in the previous year. Even Turkey was approached and, although no definite agreement was reached, the way was paved for Turkish interven tion at a later date. The stage was now set for the fratricidal war. Venizelos did begin short-lived negotiations with the Bulgarian minister at Athens, but he was restricted by the signed agreement with Serbia. M oreover, he found it neces sary to transfer Greek troops as rapidly as possible to M acedonia, where frequent clashes were occurring with Bulgarian forces that were being shifted from the Chatalja lines. Some Bulgarian statesm en now began to dem and the whole of M acedonia— a claim that antagonized the Serbians as much as it did the Greeks. The tension became so acute that on June 8 the tsar sent a personal telegram to the Bulgarian and Serbian governments advising them to ask for the arbitration foreseen by the alliance treaty. The replies


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 539
were evasive, but the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Sazonov, invited the prem iers of Bulgaria, Serbia, and Greece to come to St. Petersburg to settle their disputes. The Bulgarian government now was pressed by its general staff which, because of the growing restlessness of the army, demanded either action or demobilization within ten days. Accordingly, the Bulgarian premier, Stoyan Danev, sent a wire to St. Petersburg requesting that a decision be reached within seven days. Because of a misunderstanding Sazonov did not take cognizance of this request. Danev thereupon dispatched a rash and fateful telegram withdrawing from the negotiations. Sazonov, who was re ported to be suffering from a “severe gastric attack com plicated by kidney troubles,” was so incensed by this injudicious action that he washed his hands of Bulgaria. “Now, after your declaration I communicate ours to you! Do not expect anything from us, and forget the existence of any of our en gagem ents from 1902 until to d ay .” 23 Danev was greatly upset by this communication and attem pted to mollify Sazonov. But events now had gone too far. Public opinion in Bul garia was strongly for war. The M acedonian groups even threatened Danev and King F erdinand with assassination if they accepted arbitration at St. Petersburg. The general staff assured the government that the army was ready for action. On June 28 King Ferdinand, with the knowledge and ap parent approval of Danev, ordered General Savov to attack the Serbian and G reek lines in M acedonia. The attack, which took place on the night of Ju n e 29—30, seems to have been intended as a m eans of strengthening B ul garia’s position in the settlem ent which was to come through the m ediation of Russia. In other words, the advance was considered a political dem onstra tion rather than a military measure. But the Serbians and the Greeks seized the opportunity and answered the Bulgarian “dem onstration” with a declara tion of war. Sazonov refused to make any move and thus left Bulgaria to her fate. M ontenegro immediately joined Serbia against Bulgaria. On July 10 Rum ania also declared war on Bulgaria. Two days later Turkey followed suit. A ttacked from all sides, Bulgaria was incapable of putting up serious resist ance. Both Serbs and Greeks won easy victories. Enver Bey re-entered A drianople and the Rum anians occupied the Dobruja. On July 31 an arm is tice was concluded and on August 10 peace was signed by the Balkan states at Bucharest. ·Greece received Saloniki, Kavalla, and the greater part of the coast of M acedonia; Serbia was granted north and central M acedonia, in cluding the city of M onastir or Bitolj; Rum ania was allowed to keep a gen erous slice of the D obruja; M ontenegro extended her frontiers slightly until they touched Serbia; and Bulgaria retained only a small portion of M acedonia as the reward for her efforts during the first war. On September 29 Bulgaria and Turkey signed the Treaty of Constantinople by which Turkey regained the greater part of Thrace, including both Adrianople and Kirk-Kilissa. The


540 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 187 8 -1 9 14
territorial balance sheet at the end of the two B alkan wars is sum m arized in the following table.
Area and Population of the Balkan States before and after the Balkan Wars
a r e a ( s q u a r e m il e s ) Per Cent ESTIMATED POPULATION Per Cent
Before After Change Before After Change Albania . . . 11,317 850,000 Bulgaria 33,647 43,310 + 29 4,337,516 4,467,006 + 3 Greece 25,014 41,933 + 6 8 2,666,000 4,363,000 + 67 M ontenegro 3,474 5,603 + 6 2 250,000 500,000 + 100 Rumania 50,720 53,489 + 5 7,230,418 7,516,418 ·+ 4 Serbia 18,650 33,891 + 8 2 2,911,701 4,527,992 + 5 5 T urkey in Europe 65,350 10,882 - 8 3 6,130,200 1,891,000 - 6 9
Source: Report of the International Commission to Inquire into the Causes and Conduct of the Balkan Wars (Washington, D. C., 1914), p. 418.
T he effect of the treaty of B ucharest on inter-B alkan relations is not difficult to surmise. Viscount Grey summarized the results as follows:
It left Bulgaria sore, injured, and despoiled of what she believed belonged to her. Any future Balkan peace was impossible so long as the treaty of Bucharest re mained. Turkey, of course, was also sore and despoiled. Thus when the great war came a year later, there were two Powers, Bulgaria and Turkey, hungering for a revanche and ready to take whichever side wodld give them a prospect of obtain ing it. This naturally was the side of A ustria and G erm any. For Serbia was at war with Austria, while Greece and Roum ania were sympathetic to Serbia or to the W estern Pow ers.24
Such was the stormy history of the second Balkan League. It had enabled the Balkan states to put an end, finally, to Turkish rule in Europe. But, aside from that, nothing constructive had been accomplished. Instead, the second Balkan W ar had so em bittered relations between the former allies that conditions in the peninsula were m ore chaotic and more explosive in 1913 and 1914 than in the preceding years.
ON THE EVE
For a few months in 1912 the Balkan states had been able to present a united front and to adopt and pursue a policy of their own in spite of the opposition of the great powers. After the Treaty of Bucharest the situation was completely different. The Balkan League was smashed. Bulgaria refused to accept the peace settlem ent as final. Greece, Serbia, and Rum ania were equally determined to m aintain the status quo. This disunity was heightened by the great powers and especially by A ustria and Russia, who pulled the Balkan states this way and that in their scramble for allies. Furtherm ore, the


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 541
questions of Albania and the Aegean Islands, which had been left unresolved by the London and Bucharest treaties, remained unsettled and a perennial source of friction and war danger. Thus the Balkan Peninsula in 1913 and 1914 was a veritable powder keg which in the end blew up with disastrous consequences for Europe and the entire world. The Treaty of London at the end of the first Balkan W ar had left the status of Albania and the Aegean Islands to the decision of the great powers. The latter had settled neither problem by the outbreak of W orld W ar I. In the case of A lbania the L ondon Conference of A m bassadors an nounced on December 20, 1912, that the country should become an inde pendent state. The Conference then appointed two commissions to delimit the northern frontier with M ontenegro and Serbia and the southern frontier with Greece. In the case of the northern frontier, clashes broke out between the Albanians and the Serbians; whereupon the latter occupied territory which the Conference of Am bassadors had already assigned to Albania. Despite repeated warnings, the Serbians continued to hold the territories until forced to get out by an A ustrian ultim atum on O ctober 18, 1913. T he fron tier commission then resumed its labors in the north but it had not yet com pleted its task when W orld W ar 1 intervened. The commission sent to the southern frontier proved equally unsuc cessful. The Conference itself already had defined the main course of the frontier, assigning to Albania Koritsa (K orce) and A rgyrokastron (Gjinok a ste r), the two chief towns in dispute. T he com m ission’s task, therefore, was limited to settling the details of the frontier line. This it did in its socalled Protocol of Florence, which it issued on D ecem ber 19, 1913. The question now was whether the Greeks would accept the loss of Koritsa and A rgyrokastron, especially since their forces were occupying all the territory in question. With much justification they wished to link the A lbanian question with that of the islands, hoping thereby that their claims would be satisfied either in one area or the other. The London Conference accepted the Greek position and announced on February 13, 1914, that Greece should withdraw all her troops from the territory assigned to Albania by M arch 13, 1914, after which she was to obtain all the Aegean Islands save three that were close to the Straits. This decision settled nothing because neither the Greeks nor the T urks accepted it. O n February 28, 1914, the Greeks of southern Albania (or northern Epirus, as the Greeks called that area) declared their independ ence under the leadership of G. Ch. Zographos, former foreign minister of Greece. This move, as a British observer reported, “could not have been adopted without the knowledge and connivance of the Greek occupation authorities. . . .” 25 T he new G reek-dom inated state of E pirus naturally was unacceptable to the Albanians, who viewed it as an unofficial Greek occupa tion. Meanwhile Turkey also refused to accept the Conference decision on the Aegean Islands, insisting that the two large islands of Chios and Mytilene should be returned to Turkey along with the three islands near the Straits.


542 Age of Imperialism and Capitalism: 1878-1914
To strengthen her position Turkey bought a British warship, but Greece countered by buying two Am erican warships. Thus the two countries were drifting to war over the islands issue when the news from Sarajevo took precedence over all. The Balkan Peninsula was in turm oil in 1913 and 1914 not only because of the unsettled A lbanian and islands questions but also because the two Balkan W ars had left the Balkan states embittered and divided, while the rivalries of the great powers added to the confusion and discord. In Bulgaria, for example, Austria was successful in pulling that country away from Russia and closer to the Central Powers. Russian diplomacy during the B alkan W ars, and especially R ussia’s consent to the R um anian intervention, had strained Russo-Bulgarian relations and culminated in the establishment of the Austrophil Radoslavov government. The latter promptly proposed an alliance with the D ual M onarchy and Berchtold accepted the proposal in principle. But the alliance was not actually concluded because Berchtold in sisted that Bulgaria should first patch up her differences with Rum ania. A n other indication of B ulgaria’s new orientation was King F erdinand’s autum n visit to Vienna and his acceptance of a Germ an loan in preference to one offered by French bankers. Rum ania, by contrast, was drifting toward the Entente Powers. The traditional A ustro-Rum anian alliance of 1883 had been weakened by Aus tria ’s support of Bulgaria during the B alkan W ars and by the perennial Transylvanian problem. In the spring and summer of 1914 the Rumanian and Russian royal families exchanged visits,'and on June 24, 1914, Sazonov reported to the tsar that in case of war Rum ania would not automatically side with A ustria but would instead “take the side which will be strongest and which will be in a position to prom ise h er the greatest gains.” 20 Greece at this time was being urged by both A ustria and Germany to reach an understanding with Turkey. King Constantine, whose queen was the kaiser’s sister, apparently favored such an entente as part of a B alkan bloc under Germ an tutelage. But this project failed because of the Aegean Islands dispute, which was dragging the two countries toward war. Serbia’s foreign relations, were relatively simple after the events of 1908 and 1913. She remained at odds with Austria and Bulgaria but she had d o s e ties with Greece, Rum ania, and Montenegro. Serbia also was strongly backed by the Entente Powers. In January, 1914, she received a loan of 250 million francs from France and at the same time was negotiating for war materials from Russia. These developments naturally increased A us tria ’s apprehension of Serbia and further strained the relations betw een the two countries. In conclusion it is apparent th a t the B ucharest T reaty settled n o th ing. It merely papered over the cracks for the time being. The period be tween August 10, 1913, and June 28, 1914, proved to be but a breathing spell during which the Balkan states jockeyed for position in preparation for future developments. Thus when World W ar I broke out there was no possi


Diplomatic Developments: 1878-1914 543
bility of a united Balkan front. R ather, each state stood ready to throw in its lot with whatever side seemed most likely to satisfy its national ambitions. From the Balkan viewpoint the war was essentially a continuation of the Balkan Wars.




1914
Part VI. Age of War and Crisis
2 9 . S a ra jev o a n d W a r: 1 9 1 4 - 1 9 1 8
O n J u n e 28, 1914, Archduke Francis Ferdinand, the heir to the Hapsburg throne, was assassinated at Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia. The teen-age perpetrators of the crime wished to dem onstrate their opposition to Hapsburg rule and their desire for South Slav independence and unity. Certainly they did not foresee that their act would lead directly to a world-wide war with terrible consequences. They could not have fore seen such an outcome because the war was not merely the product of the m urder. Why should the whole world have taken up arms because of an assassination in an obscure B alkan town? Obviously other factors, such as imperialism, nationalism, and the clash of rival alliance systems, were in the background. We shall not concern ourselves with these background factors, which are of a general European rather than Balkan character. Instead, we shall attem pt in this chapter to determ ine the responsibility for the Sarajevo m ur der and to trace the events which led from the m urder to the war. This is not a simple undertaking. Since that fatal day in June, 1914, many thousands of pages have been written about the assassination of the archduke. The question of responsibility is far from academ ic, in view of the article in the Versailles Treaty holding Germ any and her allies responsible for the war. A deluge of docum entary m aterials has poured forth since 1914, totaling in all over sixty thousand documents. Despite this overwhelming flood of evidence, there is still considerable difference of opinion on certain details of the Sara jevo m urder and the beginning of the war. Yet we do know much more about those events today than did the diplomats in 1914 and the peacemakers in 1919. And the one fact which emerges indisputably from this knowledge is th at w ar guilt is som ething nebulous which cannot be isolated and which spreads widely over many frontiers.


546 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
THE MURDER
A rchduke F rancis F erdinand, the victim of the Sarajevo m urder, is one of the outstanding tragic figures of history. He was the nephew of E m peror Francis Joseph and the heir to the thrones of Austria and Hungary. Unlike his uncle, he was a man of very considerable intellectual powers and wide interests. He had a keen artistic appreciation, he was a famous collector of antiques, he was an ardent sportsman and gardener, and he possessed an acute political sense which gave him much more insight into the real state of the empire than the em peror himself ever enjoyed. At the same time there was a certain lack of stability and of propor tion in his character. “He was unbalanced in everything,” one of his close friends observed; “he did nothing like other people.” 1 He was overbearing and hot-tem pered, and was subject to fits of ungovernable rage. A t shooting parties he would sometimes blaze away at everything within range, terroriz ing all his com panions. H e is know n on one occasion to have draw n his sword and hacked furiously at the upholstery in his railroad com partm ent because of some incident that displeased him. Certainly there was much spec ulation in court circles concerning his m ental health, particularly because of the history of insanity in his family. F rancis F erd in an d ’s relations with the em peror were always strained. One reason was his m organatic marriage with the Countess Sophie Chotek, who was from an ancient but impoverished Bohemian family. M ore im por tan t was the m arked difference in the tw o m en’s tem peram ents and political views. Francis Ferdinand was impulsive and aggressive and preferred to set tle problems quickly and decisively. E m peror' Francis Joseph, on the other hand, was by nature a procrastinator who avoided decisions as long as possi ble and who, if forced to act, preferred compromise measures. M ore specifi cally, the em peror was a staunch supporter of the 1867 settlement which had transformed the Austrian Empire into the Dual Monarchy. Francis Ferdi nand took the opposite position on this basic issue. He perceived the fatal flaw of a system which established the hegemony of the A ustrians and H un garians and left the more num erous Slavic citizens in a perm anently subordi nate position. He knew that the Hungarians were unalterably opposed to a revision of the Dual System and for that reason he was extremely critical of them. O n one occasion, when it was pointed out to him that the H ungarians would block constitutional revision, he rem arked, “ Very well, H ungary will have to be conquered once again at the point of the sword. I do not see how it would be possible to escape from this necessity.” 2 O n another occasion he expressed his hostility to the H ungarians with the rem ark, “It was bad taste on their part ever to come to Europe.” 3 Francis Ferdinand never elaborated specifically his ideas on impe- . rial reorganization. It is known, however, that he favored the form ation within the empire of a third state, consisting of the territories inhabited by the Croats, Slovenes, and Serbs. Such a state, he believed, would satisfy the


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 547
nationalist aspirations of the South Slavs and effectively neutralize the PanSerb propaganda emanating from Belgrade. In proposing this plan the arch duke met with the uncompromising opposition not only of the Magyars but also of the South Slav nationalists, who saw in it a dangerous threat to their own dream of an independent Yugoslav state. We shall see that this threat was upperm ost in the thoughts of the Bosnian nationalists who plotted the m urder of Francis Ferdinand. Indeed, this was the great irony of his careerthat he was killed by South Slav nationalists precisely because he wished to raise the status of the South Slavs. In June, 1914, Francis Ferdinand attended army maneuvers in Bosnia in his capacity as inspector general of the army. Since he was in the vicinity of Sarajevo it was decided that it would be politic for him to pay an official visit to the Bosnian capital. T he day selected was V idovdan or St. V itus’s D ay, com m em orating the b attle of K osovo, which in 1389 rang the death knell of the medieval Serbian empire. The decision was unpardonably shortsighted, for this was a day when Serbian nationalist sentiment was bound to be inflamed. It was particularly shortsighted in view of the tense situation th at had prevailed in Bosnia in recent years * and the repeated attem pts that had been made on the lives of Hapsburg officials. O n St. V itus’s D ay, June 28, the archduke and his duchess m ade their official visit to Sarajevo. It was a radiant Sunday, and, by bitter coin cidence, the anniversary of their marriage. A t ten in the morning the proces sion of four cars entered the capital, proceeding in the direction of the city hall. N o less than six assassins were waiting along the route, arm ed with hand bombs and revolvers. Most of them lost their nerve at the critical mo m ent or else were unable to act because the cars sped by too fast. But one of the assassins, N edeljko Chabrinovich, hurled a bom b which fell on the folded hood of the archduke’s car. T hence it rolled off and exploded under the following car, w ounding the archduke’s adjutant. The procession resum ed its way, reduced to three cars. A fter the ceremonies at the city hall Francis Ferdinand insisted on visiting his adjutant at the hospital. This involved a change of route but the chauffeurs were not inform ed. T he archduke’s car consequently m ade a wrong turn. G eneral Potiorek, the G overnor of Bosnia, who was in the back seat with the royal pair, leaned forward and ordered the chauffeur to stop, back up, and turn to the right. This proved to be a fatal move. At that very corner was another revolutionary, Gavrilo Princip. He had let the car go past but now that it had backed up in front of him he drew his revolver and fired two shots, one at Francis Ferdinand and the other at Potiorek. The second shot went wild and hit the duchess instead. Before medical aid arrived both the archduke and his wife were dead. T here is little doubt th at the m urder would not have occurred if the chauffeur had been given proper instructions and had not made the wrong
* See Chapter 24.


548 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
turn. T here is also little doubt th a t the assassins would n o t have been able to line up in the streets of Sarajevo in broad daylight if even elementary security precautions had been taken. W hen the em peror visited Sarajevo in 1910 the street along which he passed was lined with a double cordon of troops while hundreds of suspected individuals were forbidden to leave their hom es. D uring the archduke’s visit, in contrast, six individuals who were known to the police as dangerous revolutionaries were perm itted to move about in the streets with impunity. So gross was the negligence that it has even been suggested that enemies of the archduke deliberately neglected to provide adequate protection in order to be rid of him. The fact that General P otiorek sat beside the archduke and escaped the assassin’s bullet only by accident indicates that this theory is unfounded. R ather, it appears, th at strained relations between the civilian and military authorities of Bosnia were responsible for the lack of proper security measures. The royal couple was buried in a memorial chapel which Francis Ferdinand had built in the country at A rtstetten, his wife being too lowborn to rest in the Hapsburg vaults in Vienna. The very elements seemed to con spire to mark the tragedy of the occasion. At the moment when the funeral procession was about to start up the hilly road to A rtstetten, a deafening thunderstorm broke over the Danube. Torrential rain threw everything into confusion. The coffins were carried hastily into a tiny railroad station and everyone crowded in to wait for the storm to pass. The heavens had given warning of the furies to come.
THE CONSPIRACY
The Vienna governm ent responded to the murder, by sending a legal expert to Sarajevo to collect evidence in order to prepare a tight case. In July, 1914, five of the assassins were placed on trial, the sixth one having managed to escape to Serbia. The defendants consisted of Princip, who com mitted the murder, Chabrinovich, who threw the bomb, and three of their accomplices. The most resolute and defiant was Princip, who boldly stated his beliefs and motives. “I have no regret,” he said, “because I am convinced that I have destroyed a scourge and done a good deed. . . . I have seen our people going steadily downhill. I am a p easant’s son and know w hat is h a p pening in the villages. . . . All this had its influence on me and also the fact of knowing that he [the archduke] was a G erm an, an enemy of the Slavs. . . . As future Sovereign he would have prevented our union and carried out certain reforms which would have been clearly against our interests.” 4 After protracted hearings the court found the defendants guilty. Under A ustrian law they could not be sentenced to death because none of them had completed their twentieth year. So Princip and Chabrinovich re ceived sentences of twenty years’ imprisonment and the remainder from thirteen to twenty years. The verdict of the court read as follows:


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 549
The C ourt regards it as proved by the evidence that both the N arodna O dbrana and military circles in the K ingdom of Serbia in charge of the espionage service, collaborated in the outrage. . . . T here is no doubt th a t both the N arodn a O dbrana and military circles on the active list in the Kingdom of Serbia knew of the aims of the outrage and were prodigal of all possible assistance and all possi ble protection to the perpetrators for whom they actually procured the means of carrying out the assassination.5
The N arodna O dbrana, or National Defense Society, which the court held responsible for the crime, had been organized in 1908 immediately following the annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Its objectives were avowedly revolutionary and anti-Austrian, including “encouragement and promotion of national feeling; enrollm ent and recruitm ent of volunteers; form ation of volunteer units and their training for armed activity.” 0 The N arodna O dbrana enrolled recruits not only in Serbia but also in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia. It transformed itself into a cultural society in 1909, when Serbia was forced to promise that she would live “on good neighborly term s” with Austria. But the change was more one of form than of substance. A pamphlet published in Belgrade in 1911 stated: “While, the Narodna Odbrana, evolv ing with time, has adjusted itself to the changes in the situation, it continues to m aintain the links formed at the moment of the annexation and remains the same as it then was. . . . Today dem ands quiet work, fanatical, inde fatigable, and incessant, on the tasks and duties needful as preliminary prep aration for the fight with rifles and heavy guns.” 7 Under these circumstances the Austrian authorities had no trouble finding abundant evidence of N arodna O dbrana activity in Bosnia. Hence they concluded that the Society was responsible for the m urder and made this charge in the cou rt verdict. Since then, however, m uch new evidence has been collected which indicates clearly that the N arodna O dbrana was not responsible for the crime. Rather, it was a secret Serbian organization which had infiltrated the N arodna O dbrana and used it for its purposes. This secret organization was the U jedinjenje ili Sm rt or Union or D eath, m ore popularly known as the Black Hand. The A ustrian court came closer to the facts when it included certain “military circles in Belgrade” in its indictment. But the court did not know of the Black H and which these “ military circles” had organized and which was directly responsible for the murder. The Black H and was founded in Belgrade in 1911 with the aim of realizing “the national ideal: the union of all Serbs.” As described in C hapter ' 24, the organizers of the Society were mostly army men who had participated in the 1903 revolution which had placed Peter Karageorgevich on the Serbian throne. After that bloody episode they had remained in contact with each other and had kept a watch over the new dynasty and its governments. Being men of action and fanatically nationalistic, they became increasingly im patient with what they considered to be the dilatory tactics of the Serbian government and of the Narodna Odbrana. Accordingly, they organized the


550 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Black H and in order to redeem their Serbian brothers under Hapsburg and Turkish rule by more violent and speedy measures. “This organization,” the bylaws stated, “prefers terrorist action to intellectual propaganda, and for this reason must be kept absolutely secret from non-m em bers.” 8 Certain features of the Black H and appear almost adolescent to the outsider. The initiation of a new member took place in a darkened room, lighted only by a wax candle, before a small table covered with a black cloth on w hich lay a crucifix, a dagger, and a revolver. T he Society’s seal bore a skull and crossbones, dagger, bomb, and bottle of poison, with the inscrip tion Ujedinjenje Hi Smrt. T hese extravagances reflected the fanatical earnest ness and single-mindedness of the members, and especially of the leader, Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevich. He had been one of the ringleaders of the 1903 conspiracy and had been appointed in 1913 head of the Intelligence Service of the Serbian G eneral Staff. He was an utterly selfless arid dedicated man with great charm as well as proved courage and passionate patriotism. He comm anded the complete devotion of his followers, who regarded him as a Mazzini and Garibaldi rolled into one.
Before the Balkan W ars the Black Hand had fought for the Serbian cause in M acedonia by conducting propaganda and organizing armed bands. It had been also active in Bosnia, where it had operated through the N arodna O dbrana and through the Bosnian nationalist society, the M lada Bosna, or Young Bosnia, described in Chapter 24. Vladimir Gachinovich, a prom inent leader in both the N arodna O dbrana and the M lada Bosna, was also a mem ber of the Black Hand. On the model of the Black Hand Gachinovich or ganized in Bosnia a network of revolutionary cells which .were controlled by the Central Committee in Belgrade. Thus the Black H and infiltrated the older organizations, utilizing them very effectively to organize an under ground revolutionary apparatus and to carry on agitation. This work was so effective that contem poraries described Bosnia as a volcano that was about to erupt. It is im portant to note that the Serbian governm ent .was not involved in this revolutionary activity. In fact, its relations with' the Black H and were anything but cordial. One reason was that the Belgrade government feared that the unceasing agitation might provoke A ustria to attack Serbia. A nother reason was that Prem ier Pashich and his Radical party were more interested in Pan-Serbism than in the Yugoslav ideal which animated the Bosnian revo lutionaries and the Black Hand. Furtherm ore, a sharp conflict had developed between the Serbian civilian and military authorities after the Balkan Wars over the adm inistration of the newly won territories in M acedonia. The Black H and took the Side of the m ilitary and the situation becam e so acute that the Austrian minister in Belgrade reported on M ay 8, 1914:
The conflict between the Government and the conspirator party (Black H and) . . . has bccome so aggravutcd in the Inst lew weeks that a violent clash


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 551
between the two rivals for power seems not impossible. . . . The Black H and being probably none too fastidious in its choice of means to gain its ends, 1 regard the possibility of violent eruptions, even of an overthrow of the Governm ent or a coup d ’etat, as not entirely inconceivable developm ents. . . .s
Thus the Black Hand operated almost as a state within a state. Cer tainly Prem ier Pashich feared this secret organization and dared not oppose it too openly for fear that the same thing might happen to him as did to Alexander Obrenovich in 1903. Indeed, the army paper, Piemont, at this time was making none too subtle references to “the memory of 29 May 1903.” Such was the situation in Serbia and Bosnia when the announcem ent was made that A rchduke Francis Ferdinand was to visit Sarajevo on St. V itus’s Day. T he effect on the young firebrands in Bosnia m ay be imagined. Two of them, Gavrilo Princip and Nedeljko Chabrinovich, decided they would attem pt to assassinate the archduke. It is significant that they did not go to the N arodna O dbrana for arms, money, and other assistance. They were Black H and members and they got in touch with leaders of the secret society who approved their plot and gave them full assistance. It is alm ost certain that Colonel Dimitrijevich was consulted about such a major under taking, especially since he made all im portant decisions. In any case, the young assassins were provided with four Brownings from the Serbian state arsenal, six bombs, 150 dinars, a map of Bosnia, and cyanide of potassium to be taken immediately after the deed so that they would not be captured alive. They were also given a letter addressed to the officer of the frontier guards instructing him to allow the bearers to pass. Thus Princip and C ha brinovich were able to reach Sarajevo, where they joined forces with other conspirators and went into hiding until the day of the royal visit. A t this point there arises the much-discussed question of whether Prem ier Pashich was in any way implicated in the plot. In view of the rela tions between him and the Black H and it appears certain that he was not. On the other hand, the evidence indicates quite clearly that he had heard of the plot and that, after some hesitation for fear of assassination by the Black Hand, he made two attempts to prevent the murder. He sent orders to the frontier guards to stop the assassins and he also instructed his m inister in Vienna to warn the Austrian government. Unfortunately, neither of these moves proved effective. The frontier guards, who were members of the Black H and, professed that the orders ar rived too late. A nd the Serbian minister in Vienna was on bad terms with the A ustrian Foreign M inister, so he spoke instead to the M inister in Charge of Bosnian Affairs. He did not make his warning very specific or urgent; hence, the minister did not pass on the information to the archduke. The latter thus proceeded with his trip to Bosnia, which, as we have seen, was to end in tragedy because of the criminal laxity of the officials in Sarajevo. It is evident, in conclusion, th at both the A ustrian and Serbian governm ents


552 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
were guilty of negligence and blundering and hence must be held partly re sponsible for the assassination of Francis Ferdinand. We may end this story of m urder with the question of motive. Why did Colonel Dimitrijevich approve of the plot and arrange for its execution? T he colonel’s nephew, D r. M ilan Zivanovich, has given this revealing answ er:
T he motive of the Sarajevo crim e is to be sought in the Slavophil policy of Francis Ferdinand. The A rchduke fell a victim of his political views favourable to trialism. If he had succeeded in carrying through this design, Serbia would have ended by gravitating tow ards A ustria-H ungary. Apis [D im itrijevich’s pseudo nym], an acute political thinker, had grasped all the danger of the A rchduke’s plan. Austria meant to bring about Southern Slav union within the framework of the Danubian M onarchy. Dimitrijevich, who had been for several months at the Serbian Legation in Berlin, m ust have been seriously perturbed by w hat he learnt of the political intentions of the Austrian H eir A pparent and the inform a tion, continually brought to him by Serbs and Croats from the M onarchy, of the growing sympathy which that programme roused among the Slav subjects of Aus tria. T hat is why he decided to seize the first occasion to elim inate F rancis F erd i n a n d . 10
WAR
Just as blundering was largely responsible for the m urder of the arch duke, so now it contributed greatly to the outbreak of W orld W ar I. The first miscalculation was made by certain members of the Austrian government, who assumed that they could employ forceful measures to punish Serbia without international complications. The foreign minister, Count Berchtold, and the chief of staff, General Conrad von Hotzendorf, both insisted that “A ustria must draw the sword.” On the other hand, Em peror Francis Joseph, the Austrian premier, Count Stiirgkh, and the Hungarian premier, Count Tisza, all wished to wait until the crime could be investigated and the atti tude of Germany ascertained. Berchtold thereupon sent a special emissary, C ount H oyos, to Berlin to explain A ustria-H ungary’s position. Hoyos took with him a m emorandum on the Balkan situation that had been completed by the Foreign Office on June 28. T o it was added a postscript stating that the “ruthless assassination” afforded “unmistakable evidence of the insuperability of the antagonism between the M onarchy and Serbia” and dem onstrated “the necessity for the M onarchy to destroy with a determ ined hand the net which its enemies are attempting to throw about its head.” Hoyos also took a letter from Francis Joseph to the kaiser stating th at “ a reconciliation” w ith Serbia “is no longer to be thought of” and th at “the pacific policy of all European m onarchs will be threatened so long as this center of crim inal agitation in Belgrade is not subjected to punish m ent.” 11 Both the kaiser and his chancellor, Bethmann-Hollweg, responded to these statements with promises of full support. The Austrian ambassador in Berlin telegraphed to his government on July 6, 1914, that “the German


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 553
G overnm ent is of the opinion th a t we m ust judge w hat is to be done to clear up the situation; whatever we may decide upon, we can always be sure that we shall find G erm any at o u r side, as the ally and friend of the M onarchy.” 12 This unqualified assurance of support constitutes the famous “blank check” which proved to be another big step toward war. The G erm ans, it should be emphasized, did not give the “blank check” because they w anted war. R ather, it was because they assumed that Russia would not dare support Serbia against both Germany and Austria, and that she would therefore back down as she had done in 1908.* It was not long before this assum ption was proved to be a fatal miscalculations Meanwhile in Vienna Berchtold was strengthened by the assurances from Berlin and by reports from Sarajevo that evidence had been found proving that the crime had been planned in Belgrade with the assistance of Serbian officials. This enabled Berchtold to win over the em peror and the A ustrian and H ungarian prem iers to his position. O n July 14 they all agreed that a drastic ultim atum should be issued, which it was expected— and hoped — that Serbia would reject. The ultimatum was presented in Belgrade on July 23 with a time limit of forty-eight hours. It made ten specific demands upon the Serbian governm ent: (1 ) that it suppress anti-A ustrian newspapers; (2 ) th at it dissolve the N aro d n a O db ran a; ( 3 ) that it rem ove anti-A ustrian teachers from the schools, and (4 ) anti-A ustrian officers from the arm y; (5 ) th at it accept A ustrian collaboration in conducting the inquiry regarding re sponsibility for the crime; (6 ) that it institute proceedings against those ac cessory to the plot, A ustrian representatives participating in the investigation; (7 ) th at it arrest two Serbian officials know n to have been involved in the plot; ( 8 ) that it dismiss and punish certain frontier guards; (9 ) th at it explain the utterances of certain high olficials; and (1 0 ) that it notify the Austrian government of the execution of these measures. At first glance the Serbian reply appeared very conciliatory. It seemed to concede all the A ustrian dem ands except the sixth, and it offered to submit the whole m atter to the Hague Court or to the powers of Europe for settlement. But these concessions were so hedged about with qualifications as to be evasive and of questionable value. The Austrian minister in Belgrade declared the reply unsatisfactory and broke off diplom atic relations, leaving the country within half an hour. Even before presenting their reply the Serbs ordered the mobilization of their army in the afternoon of July 25. T hat eve ning A ustria replied by mobilizing eight army corps against Serbia. In the next few days the Austrian-G erm an assumption that the Ser bian affair could be localized was proved to be a terrible miscalculation. The basic reason was that Russia was in a much more favorable position at this time than she had been in 1908. H er arm y was reorganized and stronger than in 1908, when it had not yet recovered from its defeat in the F ar East. Also, Russia now had firm support from France, in contrast to 1908, when France
* See C hapter 28.


554 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
expressly declared her unwillingness to risk war over Bosnia. It happened that President Poincare and Prem ier Viviani of France were paying an official visit to St. Petersburg between July 20 and 23. Poincare, a native of Alsace, had always favored a tough policy against Germany. Now he apparently dis regarded the intrinsic merits of the Serbian-Austrian dispute and looked upon it as a test of Entente solidarity against the Triple Alliance. Accordingly, he urged the R ussians to stand firm and assured them of F ran ce’s support. The Russians from the beginning took the position that the SerbianA ustrian crisis was of general European rather than purely local concern. When the Austrians dispatched their ultimatum, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Sazonov, declared heatedly that he would not allow A ustria to attack and “devour” Serbia. Even before Serbia gave her reply Russia began mili tary preparations. Thus the stage was set for the great catastrophe. Austria was determined to use force against Serbia; Russia was equally determined to prevent such force; and Germany and France had committed themselves to support their respective allies. Many proposals were made for preserving the peace. Germany urged that pressure be put on the Russians to restrain them. France, on the other hand, wanted pressure on Vienna to force the Austrians to modify their de mands. Italy, with a foot in each cam p, sincerely desired an equitable settle ment but her proposals received scant consideration. Earl Grey in London issued without success three successive plans for maintaining peace. Berchtold feared that all these m ediation proposals might interfere with his plans for a final and forceful settlem ent of the Serbian menace. So on July 28 he declared war on Serbia. · The chancellories of E urope now becam e feverishly active in their search for a m eans of forestalling a general conflagration. Bethmann-Hollwc)'. had realized by this time that his assum ption that the dispute could be local ized was no longer tenable. A ccordingly, he recom m ended to B erchtold thul the A ustrian forces should not advance beyond Belgrade. H e hoped that in this way a E u ropean w ar m ight be averted, while at the sam e time Auslii.i would be able to use the Serbian capital as a paw n in conducting negotiation·* for a settlement. When Berchtold did not reply to this “Halt in Belgrade” pm posal, the G erm an chancellor repeated it twice m ore, gaining B ritish suppwl in the meantime. B erchtold now felt constrained to call a meeting of the council of mill isters for July 31 to form ulate a reply. B ut the day before, R ussia ordmnl full m obilization; w hereupon the G erm an chief of staff, H elm uth von Mollkit, telegraphed to his counterpart in V ienna, C onrad von H otzendorf, to Inllnw suit with the assurance of full G erm an support. W hen the council of mini'll* i» m et it naturally decided under these circum stances to return a polite hill evasive reply to the G erm an-B ritish proposals. In this m anner Belhniimii Hollw eg’s frantic efforts to check A ustria were brought to nought by K iim Iii I mobilization. T he m obilization of Russia proved to be the final move thul niml#


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 555
war inevitable. Sazonov decided to make this move because of the prodding of his military advisers and the repeated assurances of support from Paris. When A ustria declared war on Serbia, the French ambassador, Paleologue, gave Sazonov a formal declaration promising French support. Sazonov decided that the time for action had come, so he asked for partial mobiliza tion against A ustria alone. The Russian military leaders opposed partial mobilization for fear that if general war broke out it would prove impossible to shift to full mobilization against both A ustria and Germany. Sazonov gave way to the military men and also persuaded the tsar to accept general mobilization. A t this point the tsar received a personal telegram from the kaiser stating that a direct understanding between Russia and Austria was both possible and desirable, and urging that no military measures be taken. N icholas was sincerely devoted to peace and acted upon the kaiser’s request. He counterm anded the plans for general mobilization and ordered partial mobilization instead. The military men now were in a panic and Sazonov with them. They feared that the drift to war could not be stopped despite the personal wishes of the tsar and the kaiser. Hence they envisaged a night marish situation in which Russia would be obliged to fight against both A us tria and Germany but would be unable to do so because partial mobilization would be under way and the troops and war material already en route to the Austrian front. Sazonov and the military pleaded with the tsar to change his mind, which he finally did with great reluctance. In the afternoon of July 30 he signed the order for general mobilization which made war virtually inevi table. Germany retaliated the next day with a twelve-hour ultimatum to Russia demanding that the mobilization be stopped. W hen no reply was received, G erm any declared w ar against R ussia on A ugust 1. G erm an w ar plans, prepared years earlier by C ount SchliefFen, called for an im m ediate and overwhelming attack against France with the aim of defeating her quickly and then turning against the slower-moving Russians. In accordance with this strategy, G erm any dem anded on July 31 that France make clear her position in the case of a Russian-G erm an conflict. France replied that she would be guided by her own interests. Germany then cleared the way for the im plem entation of the Schlieffen plan by declaring w ar on France on August 3 on the flimsy pretext of frontier violations. The next day England entered the war on the side of France and thus the great powers of Europe were at each others’ throats five weeks after the m urder at Sarajevo. When the tsar reluctantly signed the order for general mobilization he said to Sazonov, “Think of the responsibility which you are advising me to take! Think of the thousands and thousands of men who will be sent to their death !” 13 T he tsar could not foresee th at he was also signing the death warrant for himself and for his entire family. N or did he realize that he was unleashing forces that were to transform completely the Balkan Peninsula


556 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
and to create that great South Slav state for which Princip and other Bosnian youth had sacrificed themselves.
S ER B IA ’S T R IU M P H
The first round of fighting in the Balkan Peninsula proved to be a bitter disappointment for Austria and a glorious trium ph for Serbia. The reason for this unexpected outcome was that the Austrian army was paralyzed by precisely that confusion of conflicting mobilizations which the Russian generals had feared and had avoided by persuading the tsar to proceed with general mobilization. The origin of the confusion was the Austrian assumption that the war could be confined to the Balkans. In accordance with this assumption the A ustrians on July 25 ordered the implementation of their M obilization Plan B, which was designed for a purely B alkan war against Serbia. It soon became evident that the war could not be localized; hence on July 21 the Austrians switched to Mobilization Plan R, which required that most of the troops be sent to the Russian front. This switch created fearful anarchy be cause the bulk of the A ustrian army already was en route to the Danube. There was nothing to do but to allow the divisions to proceed southward and then, upon their arrival at the Serbian front, to start northward for Galicia, where the Russians were advancing. They arrived there so far behind schedule that the Russians were able to overrun the whole of the province of Galicia in the first m onth of the war. T he A ustrians suffered not only a serious defeat in the north but also a humiliating setback in the south. They left only 250,000 men under General Potiorek along the Danube front. The Serbian army numbered over 350,000 men, 90 per cent of whom were seasoned veterans of the Balkan W ars. N evertheless, Potiorek, who h ad barely escaped Princip’s bullet in Sarajevo, was eager to charge ahead and was certain that he could destroy “the viper’s n est.” O n A ugust 12 he crossed the D rina R iver and began the invasion of Serbia. A t first he had some success because the Serbians had expected the attack at Belgrade rather than further west, where it came. The Serbian commander, General Putnik, rushed reinforcements to the threat ened sector. Some of the troops m arched sixty miles in forty-eight hours and then plunged into battle without rest. By August 24 the Austrians had been pushed back across the Drina River into Bosnia with a loss of a third of their forces. O n September 8 Potiorek returned to the attack, invading Serbia once more from Bosnia. After hard fighting and heavy losses he was able to take Belgrade on December 2. On the same day Putnik ordered a counter offensive, which he began without artillery preparation because of the ex treme shortage of ammunition. The undaunted Serbian soldiers attacked with such spirit that they broke through the Austrian positions. They kept pressing forward, giving the A ustrians no chance to re-form their lines. On D ecem ber 15 Serbian cavalrym en galloped into Belgrade while the A ustrians


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 557
once m ore fell back across the river to their own territory. Potiorek' retired to a sanitarium while Putnik announced to the world: “O n the territory of the K ingdom of Serbia there rem ains not one free enem y soldier.” 14 The Serbians had paid heavily for their victory, their casualties totaling over 100,000. A nd their ordeal had only begun. As soon as the fighting ended a devastating typhus epidemic began. The crowding in the cities and the generally unsanitary conditions resulting from the war made the epidemic exceptionally virulent. Despite the aid of medical missions from Allied countries it raged on until June, 1915, causing at least 150,000 deaths. A nd then a few months later came still another blow. Bulgaria joined the C entral Powers in a coordinated attack upon Serbia from all sides. Before considering this new campaign we shall turn to the ill-fated Dardanelles ex pedition which had far-reaching consequences in the Balkans and through out Europe.
DARDANELLES AND GA LLIPOLI
The Allies attacked the Dardanelles because Turkey joined the Cen tral Powers on November 2, 1914. The Turkish government leaders inter vened as early as they did because they were certain that they had picked the winning side and they hoped that as a result they would recover the terri tory they had lost in the Balkan W ars. On July 27, before hostilities had started, the Turkish grand vizir offered to the Germ an am bassador a secret offensive and defensive alliance against Russia. The am bassador was cool to the proposal because he considered the Turkish army to be of little value. B ut the kaiser intervened energetically, stating: “ It is now a question of getting hold of every gun which is ready in the Balkans to let go for A ustria against the Slavs. . . .” 15 The am bassador hurriedly dropped his objections and concluded a treaty of alliance on August 2. The two parties agreed to observe neutrality in the conflict between A ustria and Serbia, but Turkey promised to enter the war in case Russia intervened— which she already had done when the treaty was signed. The Germ ans now discovered that it was one thing to secure an alliance with the Turks and quite another to persuade them to fight. The Turks delayed intervention on the grounds that they wished first to com plete their mobilization, an operation for which they required several weeks. During that period the Turks amused themselves by pretending to conduct serious negotiations with the Allied ambassadors. They swore that they were not committed and even offered to join the Allies if a sufficiently lucrative offer were made. The Allied representatives, completely taken in, pursued these negotiations earnestly and hopefully. The Turks enjoyed this game until it was rudely interrupted on A ugust 11 by the arrival in C onstantinople of two G erm an cruisers, the Breslau and the Gäben. These ships had been sailing in the M editerranean when the war began. Since the Allies controlled the Suez and G ibraltar exits the G erm an adm irals sought a refuge in the Straits. T he Allies protested to


558 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Constantinople because the entry of non-Turkish warships into the Straits was a violation of long-standing treaty stipulations. The Turks replied blandly that they had purchased the ships in question and that they should be considered henceforth as Turkish. The citizens of Constantinople now witnessed the strange spectacle of blond and blue-eyed Germ an sailors wearing red fezzes and enjoying the sights of the capital while on shore leave. Needless to say, the German admirals retained control over their ships and paid no attention to Turkish naval officials. In fact, it was these admirals who finally forced the Turks into the war. O n October 29 they steamed into the Black Sea, apparently without the consent or knowledge of the Turkish government, and shelled Odessa and Sebastopol and sank Allied shipping. Russia responded by declaring war on November 4 and Britain and France followed suit the next day. W ith Turkey on the side of the Central Powers the Straits were com pletely closed to the Allies. This was a particularly serious blow for the Rus sians, who, short of war matériel, depended on their W estern allies to make up the deficit. But now that the Straits were blocked it was extremely diffi cult for the Russians to obtain the needed supplies. The only ports that could be reached by Allied shipping were on the Arctic and Pacific coasts, both far removed from the front lines. A group of Allied strategists led by W inston Churchill proposed to meet this dilemma by sending an expedition to force the Dardanelles and take Constantinople. In this way, they argued, Turkey would be put out of the war, the route to Russia would be opened,-W estern factories would be able to supply R ussia’s inexhaustible m anpow er with weapons, and the w ar would thus be won in short order. M ost professional soldiers opposed this plan on the ground that victory could be gained only on the western front by a direct assault upon the G erm an lines. Churchill eventually persuaded the cabinet to try his strategy. But because the high com m and of the army rem ained hostile, he had to rely only on naval forces. On M arch 18, 1915, a squadron of fourteen British and four French battleships steamed into the Straits with guns blazing. The principal obstacle was the multitude of mines rather than the shore fortifications. On the first day three ships were sunk and two others badly damaged. The British adm iral in command of the operation decided that the losses were prohibitive and withdrew the squadron. In doing so he allowed one of the greatest op portunities of the w ar to pass. It is know n now th a t the T urks h ad used up most of their ammunition and that the Allied ships probably would have reached C onstantinople w ithout m uch difficulty if the attack had been re sumed the next day. O n th at night the chief G erm an officer at the Straits, G eneral Mei tens, declared, “We expect that the British will come back early tomorrow m orning, and if they do, we may be able to hold out for a few hours.” 1,1 ll it also known that the O ttom an capital was deeply demoralized and divided and would not have offered serious resistance. The American ambnssadoi


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 559
in Constantinople, Henry M orgenthau, reported that “the whole O ttom an state, on that eighteenth day of M arch, 1915, when the Allied fleet abandoned the attack, was on the brink of dissolution. . . . Among the subject races the spirit of revolt was rapidly spreading. . . . The Turks themselves were praying that the British and French would take their city, for this would relieve them of the controlling gang [Young Turk government], emancipate them from the hated G erm ans, bring about peace, and end their m iseries.” 17 It is quite understandable that the British adm iral should have de cided to withdraw; nevertheless, it is fascinating to speculate how different the course of European and even of world history might have been if his decision had been otherwise. Constantinople probably would have been taken, in which case T urkey would have been forced out of the war, Russia would have received the supplies she needed so desperately, her armies would have fared better than they did, and quite possibly the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 might have been averted. With the failure of the Dardanelles expedition the Allies decided to try to take the Gallipoli Peninsula by land and thus open the Straits to their fleets. They were able to scrape together only five divisions of British, A us tralian, New Zealand, and French troops, only one of these being well trained. Landings were made on the Gallipoli beaches on April 25 but only shallow footholds could be secured in the face of withering m achine gun fire. Both sides brought up reinforcements, dug trenches, and consolidated their lines. But the Turks commanded the heights and could look down on the beaches on which every man and every box of ammunition had to be landed. The Allies did not have sufficient reserves to overrun the peninsula; yet they hesi tated to withdraw once more because of prestige considerations. Finally, they were forced to face facts and in January, 1916, they extricated their forces in the only successful operation of the campaign. An obvious reason for the failure of the Allies at the Straits was that their strength never reached more than half of the 800,000 men in the T urk ish lines. Equally im portant was the dissension among the Allies, which pre vented them from utilizing to the full their potential resources. Much of the dissension arose from Russian suspicion concerning the objectives of her W estern allies in the Straits. This was paradoxical in view of the fact that one of the aims of the Dardanelles and Gallipoli campaigns was to open a sea route to Russia. Nevertheless, the Russians could not be certain that, if the British were able to take such a glittering prize as Constantinople, they would then be willing to relinquish it. Furtherm ore, the Russians were suspicious of Prem ier Venizelos of G reece who, on M arch 5, 1915, offered his country’s land and sea forces for the assault on the Straits. The Russians were well aware of the centuries-old Greek aspiration for Constantinople and they knew that this aspiration was still very strong. Accordingly Sazonov stated outright that Greek participation in the Straits campaigns was unacceptable to Russia. It is not altogether certain th a t Venizelos in any case would have been able to persuade his king to commit the Greek forces. But he might have


560 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
succeeded if R ussia’s attitude had been different. A nd the addition of G reek manpower to that of the Allies might then have spelled the difference between defeat and victory. The Russians not only vetoed Greek participation but also pressed Britain and France to recognize legally their claims to Constantinople and the Straits. O n M arch 4, 1915, Sazonov issued his fam ous m em orandum in which he claimed the city of Constantinople, the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus to the Sakaria River, and the entire European shore of the Straits together with Thrace to the Enez-M idye line. Britain and France reluctantly accepted these demands on M arch 12 and April 10, respectively. A t the same time the W estern Allies reserved the right to define at a later date their claims in Asiatic Turkey. They did stake their claims in secret treaties in 1915, 1916, and 1917. A nd at the end of the war they secured these claims in the form of the Palestine, Iraq, and Syria mandates. But Russia, having gone Bolshevik in 1917, was unable to gain the great prize which her allies had conceded in 1915.*
B u l g a r i a ’s i n t e r v e n t i o n
The failure of the Dardanelles and Gallipoli expeditions affected not only the position of Russia but also the situation in the Balkans. If the expe ditions had succeeded there is little doubt th at the B alkan states sooner or later would have joined the Entente. As it was, the failure at the Straits con tributed substantially to B ulgaria’s decision in the fall of 1915 to intervene on the side of the Central Powers. Bulgaria, by virtue of her strategic location, was the pivot of the Balkan theater of war. To the Central Powers she offered a safe overland route to Constantinople and an essential ally for defeating Serbia. C ontrari wise, she was im portant to the Allies for the security of Serbia and the isola tion of Turkey. Thus from the beginning of the war both sides ardently wooed Bulgaria. The Allies labored under a distinct disadvantage because the Central Powers could promise Bulgaria territory at the expense of Serbia, whereas they could find little to offer as com pensation. They persuaded Pashich to offer a few bits of M acedonia in exchange for the territory that Serbia would gain from Austria. But these concessions, far short of what Bulgaria had lost in the second B alkan W ar, did not im press Ferdinand. The Allies also suggested that Greece give up something in return for com pensation in Asia M inor. The Greeks did not respond, preferring the sparrow in the hand to the pigeon in the air. W hen Turkey entered the war at the end of October the Allies made a serious effort to win over B ulgaria. O n N ovem ber 13 they offered F erdi nand both Thrace and M acedonia as well as financial aid if he would attack Turkey. Thrace was to be taken from Turkey but M acedonia was being of fered against the will of its current owners— neutral Greece and Serbia— the
* See C hapter 30.


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 5 6 1
latter, of course, being the state for whose integrity the world had just been plunged into war. The Austrians easily overbid their opponents by offering Ferdinand a larger share of Serbia. The Bulgarian king listened to all these offers, asked for more, and refused to commit himself until it became clearer which side was likely to win. In 1915 Ferdinand decided that the Central Powers would be the victors. He reached this conclusion because of the failure of the Allies at the Straits and also because of the overwhelming defeats sustained that year by the Russians. Having made his decision Ferdinand soon reached an agree m ent with the Central Powers despite frantic last-m inute offers by the Allies. The Germans smoothed the way by persuading the Turks on July 22 to hand over immediately to Bulgaria a part of Thrace. The next month the German and Austrian governments gave Bulgaria a loan of 200 million francs. F i nally, on September 6, 1915, Ferdinand signed an alliance and a military convention providing for mutual aid against a neighboring state, for a Germ an-Austrian campaign against Serbia within thirty days, and for Bulgarian participation five’days later. In return B ulgaria was to receive the M acedonian boundaries of 1912 as well as the Dobruja if R um ania joined the Allies, and the Kavalla region if Greece did likewise. F erdinand did not have much popular support in pursuing the policy he did. Considerations of race, religion, and historical traditions made the Bulgarian people much more sympathetic to Russia than to the German powers. This is borne out by the experiences of the Russian am bassador at Sofia.
. . . as far as the people w ere concerned I can certify that in spite of all the mistakes made by the Russian G overnment during about forty years, the na tion had preserved intact its feeling of gratitude to her deliverers. Indeed, as soon as the war had broken out, I began receiving pile upon pile of letters, one more touching than the other, coming from the most obscure and remote parts of the country, wishing success to the Slavic cause and containing donations to be for w arded to the sons of the heroes of the em ancipation w ar of 187 7 -7 8 .18
Despite this popular sentiment Ferdinand was able to have his way w ithout serious trouble because the prem ier in office at the time was Vasil Radoslavov, leader of the traditionally anti-Russian Liberal party. Radoslavov had assumed office in 1913 following the disastrous outcome of the second Balkan W ar. His appointm ent reflected the tendency in Bulgarian court circles to blame Russia for the misfortunes of the second Balkan W ar. Despite the authority of both king and premier, considerable resist ance was organized against the alliance with the Central Powers. On Septem ber 17, 1915, the leaders of the opposition parties secured an audience with Ferdinand and expressed their disapproval of the impending attack upon Serbia. The leader of the young A grarian party, A lexander Stambuliski, was particularly outspoken in his com m ents, warning the king that if he in tervened in the w ar he would lose his throne. Ferdinand replied th at if Stam


562 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
buliski were not more careful he would lose his head. In fact, Stambuliski was arrested and sent to prison for lese-majeste. But within three years he was completely vindicated as Ferdinand fled to G erm any before the victorious Allied armies.
O C C U PA TIO N O F SERBIA
B ulgaria’s intervention spelled Serbia’s doom . A n overw helm ing num ber of German, Austrian, and Bulgarian divisions were gathered for a simul taneous attack upon Serbia from three sides. On September 22 Bulgaria ordered general mobilization. The Serbs, suspecting the worst, favored an immediate preventive attack on the Bulgars. But the Allies vetoed this pro posal, still cherishing the illusion that they would be able to keep Bulgaria neutral. Serbia then appealed to Greece for assistance under the terms of their alliance of May, 1913. But no assistance was forthcoming from that quarter either. We will consider later the political deadlock th at developed in G reece during W orld W ar I and which was to convulse that country for many years. Suffice it to note here th a t King C onstantine, who had m arried the kaiser’s sister, insisted on neutrality, while Prem ier Venizelos ardently urged inter vention on the side of the Allies. This split, which manifested itself when Serbia asked for aid on the eve of the Bulgarian attack, will be discussed later in this chapter. The 1913 alliance had provided that Serbia should supply 150,000 men in a joint war, a condition that she manifestly was now incapa ble of fulfilling. So Venizelos notified the Entente Powers on Septem ber 22 that if they would supply the 150,000 men Greece would enter the war. The Allies accepted and on October 3 British and French troops began to disem bark at Saloniki. This development appeared promising for the Serbians, but in the end nothing came of it. King C onstantine insisted that Greece rem ain neutral and Venizelos resigned in protest on O ctober 5 when the Allied troops were still landing in Saloniki. The king had strong argum ents to justify his stand. Britain and France had failed at the Straits, Russia was battered to helpless ness, Bulgaria was about to join the Central Powers, while M ackensen was poised along the Danube with a powerful army. Under these circumstances, Constantine argued, any policy other than neutrality was sheer suicide. R egardless of the m erits of the king’s action, the fact rem ains th at it made effective aid to the Serbians almost impossible. The Allies had counted heavily on the Greek army to reinforce their own army that they had planned to send forth from Saloniki to rescue the Serbs. Now the Greeks were un available and the rescue plan unfeasible. To make m atters worse, the Allies were divided as to whether the Saloniki foothold should be maintained. The French strongly favored it while the B ritish just as strongly wished to give it up on the ground th at it was too late to give effective aid to the Serbians. As is usual in such cases, the o u t


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 563
come was an ineffectual and worthless compromise. The Saloniki front was maintained but not enough troops were provided to bolster the Serbians. On October 5 news of the Saloniki landings reached G eneral M ackensen, commander of the A ustro-Germ an army gathered along the Danube. The next day he gave the order to advance. The position of the defending Serbs was quite untenable. Because of the Bulgarian threat on their flank they had stretched out their forces thinly along a six-hundred-mile line on their northern and eastern frontiers. The Serbians nevertheless fought gallantly in the vain hope that help would come from Saloniki if they slowed dow n the enem y’s advance. They resisted fiercely in Belgrade, fighting the invaders street by street for three days before surrendering the capital. Then the Bul garians attacked from the east on O ctober 14. Advancing rapidly in the southern sector, they cut the all-im portant Belgrade-Saloniki railroad and severed Serbia from her newly acquired M acedonian territories. General Sarrail, who commanded the Allied forces at Saloniki, attem pted to come to the rescue. But he had only twenty thousand men available at this time, so the Bulgars were able to stop him and to push him back into G reek territory. The Serbians now were alone, outnum bered in m anpower and out weighed in artillery. Germans, Austrians, and Bulgarians moved forward simultaneously for the kill. The Serbians fought desperate delaying actions, always managing to escape encirclement and to continue the struggle. On Novem ber 5 the Bulgarians took Nish and effected a junction with M ackensen’s troops. B ut the Serbs again slipped out and retreated tow ard Kosovo, where, in 1389, their medieval empire had been destroyed by the Turks. After m ore than five hundred years the Serbians once m ore w ere fighting for na tional existence on the same historic Kosovo field. As the enemy armies were drawing in, the Serbians had to decide upon one of three possible courses that were open to them: they could sur render and sign a separate peace; they could fight on defiantly to the end, as their ancestors had done before them; or they could attem pt a retreat through the mountains of M ontenegro and Albania to the A driatic coast, where A l lied shipping could rescue the survivors. The third course was chosen; where upon ensued one of the great epics of W orld W ar I. The Serbian retreat to the Adriatic coast has been com pared to the famous marches of Xenophon and Napoleon. Preceded by thousands of ref ugees and with winter closing in, the Serbian army plunged into the m oun tains that separated them from the Adriatic ports. Enemy bombing planes attacked from above and hostile Albanians harassed those detachments that struggled through their lands. But the worst enemy was hunger. Starvation, together with cold, disease, and enemy action, took a toll of twenty thousand soldiers and countless refugees. The miserable survivors reached Scutari, fled on to Durazzo with the A ustrians on their heels, and -finally reached safety at V alona. From there a fleet of Allied ships transported them to Corfu. By April 15, 1916, the re


564 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
treat was over. A nd by July of the same year a Serbian army of 125,000 rested and re-equipped veterans was ready to return to the front. The home land was under enemy occupation but the Serbian cause was not lost.
RU M A N IA N IN TERV EN TIO N
The outstanding event in the B alkans in 1916 was the intervention of Rum ania on the side of the Entente. Rum ania had been allied with G er many and A ustria since the secret treaty of 1883. But the plight of the three million Rum anians in Transylvania had aroused such strong feeling against the Dual M onarchy that it was no surprise when the Rum anian government proclaim ed its neutrality on A ugust 3, 1914. Indeed, the A ustrian minister in Bucharest reported that there were only two parties left in Rum ania— those who believed in immediate war against A ustria and those (“our friends” ) who favored delay because the M onarchy had not yet been beaten. After her declaration of neutrality Rum ania was courted by both sides. The Allies offered Transylvania while the Central Powers promised Bessarabia. The Rum anian premier Ionel Bratianu, preferred to remain neu tral until the outcome of the war became more certain. In the meantime his country sold vast quantities of food to the Central Powers at handsome profits. In the spring of 1915 Bratianu almost joined the Allies, having ex tracted a high price— Bukovina, Transylvania, and the Banat of Temesvar. He was about to follow the example of Italy and abandon his neutrality when news arrived of the catastrophic Russian defeats ip Galicia. Bratianu had not committed himself as far as the Italians, so he was able to draw back and remain on the side lines. The following year Bratianu was impressed by the failure of the Ger mans to take Verdun and by the unexpected Russian victories in Bukovina. He decided that the right moment had come, so on August 18, 1916, he joined the Allies with the sam e territories pledged to him as h ad been in the year before. “T oday it is given to us,” proclaim ed King F erd in an d to his people, “to assure unshakeably and in its fulness the w ork m om entarily real ized by M ichael the B rave— the union of the R um anians on b o th sides of the C arp ath ian s.” 10 F rom the m ilitary view point the R um anians should have acted in June when the R ussian offensive was still under way. B ut they decided to wail until their harvest had been gathered. E ven then they proved to be very in adequately prepared for serious war. A t the outset they enjoyed a victorious m arch into Transylvania, which was lightly defended. B ut this advance turned out to be a serious strategic blunder. T he C entral Pow ers decided to miiki Rumania an object lesson for other neutrals who might be contemplating throwing in their lot with the Allies. A ustro-G erm an forces counterattacked in T ransylvania while G erm an, B ulgarian, and T urkish forces under Muck ensen pushed up from the Dobruja. M eanw hile the Allied arm y at Saloniki was too weak to make a ».e


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 565
rious diversion from that quarter, while the Russian offensive in Bukovina had petered out. Thus the Central Powers were left free to strike down the hapless Rumanians from all sides. Within three months the Rum anian armies were crushed. On D ecem ber 6, 1916, B ucharest fell to the enemy. By midJanuary two thirds of Rum ania was occupied, including the im portant wheatand oil-producing areas. Meanwhile, the defeat of Russia and the outbreak of revolution in that country had left Rum ania completely isolated from her W estern allies. Thus when the Bolsheviks were forced to sign the Brest-Litovsk Treaty with the Central Powers on March 3, 1918, the Rumanians had no alternative but to follow suit and accept the Treaty of Bucharest on May 7 of the same year. By its term s they ceded the D obruja to Bulgaria and the C arpathian passes to Austria-Hungary. Also, they undertook to pay the expenses of an enemy army of occupation, to grant rights of military transport through their territory, and to lease their oil wells to the G erm ans for ninety years. By one of the strangest quirks of the war, the Rum anians were able to gain immediate com pensation for the losses and humiliations imposed by the Bucharest Treaty. The compensation consisted of the province of Bessara bia, which had been a part of the Russian Empire since the earlier Bucharest Treaty of 1812. The circumstances of this territorial shift remain a contro versial issue to the present. Bessarabia had fallen into a state of anarchy following the collapse of the tsarist regime in February, 1917. By the middle of the year the peasants began to seize land and by the end of the year they had taken over about two thirds of the landed property. Meanwhile, two political currents had emerged, a nationalist Moldavian that looked to Bu charest, and an agrarian-revolutionary that was hostile to Rum ania as a land dominated by boyars. The separatism of the Moldavians was accentuated by the advent of the Bolshevik regime, with its revolutionary doctrines and centralized administration. The Moldavians convoked a national council or Sfat, which announced on December 2, 1917, the form ation of a Democratic M oldavian Republic as a self-governing unit in the Federative Dem ocratic Russian Republic. It soon became apparent that the new republic was incapable of standing on its own feet, menaced as it was by the U krainian Republic re cently formed under Germ an auspices, and by Bolsheviks of both the Russian and native varieties. In fact, soviets were established in several cities and were effectively challenging the Sfat’s authority. U nder these circum stances the Sfat on April 9, 1918, voted— 86 to 3, with 36 delegates abstaining— in favor of union with Rum ania. The controversy concerning the annexation of Bessa rabia by R um ania has centered on this vote of the Sfat. The Soviet thesis is th at the Sfat was not representative, th at its vote did not reflect the wishes of the people, and that it was merely the tool of the big landlords who used it against the soviets, which truly represented the peasant masses. The high num ber of abstentions does suggest that the vote was scarcely an ideal refer endum , especially in view of the presence of R um anian troops, which had


566 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
entered the province in January at the request of the Sfat. In any case, R u mania acquired Bessarabia, thus presenting the altogether unique case of a country, overwhelmingly defeated in war, extending her territory at the ex pense of one of her own allies. The Soviet governm ent refused to recognize the loss of Bessarabia, and the province became a critical issue between Russia and Rum ania during the entire period between the two world wars.
GREEK IN TERV EN TIO N
Meanwhile, Greece was being forced to take up arms by blatant Al lied pressure. Since the beginning of the war the question of neutrality or intervention had been a burning issue in that country. During the last days of July, 1914, when it seemed that the war would be localized, King Con stantine and Prem ier Venizelos agreed that Greece should remain neutral. The 1913 alliance with Serbia had provided for mutual aid only in the case of unprovoked aggression. The Greek leaders were agreed that Serbia had been guilty of “provocative conduct” and that there was no obligation to give aid. They let it be known, however, that if Bulgaria attacked Serbia, Greece would go to the assistance of her ally. Once the war became general, the kaiser brought strong pressure on King Constantine to join the Central Powers. He appealed to him “as a com rade, as a German marshal . . . and as a brother-in-law, to march together, hand in hand, against the common enemy, Slavism.” The kaiser went so far as to threaten that if Greece did not do this, “then there will be a complete break between Greece and the [German] Em pire.” In his reply of August 7 Constantine explained and defended his neutrality position to which he ad hered throughout the war. “The Em peror knows that my personal sympathies and my political views draw me to his side. . . . After m ature reflection, how ever, it is im possible for me to see how I could be useful to him, if I m obil ized m y arm y im m ediately. T he M ed iterranean is at the m ercy of the united fleets of England and France. . . . W ithout being able to be useful to him in anything, we should be wiped off the map. 1 am compelled to think that neu trality is forced upon us. . . . ” 20 · Greece was also courted by the Entente Powers, which had the enthu siastic backing of Prem ier Venizelos. The latter was convinced that the Allies would win the war in a short time. As early as August 18 he prophesied to his cabinet that the Allies would crush the Central Powers within three weeks and that Greece should act immediately if she wished to profit from the war. Although, the cabinet was divided, Venizelos called on the Allied ministers that very afternoon and offered them G reek aid without asking for any com pensations. This unprecedented generosity led the Allies to suspect that Venizelos’ motive was to gain their support for an attack upon Turkey. And since the Allies at this date had hopes of keeping Turkey neutral, they turned down the Greek premier. Venizelos next tried to embroil Greece during the Dardanelles cxpc


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 567
dition. The thunder of Allied cannon at the Straits revived the age-old dream of a new G reek em pire based upon St. Sophia and C onstantinople. Venizelos persuaded the crown council to give him a free hand in negotiating with the Entente. But the G reek general staff was strongly opposed to intervention on the grounds that an attack upon the Straits or Constantinople would leave Greece vulnerable to a flank attack by Bulgaria. Venizelos nevertheless of fered on March 5, 1915, to provide Greek military units for use in the D ar danelles campaign. He added that “without having any political views on Constantinople and the Straits, we have such interests of a moral and com m ercial order there th at we could not be disinterested in their fate.” 21 Venizelos’ effort at intervention was again frustrated. As noted ear lier in the chapter, Russia categorically refused to allow the Greeks to par ticipate in the action against C onstantinople and the Straits because she would brook no com petition in that region. Furtherm ore, King Constantine now repudiated Venizelos’ offer, having been swayed apparently by the arguments of his military advisers and by the representations of the Russian minister. Venizelos had no choice but to resign (M arch 6 ), and a new government that was less favorable to the E ntente took office. L ater in the year, when B ulgaria’s intervention was im m inent, Serbia appealed to G reece for aid. We saw earlier in this chapter th at Venizelos, who had resumed the prem iership in the interval, wished to respond to their appeal. He invited the Allies to land troops at Saloniki but he was unable to persuade the king to go as far as actual intervention. So on O ctober 5, 1916, Venizelos once more resigned and Greece continued to remain neutral. By this time the relations between king and premier had become em bittered, particularly because Venizelos had the support of the majority in the cham ber for his foreign policy. He accused the king of authoritarian ism and constitutional irresponsibility, and he refused to participate in the election of December 19, 1916. This decision allowed the Royalist party supporting Constantine to win a majority. But more im portant than this, Venizelos’ boycott drove his Liberal party into extraparliam entary opposition and thereby exacerbated the constitutional conflict into a veritable revolu tionary situation. Meanwhile the British and French governments had come to the con clusion that the security of their forces in the Saloniki area required a new regime in Athens. Two actions of the royalist cabinet goaded the Allies to take extreme measures. One was its refusal to perm it the Serbian army, which had re-formed in Corfu after its great retreat, to cross G reek territory to the Saloniki front. The other was its surrender to the Bulgarians, without any attem pt at resistance, of the strategic Fort Rupel commanding the entrance to the Struma Valley. The Allies retaliated by demanding on June 21 that the cham ber be dissolved, that a new cabinet be formed, that the Greek army be reduced to a peace footing, «nd that certain obnoxious police officials be removed. Rarely had an independent country been subjected to such humiliat ing treatm ent. Arid this was only the beginning. Greece, as a contem porary


568 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
observer rem arked, had become a “public place,” in which each side felt free to act as it wished. In September, 1916, a German-Bulgarian force occupied Kavalla and sent its garrison of eight thousand G reek soldiers to G erm any for intern ment. This convinced Venizelos that nothing short of a revolution could force a change in Greek policy. O n September 25 he went to his native Crete, where he proclaim ed, amid wild enthusiasm, a revolutionary movem ent to bring Greece into the war. From Crete he made a trium phal tour of the islands, which joined his cause wholeheartedly. O n O ctober 9 he landed at Saloniki where, with popular acclaim, he established his provisional govern ment. The Allies recognized the new government and took various high handed measures to eliminate the king. The climax came on November 30, when they landed troops in Piraeus to compel the king to surrender certain arms. These troops were fired upon by Greek forces as they were marching on the capital and were forced to return to their ships. The Allies retaliated by imposing a blockade and forcing Constantine to withdraw his army to the Peloponnesus. T hen the entry of the U nited States into the w ar in April, 1917, left the Allies free to take the final steps. Hitherto they had held back because of concern for American public opinion. But now that the United States was in the same camp, the Allies felt free to present an ultimatum on June 11, 1917. They gave C onstantine the alternative of abdication within twenty-four hours or bom bardm ent of Athens. He chose abdication and left for Switzerland, leaving as his successor his second son, Alexander. On June 27 Venizelos became prem ier and on July 2 he formally brought Greece into the war on the Allied side. But the cost was a country divided by a bitter feud whose evil effects were to be felt until W orld W ar II and beyond. The intensity of the emotions aroused is illustrated by an event th at occurred in A thens on D ecem ber 26, 1916. On that day the Archbishop of Athens, standing on a cairn of stones, performed the medieval rite of excommunication. Eight bishops standing around him, representing royalist Greece, chanted: “Cursed be Eleutherios Venizelos who imprisons priests and who plots against his king and his coun try.” Each participant cried, “Cursed be he,” and cast a stone upon the cairn. Sixty thousand A thenians took part in this ceremony, each bringing his stone and his curse.
A LLIED VICTORY
In Septem ber, 1918, a year after G reece’s entry into the w ar, the Allies began their long-awaited offensive from their Saloniki base. The com m ander, F ran ch et d ’Esperey, had at his disposal a cosm opolitan arm y of twenty-eight divisions: nine Greek, eight French, six Serbian, four British, and one Italian. The Bulgarians were of about equal strength in men ami guns but they were outnum bered in the air. M ore im portant, they were thoi oughly dem oralized by this time. Bad harvests and insullicent food had un


Sarajevo and War: 1914-1918 569
derm ined civilian morale, while the soldiers hated the Germans, who had taken over the key posts and who were better fed and clothed than they. In fact, thousands of Bulgarian soldiers had deserted in the summer of 1918 and could not be forced back to the colors. The Allied offensive began on September 15. The Serbian army and a French division spearheaded the attack, overrunning strong enemy posi tions west of the V ardar River. The Serbs fought savagely, wreaking venge ance for what they had suffered in 1915. They pierced three enemy defense lines and rolled back Germ an reinforcements that were hurried to the front. O n Septem ber 18 British and G reek divisions attacked further to the east and broke through after stubborn fighting. On September 21 the Allies launched still another offensive, this time in the west in the M onastir (Bitolj) region. The Bulgarian and G erm an troops now were in full retreat, with Brit ish air units inflicting heavy losses in the V ard ar and Strum a valleys. The Bulgarians now realized that defeat was inevitable sooner or later. Being desperately anxious to avoid invasion of their home territory by Serbs and Greeks, the Bulgarians decided to surrender at once. After brief negotiations they signed an arm istice with Fi;anchet d ’Esperey on Septem ber 29. The Bulgarian collapse had a decisive effect on the course of the whole war because Germany and Austria-Hungary no longer had the reserves needed to organize a new defense line on the Danube. Thus Ludendorff and H indenburg officially notified the G erm an civilian authorities on O ctober 3 that “as a result of the collapse of the M acedonian front, and of the weaken ing of our reserves in the West, which this has necessitated . . . there appears to be now no possibility, to the best of human judgement, of winning peace from our enemies by force of arms. . . . in these circumstances the only right course is to bring the w ar to a close. . . 22 The Serbs exploited to the full the strategic opportunities afforded by Bulgaria’s downfall. They pressed onw ard tirelessly, pursuing the G erm ans and A ustrians northw ard. O n O ctober 12 they recaptured Nish and on N o vember 1 they entered Belgrade. W ithin six weeks they had swept the country clear of its enemies from border to border. Austria-Hungary was now being battered from all sides— in the west by the Italians, in the south by the Serbians, and in the east by the R um a nians, who re-entered the w ar on Novem ber 10. A t the same time the various subject peoples were taking m atters into their own hands, proclaiming their independence from Hapsburg rule. Finally, on November 3 Austria-Hungary concluded an arm istice with the Italians, and on N ovem ber 13 H ungary alone signed a separate armistice with Serbian and French commanders on the D anube. In this m anner the historic enemy of the South Slavs was hum bled and torn apart. Meanwhile, the other great empires of Eastern Europe were also dis integrating. In Russia the Romanovs were gone and the country was torn by civil war and intervention. The O ttom an Em pire was crum bling before attacks in M esopotamia and Palestine by British, Indian, Australian, New Zealand,


570 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
and A rab forces. Thus in these last months of 1918 whole centuries of past history were being reversed. The conquests of M ohammed and Suvorov and Prince Eugene were being undone irresistibly and irrevocably. A t long last there was being realized the visionary slogan, “The Balkans for the People of the Balkans.” O ut of the ruins of the old empires arose the sturdy forms of new states: Yugoslavia— the home of the South Slavs; G reater Rum aniagreater even than M ichael the B rave’s short-lived creation; a new A lbaniafor the first time since Skanderbeg; a larger Greece— though not measuring up to the fantasy of the Megale Idea; and finally Bulgaria— the black sheep, shorn once more, and left embittered and revisionist.


3 0 . P e a ce S ettlem en t: 1 9 1 8 -1 9 2 3
w
I I h e n W o r l d W ar I had ended and the armistice agreements had been concluded, there arose the problem of how to proceed with the peace settlement. After long deliberation the Allied leaders decided in favor of separate treaties with the enemy states rather than one general agreement. But a considerable time elapsed before any of the treaties could be concluded. The reason was that the war had been extraordinarily destruc tive of state structures and of power relationships. This was especially true in Central and E astern E urope, where four great empires had disappearedthe German, the Austro-Hungarian, the Russian, and the Turkish. Amid such wreckage it proved extremely difficult to restore some semblance of order and to draw new frontiers. The w ar nominally ended in 1918 but hostilities continued to flare up sporadically throughout the Con tinent during the next five years. In the Balkans alone, the Yugoslavs clashed with the Austrians over Carinthia and with the Italians over Fiume; the Rum anians occupied Bessarabia and beat back the Russians and the Ukraini ans; and Greeks and Turks fought a full-scale war in Asia M inor for three years. Eventually the fighting ceased and peace treaties were negotiatedthe Versailles Treaty with Germ any (June 28, 1919), the Saint-Germain Treaty with A ustria (Septem ber 10, 1919), the Trianon T reaty with H un gary (M arch 22, 1919), the Neuilly Treaty with Bulgaria (Novem ber 27, 1919), and the Sèvres Treaty with Turkey (August 20, 1920). The last treaty proved to be the only one that could not be enforced. Oddly enough, Turkey alone of the Central Powers was able to repudiate the terms imposed by the victorious Allies. She defeated a G reek army in Asia M inor, successfully defied the w ar-w eary W estern powers, and in the end won a more favorable settlement— the Lausanne Treaty of July 24, 1923. It was not until that date, then, that W orld W ar I came to a close in the Balkans. And it should be rem em bered that the war had begun in the peninsula, for all practical purposes, in 1912 with the outbreak of the first B alkan W ar.
S7 I


572 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Thus the Balkan states were engaged in hostilities almost continuously for over a decade. And the outcome, as we shall see, was a peninsula that was altogether different in 1923 from w hat it had been in 1912 or 1914.
THE OLD ORDER PASSES
The downfall of ancient empires during the course of W orld W ar I m ade possible the establishm ent of a new order in the B alkan Peninsula. T he collapse of the tsarist regime enabled Rum ania to acquire the province of Bessarabia. Similarly, the disintegration of the O ttom an Empire led the new Turkish Republic to accept as final the loss of most of E uropean Turkey. But most im portant, so far as the Balkan states were concerned, was the dis appearance of the Hapsburg Empire. This great event released vast territories to the north of the Danube and made possible the formation of G reater R u m ania and the new state of the South Slavs—-the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, in 1929 renam ed Yugoslavia, the name by which this country is now known and the nam e which will be generally used henceforth in this text. The partitioning of the Hapsburg Empire has frequently been criti cized as a grave error that brought only grief and peril to the Continent of Europe. W inston Churchill expressed this viewpoint in his usual forceful manner.
The . . . cardinal tragedy was the complete break-up of the AustroH ungarian E m pire by the Treaties of St.-G erm ain and T rianon. F or centuries this surviving em bodiment of the Holy Rom an Em piré had afforded a com m on life, with advantages in trade and security, to a large num ber of peoples, none of w hom in our own tim e had the strength or vitality to stand by themselves in the face of pressure from a revivified G erm any or Russia. All these races wished to break away from the federal or im perial structure, and to encourage their desires was deemed a liberal policy. The Balkanization of Southeastern Europe pro ceeded apace, with the consequent relative aggrandisem ent of Prussia and the G erm an Reich, which, though tired and war-scarred, was intact and locally over whelming. T here is not one of the peoples or provinces th at constituted the Em pire of the H apsburgs to whom gaining their independence has not brought the tortures which ancient poets and theologians had reserved for the dam ned.1
Churchill is certainly justified in pointing out that the principle of self determ ination of peoples did not usher in the millenium that some idealists had naïvely expected. B ut he is quite unjustified in attributing the breakup of the A ustro-H ungarian Em pire to the diplom ats who negotiated the Saint G erm ain and T rianon treaties. T he fact is th at the em pire had dissolved lonn before the diplomats began their deliberations. They merely gave legal recogni tion to a fait accom pli and also delineated frontiers whose main course hail been determined many months earlier by revolutionary upheavals. It might be argued that the peacem akers should have resisted rathei than accepted the desire of the former Hapsburg subjects for national independ


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 573
ence. But Central and Eastern Europe were so devastated and exhausted, and so infected with the virus of Bolshevism, that it never occurred to the diplomats to undertake so hazardous a task as to combat both revolutionary nationalism and revolutionary Bolshevism. And if they had been so rash as to assume this task there is no reason to assume that they would have been m ore successful in curbing South Slav or R um anian nationalism than they were with Turkish nationalism . A review of the developments in Central and Eastern Europe during these years will dem onstrate th at the diplom ats at Saint-G erm ain and T rianon had little to do with the breakup of the Hapsburg Em pire or with the form a tion of the new Yugoslavia and Rumania. The natural starting point from which to trace the unfolding of these m om entous developm ents is the death of E m peror Francis Joseph on November 21, 1916. This marked the beginning of the end of the empire over which Francis Joseph had ruled since the revolu tions of 1848. His successor was Em peror Charles, a young man of high char acter and ideals, but, lacking in balance and experience. Even without these failings the new ruler would have had little chance of coping with the over whelming odds that he faced. His foreign minister, Count O ttokar Czernin, in form ed him early in April, 1917, that “another winter campaign would be absolutely out of the question: in other words, that in the sum m er or late autumn an end must be put to the war at all costs.” 2 Charles attem pted to meet the growing crisis by calling a meeting of the Austrian parliament for May 30, 1917. When the representatives of the South Slavs and Czechs and other nationalities met in Vienna they expressed not their loyalty to the m onarchy but rather their determ ination to win full independ ence. And in Hungary the resignation of the strong-man prem ier, C ount Stephen Tisza, reflected the crumbling of the old imperial order. During the following year C ount C zernin’s prophecy of im pending dis aster was dramatically fulfilled. The em pire began to crum ble under the com bined pressures of military defeat, economic distress, and national separatism. O n O ctober 7, 1918, the A ustro-H ungarian leaders applied for an arm istice on the basis of W ilson’s Fourteen Points. W hile awaiting the answer, E m peror Charles issued a m anifesto on O ctober 16 transform ing A ustria into a federa tive state. The representatives of each national group in the A ustrian Reichstag were to withdraw and form national councils. This far-reaching concession failed to halt the process of disintegration in Austria. The national leaders in the Reichstag wanted independence rather than federation. Accordingly, they formed national councils and then took a step further and severed the ties with Vienna. The Czechs proclaim ed their in dependence in Prague, the G erm ans did likewise in V ienna, while the South Slavs in the Austrian part of the empire joined with their brothers under H un garian rule in declaring for union with Belgrade. The same development occurred in the H ungarian part of the empire. The liberal aristocrat, Count M ichael Karolyi, took office on O ctober 31, 1918, with the hope of preserving Hungary as a federative state. He appointed as


574 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
minister of nationalities Professor Oscar Jaszi, a well-known champion of the subject peoples. Jaszi offered the nationalities full autonomy as the basis for a new D anubian confederation of free peoples. But this offer, which would have been gratefully accepted five years earlier, was now unhesitatingly rejected. The Rumanians of Transylvania declared for independence and then union with Bucharest. Likewise, the Croatian Diet passed a resolution on October 29 that “Dalmatia, Croatia and Slavonia with Fiume are . . . a State com pletely independent of Hungary and Austria and . . . join the common na tional and sovereign State of the Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. . . . ” 3 No one offered resistance to the national groups, and thus the Hapsburg Empire passed into history quietly and anticlimactically. This sequence of events shows that the subject nationalities rejected both the old Hapsburg Empire and the new democratic federation proposed by A ustrian and Hungarian liberals. However desirable it might have been for the H apsburg Em pire to have been preserved in one form or another, the fact re mains th at it com pletely lacked any popular support upon which it could have been based. It follows inescapably that the Hapsburg Em pire was the victim not of shortsighted diplomats but rather of trium phant nationalism which now was coming into its own throughout Central and Eastern Europe.
SAINT-GERM AIN TREATY
T he Saint-G erm an T reaty was signed on Septem ber 10, 1919, after serious conflicts that threatened at one point to wreck the Peace Conference. The conflicts arose among the Allied Powers themselves over the question of how the Austrian possessions should be divided. The sharpest clash was that between Italy on the one hand, and Serbia and the Hapsburg South Slavs on the other. The origins of this clash go back to the secret Treaty of London of April 26, 1915, by which Italy, in return for entering the war, was prom ised the Trentino, Istria, Dalmatia, the Adriatic islands, and lands or spheres of influence in Albania, Asia M inor, and Africa. These territories included at least 250,000 G erm ans and 500,000 South Slavs. The implementation of this treaty was obstructed by certain develop ments that occurred during the course of the war. The most im portant of these was the Yugoslav movement among the South Slavs in the Hapsburg Empire. Several leaders of these South Slavs fled to Rom e soon after the beginning of the war and organized themselves as the Yugoslav Committee, with a Dalm a tian, Dr. Ante Trumbich, as their president. The Italians were openly hostile to the Committee, fearing that it would lead to the establishment of a strong Slavic power in the Adriatic. Accordingly, the Committee moved its headquar ters to London, where it carried on propaganda in behalf of a postwar federal South Slav state. We shall see in Chapter 32 that Prem ier Pashich of Serbia was not altogether happy about this Yugoslav movement. He and other Serbian leaders were undecided whether to strive for a greater Serbia or a Yugoslav state. This


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 575
fundam ental question rem ained unresolved during the war period despite official proclamations and agreements. It persisted into the postwar years, wracking the new state throughout its existence. Pashich finally decided to cooperate with the Yugoslav Committee, at least for the time being. One reason for his decision was the fall of the tsarist regime, which had supported him strongly in the past. A nother reason was the intervention of the United States, which generally favored the Yugoslav idea. Accordingly, Pashich and the leaders of the Yugoslav Committee on July 20, 1917, signed the Declaration of Corfu. This docum ent stated that all the South Slavs were one people and that, in accordance with the principle of selfdetermination, they wished to be united at the end of the war into one state. This state, to be called the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, was to be a constitutional monarchy under the Karageorgevich dynasty. Freedom of religion would be guaranteed, the Cyrillic and Latin alphabets would be equally acceptable, and all citizens would be equal before the law. But on the crucial question of centralism versus federalism (or Pan-Serbism versus Yugoslavism), the declaration was deliberately vague because no agreement had proved possible. Nevertheless, the D eclaration seryed its purpose of presenting a solid front to the outside world, and particularly to the Italians. The latter were also now willing to cooperate, at least formally, with the Yugoslavs. They were persuaded in part by the same factors that had in fluenced Pashich. The Italians also hoped that a gesture toward Yugoslavism would soften the Croatian regiments which were still fighting stoutly in the Alps under the H apsburg flag. A ccordingly, the unofficial Congress of O ppressed Nationalities was allowed to m eet in Rome and to proclaim the unofficial Pact of Rome in April, 1918. This docum ent asserted the right of subject peoples, and particularly of Italians and Yugoslavs, to national unity and independence on the basis of self-determ ination. M ore binding was an official Italian govern ment statem ent (September 8, 1918) to the effect that “Italy considers that the movement of the Yugoslav people for independence and for the constitution of a free state corresponds to the principles for which the Allies are fighting and to the aims of a just and lasting peace.” 4 These Italian commitments, to gether with similar ones by the W estern powers, contributed substantially to the revolutionary Yugoslav movement within the Hapsburg Empire. The climax came, as we have seen, on October 29 when the Croatian Diet adopted the resolution for incorporation in a unified South Slav state. In the light of these w artim e developm ents it is understandable th at serious trouble should have ensued when the Italians at the Peace Conference dem anded not only what they had been prom ised by the London Treaty but even more. They demanded the port of Fiume in addition to the other Adriatic territories listed in the Treaty of London. The Yugoslavs vehemently opposed the cession of Fiume. They claimed that the disputed territory was overwhelm ingly Yugoslav in population and pointed out that if it was given to Italy they would be deprived of the only economic outlet available to them on the Adri atic. Thus Italy and the new Yugoslavia collided squarely on the issue of Fiume,


W hen the question was discussed at the Paris Peace Conference, Presi dent Wilson strongly supported the Yugoslavs. His Fourteen Points had stipu lated that the Italian frontiers should be drawn “along clearly recognizable lines of nationality.” Wilson, under pressure from the British and French, waived this principle in the case of the 250,000 Germans in the Tyrol. He also agreed to allot Trieste to Italy but he resolutely refused to do likewise with Fiume. A deadlock ensued, whereupon Wilson made his famous appeal to the Italian people over the head of their representative, Vittorio Orlando. The Italian cham ber gave Orlando a ten-to-one vote of confidence and the deadlock con tinued. Finally, it was agreed that both the Saint-Germain and the Trianon treaties should include clauses assigning all the disputed territories to the Allies to be allotted at a later date. When Italy and Yugoslavia resumed negotiations, the latter country was m ore inclined to yield because of the repudiation of W ilson’s policies in the November, 1920, presidential election. Finally, on the twelfth of that month the Treaty of Rapallo was signed. It awarded to Italy more islands and a larger portion of Istria than Wilson had been willing to concede. In return Italy re nounced her claims to Dalmatia, and Fiume was made an independent state. T he latter provision was never enforced because the flam boyant D ’Annunzio made his famous coup in Fiume on September 12, 1919, and established him self as dictator of the city. He was later forced to leave Fiume, but Italian troops took his place and rem ained the de facto occupants while negotiations dragged on year after year. At length a new Italo-Yugoslav Treaty of January 27, 1924, ceded Fiume to Italy but its suburb, Susak (P orto B arro s), to Yugoslavia. This settlem ent proved to be econom ically absurd. Yugoslavia spent larg'c sums to develop the naturally inferior Susak, while Fiume, with its superior facilities, suffered a disastrous decline. In conclusion, the Saint-Germain Treaty and the later agreements left A ustria with only a little over one quarter of her prewar territory. The remainder was divided am ong several states. In the north, G alicia and a p art of Silesia went to Poland, and Bohem ia and M oravia to Czechoslovakia. As for the Bal kan territories of Austria, they were distributed as follows: Bukovina to Ru m ania; the Tyrol, a part of Istria, and bits of other provinces to Italy; and the remainder of Istria, Carinthia, Carniola, Dalmatia, and a part of Styria to Yugo slavia. The Trianon Treaty, to which we now turn, changed the map of the B alkans m uch m ore radically because H ungary’s B alkan possessions were l;ii more extensive than those of Austria.
TRIANON TREATY
In Hungary the liberal Count M ichael Karolyi had taken office on Ocln b er 31, 1918. His aim was to preserve the country’s integrity by reorgani/m r it along dem ocratic federal lines* But he was frustrated by the uncom prom r.m i' dem and of the subject nationalities for com plete independence. A nd behind Iho nationalities stood the new Yugoslav and Rumanian states determined to amu·» as large portions of Hungary as possible. The Serbian arm y crossed the I V iiiiiI m
576 Age of War and Crisis: 1914


Peace Settlem ent: 1918—1923 577
and occupied a large section of southern Hungary. The Rum anians, who had been forced to sign a separate treaty in 1917, now re-entered the war on N o vember 9, 1918. Their forces poured into Transylvania, and the Peace Confer ence supported them by ordering Hungary to withdraw her troops from the territories claimed by the Rum anians. A t the same time the Czechoslovak army was advancing into Hungarian territory from the north. Karolyi at this point resigned in despair and turned over the govern ment to a coalition of Socialists and Communists headed by Bela Kun. The new regime represented partly a social revolution and partly a nationalist H un garian protest against foreign invasion. Bela Kun not only appointed People’s Commissars and proclaimed a Soviet Republic, but also sent forces to stop the advancing Rumanian and Czechoslovak armies. The attempt failed and the victorious Rumanians entered Budapest and occupied and looted the capital between August 8 and November 14, 1919. When they evacuated the city a new government was formed representing the old conservative elements and headed by Admiral Horthy. With the danger of communism on the Danube ended, the Allies in vited the H orthy regime on D ecem ber 1, 1919, to send delegates to Paris to conclude a peace. The delegates tried to minimize the loss of territory by de m anding plebiscites in all disputed regions. T he Allies replied on M ay 6, J9 2 0 , that plebiscites were superiluous because they “would not give results substan tially different from those at which they had arrived after a m inute study of the ethnographic conditions and national aspirations. The wish of the peoples was expressed in O ctober and Novem ber 1918 when the Dual M onarchy disap peared under the blows inflicted by the Powers, and when long-oppressed popu lations welcomed their Rumanian, Yugo-slav, and Czecho-Slovak brethren.” 5 The Hungarians had no alternative but to submit, and on June 4, 1920, they signed the Trianon Treaty. In the north they ceded the provinces of Slovakia and Ruthenia to the new Czechoslovak state. In the Balkans they sur rendered extensive territories to both Yugoslavia and Rumania. Yugoslavia re ceived Croatia and Slavonia without any dispute. This transfer had been pre pared by the activities of the Yugoslav Committee during the war and by the vote of the Croatian Diet on October 29, 1918.* Yugoslavia also received from Hungary a triangular piece of the H un garian plain to the north of the Danube. This consisted of three districtsBaranja, Bachka, and the B anat— and was given the title of the Voivodina, or Duchy, after being incorporated in Yugoslavia. The frontiers of the Voivodina were drawn further to the north than the ethnic distribution of the Serbs war ranted. As a result, about 200,000 Magyars found themselves under Yugoslav rule. T he explanation is to be found in strategic considerations. A strictly ethnic line would have run so close to Belgrade that it would have left the capital almost as vulnerable as it had been before the war. In the eastern portion of the Voivodina, that is, in the Banat, the Serbi
* See Chapter 32.


578 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
ans came into conflict with the Rum anians. The latter had been promised the entire Banat in the secret 1916 treaty under which they entered the war. But the Allies now maintained that the treaty had become invalid because Rum ania had signed a separate peace with the C entral Powers in 1917. Furtherm ore, the Serbians claimed the western part of the Banat on justifiable ethnic grounds. As a m atter of fact, the area was populated by such a mixture of Serbs, M ag yars, Germans, and Rum anians that it was impossible to draw a frontier line that would not leave considerable minorities on either side. In the end, the frontier was adjusted in such a way as to balance the num ber of Serbians awarded to Rum ania against the number of Rumanians awarded to Yugoslavia. The result was that the western third of the Banat went to Yugoslavia and the remainder to Rumania. R um ania acquired from H ungary the province of Transylvania as well as a portion of the Banat. There was no serious question about Transylvania because the Rum anians of that province had rejected all offers of autonomy and had declared in favor of union with Bucharest. Furtherm ore, Rumanian troops had already occupied Transylvania, so that the Trianon Treaty merely gave legal recognition to a fait accompli. In addition to the acquisition of these territories from Hungary, as noted earlier, Rum ania also obtained Bukovina from A ustria and Bessarabia from Russia. The net result of the Trianon Treaty was that Hungary was left with 28.6 per cent of her form er territory. The rem ainder had been divided as fol lows: 31.5 per cent to Rum ania (Transylvania and two thirds of the Banat); 19.6 per cent to Yugoslavia (Croatia, Slavonia, and one third of the Banat); and 18.9 per cent to Czechoslovakia (Slovakia and Ruthenia), The remaining 1.4 per cent consisted of miniscule cessions to Austria,, Poland, and Italy, the latter being the Fiume city area.
NEUILLY TREATY
M ilitary defeat forced far-reaching changes upon B ulgaria as well as upon the other Central Powers. We saw in the last chapter that King Ferdinand and Prem ier Radoslavov did not have enthusiastic popular backing when they took the country into the war. As the fighting dragged on, discontent spread widely, particularly because of the conduct of the G erm an allies. The latter had between 16,000 and 18,000 men stationed on the Bulgarian front, but by various means they drew rations for over 100,000 men, thus stripping the country of foodstuffs. Furtherm ore, the Germ ans refused to allow Bulgaria to occupy n o rth ern D ob ru ja in 1916, w hen it was taken from R um ania, and set up instead a condominium. Consequently, popular antipathy grew against the Central Powers and against Ferdinand and Radoslavov, who had ranged the country on their side. In 1918 Bulgaria began· to suffer military reverses for the first time after the easy victories following intervention. Public unrest reached such pro portions that Ferdinand felt constrained to make some concessions. On June 21, 1918, he dism issed the R adoslavov m inistry and appointed in its place .a


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 579
coalition cabinet of Democrats and Liberals headed by Alexander Malinov, head of the form er party. As described in C hapter 29, the crisis cam e in midSeptember, 1918, when the front crumbled and the demoralized troops began deserting. On September 29 Premier M alinov accepted an armistice. Four days earlier Ferdinand had released the Agrarian party leader, Alexander Stambuliski, from prison, where he had been sent in 1915 because of his opposition to intervention. Ferdinand hoped that Stambuliski would use his influence to calm the mutinous troops and check the disintegration of the army. Instead, Stambuliski proclaim ed a republic on September 27 and m arched on Sofia at the head of the disaffected soldiers. He was defeated by combined loyalist and German forces and compelled to go into hiding. N evertheless F erd in an d ’s position by this time had becom e patently untenable. The national catastrophe had completely discredited both him and his policies. On the insistence of the party leaders he abdicated on October 4 and made his way to Germ any, where he was soon joined by Radoslavov. Ferdinand was succeeded by his twenty-four-year-old son, who ascended the throne as Boris III. Thus ended the reign of an able but utterly unscrupulous and inordinately am bitious ruler who sought to m ake Bulgaria great in order to satisfy his own megalomania but who instead brought disaster upon himself and upon his country. On November 19, 1918, the M alinov cabinet gave way to a coalition governm ent including the com paratively radical Agrarians and Socialists as well as the traditional party leaders. Elections held on August 17, 1919, reflected the drastic changes in the political balance that had occurred during the course of the war. The Agrarians received one third of the total votes, the traditional parties about two fifths, and the Communists one fifth. Since the Agrarians were the strongest, Stambuliski organized a new coalition government on Octo ber 6 with the support of two of the traditional parties. Shortly afterward he headed a delegation to Paris to negotiate the peace settlement. The Bulgarians, like the Hungarians, dem anded plebiscites in disputed areas in order to reduce the loss of territory. The Allies paid no attention, for in drawing the new frontiers they were motivated by strategic rather than ethnic considerations. Their aim was to deprive Bulgaria of certain key areas that would make it difficult for her to launch another offensive war. Accordingly, the Neuilly Treaty (November 27, 1919) restored the D obruja to Rumania and gave Yugoslavia four small but strategic salients totaling 975 square miles. These salients left the Yugoslavs in control of certain passes and also pushed the Bulgarian frontier away from the vital Belgrade-Saloniki railroad. The treaty also required Bulgaria to cede W estern Thrace to Greece. N or did ethnic considerations enter into this decision, for the population of the province was extremely mixed. The most numerous were the Greeks, Bulgari ans, and Turks, but none of them constituted a majority. Thus the motive of the Allies again was strategic— to interpose a barrier between Bulgaria and the Straits. Nevertheless, the Bulgarians resented this loss most of all because it left them without any outlet to the Aegean, whereas Greece already had gained the


580 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
prize ports of Saloniki and Kavalla during the Balkan W ars. Greece did offer to make available a trade outlet at a suitable Aegean port with appropriate harbor and rail facilities and with duty-free handling of commodities. These terms would have secured for Bulgaria virtually the same advantages as if the port had belonged to her. But there remained the intangible yet powerful factor of prestige. Furtherm ore, the Bulgarians did not wish to weaken their territo rial claim by accepting the proffered trade outlet. Hence they rejected the Greek offer, and the issue of an outlet to the Aegean remained a bone of contention between the two countries throughout the postwar years. In addition to these territorial losses Bulgaria was compelled to re nounce compulsory military service, to limit her army to 33,000 men, and to pay an indemnity of 450 million dollars over a period of thirty-eight years. All in all, these terms were generally considered by most Bulgarians to be unjustifi ably severe. They felt this the more strongly because they maintained that Ferdinand and his ministers had been primarily responsible for the interven tion on the side of the Central Powers. But now that Ferdinand was gone, why should the new Bulgaria be compelled to pay for the sins of the old? Why should Bulgarians be compelled to live under Greek and Rum anian and Yugo slav rule, in blatant disregard of the principle of se'f-determination? These griev ances were exaggerated and kept alive by some 250,000 Bulgarian-speaking refugees who had come from the neighboring countries between 1913 and 1925. Thus revisionism became in the postwar years a political football within Bul garia artd a perennial source of friction between her and her neighbors.
SEVRES TREATY
The arrangement of a peace settlement with Turkey was complicated by the fact that during the war the Allies had concluded four secret treaties for the dismemberment of that country. Two of these have already been mentioned: the Treaty of Constantinople of April 10, 1915, giving Constantinople and the Straits to Russia, and the Treaty of London of April 26, 1915, assigning south western Asia Minor to Italy as her zone of influence. In addition, there were the Sykes-Picot Treaty of May 16, 1916, defining the m anner in which Britain and France would divide the A rab provinces of Turkey between themselves, and finally the Saint-Jean-de-M aurienne Treaty of April 21, 1917, allotting to Italy a larger share of Asia Minor. Thus the effect of these secret treaties was to leave to the Turks only north-central Asia M inor. Furtherm ore, the Greeks also had large am bitions in Asia M inor, especially in the Smyrna region, where G reek settlements had existed since antiquity. T he 1917 revolution in Russia raised certain obstacles in the way of the secret treaties. The Bolsheviks not only repudiated the treaties but also pub lished the texts, thereby arousing considerable opposition to their provisions in certain Allied circles. The intervention of the U nited States also created dif ficulties because of the glaring contradiction between the secret treaties and the Fourteen Points. The latter provided that purely Turkish territory should re


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 581
main independent and that the non-Turkish parts of the O ttom an Empire should be assured “an absolutely unmolested opportunity of autonomous develop m ent.” But when it came to the actual definition of the Turkish peace treaty, the United States was not able to exert much influence. Thus the Sèvres Treaty of August 10, 1920, incorporated most of the provisions of the secret treaties. The articles concerning the Asiatic part of the empire need not detain us, except to note that B ritain and France, in accordance with the term s of the secret treaties, received Palestine, Syria, and M esopotamia as mandates. Rus sia, struggling with civil w ar and Allied intervention, and having repudiated the secret treaties, did not obtain Constantinople and the Straits. Instead, the treaty provided that this strategic region should be left under Turkish sover eignty, though the Straits were to be demilitarized and placed under interna tional control. The Dodecanese Islands were ceded to Italy, who had occupied them since her war against Turkey in 1911-1912. Finally, the treaty provided for im portant concessions to Greece which were to have far-reaching conse quences for the Balkan Peninsula. The Greek premier, Eleutherios Venizelos, had proved to be extraordi narily persuasive and successful at the Peace Conference. One reason was his diplom atic skill and his personal prestige as a cham pion of the Allies from the very first days. A nother reason was that Venizelos kept the Greek army intact, and even increased it, at a time when the Allied powers were rapidly demobiliz ing. Thus Venizelos was able to counter and overcome Italian opposition to his claims in Asia M inor. One of his main objectives was to acquire Smyrna and the hinterland, but the Italians were strongly opposed because this region had been allotted to them by the Saint-Jean-de-M aurienne Treaty. When O r lando boycotted the Peace Conference during the Fiume crisis, Venizelos took advantage of his absence to secure the Suprem e C ouncil’s perm ission to occupy Sm yrna. G reek troops landed at the city on May 15, 1919, and occupied the hinterland. Having the advantage of actual possession, Venizelos was able to secure a clause in the Sèvres T reaty providing that Sm yrna and its environs should be adm inistered by G reece for five years, and that the final disposition of the territory should then be decided by a plebiscite. The Sèvres Treaty also allotted to the Greeks Eastern Thrace, which, together with W estern Thrace obtained from Bulgaria, gave them control of the entire Aegean coast to the gates of Constantinople. Finally, the treaty also gave Greece many of the islands in the Aegean, including Imbros and Tenedos at the entrance to the Straits. The two powers which had gained the most by the Sèvres Treaty were B ritain and G reece. T he latter country had obtained all th at it w anted in the Balkans from Bulgaria, and in the Aegean Sea and Asia Minor from Turkey. B ut the lion’s share w ent to B ritain, who strengthened her position in the east ern M editerranean to an unprecedented degree. She had obtained Palestine and M esopotamia as m andates; she had legalized her hold over Cyprus and Egypt; she had consolidated her primacy in the A rabian Peninsula; and, through the demilitarization of the Straits, she had become the mistress of Constantinople and the Black Sea, with all that th at implied for Russia as well as for Turkey.


582 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
This Draconian treaty was based on the assumption that Turkey was powerless and had no choice but to accept the loss, not only of the A rab prov inces, but also of the Smyrna enclave and Eastern Thrace. At this time this as sumption appeared reasonable. The population was war-weary, having fought almost continuously since 1911 against the Italians, the Balkan League, and the Allies. W hen the w ar ended, some of the educated Turks believed that the only hope was for their country to become an Am erican m andate. In Constan tinople Sultan M ohammed VI had succeeded his brother, M ohammed V, on July 4, 1918. But he was the helpless and pliant tool of the Allies and did as he was told. The Am erican representative in Constantinople reported on Janu ary 4, 1919: “A t the present time ordinary government activities of country are badly organized. Tewfick Pasha cabinet contains no prominent or really able men and has no real hold on country. . . . Orders issued by Constantinople therefore often receive but scant consideration in the provinces and public safety is very poor throughout A sia M inor. . . . G eneral attitude am ong Turks is one of hopelessness, waiting the outcom e of the Peace C onference.” (i O ut of this apathy and demoralization developed a powerful national ist movement. The Allies themselves provided the impetus when they landed Italian troops in southwestern Asia M inor in April, 1919, and G reek troops in Smyrna a month later. These infringements upon the Turkish homeland pro voked a nationalist reaction which was superbly led by M ustafa Kemal. At the same time that the Turks were experiencing this revival the Greeks were under going a profound crisis which weakened their army in Asia M inor. And since the enforcement of the Sèvres Treaty depended largely upon this army, the Turks were able to accomplish what none of the other Central Powers had dared even to try. They repudiated the treaty, defied the Allies, drove the Greeks into the Aegean, and emerged trium phantly with a more favorable peace settlem ent and with a new republic in place of the old and discredited O ttom an E m pire.
TU RK ISH REVIVAL
T he G eorge W ashington of. m odern T urkey is M ustafa Kemal, later known as A taturk, or Forem ost Turk. Kemal had participated in the Young Turk revolt of 1908, though not as one of the top leaders. During W orld W ar I he distinguished himself as a military leader in the D ardanelles and at Syria. But again he did not rise to the highest posts, being at odds with the Young Turk clique that had embroiled Turkey in the war. His opportunity came at the end of the war, when his country lay helpless before the victorious Allies. He recognized the necessity for surrendering the non-Turkish parts of the em pire but he refused to accept the Allied plans for partitioning Anatolia. Having made himself obnoxious in Constantinople with his defiant nationalism, he was sent to eastern Asia M inor as inspector of the Third Army. This appointment proved to be the genesis of the Turkish nationalist movement. D uring his tour of inspection in the heart of Asia M inor Kemal saw more clearly than ever before that the future of the nation required the repudiation


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 583
of the imperial regime in Constantinople. His aim, in his own words, was to organize and lead the people “against the O ttom an regime, against the O tto man Sultan, against the Caliph, and against everything M ohammedan. The whole Turkish nation and the whole Turkish army had to be won over to the idea of revolution.” 7 Accordingly, Kemal traveled about the country in the summer of 1919, organizing popular support for his nationalist movement. Everywhere he met with enthusiastic response, especially because of the intense national reaction to the landing of Greek troops in Smyrna a few months earlier in the spring of that year. By September, 1919, Kemal was able to summon a nationalist con gress which adopted the N ational Pact. This docum ent enunciated six principles, including self-determination, abolition of capitulations, security for Constanti nople, and a new Straits regime. T he success of K em al’s efforts was dem on strated when his followers won a m ajority in the O ctober, 1919, elections. Parliam ent met in C onstantinople in Jan u ary , 1920, and im m ediately adopted the National Pact. The Allies retaliated by occupying Constantinople on M arch 16 in order to check the spread of the nationalist agitation. But this move stimulated the nationalist cause as much as the landing of G reek troops had done in the pre vious year. Kemal now made the final break with the Allies and with the old imperial order. He summoned the nationalist deputies to meet in April, 1920, in A nkara, a town in central Anatolia. There they convened as the G rand N a tional Assembly and on April 23, 1920, they denounced the Constantinople regime and established a provisional governm ent with M ustafa Kemal as presi dent. This was the government which henceforth commanded the loyalty and support of most of the Turkish people. With Kemal at the head, it organized and led to a successful conclusion the national struggle against foreign inter vention. The final victory was due not only to the national awakening but also to a rem arkably successful diplomatic campaign which strengthened immensely the position of the nationalists and made feasible their self-appointed task. In essence, Kemal exploited the serious differences among the Allies to conclude separate treaties with them, thereby isolating the Greeks and paving the way for their defeat. Kemal signed the first pact with the Italians, who were the most dissatisfied with the terms of the Sèvres Treaty. They had not obtained any m andates, as had Britain and France. W orse still, they had lost the rich Smyrna area to the Greeks, even though it had been promised to them by the Saint-Jean-de-M aurienne T reaty. It is not surprising, then, th at Italy should have struck back at her rivals by reaching an accord with the Turks on M arch 13, 1921. In return for certain economic concessions in southeastern Asia M inor, Italy agreed to withdraw her forces from that area and to give diplo matic support to the Turks in their efforts to regain Smyrna and Eastern Thrace. The French soon followed the Italian example. They were motivated partly by the desire to protect their precarious position in Syria and partly by resentm ent against the British, who had seized the lion’s share of the booty in


584 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the N ear East. On October 20, 1921, the French signed a pact with the Turks defining the frontier between Syria and Turkey and settling various railroad and other economic issues. This agreement was particularly significant because it revealed a definite split in the Levant policies of the two leading Allied powers, Britain and France. Meanwhile, the Turks had also been negotiating with the Russians. The relations between the two at this time were quite different from what they had usually been in the past. Instead of being opposed to each other, they now were almost forced to cooperate because they had a common enemy, G reat Britain. Britain occupied Constantinople and the Straits and supported the Greeks in Asia M inor. Britain also had been a leading interventionist power against Bolshevik Russia and she still threatened southern Russia by virtue of her control of the Straits and the Black Sea. It was only natural, therefore, for Turkey and Russia to sign a treaty of friendship and virtual alliance on M arch 16, 1921. Both parties pledged themselves not to recognize any treaty imposed on either by force. They defined their common frontier in the Caucasus, Batum going to Russia and Kars and A rdahan to Turkey, They also agreed to entrust to a special conference, com posed of delegates from all the riverain* states, the drafting of the international status of the Black Sea and the Straits. After the signing of the treaty, Russia began to furnish arms and money to the Turkish nationalists. She calculated that Turkey thereby might go Bolshevik. And even if that did not happen, T urkey at least would be able to fight m ore effectively against the common enemy. The Turks, on their part, accepted the Russian aid as a necessity but took care to check any communist infiltration. Emissaries from Russia who sought to propagate the new proletarian gospel mysteriously disappeared on their arrival in Turkey. This series of treaties effected a veritable diplomatic revolution in the N ear East. Turkey and Russia now presented a united front, while the Allies were irrevocably divided. Only Britain and Greece were left to enforce the terms of the Sèvres Treaty. And Britain, because of her world-wide commit ments and the state of public opinion at home, could do no more than main tain her position in Constantinople and the Straits. In other words, the Greeks now were left alone to face the growing Turkish nationalist upsurge in Asia M inor. And this at a time when they were being steadily weakened by political dissension and by the strain of a decade of continual warfare.
G REEK CRISIS
While the Turks were staging their rem arkable comeback the Greeks were floundering in a crisis which led almost inexorably to catastrophe. The tap ro o t of their difficulty was V enizelos’ original decision in favor of an A nato
* Because this would exclude the Western powers that both Russia and Turkey
n n n n « l‘(l.


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 585
lian adventure which his country could not possibly see through to a successful conclusion. Greece lacked the resources needed for such an undertaking and the Greek colonies in Asia M inor were not strong enough to turn the balance. Venizelos himself at the beginning of W orld W ar I considered any claims upon Asia M inor territory to be visionary. “The Greeks in Turkey are so scattered,” he pointed out on November 27, 1914, “that we cannot expect any compensa tion from that quarter.” 8 Only six weeks later the same Venizelos had completely changed his mind. One reason was that he had learned in the interval that plans for O tto man partition were being discussed and that Italy was claiming the Smyrna re gion, where many Greeks had lived since antiquity. A nother reason was that Sir Edw ard Grey on January 23, 1915, made Greece his famous offer of “im portant territorial concessions on the coast of Asia M inor.” 8 In return Grey proposed that Greece should cede some parts of M acedonia to Bulgaria in order to keep that country from joining the Central Powers. These developments proved sufficient to induce Venizelos to change his mind. On January 24, 1915, he prepared a historic m em orandum for the king in which he form ulated for the first time the new policy of expansion in Asia M inor. “I would not hesitate,” he wrote, “to recommend . . . the sacrifice of Kavalla, if only to save the O ttom an G reeks [of Asia M inor] and so ensure the foundation of a really big Greece. . . .” 10 Having adopted this policy, Venizelos pursued it with his customary skill and success. He brought Greece into the war on the Allied side despite the opposition of the king. He landed a G reek arm y in Sm yrna in the face of bitter Italian opposition. A nd in the peace settlem ent he got not only Smyrna but also the two Thraces. Venizelos apparently had attained his aim of “a really big G reece.” But in 1915, when G reece’s intervention in the w ar was being debated, Venizelos had received two m em oranda (January 27 and 31) which clearly pointed out the fatal flaw in his new policy. The author of these docum ents was Colonel John M etaxas, at that time acting chief of the general staff, and later to attract international attention as dictator of G reece in the 1930’s. M etaxas presented a brilliant analysis of the insuperable difficulties in the way of suc cessful intervention in Asia M inor. He noted th at out of A sia M inor’s total population of ten million, less than two million were Greeks, and they were so scattered along the seaboard th at they did not constitute a m ajority in any one district. Hence an attem pt to annex any portion of Asia M inor would re quire a long and arduous campaign in a population that would be prcdomi nantly hostile. M oreover, the physical obstacles would be immense, given the series of m ountain ranges running north and south, and the lack of roads and other means of communication. M etaxas therefore warned that a Greek army might have the advantage at the outset but that, because of the necessity of guarding its flanks and lines of com m unication, its strength would dwindle as it advanced farther into tininterior. Inevitably a point would be reached when the equilibrium would tip


5 8 6 A ge of War and Crisis: 1914■
over to the advantage of the Turks fighting on interior lines in their own coun try. T hus M etaxas foresaw a repetition of N apoleon’s experience in Russia. In fact, the distances in Russia and Asia M inor were on a similar scale. It was approxim ately 600 miles from the Niemen to Moscow com pared to 400 miles from Smyrna to A nkara and 1,000 miles from Smyrna to the eastern frontier of Turkey. In view of these factors M etaxas concluded that an expedition in Asia M inor would have no chance of success except under the following two condi tions: first, that the Allies should participate in the intervention with forces sufficient to ensure success; and second, that A natolia should be partitioned among the Alljes, or that the portion left under Turkish sovereignty should be so restricted as no longer to constitute a serious menace to the Greek position in Smyrna. We have seen that neither of these conditions prevailed when the Greek army landed in Smyrna. In fact, the situation was exactly the opposite to that which M etaxas had stipulated. The Russians were aiding the Turks openly, while the French and Italians were doing so covertly. Only the British and the Greeks were left to resist the Turkish nationalists. And since the British, be cause of domestic political considerations, could do no more than hold their ground in Constantinople and the Straits, the Greeks now had to face alone the rising wave of Turkish nationalism. Under these circumstances it was not long before M etaxas’ gloomy prophecy was tragically fulfilled. A t the same time that Greece was facing insuperable,odds in Asia M inor she was also being weakened by growing dissension at home. As noted in the last chapter, the country had been left divided by the forced abdication of King Constantine in June, 1917, and the intervention in the war the following month. These developments had divided most Greeks into two bitterly hostile fac tions, the Venizelists and the Royalists. The intensity of feeling was dem on strated when two Greek naval officers attem pted to assassinate Venizelos in Paris two days after he had signed the Sèvres Treaty. W hen Venizelos returned to A thens in the fall of 1920 after a two-year absence abroad, party strife flared up again in full violence. The precipitating event was the unfortunate death of King Alexander on October 25, 1920, from the bite of a monkey. The country at the time was in the midst of hectic cam paigning for elections scheduled for Novem ber 14. The death of the king im mediately raised the delicate question of the succession to the throne. The crown was offered to Prince Paul, C onstantine’s third son, but was refused on the ground that his father and elder brother had never renounced their rights to the throne. Thus it became clear that the main issue in the forthcoming elections would be the question of C onstantine’s return. A m onkey’s bite had brought the feud once more to a head by pitting the old adversaries against each otherConstantine versus Venizelos. The election results surprised everyone— even the most sanguine royal ists. Venizelos himself was unseated, and only 120 of his Liberals were returned to a house of 370. Venizelos did gain 52 per cent of the total vote, which, under


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 587
proportional representation, would have given him about 200 seats. Even so, the returns represented a stinging defeat for a man who had just won spectac ular triumphs at the Peace Conference. On November 17, 1920, only three months after he had signed the Sèvres Treaty, he boarded a British private yacht and went into exile. Venizelos’ defeat was as stunning as that of W inston Churchill in 1945. O ne explanation is to be found in his long absence from the G reek political scene. A nother was the inefficiency and corruption of some of the deputies he had left behind. But most im portant was the war-weariness of a country whose army had been mobilized almost continuously since the beginning of the first Balkan W ar in 1912. Undoubtedly many Greeks voted against Venizelos not because they preferred Constantine but because they wanted the soldiers to return. On December 19, 1920, Constantine returned to Athens amid popular acclaim. The chief question facing the new regime was whether or not to con tinue the intervention in Asia Minor. W hen the royalists had been in opposition they had denounced Venizelos’ foreign policy as foolhardy and adventurous. But now they chose to pursue the same policy, apparently mesmerized, as Venizelos had been, by the vision of a G reater Greece in the eastern M editer ranean. The final outcome, as M etaxas had warned, was a national disaster of the first magnitude.
G RECO-TURKISH W A R
The operations in Asia M inor began at the end of M arch, 1921. The Greek army appeared to have all the advantages at the outset, but serious w eak nesses soon became manifest. It was poorly equipped, it lacked munitions, and there were no funds in the treasury to remedy these deficiencies. Also, the officer corps was badly divided because the new regime had appointed royalist sympathizers to top posts even though many had no training in the latest mili tary techniques. At first the Greeks met little resistance because the Turkish forces were still little more than guerrilla bands. But, as M etaxas had foreseen, the farther the Greeks advanced the stiffer became the opposition. Only a single railroad was available to bring supplies from Smyrna. And the distances were so great and the population so hostile that fully two thirds of G reek manpower had to be used to guard lines and to provide transportation. Kemal allowed the Greeks to advance until they reached a battleground of his own choosing— the line of the Sakarya River where the heights of the farther bank formed an ideal defense position. The Greek commanders in structed their troops to “annihilate” the enemy and to “ advance to A nkara.” The Greek soldiers were in no position to do anything of the kind. They were exhausted by a long m arch through desert country. They were short of every kind of food except meat, which could not be cooked for lack of fuel. They were also low on gasoline and am m unition, and their horses were weak because of lack of forage. By contrast, the T urkish arm y was cntrenchcd in a strong


588 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
position, not far from its base, and was inspired with enthusiasm for the na tionalist cause. The Greeks began their attack across the river on August 24, 1921. For fourteen consecutive days they kept on attacking despite the scorching sun and the constant raids on their com m unication lines. The Turks, who were about equal in men and equipm ent, held their ground grimly. The casualties on bbth sides m ounted to almost 50 per cent of the effectives. Neither the Greeks nor the Turks could claim victory on the battlefield. But so far as the campaign was concerned, the fact that the Turks were able to stop the Greek advance represented the decisive turning point of the war. The Greeks, as M etaxas had foreseen, were now in an untenable position. They had failed to sm ash the Turkish defense and they could not hope to winter on the Sakarya line be cause of com m unication difficulties. There was no alternative but to retreat to more defensible positions. Retreat brought demoralization to the Greek ranks. They were aware of the fact that their allies had in effect deserted them. They hung on to their new positions, but their fighting spirit was gone. The num ber of deserters in creased alarmingly. Kemal held back his counteroffensive to allow the dem orali zation to proceed apace. Finally, on August 26, 1922, a full year after the Sakarya battle, he gave the order to attack. The following day the G reek lines were cut in two. The northern section, after a skillful retreat, reached the Sea of M armora and em barked almost intact for Greece. The southern section broke and ran in a wild stampede. Soldiers and civilian refugees Hocked into Smyrna. The bulk of the arm y was evacuated to the adjoining islands before Kemal, on September 9, trium phantly rode into the city. The great victory of Turkish nationalism was celebrated by setting fire to Smyrna, the hateful strong hold of Hellenism. The Athens government was staggered by the extent of the calamity. In the space of a fortnight it had lost w hat had taken three years to conquer. The tem per of the troops was such that the governm ent issued orders for de m obilization. This left the frontiers undefended, but it was hoped that demo bilization would avert a revolution and save the dynasty. However, the disaster was too great to pass without convulsions in Athens. A Revolutionary Committee was organized by Colonel Nicholas Plastiras and a large num ber of officers who had fled to the island of Chios off Asia M inor. On September 26, 1922, the committee sent an ultimatum to Athens calling for the abdication of the king. The following day the king complied, leaving his eldest son on the throne as George II. The reaction to the catastrophe was not yet completed. The committee appointed a Com mission of Inquiry to determine the responsibility for the Asia M inor debacle. T he com m ission indicted eight of C o nstantine’s principal m inisters and m ili tary advisers, who were brought to trial before an extraordinary court-m artial of eleven officers. All the accused were found guilty of sacrificing the interests of the country to party considerations. Six of the eight were sentenced to death and immediately executed. Thus fuel was added to the flames of party


Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 589
strife at a time when Greece faced the desperate problems of negotiating a peace with the victorious Turks and salvaging the million and a half hom e less refugees from A sia M inor.
LAUSANNE TREATY
Following their great victory in Asia M inor the Turks dem anded that the Greeks evacuate Eastern Thrace at once. To back up their demand they began to advance into the Straits zone. There they were confronted with British troops, and for a few days an Anglo-Turkish war seemed imminent. In the end the M udanya Armistice was concluded on October 11, 1922, and in the following m onth peace negotiations began at Lausanne. The Lausanne Conference developed into a duel between the British representative, Lord Curzon, and the Turkish representative, Ismet Pasha. Curzon endeavored with his forceful personality and debating skill to brow beat the conference into accepting his position. Ismet, who was a military m an, was unable to cope directly w ith the E nglishm an’s brilliant rhetoric. Y et he held his ground stubbornly, resorting to delaying tactics when he needed time to think and to form ulate replies. His aim was to attain to as great a degree as possible the objectives set forth in the N ational Pact. M ore specifically, he wanted territorial integrity and full independence— m eaning thereby the restoration of Eastern Thrace and the Straits, and the abolition of all foreign control over Turkish finances, minorities, justice, or anything else. These goals were not easily reached. In fact, the conference, after begin ning on November 20, 1922, broke up on February 4, 1923, because no agreement could be reached. The sittings were resumed on April 23, and finally, on July 24, the m arathon sessions ended and the Lausanne Treaty was signed. So far as the Balkan Peninsula was concerned, Eastern Thrace, in cluding Adrianople, returned to Turkey and the Imbros and Tenedos Islands near the Straits also reverted to Turkey, though the remaining Aegean Islands went to Greece. Italy retained the Dodecanese Islands, and England, Cyprus. The capitulations were abolished in return for a promise of judicial reforms, and Turkey was not required to pay reparations though she did accept treaties for the protection of minorities. On the crucial question of the Straits, the principal conflict had been between Russia and the W estern powers. Russia wanted the Straits to be closed to all warships, w hereas the W estern powers wished to be free to send a lim ited num ber of warships into the Black Sea at the price of giving Russia similar access to the M editerranean. Turkey accepted the W estern position in return for the restoration of Eastern Thrace. As a result, the agreement reached on the Straits represented a balance between Western and Turkish interests at the expense of Russia. The provisions were as follows: (1) Free dom of passage was established for m erchant vessels in peace and war. (2 ) Freedom of passage was allowed to all warships in time of peace, though no power might send a fleet into the Black Sea larger than the largest fleet


590 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
of a littoral power. This provision, it should be noted, prevented a single fleet larger than that of the Soviets from passing the Straits, but a com bina tion of hostile fleets was still permissible. (3 ) A n international Straits C om mission was established to see that the provisions concerning the passage of warships was carried out. (4 ) The shores of the Dardanelles and the Bos phorus were demilitarized but, in contrast to the Sèvres Treaty, the Sea of M arm ora was exempted from this dem ilitarization stipulation. This safe guarded Turkish security, as did also the provision allowing Turkey to close the Straits to enem y ships in a vyar in w hich she herself was belligerent. F u r therm ore, the freedom of the Straits and the security of the demilitarized zones were guaranteed jointly by Britain, France, Italy, and Japan. This regime for the Straits was to last until 1936, when it was replaced by the M ontreux Convention, which was more favorable to Turkey and Russia.* A separate agreement also reached at Lausanne on January 30, 1923, provided for the compulsory exchange of Greek and Turkish minor ities. This undertaking is of considerable significance because it altered sub stantially the ethnographic m ap of the Balkans and especially of M acedonia. It should be noted that the migrations following the Lausanne agreement were but the culmination of a series of Balkan population shifts that began with the Balkan W ars. The first occurred in 1912, when about 100,000 T urks fled before the successful armies of the Balkan League. Then with the second Balkan W ar and the Bucharest Treaty that concluded it, other mass migrations oc curred, involving approximately 50,000 Turks, 60,000 Bulgarians, and 70,000 Greeks. During 1914 the population movements continued as many people found themselves on the wrong side of the newly created frontiers. About 115,000 Moslems left Greece, another 135,000 left the other Balkan countries, and 115,000 Greeks departed from Turkish Eastern Thrace. D ur ing W orld W ar I the migratory movements ceased, though the Bulgarians expelled about 36,000 Greeks from Eastern M acedonia in 1916 when they occupied that region. With the end of the war the migrations resumed, the largest being the voluntary exchange of Greek and Bulgarian minorities pro vided for under the Neuilly Treaty, and the compulsory exchange of Greek and Turkish m inorities required by the agreem ent reached at L ausanne. It is estimated that 53,000 Bulgarians emigrated from Greece and 30,000 Greeks left Bulgaria. The Greco-Turkish exchange was of an altogether different magnitude, involving some 400,000 Turks and 1,300,000 Greeks. Population shifts of such dimensions involved a tremendous amount of dislocation and suffering. Ancient communities were uprooted in the name of nationalism and resettled in strange and frequently barren and inhospitable surroundings. T he A sia M inor G reeks h ad perhaps the m ost difficult time, in adjusting, partly because of their numbers but also because there were fewer opportunities in poor and overcrowded Greece than in Turkey, where they h ad dom inated econom ic life.


On the other hand, the population transfers did reduce the size of minority groups in the Balkans and thereby removed a leading source of friction. Very few Greeks were left in Turkey, with the exception of Con stantinople, where the compulsory exchange had not been applicable. Simi larly, in Bulgaria the Greek settlements were reduced to negiligible propor tions. In W estern T hrace the Turks still constituted about 30 per cent of the total population, having been allowed to remain in return for the similar privi lege extended to the C onstantinople Greeks. The greatest change occurred in Macedonia, where there now was much greater ethnic homogeneity than at any time in the past. This was particularly true because m any of the Asia M inor Greeks settled in sections of G reek M acedonia evacuated by Turks and Bulgars. According to an ethnographic map of the League of Nations Refugees’ Settlement Commission, whereas in 1912 the population of the portion of Macedonia now belonging to Greece was 42.6 per cent Greek, 39.4 per cent M oslem, 9.9 per cent Bulgarian, and 8.1 per cent m iscellaneous (including the Saloniki Jew s), by 1926 it had become 88.8 per cent Greek, 0.1 per cent M oslem, 5.1 per cent Bulgarian, and 6 per cent miscellaneous (again including the Saloniki Jew s). In conclusion, the Lausanne Treaty obviously represented a great victory for Turkish nationalism. With the exception of the Straits provisions, Ism et had gained alm ost all the points set forth in the N ational Pact. G reece had suffered a disastrous and presum ably final setback to her Megale Idea. But she did come out with a net gain consisting of W estern Thrace and the A egean Islands. A nd if H ellenism had been extirpated in Asia M inor it had thereby been consolidated in M acedonia. As for great-power interests in the Balkans, Britain had won a victory in securing the demilitarization of the Straits and the right to send her warships through that waterway. The strong est opponents that the British encountered on this issue had been the Rus sians, who, for obvious reasons, wanted the Straits closed to all foreign war ships. Consequently, in the postwar years they were as opposed to the new Straits regime as were the Turks.
THE NEW BALKANS
The territorial changes effected in the Balkans by the various treaties may be summarized as follows:
Peace Settlement: 1918-1923 591


592 A ge of War and Crisis: 1914
A part from Turkey, Rumania remained the largest Balkan state after the war, as she had been before. She more than doubled in territory and population as a result of her acquisitions from Russia, Austria-Hungary, and Bulgaria. But Rifmania faced the problem of sizable minorities amounting to 27 per cent of the total population. Furtherm ore, her extraordinary gains had been made possible because of the power vacuum that prevailed with the disappearance of the Germ an, Russian, and Austro-Hungarian empires. When Russia and G erm any revived in the 1930’s under new regimes R um ania’s position became untenable. Thus she lost most of her newly acquired terri tory at the beginning of W orld W ar II and regained only a portion at the end of that war. Serbia gained the most on a percentage basis, almost tripling in area and population. But Yugoslavia also faced serious problems as a result of her expansion, outstanding being the conflict with Italy in the Adriatic and the friction between the Serbs and the Croats over the question of the form of government. Greece also gained substantially, finally realizing her irre dentist aspirations with the exception of the Dodecanese Islands and Cyprus and her claims to Southern Albania. Turkey lost the most so far as territories were concerned. But in the end she gained because of the homogeneity and unity following her trans form ation from a multinational empire to a nation-state. Furtherm ore, the relations between Turkey and the Balkan states changed basically in charac ter because Turkey now definitely gave up any thoughts of regaining her former European provinces. She was satisfied to have retained the Straits and surrounding area, and she now concentrated her energies on developing her Anatolian heartland. Bulgaria was left as the sole revisionist power in the Balkans, having fallen from second to last place in the Balkan hierarchy. The influx of refugees from M acedonia and the activities of their 1MRO organization made irredentism a prime issue in the interw ar years. Just as the defeat in the sec ond Balkan W ar had driven Bulgaria into the camp of the Central Powers in 1915, so now the defeat in W orld W ar I was to lead Bulgaria to the side of the Axis Powers in 1941. Having examined the various treaties that concluded W orld W ar I we will analyze in the following chapter the new political, economic, and so cial factors that determined the course of Balkan history during the interwar period.


3 1 . The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939
T
i h i ; B a l k a n c o u n t r i e s began the postw ar era with every promise of a bright future. Millions of Rum anian and South Slav peas ants had been freed from foreign im perial rijle. It is true th at new m inorities appeared, consisting now of the defeated Bulgarians and Hungarians. But these were of minor significance com pared with the massive blocs of subject peoples in the prewar m ultinational empires. The Balkan frontiers conformed to the principle of the self-determination of peoples to a greater degree than at any time in the past. The war years and those immediately following also witnessed land distribution on an unprecedented scale. In every Balkan country the large estates, which comprised a substantial proportion of the total arable land, were divided among the landless and dwarf peasants. The only exception was Bulgaria, where small holdings already prevailed. But even there the few large estates were broken up. Thus the Balkan peasants, who had freed them selves from serfdom and coercive labor during the nineteenth century, now gained possession of the land they worked. In this m anner two revolutionary principles were to a large degree realized: “T he self-determ ination of peoples” and “ L and to those who till it.” It was naturally expected that these developments would promote political harm ony and social stability. In actual fact, the outcome was political crisis and social conflict. In this chapter we shall analyze the factors determining Balkan politics in the period between wars and accounting for the unhappy denouem ent.
ECO N O M IC TRENDS
Land Distribution. The Balkan countries during the interwar years remained overwhelmingly agricultural, and their populations remained corre spondingly agrarian. The outstanding experience of these peasant masses during the years immediately following W orld W ar I was the acquisition of
593


594 A ge of War and Crisis: 1914■
private plots as a result of sweeping land reforms. Various factors were responsible for the radical land distribution. One was the nationalistic urge to divide among the long-oppressed R um anian and South Slav peasants the estates of foreign landowners, such as the Magyars in Transylvania and the Russians in Bessarabia. A nother factor was the widespread feeling that so cial justice for the peasants was long overdue. They had borne the brunt of the war and they now deserved to be given an equitable share of the national wealth. Econom ic necessity was also involved in the case of the land given to the destitute refugees who flocked into Bulgaria and Greece. But the over riding motivation behind land reform was undoubtedly the fear of revolution. A fter six years of almost continual fighting the Balkan peoples were warweary and disaffected. The great upheaval in Russia and the spread of Bolshevism to Hungary and other parts of Central Europe raised the specter of a vast revolutionary wave sweeping over the Balkan Peninsula. This in duced the landowners and the ruling political circles to enact land reform in the hope that it would function as a lightning conductor during the revolu tionary storms. The above factors explained the thoroughgoing m anner in which land was expropriated and divided. In Yugoslavia one out of every four peasants received some land. Even in Bulgaria, where large estates were a rarity, some 6 per cent of the arable land was distributed. In Rum ania the percentage m ounted to 21 and in Greece to 38. The high figure in the case of Greece presumably arose from the mass exodus of Turkish landowners from the newly acquired provinces.* • This drastic distribution of land among the Balkan peasants has been criticized on the grounds that it reduced productivity and was economically unsound. This criticism is irrelevant because the reform s were politically motivated and politically inevitable. Econom ic considerations could not and did not enter into the picture. Population Pressure. The breakup of the large estates did not solve the problems of the Balkan peasantry. Agriculture rem ained in a pre carious state during the interwar years. One of the basic reasons was the pressure of a rapidly increasing population. The Balkans today are passing through the same phase of great population growth that W estern Europe ex perienced during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Originally W estern E urope had the same dem ographic pattern as the rest of the world, th at is, a high birth rate and a correspondingly high death rate, leaving a stationary or only slightly expanding population. In the eighteenth century this tradi tional pattern suddenly changed. The death rate dropped sharply because of medical advances, hygienic measures, and improved nutrition. A fter a con siderable interval the birth rate also dropped down to approxim ately the new death rate, apparently because of conscious social restriction. The lag be
* Details of land distribution in each Balkan country are given in the releva chapters below.


tween the fall in the death rate and the subsequent fall in the birth rate pro duced the unprecedented growth of population in W estern E urope during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In the Balkan Peninsula, and throughout Eastern Europe, the de cline in the death rate occurred in the latter half of the nineteenth century. B ut a corresponding drop in the birth rate has not yet developed. Conse quently, the Balkan countries today far exceed W estern Europe in rate of population growth. Despite this fact, W estern Europe still has a denser pop ulation in relation to area than do the Balkan countries. On the other hand, a much larger percentage of the Balkan peoples are dependent upon agri culture th an is the case with the populations of the industrialized W est. T he net result is that more people subsist on each unit of arable land in the Balkans than in W estern Europe. The table on page 596 shows that population pressure per unit of arable land was much greater in the Balkans than in most W estern European countries. This pressure, which was continually increasing because of the persistently high birth rates, fundam entally affected the character of Balkan agriculture. It caused the small peasant plots to be divided and redivided am ong the num erous sons to the point where the m ajority of holdings in each Balkan country became too small to support a family. The difficulty was aggravated by the fact that each peasant commonly held several widely scattered parcels of land rather than one plot. This parcelization wasted much land in the form of boundaries and paths, and also made impossible the in troduction of rational productive methods. Thus the average Balkan peasant, if he had not been obliged by economic pressure to give up his land, owned several parcels, each a fraction of a hectare in area and the total quite in adequate for his family needs. This m eant that every Balkan country in the interw ar period suffered from rural overpopulation. M ore people were engaged in agriculture than were needed for the prevailing type of cultivation. It has been estimated that in 1930 no less than 61.5 per cent of the rural population in Yugoslavia was “surplus,” 53 per cent in Bulgaria, 51.4 per cent in R um ania, and 50.3 per cent in Greece.1 These appallingly high figures, it should be noted, were chronic. They did not represent passing unemployment as in the case of the W estern countries during the depression years. In other words, the majority of the people in the Balkan villages were not needed. In fact, they were an outright burden. If perchance they had disappeared overnight the remaining minority would have been able to carry on the work and would have had more left to eat. Such was the tragic plight and bleak future of most of the Balkan peasantry. L ow Productivity. H eavy population pressure on the land is not necessarily incompatible with agricultural prosperity. The Netherlands, for example, had 81.7 people dependent upon agriculture per square kilometer of “arable-equivalent” land in 1930 com pared to 79.7 in the case of Ru
The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 595


596 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
“ D. Kirk, Europe’s Population in the Interwar Years (Geneva, 1946), pp. 263 ft. *Ibid.
0Based on W. E. Moore, Economic Demography of Eastern and Southern Europe (Geneva, 1945) p. 26; H. L. Roberts, Rumania: Political Problems o f an Agrarian State (New Haven, Conn., 1951) pp. 355 ff.; J. Tomasevich, Peasants, Politics and Eco nomic Change in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1955); S. D. Zagoroff, The Agricultural Economy o f the Danubian Countries 1935-45 (Stanford, Calif., 1955), p. 11; Economic Development in S. E. Europe (London, 1945); South-Eastern Europe: A Political and Economic Survey (London, 1939), pp. 125, 139, 156, 167. Although the above sources give different figures concerning population percentages dependent on agriculture, all give much higher percentages for the Balkan states than for the others. * “Arable-equivalent” is a statistical device to achieve a rough comparability between different types of land (arable, pasture, vineyards, etc.) used for agricultural purposes. This is necessary for meaningful comparison because a sq. km. of pasture obviously is not equivalent to a sq. km. of arable. * Moore, op. cit., pp. 197 ff. Different figures on density of population dependent on each unit of arable land are given in Tomasevich, op. cit., p. 309; Economic Develop ment in S. E. Europe, p. 26; A. Pepelasis, “Socio-Cultural Barriers to the Economic De velopment of Greece” (University of California, Berkeley, unpublished doctoral disserta tion, 1955), p. 34, and Report o f the FAO Mission for Greece (Washington, D.C., March, 1947), p. 134. But again all sources agree that population pressure per unit of arable land is greater in the Balkans than in most Western European countries.
mania. Yet the income and the living standards of the Dutch farmers were infinitely higher than those of the R um anian. T he explanation is to be found in the much higher productivity of the Dutch farmers. Thus agricultural pros perity depends upon productivity as well as population pressure. But the peasants of every Balkan country operate at a very low level of productivity. In general, one Balkan peasant grows food sufficient for one and a half per sons, w hereas the ratio of the W estern E u ro p ean farm er is one to four. T he contrast betw een B alkan and W estern E uropean agricultural productivity is revealed m ore specifically in the following table.


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 597
Source: Moore, op. cit., p. 35.
We may conclude that the basic problem facing Balkan agriculture is the com bination of low productivity and m ounting population pressure. This constitutes a truly vicious circle because rural overpopulation perpet uates low productivity. It does so because low income means poor nutrition and health which im pair the efficiency of labor. Low income also leaves no surplus for investment and thus blocks economic development. And rural overpopulation leads to fragm entation of plots, which makes efficient cul tivation impossible. Thus the Balkan peasants, like those of other underdeveloped regions, found themselves on a treadm ill during the interwar years. They could not emigrate in large num bers because of the barriers raised by the United States and the British dominions. They could not move to their own cities because industry was not sufficiently developed to absorb a large influx from the country. The alternative was to increase productivity as the W estern farmers had done during the preceding two centuries. But this required capital and technical knowledge, neither of which the Balkan peasantry possessed. External Pressures. In addition to these difficulties arising from domestic conditions, the Balkan states had to contend with severe economic pressures from without. One was the agricultural protectionism adopted by most of the European industrial states during the interwar years. This re duced substantially the m arket for Balkan agricultural products. Another ex ternal pressure was that of the overseas cereal exporters who, with their vast land resources and mechanized techniques, were able easily to undersell the Balkan peasants. Finally the world depression that began in 1929 hurt the Balkan economies especially severely because the prices of raw materials dropped much more than those of m anufactured goods. This created a price scissors which is evident in the table on page 598.


598 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
“ The price scissors was slight in Greece because that country imported much grain which fell in price almost as much as the tobacco that Greece exported. Source: The Balkan States: 1. Economic (London, 1936), p. 65.
Role of Governments. The Balkan governments did little to relieve the plight of the peasants during the interwar years. They apparently as sumed that since the peasants had been given land they could now be left to their own devices. This assumption was quite unjustified although under standable. In actual fact the Balkan peasants urgently needed government aid in various fields. They needed credit facilities to improve their plots and equipment, but the government credit agencies set such security requirements that only the small minority of medium and wealthy peasants could qualify. The rem ainder were forced to turn to the village usurers, who charged rates as high as 200 per cent and more. This was one of the reasons why the Balkan peasantry sank progressively deeper into debt during these years. The peasants also needed instruction in m odern farming methods in order to exploit their plots efficiently. M any of them were too bound by tradition to accept such instruction. But those who were not could turn to few agencies for guidance. None of the agricultural ministries of the various Balkan countries received adequate funds to provide the necessary services. In Yugoslavia, for example, the ministry of agriculture received only 1.06 per cent of the total governm ent appropriations for the fiscal year 1929-1930. T hat year, it should be noted, was the most prosperous of the entire inter war period. Two years later the ministry received only 0.76 per cent of the government appropriations. The situation was very similar in the rem ainder of the peninsula. A nd this in a region where about three fourths of the popu lation depended on agriculture for its livelihood. The Balkan governments failed in various other fields to give the peasants a proper return for the taxes they paid. M ost im portant were edu cation, public health, and transportation. In fact, an analysis of Balkan tax


systems shows that peasants, whose per capita income was far below that of the city dwellers, were forced to bear most of the tax load. This was done by levying light taxes on incomes and heavy taxes on mass consum ption articles. Incom e taxes in the various Balkan countries provided 19 to 28 per cent of total tax revenues while taxes on com m odities supplied 55 to 65 per cent. It is estimated that at least 50 per cent of the cash disbursement of the Balkan peasants was taken by indirect taxes on necessities such as clothing, boots, salt, sugar, matches, tobacco, fertilizers, agricultural implements, and petro leum. In Yugoslavia, for example, agricultural machinery cost three times more than in Central and W estern Europe, and fertilizers two and a half times more. The natural result was that the use of both machinery and fer tilizers decreased as being “unprofitable.” Thus it can be seen that the dis crim inatory taxation prevalent in the Balkans had far-reaching repercussions. It contributed strongly to widespread malnutrition, primitive agricultural m ethods, low consum ption of m anufactured goods, and slow development of local industry.2 Failure of Industrialization. The Balkan governments did follow one policy consistently and energetically, th a t is, industrialization. T hey em ployed various methods to develop their industries, including tariff protec tion, tax exemption, special railway rates, lucrative concessions to foreign investors, and state investment in industry and transportation. It was hoped that industrial expansion would provide work for the surplus rural popula tion, provide manufactured goods and fertilizers for the peasants, and furnish a large market for agricultural foodstuffs and industrial crops. None of these objectives was realized to a significant degree. One reason was that foreign investments, which financed much of the industrial growth, were definitely a mixed blessing. Extremely high profits indicated excessively generous concessions and led to the siphoning of much capital to outside shareholders. Equally serious was the unsystematic development of natural resources. Foreign investors pursued the most profitable and least risky enterprises, regardless of how they affected the general development of the local economies. They concentrated on the production of raw materials and semifinished products, and were reluctant to invest their profits for the production of finished products. This retarded and distorted the economic development of the Balkan countries, perpetuating a semicolonial relation ship between them and the industrial West. Domestic investors were equally at variance with national economic interests. They concentrated on those in dustries which showed the most promise of gaining a monopolistic position through tariffs and im port regulations or through positive state support. Balkan industry did expand considerably during the interwar period in spite of the m ethods and effects on the various countries. But the ex pansion was far from adequate to absorb the surplus rural population. In Yugoslavia, for example, the num ber of industrial workers rose from 200,000 in 1919 to 385,000 in 1938. B ut in the sam e period the population of the country rose from 11.6 to 15.6 millions, an increase of 4 millions, of whom
The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 599


600 Age of War and Crisis: 1914—·
about one half were of working age.3 The same disproportion prevailed in the other Balkan countries between industrial employment and population in crease. Balkan industries not only failed to meet the basic population prob lem but aggravated the plight of the peasants by imposing on them the cost of industrialization by such means as high im port duties on m anufactured goods and high export duties on agricultural products. Rum anian economists, for example, estimate that the burden of their industry was such that it de pressed rath er than raised the living standards of the peasants. “ It is certain,” one of these economists stated, “that the position of quasi-monopoly created by the system of protection of the national industry is the principal cause of the state of inferiority into which agriculture in general and peasant agricul ture in particular have been driven.” 4 German Domination. During the late 1930’s G erm any gained con trol of the lion’s share of B alkan trade. G erm any’s advance was partly at the expense of Italy, who lost ground especially after the imposition of sanctions during the Italo-Ethiopian War. Germany also advanced abruptly after she annexed Austria and Czechoslovakia, countries which had traded extensively with the Balkans. But the basic reason for G erm any’s gains was her willing ness to buy Balkan products like tobacco and cereals which could not be sold anywhere else. G erm any paid high prices for these products and bought them in large quantities. Balances in blocked marks accumulated to the credit of her Balkan suppliers. The latter had to buy Germ an goods in order to get paid. T he effect upon B alkan trade is evident in the following figures.5
Share of Greater Germany (including Austria and Czechoslovakia) in Balkan Foreign Trade (1938)
Imports from Exports to Country Greater Germany Greater Germany
Bulgaria 57.9% 63.6% Greece 31.1 43.2 Yugoslavia 50.0 49.9 Rum ania 48.5 35.9
The Balkan countries found themselves in a weak bargaining position because they could find no other m arket for their products. U nder the cir cumstances Germany could have raised the prices of her m anufactured goods, which the Balkan countries would have had to accept in order to liquidate their clearing balances. Germany also might have supplied only certain types of goods that she wished to unload. In practice, however, Germany did not exploit her strangle hold on the Balkan economy. She charged competitive prices and did not restrict the types of goods she sold. Reports that Germ any supplied only aspirin, cameras, m outh organs, and such trifles were quite un founded. In fact, G erm any’s treatm en t of her B alkan custom ers was m ore generous than was necessary in the given circumstances. This suggests that


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 601
considerations other than purely economic ones were involved. Germany was apparently seeking to develop in the Balkans a source of vegetable and mineral raw materials that was secure from blockade. W hatever the reasons, the fact remains that Germany already dominated the Balkan countries eco nomically before she occupied them militarily during W orld W ar II. Conclusion. We may conclude that the Balkan countries made no significant economic progress between the two wars, in the sense that the basic economic problems remained largely unresolved. Agricultural produc tivity remained low and industrial growth was inadequate from the view point of the needs of the Balkan economies. This created a vicious circle be cause the weakness of industry restricted the market for agricultural products and limited the jobs available for the surplus rural population, while the poverty of agriculture restricted the domestic m arket available to industry. For obvious reasons, the Balkan arm am ent industries were booming on the eve of the war. But most of the consumers’ goods industries were operating at 40 to 60 per cent of capacity because of the lack of domestic purchasing power. In fact, it is a question w hether the real income of the B alkan peo ples declined during the interwar period. Certainly their living standards were far below those prevailing in the rest of Europe.
E stim ates of National Income in Selected Countries (1 9 2 5 -1 9 3 0 )
Source: Colin Clark, The Conditions of Economic Progress (London, Macmillan & Co. Ltd. and St. M artin’s Press, Inc., 1940), pp. 40, 132. Estimates of Balkan national incomes and productivity are given by the Greek agricultural economist, Ch. Evelpidi, “Le revenu national des pays balkaniques,” Metron, XIV (June 15, 1940), 167; and his Les états balkaniques (Paris, 1930), p. 341. His estimates differ from those of Colin Clark in detail, but both are agreed con cerning the discrepancy between Balkan and general European incomcs.


602 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
SOCIAL AND C U L T U R A L TRENDS
Variations. The low income of the Balkan peoples produced social conditions typical of underdeveloped areas. M alnutrition was ram pant in the prewar years, housing was substandard, and health conditions were far below those prevailing in Central and W estern Europe. This does not mean that unrelieved misery prevailed throughout the peninsula. The city dwellers generally were better off, their per capita income in every Balkan country being at least double that of the peasants. Rumania had 4.6 doctors per 10,000 inhabitants but only 1.1 in the rural districts. C ontrary to wide spread belief, the diet of the majority of peasants who owned small plots or none at all was poorer than that of industrial workers.0 Wide variation in living standards existed between regions as well as between social groups. In the Banat of Temesvar the peasants tilled their fertile plots efficiently and enjoyed relatively good incomes. In central Serbia a happy balance prevailed between cereal growing and livestock raising. In the foothills of the Carpathians fruit farm ers organized selling cooperatives and lived comfortably. But in other sections of the peninsula the peasants lived miserably amid poverty and squalor. This was especially true of poorly endowed areas such as the “karst” region of western Yugoslavia and the b arren m ountain areas of E pirus in G reece and w estern Transylvania in R um ania. A p a rt from these local variations it is correct to say th at social and cultural standards in general were far lower than elsewhere on the Continent. Food and Housing. Travelers in the Balkans praise the tasty na tional dishes of grilled meats and num erous meat-and-vegetable stews. These dishes are national in the sense th at they are specific to particular regions or countries. But they definitely are not national in terms of consumption. The great majority of the peasants taste meat only several times a year during certain holidays. The rest of the time they can afford only poor bread, cheese, onions, fruits and vegetables if they are in season, and olive oil and olives if they live in a M editerranean area. The table on page 603 shows how low in come in the Balkans has affected nutrition. The salient feature of the nutrition standards reflected in these figures is the excess of grains, which are cheap, and the deficiency of anim al proteins, which are expensive. The Balkan countries export large quantities of protective foods such as meat, eggs, butter, and cheese. But this reflects a lack of domestic purchasing power rather than a real surplus. In fact, if the “desirable diet” prevailed in the Balkans it would be necessary to im port rather than export foodstuffs. A Yugoslav rural health worker has noted and analyzed this paradox of food exports from malnutrition areas.
A survey undertaken in several rural countries on the nutritional status of the population showed that there exists undernourishm ent among a large num ber of the rural population, and that agricultural products are exported from rural countries without consideration of the nutritional requirements of the peo


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 603
pie. The reasons are purely commercial. The industrial products imported into the rural countries in exchange serve merely the urban population and industrial establishments from which the farming population derives comparatively small benefit. To cover their money requirements, the farmers owning small holdings are usually compelled to sell the best products of their farm s to the town people. Thus they are helping the cities and industries, themselves remaining far in the rear in regard to sanitation, housing, health, and general education.7
Estimated Consumption of the Main Foodstuffs per Head of Population Kilos per Year (Figures in brackets are conjectural)
H ousing conditions in m ost parts of the B alkans are extrem ely bad. A large percentage of peasant dwellings are of one story and have floors of packed earth. In the most primitive regions, such as sections of Bosnia, the livestock are sheltered in the same room as the family. M ore commonly there is a wooden or stone partition, or else the livestock take the first floor and the family the second. Living conditions are further depressed by the custom of setting aside a “parlor” for the entertainm ent of guests. Social prestige de mands that this be done, though it usually means crowding the entire family into one other room. Hygenic conditions are deplorable, as m uch from ig norance as from poverty. The findings of a survey m ade in 1939 of the D rina region of Yugoslavia are reasonably representative of the Balkans as a whole. O ut of 219,279 households, 46.4 per cent had no beds, 54.3 per cent had no latrines of any sort, and 51.6 per cent had no wooden flooring, having to do with packed earth. Health. H ealth conditions in the Balkans during the interwar years reflected the low income and poor food and housing. The death rate had de clined substantially since the O ttom an period, yet the incidence of deficiency diseases, especially in the poorer districts, rem ained much higher than in Central and W estern Europe^ Pellagra and anemia were widespread in R u m ania. M alaria was prevalent in G reece and rickets in Bulgaria. Scurvy, rickets, night blindness, and anem ia were com m on in Y ugoslavia. A nd every


604 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
where tuberculosis and infant mortality decimated the peasant masses. Com parative statistics are available for infant mortality and they show that the rate in the Balkans was double and even triple that of W estern Europe. In 1938, deaths under one year per 1,000 live births am ounted to 183 in R um ania, 144 in Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, 106 in Italy, 99 in Greece, 66 in France, 60 in Germany, 55 in England and Wales, and 37 in the N ether lands.8 Various factors contributed to the bad health conditions, including lack of hygenic inform ation and excessive and wasteful feasting on special occasions such as Christmas, Easter, weddings, and baptisms. But the basic factor was the overwhelming poverty which left the great majority of the B alkan peoples ill-clad, ill-housed, and ill-fed. This is made clear in the fol lowing passage by Professor Jozo Tomasevich which refers specifically to Yugoslavia but which is equally valid in a general sense for the rest of the peninsula.
Deficient nutrition is not only responsible for the greater incidence of typical nutritional deficiency diseases, but by weakening the bodily strength it makes people less resistant to pra.ctically all diseases, especially such diseases as tuberculosis and malaria. . . . A general characteristic of the dietary pattern of the ru ral population in Y ugoslavia is that its adequacy and variety are basically influenced by the sea sonal factors in the local production of food. As a rule, nutrition is at its best in the fall and early w inter m onths. Cereals, potatoes, onions, and in some areas turnips, from the current harvest, last into these months in most families; some types of cabbage arc available in fresh form , as are some types of fruit. Legumes and some fruits are available in dried form , and some vegetables are pickled. Am ong the preserved vegetables, by far the most im portant is sauerkraut. T he supply of fresh and dried meat, anim al fats and oils, and cheese is most plentiful at that time. These foods of vegetable and animal origin are the “winter reserves” (zim nica) that every fam ily tries to secure for the m onths when there is little or nothing in the fields. On the other hand, the nature and am ount of w ork to be perform ed in the m onths w hen the food is best and m ost plentiful are lim ited, the days are short, and the length of tim e available for sleeping and leisure is much longer. T hat is also the period of most frequent feasting because of many holidays, while the num ber of fasting days is limited. But in the spring, in some households beginning in January or February, nutrition in the villages suffers. A large portion of ru ral families have by that time used up their home-produced cereals and practically all other winter reserves of food, and have to start buying much of what they need for subsistence. Of course, the medium and wealthier peasants have sufficient cereals to last them the whole crop year, and their winter reserves of other foods last usually well into the spring. The very fact that some peasants have to start buying food contributes to quantitative and qualitative worsening of the diet. Generally speaking, the peasant diet during the spring m onths is lim ited to cereals, hom e produced or bought, dried beans, some potatoes, and w hat the fam ily is able to afford of such products as rice and pastes (both cereal foods), and such vegetables as onions.


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 605
T he intake of meats, dairy products, and fats and oils is reduced m uch below that of the previous m onths, and so is the intake of wine in areas in w hich wine is produced. Until the late spring there are no vegetables and fruits in the fields and gardens. The supply of milk and eggs begins at this time to be larger, but practically all of such products have to be sold in order to buy the high calory foods. On the other hand, field w ork becomes progressively heavier with the advance of spring and summer, the days become longer, and the time available for sleeping and leisure is drastically cut. It is in these m onths that, owing to poorer nutrition and greatly intensified physical exertion, a great portion of the peasants become dangerously less resistant to the ravages of disease. It is during these m onths that most of them lose weight, their faces become draw n, their skin acquires a parchment-like color, their eyes become dull. In these months the ap pearance of most of the rural people is in profound contrast to the budding spring around them. Only when the sum m er finally arrives is there bread from the field and a more plentiful and m ore varied supply of vegetables and fruits. . . . Now, while this rhythm in nutrition in rural areas could be called a natural one because it rem inds us of a sim ilar pattern (though at other seasons) in the case of wild animals and also of most of the livestock herds in Yugoslavia, it is certainly nothing in which one could find ^my com fort when it applies either to people or to dom estic animals. W as not one of the forem ost objectives of mankind from the dawn of civilization to secure life against the vagaries of na ture, including the rhythm in nature’s production? A bundance and variety of production of food, high income, well-organized trade, development of storage facilities and food-preservation technology have almost completely eliminated the influence of seasonality of food production on the pattern of nutrition in advanced countries. Underdeveloped areas, on the contrary, are very far behind indeed from this goal.*
Emigration. Life had been difficult in the Balkans long before 1914. But it had been possible in the prew ar years to leave for the New W orld where the emigrants usually were able to support not only themselves but also several relatives back home. Emigrant remittances had played an ex trem ely im portant role in the econom ies of G reece, as we noted in C hapter 25, and of certain parts of Yugoslavia. But the immigration restrictions adopted by the United States and certain British Dominions after the war reduced B alkan em igration to a trickle. This m eant the loss of what hitherto had served as an im portant safety valve. The extent of the emigration drop in indicated in the table on p. 606.
Education. The Balkan countries suffered from the combination of mass illiteracy and unem ploym ent in the professions that was common to underdeveloped regions. The governments did try to provide schooling for all, but only with modest success because of the shortage of funds and the reluctance of some hard-pressed parents to dispense with the labor of their
* Reprinted from Peasants, Politics, and Economic Change in Yugoslavia, by Jozo Tomasevich, with the permission of the publishers, Stanford University Press. Copy right I9J5 by the Hoard of Trustees of I.eland Stanford Junior University.


606 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
children. The percentage of illiteracy at the age of ten and over on the eve of W orld W ar II am ounted to 27 in G reece, 32 in Bulgaria, over 40 in Y ugoslavia, nearly 50 in R um ania, and about 85 in A lbania. T he nature of the teaching in the lower schools left much to be desired. The teachers usually were poorly trained and the classrooms were overcrowded because of the lack of funds with which to provide more schools. As a result, the pupils rarely received m ore than a grounding in the “three R ’s,” together with a healthy dose of nationalistic indoctrination. They were taught to look back to their respective periods of glory and greatness during the medieval ages and to regard the neighboring peoples as inferior in culture, morals, and military prowess. The Serbian pupils learned about their Dushan the Great, the Bulgarian about Tsars Simeon and Samuel, the Rumanian about Michael the Brave, and finally the Greek pupils reveled in the exploits of Byzantine emperors such as Basil the Bulgar-Slayer. Some of these pupils were able to continue beyond their village ele m entary school to the secondary school in the nearest town and a few even to the university in the national capital or to some foreign institution. Most of these aspiring students were bright and ambitious but desperately poor. Through the difficult years of training they struggled and starved in the attics of Paris, Berlin, M unich, Vienna, or their own capitals. After many sacri fices, by their families as well as by themselves, they finally graduated, splen didly equipped for careers in their chosen professions. But all too frequently no positions were available, even though their countries needed more doc tors and engineers and teachers. Thus the young intellectuals were left in limbo, unable to find work for which they were trained and yet unfitted and unwilling to take up the m anual work which had been the lot of their peasant fathers and grandfathers. It is true th at too m any of these students selected law as their p ro fession. B ut it is also true th a t not all those who becam e agronom ists or some other type of scientist were able to find employment despite the need for their services. The explanation is to be found in the underdeveloped state of the Balkan societies. An agronomist, for example, could not hope to be employed privately by the poverty-stricken peasantry of his country. His only


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 607
chance lay in obtaining a position in the ministry of agriculture. We have seen that these positions were few because of the scanty funds that were ap propriated. Thus the trained agronomist was left with the unfortunate choice of seeking employment of any sort in another branch of the government bureaucracy or accepting a position in a foreign country where he would be able to use his training and talents. Agronomists were not alone in this pre dicament. It has often been observed that doctors crowded together in a few B alkan cities while the countryside rem ained neglected. B ut it is not gen erally realized that the doctors did so not only for social reasons but also because the peasants could not afford medical care. This explains why an appreciable num ber of scientists and professional men of Balkan origin were to be found practicing in W estern Europe and the United States despite the fact that their own countries urgently needed their services. It also explains why the unemployed intellectuals who stayed at home became frustrated and rootless and were prone to join such organizations as the Communist parties, the Peasant parties, and the fascist Ustashi of Croatia, and Iron G uards of R um ania, which had one thing, at least, in common— all were opposed to the status quo.
State Administration. Balkan bureaucracies were proverbially over grown, inefficient, and corrupt. The reasons were partly historical and partly economic. State structures developed in the West naturally and harm oniously with the growth of econom ic life. But in the Balkans the m achinery of gov ernm ent was copied from the W est and was superim posed with all its elab orateness and costliness upon an underdeveloped agrarian economy. At the same time the pressure of the unemployed university graduates for govern m ent positions also tended to swell the ranks of the civil servants. The result was th at all the B alkan bureaucracies becam e grotesquely overstaffed. M any m ore officials per capita were to be found in the B alkan states than in the W estern, despite the weakness of the Balkan economies. The load was borne only by reducing salaries to ridiculously low levels. In R um ania, for example, a study undertaken in May, 1941, revealed that a group of state employees in the Central Institute of Statistics were obliged to devote 62.3 per cent of their personal budgets to food alone, 13 per cent to housing and 11 per cent to clothing.10 Inevitably such conditions led to inefficiency and corruption. The harrassed civil servant worked at other jobs on the side in order to make ends meet, and when the opportunity arose he was understandably tempted to accept the traditional bakshish. Corruption was not limited to the petty operations of poverty-stricken clerks. It perm eated to the highest levels of governm ent for the simple rea son that in the Balkans, as in other economically underdeveloped regions, the greatest fortunes were made in politics rather than in commerce or in dustry. Ministers received handsome rewards, for example, in return for granting generous concessions to foreign companies, awarding monopolies to domestic syndicates, raising high tariffs in favor of some industry, or allowing favorable railway rates to certain companies. Occasionally scandals


608 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
of a particularly revolting nature cam e to light. In the early thirties it was dis covered in Greece that the state quinine monopoly had been dispensing a worthless pow der in place of the drug with which it had been entrusted. And this in a country where a fifth of the population suffered from malaria. In Bulgaria most outgoing governments voted an amnesty commuting or com pletely abrogating such sentences as had been passed against their supporters for infringements of the law. The minister of justice pointed out on Decem ber 29, 1931, th at thirty-five such am nesties had been voted since 1 8 8 1.11 The following passage captures the atm osphere that prevailed in Balkan government bureaus and illuminates the gulf that separated the rulers and the ruled.
The Balkan official regards himself as immeasurably superior to the peasants am ong whom he lives and from whose ranks he has sprung. To be an official is the fondest dream of every able young son of a peasant. T he Balkan official does not like to work. H e considers himself so fine a fellow that the State and the public should be proud to support him for life, and should not ask him to make efforts that will tax his intellect or character. A visitor to a Balkan M in istry or Police H eadquarters in the middle of the m orning will find the rooms filled with good-natured fellows com fortably enjoying a cup of Turkish coffee and a chat with their friends. T he papers lie on their desks. O utside stand, sit and squat patient queues of peasants awaiting their various permits and receipts. Foreigners and citizcns with “protekeija” * obtain swift and polite attention, but the people can afford to wait. They have waited many hundreds of years already for justice, and a few m ore hours will not m ake much difference.12
POLITICAL TRENDS
Pattern. A consistent pattern is noticeable in Balkan political devel opments during the interwar period. A t first a revolutionary atm osphere pre vailed, with the left-wing Socialist, Communist, and Agrarian parties com m and ing a large following. In Greece the dynasty was overthrown and a republic established. In Bulgaria, King Ferdinand was forced to flee and, although his son Boris succeeded him on the throne, the country was dom inated by an agrarian government under Alexander Stambuliski. In Rumania the National Peasant party led by Iuliu M aniu successfully challenged the entrenched Lib eral party and assumed office in 1928. Finally, in Yugoslavia the Peasant party organized by the Radich brothers retained the support of the great majority of Croatians throughout the interwar period in defiance of the centralist govern ments in Belgrade. Despite this initial radical upsurge, the left-wing parties in each Bal kan country eventually were suppressed and dictatorial governments estab lished. Stambuliski was m urdered in 1923 and a rightist regime followed, end
* This is the Serbian form of a word used, with different terminations, in the languages and countries of Eastern Europe, to denote “special protection,” “connec tions,” “graft,” or “pull.” It is indispensable for the making of a career.


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 609
ing ultim ately in a royal dictatorship. Similarly in Yugoslavia, Stjepan Radich was assassinated in 1928 and King A lexander established a personal dictator ship the following year. M aniu did not suffer the fate of the other Agrarian leaders but he also was forced to give way in 1930 to King Carol, who soon established a corporatist regime. In Greece the m onarchy was restored in 1935 and the following year a full-fledged dictatorship was imposed by General John Metaxas. Thus the interwar period, which began with a sweeping revolutionary wave, ended with dictatorial regimes in every Balkan country. The question arises what forces were operating in the background to produce this common pattern. The reasons for the revolutionary atmosphere following World W ar I are clear enough. During the war years the peasants gained greatly in selfconfidence because they realized that they were essential to the national econ omy as producers of foodstuffs and raw materials. At the same time the mil lions of peasant recruits widened their horizon immeasurably as a result of their war experiences. They observed not only the differences between city and vil lage life but also the differences betw een various countries in regard to living standards and social institutions. The peasants were also strongly influenced by the Russian Revolution, the collapse of the Ailstro-Hungarian Empire, and the spread of Bolshevism into Central Europe. Finally, the unprecedented destruc tion and suffering during the long years of war aggravated the revolutionary situation. This was especially true of the countries that suffered defeat, and ex plains the abdication of both Ferdinand and Constantine. The precise political m anifestation of this revolutionary ferment varied from country to country according to local circumstances. The Com m unist par ties did not play an outstanding role because they were outlawed everywhere as soon as they appeared to be dangerous. This happened in Yugoslavia and R um ania in 1921, in Bulgaria in 1923, and in G reece in 1936. This left the Agrarian parties as the only legal opposition organizations of any significance. Thus the A grarian parties bulked large in Balkan politics during the 1920’s, though they were by no means predom inant throughout the peninsula. The most successful, durable, and best-organized Balkan P easant party was th at in C roatia organized by the Radich brothers. It retained the support of the great majority of C roatians during the interw ar years not only because it concerned itself with the needs of the peasant m ajority but also because it assumed the leadership of C roatian nationalism against Serbian hegemony. T he A grarian U nion in Bulgaria was also strong and influential, primarily because two disastrous wars in succession discredited the dynasty and the old parties. In Rum ania the N a tional Peasant party attracted a wide following because of the difficult position of the peasants and the identification of the hitherto dom inant Liberal party with the urban interests. O n the other hand, Agrarianism did not make appreciable progress in Serbia or Greece. One reason was that peasant proprietorship traditionally had prevailed in both countries. A no th er reason was that both N ikola Pashich, who headed the Serbian Radical party, and Eleutherios Venizelos, who headed the


610 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Greek Liberal party, enjoyed such prestige and following that no Agrarian pro gram could compete seriously with them. Finally, important political issues in each country diverted public attention from agrarian problems— the VenizelosRoyalist feud being the overshadowing issue in Greece, and the centralismfederalism dilemma in Serbia. Agrarianism. The appearance of organized Peasant parties in Balkan politics was an unprecedented development. Similar Peasant parties became prom inent at the same time elsewhere in Eastern Europe, particularly in Czechoslovakia and Poland. All these Agrarian movements had certain com mon general objectives. In regard to agriculture, they wished to distribute the land to those who tilled it and to substitute cooperatives for the ubiquitous middlemen. They were fundamentally hostile toward industrialization because it was incompatible with the rural type of society they cherished. W here indus try was inescapable they preferred either public or cooperative ownership. They also favored light industry that processed local agricultural products rather than heavy industry that required much capital and transformed the entire economy. In the field of government the Peasant parties were strongly egalitarian. They wanted representative government based on universal franchise and also full local self-governm ent. They .favored popular referendum and the people’s initiative in such m atters as dismissal of public officials and convocation and dissolution of parliament. Cheap and prom pt justice was another prominent feature of Agrarian programs, including the establishment of arbitration courts for the settlement of the perennial peasant disputes. On the question of m on archy or republic, the Peasant parties were divided. The National Peasants of Rum ania accepted monarchism, whereas the Croatian and Bulgarian parties both favored republicanism in their platforms, though in practice they found it necessary to accept their respective dynasties. In international affairs the Peasant parties had m arked pacifist lean ings. They advocated reduction of arm am ents, reliance on militia forces rather than large standing armies, and prom otion of policies designed to further in ternational peace and understanding. A very common attitude throughout the A grarian parties was that war was an unmitigated evil, in support of which the peasants were forced to pay high taxes and provide the cannon fodder. Accord ingly, various Peasant leaders, and especially Stambuliski of Bulgaria, conceived the idea of an international Peasant organization to end the traditional national rivalries. This “G reen International,” as it was commonly called, was to offset the “Red International” of revolutionary Bolsheviks and the “White Interna tional” of reactionary monarchs and landlords. The first step was the establish ment in Prague of the International Agrarian Bureau designed to serve as an information center. Dr. Milan Hodza, the head of a Czechoslovak Agrarian party, described the purpose of the bureau in 1925 as follows: “We know that agrarian dem ocracy . . . is a strong bond which will bring the peoples to gether in an international unity— a form al, organic and spiritual unity against which all attacks w hether from the im perialist Right or the Bolshevik Left will sh atter them selves.” 13 T he bureau held annual congresses but they were


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918-1939 611
gradually dropped with the oncoming of the world depression and the accom panying political storms. This unprecedented upsurge of peasant political consciousness and activity aroused great expectations. M any were dazzled by the vision of one hundred million peasants on the m arch in Eastern Europe for the first time in history. “The G reen Rising is a thing like the G reat W ar,” w rote G. K. C hester ton in the early twenties. “ It is a huge historical hinge and turning point, like the conversion of Constantine or the French Revolution. . . . W hat has hap pened in Europe since the war has been a vast victory for the peasants, and therefore a vast defeat both for the Communists and the capitalists. . . . In a sort of awful silence the peasantries have fought one vast and voiceless pitched battle with Bolshevism and its twin brother which is Big Business, and the peasantries have w on.” 14 C hesterton’s acclaim of a historic peasant victory was decidedly pre m ature. Agrarianism proved a failure so far as immediate concrete results were concerned. Few Peasant parties came to power and none retained power long enough to test the practicability of their program. In country after country they were suppressed and dictatorships established. One reason for the failure of the Peasant parties in practical politics was th6ir pacifism and distaste for vio lence. This left them vulnerable to the entrenched military and bureaucratic elem ents which did not hesitate to use force in order to seize and retain power. A nother reason for the failure of Agrarianism was that it tended to deceive itself with the rom antic illusion of village cohesiveness and peasant unity. In actual fact no such solidarity existed. A few peasants were well off but the great m ajority were miserably poor. A few ate well but most did not. Some could afford to hire help while the majority were forced to accept out side employment to make ends meet. Some wealthy peasants loaned money which their less fortunate neighbors borrowed at extortionate rates. Thus the peasantry was by no means as cohesive a class group as A grarian ideologists commonly assumed. It should also be noted that the Peasant parties came increasingly under the control of lawyers and urban intellectuals, who were attracted by the initial electoral successes of the new Agrarianism . This influx of nonpeasant elements created an ever-widening gulf between the peasants and their leaders. Further more, the Agrarian parties usually represented the interests of the wealthy peas ants and ignored the small-holder class. This accentuated the differences be tween the party leaders and the mass of poor peasants. Perhaps the greatest weakness of the Peasant parties was their idealiza tion of agriculture as “a way of life” as well as a means of livelihood. Conse quently, they looked upon industry as a necessary evil th at should be strictly limited and controlled. A Peasant spokesman has expressed this attitude as follows:
According to the program of the Peasant Movements, industrialization is only an auxiliary m easure in the scheme of im provem ent of the peasant econ


612 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
omy, and should not be regarded as an economic goal in itself. . . . The Peasant Movement opposes the establishment of substantial heavy industry because it leads to conglomerates of industrial population, which means in practice a con siderable change in the social structure of the country. . . . M ost of the finished products of heavy industry such as war matériel (e.g., tanks, guns, tractors and trucks) are either not needed in a peasant country or if needed can always be acquired under more favorable conditions from the industrialized West in ex change for the agricultural products that can be produced at hom e.15
This attitude was in reality quite impractical. The experience of all the peasant countries during the interwar years demonstrated that the exchange of agricultural products for m anufactured goods was by no means as simple and satisfactory as pictured above. The industrial countries resorted increasingly to agricultural protectionism, which reduced the market for agricultural products. Furtherm ore, there was the competition of overseas foodstuffs which were pro duced on a much larger scale and were correspondingly cheaper. Consequently, all the Balkan countries found it difficult to m arket their exports and were forced to accept unfavorable terms for what they did sell. This in turn m eant a low income for the B alkan peasant peoples. In fact, we noted above that the predominantly agrarian economies of the peninsula were quite incapable of supporting their respective populations, and that the resulting “surplus” popu lation had nowhere to go precisely because of the absence of a well-developed industry. “The solution of the problem of agriculture and peasantry,” one author ity has observed, “could not be found within agriculture itself but rather in a policy directed toward rapid development of industry and modernization of agriculture.” 1(1 A ccording to another authority, “T he brutal truth is that the Peasant States can only become prosperous and healthy when they cease to be Peasant States.” 17 This conclusion, inescapable though it is, naturally could not be considered or accepted by the peasant parties. Indeed, it represented the Achilles heel of the A grarian m ovement in the Balkans and elsewhere. Dictatorships. W hatever the failings of the peasant parties may have been, they cannot be held solely responsible for the trium ph of absolutism in the Balkans. D ictatorial regimes prevailed not only in the northern Balkans but also in Greece, where agrarianism was virtually nonexistent. Thus the origins of the dictatorships cannot be attributed merely to various defects of the agrar ian movem ent. It is certainly necessary to take into account the world depres sion, which hurt V enizelos’ L iberal governm ent in G reece as well as M aniu’s Peasant governm ent in Rum ania, and which paved the way for the dictatorship of M etaxas in G reece as it did th at of C arol in R um ania. It is also necessary to note the wide gap that separated the rulers from the ruled. Such a gap exists in all societies, but it was especially pronounced in the Balkans, where the average peasant was unable to exercise his rights and duties as a citizen. One reason was that he was usually illiterate and ignorant, and lacked any tradition of democratic self-government. A nother reason was that his economic role as a relatively self-sufficient producer restricted his interests and activities to his


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918—1939 613
village. His economic and social life did not extend into the num erous fields that comprised the necessary activities of modern government. Consequently there was much less rapport between citizen and official in the Balkans than in W estern Europe. It is true that m any B alkan political leaders were educated in the W est and that they faithfully initiated W estern political institutions, such as written constitutions and political parties with traditional names such as Liberal, Con servative, and Radical. But all this was a thin veneer. Indeed, the attem pt to graft W estern institutions on a native stock produced serious maladjustments. The following indictment of Rum anian institutions by a citizen of that country is equally applicable to the entire peninsula.
U nfortunately our glorious urban institutions, for all their liberal-demo cratic techniques, are pure falsehoods. . . . we have introduced universal suffrage, but with ballot stuffing; we have ruined rural households in order to increase credit institutions, but have not perm itted free competition among these institu tions, but have favored some— those belonging to us— and have attacked othersthose belonging to our adversaries; we have encouraged national industry, but not for the benefit of the rural population, as would have been right, since they made the sacrifices, but for the benefit of politicians who are pensioners of this national industry; we have centralized the administration of the country, but not in the hands of a trained bureaucracy but in the hands of the party and its p ar tisans; in a word we have aped the E uropean bourgeoisie in form , but at bottom we have persisted in the sycophantic habits of the past. In this way we have tran s form ed political life into a hopeless turm oil.18
Such a combination of political, economic, and historical factors ex plains the appearance of dictatorships in all the Balkan countries. T hese regimes, however, were very different from the contemporary authoritarian governments in Fascist Italy and Nazi G erm any. T he m ain difference is th at the B alkan re gimes lacked mass support. They did not possess an ideology that caught the im agination of the masses. Nor did they have the efficiency and technical facili ties necessary to indoctrinate the masses even if they had possessed an effective ideology. Thus the great bulk of the population remained unaffected by the heroics of Balkan fuehrers like Carol, M etaxas, and Stoyadinovich. “The east ern dictatorships,” one authority has concluded, “never rested on the support of strong sections of the masses. The villagers especially looked with bland peasant skepticism on the uniforms and parades and oratorical antics of these would-be tribunes. The eastern dictatorships were never anything but bureau cratic and m ilitary regimes, as brittle as they were inefficient and oppressive.” 19 Communism. In view of the unprecedented developments following W orld W ar II it is w orth noting at this point the position and role of the B alkan Communist parties during the interwar period.* The Communist parties in the Balkans, as in other parts of the world, emerged from the split that occurred in the prewar Socialist parties following the Russian Revolution. The right-wing
* Thu individual Balkan Comm unist parties arc considered in C hapters 32-35.


614 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
elements rem ained Socialist and continued to be affiliated with the Second (So cialist) International, while the left-wing elements constituted the new Com m u nist parties and affiliated with the Third (Communist) International or Comin tern. In January, 1920, delegates of the Bulgarian, Yugoslav, and Greek parties met in Sofia and formed the Balkan Com m unist Federation in order to coor dinate and strengthen their activities. A t that time the Bulgarian and Yugoslav parties each claimed to have 30,000 members. The Greek party claimed only 1,300, while the R um anian party probably was at about the same low level. The activities and influence of the Communist parties are difficult to assess because they were all soon outlawed and forced to operate underground. U nder this circumstance they conducted their work with two objectives in mind. One was to recruit and train disciplined cadres in order to keep the move ment alive despite severe repression. The other was to carry on propaganda based on directives from the Com intern and designed to win sympathizers and create a mass movement. The Communists were most successful with urban workers, disaffected intellectuals, minority groups such as the Jews and H un garians in Rum ania, and uprooted groups such as the Asia M inor refugees in Greece and the M acedonians in Bulgaria. The Communists were not able to accomplish much during the inter war years because of the many handicaps under which they operated. One was the repression from above which forced them to work underground and ham pered their propaganda activities. A nother was the fear that devout peasants had for godless communism , a fear that was particularly strong in Catholic areas such as Slovenia and Croatia. Fear of Slavic Russia was also an im por tant factor in non-Slavic countries, such as Rum ania and Greece. Finally, and perhaps most important, the Balkan Communists labored under the great dis advantage of being required to accept and to carry out orders from the Com in tern. These orders proved to be a constant source of em barrassm ent and hin drance for the C om m unist cause in the Balkans. This was especially true in regard to the national question on which the Com intern took an extreme position based on the principle of the selfdetermination of peoples. Thus the Fifth W orld Congress of the Communist International held in the summer of 1924 stated that the Versailles Treaty had created a num ber of small imperialist states in E astern E urope to serve as a cordon sanitaire against the Soviet Union. These states had been form ed by the annexation of large areas with foreign populations. Accordingly the Congress proclaimed “the right of every nation to self-determination, even to the extent of separation,” and called for “the political separation of oppressed peoples from Poland, Rumania, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Greece.” M ore specifically the Congress declared itself in favor of stripping M acedonia and Thrace from Greece; M acedonia, Croatia, and Slovenia from Yugoslavia; and Transylvania, Dobruja, Bessarabia, and Bukovina from Ru mania. All these territories were to become independent political units in a Balkan Communist Federation, with the exception of Bessarabia and Buko vina, which were slated for incorporation in the Soviet Union.


The Dynamics of Balkan Politics: 1918—1939 615
It is apparent th at parties com m itted to the w holesale dism em berm ent of their own countries had little chance of gaining widespread support. In fact, the Comintern directives not only isolated the Balkan parties from the people but also fomented dissension within the communist movement. Both the Yugo slav and the Greek parties protested strenuously against the establishment of an independent M acedonia while the Bulgarian party favored this policy. The C om intern denounced all opposition as opportunism and betrayal of the prole tariat. In June, 1925, Stalin replied to Sima M arkovich, head of the Yugoslav party, as follows: . . he has not grasped the fact that the national question must be considered not in isolation, but in inseparable connection with the question of the victory of the revolution, as a part of the general question of revolution.” 20 T he C om intern was able to keep m ost of its followers in line in the Balkans as elsewhere in the world. But a few refused to accept the argu m ent that the international revolutionary cause required acceptance of dicta tion from Moscow. Pouliopoulos, a Greek leader who later became a prom i nent T rotskyite, challenged the very principle of C om intern dom ination. “ It is inadmissible that any international commando should autocratically decree that other Communist Parties should promulgate principles incompatible with the objective conditions of their countries.” 21 It should not be assumed, however, that the position of the Communist parties was wholly unfavorable. They did have certain unique advantages that enabled them eventually to play a leading and dramatic role in Balkan affairs. One was their propaganda, which was simple and effective. It was based essentilly on two ideas— social justice and revolution. Simple Balkan peasants who knew little about M arxist ideology could grasp and appreciate these ideas. Social justice was bound to have appeal where social injustice was the rule. Revolu tion also found fertile soil in the Balkans because of the tradition of violence and direct action. In fact, this explains to a large degree why the socialist par ties, with their emphasis on legal action and parliam entary procedures, were never able to compete successfully with their communist rivals in the Balkans. Another advantage of the Communists was their militancy and their dogged underground activity despite fierce repression. The Socialists tended to give up the struggle as hopeless when the various dictatorships were established. They either com prom ised with existing authority or else waited in the hope that international events would affect the domestic situation. The Communists, by contrast, continued their opposition underground, fortified, as the Socialists could not be, by the belief that a great power was on their side. This charac teristic of the Communists proved to be of basic importance because, when the Axis armies overran the peninsula in 1940-1941, only the Communist parties possessed trained and trusted cadres for underground resistance. Thus they were able to lead and dominate the resistance movements during the occupa tion years. And their connection with the Soviet Union gave them another and decisive advantage during the -postwar years when Russian armies controlled the northern Balkans.


32. Yugoslavia: 1918-1939
D
M Jy a l l o d d s the most serious problem facing the new state of Yugoslavia was that of centralism versus federalism. This was scarcely surprising in view of the disparate origins and composition of the state. It con sisted of Slovenia and Dalmatia— form er territories of Austria; CroatiaSlavonia— formerly a quasi-autonomous province of Hungary; the Voivodina — formerly an integral portion of Hungary; Bosnia-Herzegovina— formerly an Austro-Hungarian condominium administered by their joint ministry of finance; and finally M ontenegro and Serbia— form er independent kingdoms. Furtherm ore, it should be noted that Serbia and M ontenegro included por tions of Macedonia and the Sanjak of Novi Bazar, which had been Turkish territories until 1912. Given this complex background, it becomes understandable why the leaders of Yugoslavia met with so much difficulty in their attem pts to construct a viable state. T heir efforts eventually failed, as is indicated by the storm y course of Yugoslav politics during the interwar years. The reason for their fail ure is to be found in the fact that from the beginning— indeed, even before the new state was born— there were two diametrically opposed viewpoints concern ing the political organization of the South Slav peoples, the G reater Serbian and the Yugoslav.
SEEDS OF d is u n it y :
CENTRALISM VERSUS FEDERALISM
The Greater Serbia idea, held by the Belgrade politicians led by Nikola Pashich, had as its principal goal the addition to Serbia of all lands inhabited prim arily by Serbs. This involved specifically the annexation of BosniaHerzegovina with an outlet to the Adriatic. The bonds holding together the new G reater Serbia were to be the common O rthodox religion and Serbian nationality of its inhabitants. O ther South Slav lands, such as Slovenia, Croatia, Dalmatia, and the Voivodina, might also be acquired sometime in the future,
616


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 617
AUSTRIA HUNGARY
i s s Zagreb—^
^.(Agram):
C R O A T IA 
RUMANIA
:b a n a t
grade, BO SN IA
TIM OK.
I S a ra je vo ·
H ER ZEG O V IN A
= C ARIBROD (T SA R IB RO D )
BULGARIA
B O S 1 L IG R A D
L a s to v o I. (Lagosta) ··' D u b ro v n ik ^ k
(R agu sa)
Palagruza Is. i (Pclagosa)
S koplje
\ (U skub)
STRUM ITSA
M o n a s tir:;
^ 3 ^ " GREECE
ALBANIA
TERRITORIAL GROWTH OF YUGOSLAVIA
1815 Formation of Principality of Serbia 1833 Turks recognize Serbian control of border regions 1878 Nish-Pirot region ceded by Turkey 1913 Part of Macedonia ceded by Turkey 1918-1919 Kingdom of Yugoslavia formed by unification of Montenegro with Serbia, and acquisitions of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Dalmatia, and Slovenia from Austria [ |j[|fiHTI ; Croatia, Slavonia, the Voivodina, and part of the Banat from Hungary
1947
Strumitsa, Bosiligrad, Caribrod (Tsaribrod) and Timok enclaves from Bulgaria Istria and the Lastovo (Lagosta) and Palagruza (Pelagosa) Islands ceded by Italy
b u t their acquisition was not considered indispensable. W hatever the area it em braced, the state was to be strongly centralized, Serbian-dominated, and ruled by the Orthodox Karageorgevich dynasty. The H apsburg South Slavs, who were the chief supporters of the Yugo slav idea, opposed every aspect of this G reater Serbia program. In place of a G reater Serbia they wanted an all-inclusive South Slav state. In place of a Serbian-dom inated realm they wanted a federal political structure in which each group would be able to preserve its unique political, cultural, and religious characteristics. A nd as for the Karageorgevich dynasty, they were willing to accept it on the condition that its members considered themselves to be Yugo slav rather than purely Serbian rulers. This divergence in views came to the fore as soon as W orld W ar I began. On July 29, 1914, the day after Austria declared war on Serbia, the I’ushieh governm ent issued a m anifesto calling upon the Serbs to defend their


618 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
homeland. Not until four months later, after considerable pressure from groups sympathetic to Yugoslavism, did Pashich announce that the aim of his governm ent was the liberation and unification of all South Slavs. M ean while a num ber of H apsburg South Slav leaders had fled abroad and estab lished the Yugoslav Committee headed by a Dalm atian, Dr. A nte Trum bich. The stated purpose of the committee was to conduct propaganda directed to w ard “the deliverance of all Yugoslavs from the A ustrian yoke, and union with our free brothers in Serbia and M ontenegro in one united state.” 1 In April, 1916, Dr. Trum bich met with the Serbian Crown Prince Alexander in Paris and told him that the Serbo-Croat-Slovene nation in Austria-H ungary “has come to the firm conviction that it cannot expect life and freedom in that monarchy, and thus our people asks to be freed from foreign domination and to be united with their brothers in Serbia under the glorious dynasty of the Karageorgevich.” 2 This campaign in behalf of Yugoslavism was one-sided until July 20, 1917, when Pashich and Trumbich signed the Corfu Pact, calling for the estab lishment of a Yugoslav state at the end of the war. One reason why Pashich signed the document was that Serbia at the time was occupied by enemy forces and consequently he was not in a position to be intransigent concerning post war political organization. Also, the tsarist regime, which had strongly sup ported G reat Serbism, had fallen in M arch, 1917, and the Am erican govern ment, which was inclined to be pro-Yugoslav, entered the war the following month. Under these circumstances Pashich felt constrained to accept an agree ment providing for a constitutional, democratic, and parliam entary monarchy under the Karageorgevich dynasty. T he state was to include all the South Slav peoples and its constitution was to be prepared by a constituent assembly elected after the war by universal suffrage and secret ballot. Despite this agreement the relations between the Yugoslav Committee and the Serbian government continued to be strained. The committee com plained because Serbia’s am bassadors, on instructions from Belgrade, contin ued to work for purely Serbian interests rather than for the new Yugoslav program . It also resented Pashich’s refusal to support plans for a large, allYugoslav congress in Paris to publicize the Yugoslav cause. In spite of this mutual suspicion and hostility, both sides were forced to work together by the headlong course of events attendant upon the collapse of the Hapsburg E m pire. In August, 1918, the Hapsburg South Slavs held a congress in Ljubljana and established the Yugoslav National Council under the leadership of Father Koroshetz, head of the Catholic Slovenian Populist party. It was to this body that the Austrian military authorities handed over their power on October 28. The following day the council proclaim ed the independence of the South Slav provinces from Hapsburg sovereignty. The Austrians and the Hungarians had no choice but to recognize the authority of the council. But the Allies refused to do so at this time, and the Italians seized the opportunity to move their troops into territories claimed by the council. Meanwhile the peasants were


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 619
seizing land and rum ors were spreading of the growing danger of Bolshevism. This critical situation compelled all parties to act swiftly. O n Novem ber 11 the D eclaration of G eneva was signed by K oroshetz for the N ational Council, by Trumbich for the Yugoslav Committee, and by Pashich for the Serbian government. The Declaration called for “one state, formed of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes,” though with the proviso that the former Hapsburg prov inces were to have full autonomy until a National Constituent Assembly met to decide the form of governm ent of the new state. On Novem ber 26 an assem bly m et at Podgorica in M ontenegro, formally deposed King Nicholas and his dynasty, and proclaimed the union of M ontenegro with Serbia. Finally, on De cem ber 1, 1918, representatives of all the South Slav lands m et in Belgrade and formally proclaimed the new Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes.* A t last all the South Slavs were gathered under one llag. But the conllicting viewpoints which had been expressed during the w ar still rem ained to be re solved. And a portent of the trouble ahead was the little-noticed fact that Stjepan Radich, leader of the Croatian Peasant party, had refused to recognize the transfer of power to Prince Alexander, demanding, instead, an independent peasant Croatian republic.
LAND RF.FORM
The first Yugoslav governm ent was form ed in January, 1919. It repre sented all groups, the prem ier being the Serbian statesm an Stojan Protich, the vice-premier the Slovene Koroshetz, and the minister of foreign alfairs the Dal m atian Trumbich. A provisional National Assembly was also formed, compris ing delegates from the Serbian Skupshtina and the Yugoslav National Council together with representatives of M ontenegro and the Voivodina. The cabinet and the assembly addressed themselves to pressing problems such as the nego tiation of the peace treaties and the reconstruction of devastated Serbia. But the outstanding problem, in the view of most Yugoslavs, was that of land re form. In view of the fact that much criticism has been levied against the drastic land distribution th at took place in Y ugoslavia, it is well to recall that this was quite unavoidable at that time. Repeated promises of land reform had been made during the course of the war by both the Serbian government and the Yugoslav National Council. Also, nationalist considerations were involved in the dem and for land distribution: in the north ern areas five out of every six landlords were foreigners, mostly Austrians and Hungarians. It was unthink able after four years of war that landless Yugoslav peasants should continue to work the estates of enemy nationals. In the south, religious considerations en tered, most of the landowners in M acedonia and Bosnia-Herzegovina being Moslems. Another factor that entered into the picture was the contrast between the small peasant plots that prevailed in Serbia and the large estates that domi nated the former Hapsburg provinces. The perpetuation of this contrast was
* The name of the new state was changed in 1929 to Yugoslavia. This name has been employed here for all periods, in accordance with common usage.


620 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
politically impossible now that the Hapsburg power had been broken. Also, it should be recalled that the peasants were in a revolutionary frame of mind in 1918 and that for this reason the landlords accepted land reform uncomplain ingly at the beginning for fear of more radical developments. In fact, in many areas the peasants were overrunning and dividing the estates without waiting for government action. Thus the land reform legislation that was eventually passed simply gave legal recognition to a fait accompli and defined precisely the terms of expropriation. The basic land bill was the “Interim Decree” of February 25, 1919. This set forth three general principles that were to govern land distribution: abolition of all feudal and quasi-feudal institutions, expropriation of a portion of the large estates above a certain minimum, and payment of indemnity to the form er landowners. The weakness of this bill was its prelim inary character, merely defining the general lines of reform. Because of the very different con ditions prevailing in the various provinces it was necessary to prepare specific legislation for each area. But the delay gave the landlords time to organize op position and to fight against terms which they would have gladly accepted in 1919. With the passage of time, land reform unfortunately became a political football. The most flagrant case was that of the Moslem landowners, who con trolled a bloc of seats in the Skupshtina representing the sizable Moslem m inor ity in M acedonia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. We shall see that Pashich needed these M oslem votes to get his centralist constitution through the Constituent Assembly. So he struck a bargain by which he gave very generous terms to the Moslem landowners when their estates were divided, and in return he received their votes and thus passed his constitution. U nder these conditions a large num ber of land bills were passed d ur ing the following years. Because of the complexity of the problem and the opposition of the landlords, a full legal settlem ent had not been reached in certain regions even by the 1930’s. In fact, a few cases rem ained unresolved when W orld W ar II began. Despite this vacillation and delay, the fact remains that a tremendous am ount of land changed hands throughout the country, with the exception of Serbia and M ontenegro, where it was felt that land re form was not needed. Well over 2,000,000 hectares were distributed, not counting forest land. The land distributed represented over a quarter of all the arable land. A nd the beneficiaries were 500,000 peasant families, or more than one out of every four.
TRIU M PH OF CENTRALISM :
1 9 2 1 CONSTITUTION
The Constituent Assembly was elected on November 28, 1920. The election itself was eminently fair, a quality that was not to be characteristic of later elections. See the table on the following page.


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 621
Party Deputies elected Democrats (Davidovich and Pribichevich) 92 Radicals (Pashich) 91 Communists 58 Croatian Peasant party (Radich) 50 A grarians 39 Slovene People’s party (K oroshetz) 27 Moslems (Spaho) 32 Socialists 10 Miscellaneous 20
Total 419
Source: Charles A. Beard and G. Radin, The Balkan Pivot: Yugoslavia (New York, 1929), p. 41.
In the light of the events of the interwar years, the most im portant of these parties were the Radical and the Croatian Peasant. The Radical party was founded in 1881 by N ikola Pashich, the outstanding figure in Serbian poli tics before the rise of Tito. W hite-bearded, grave, and taciturn, Pashich was an anom alous figure among his voluble and explosive countrym en. He resembled most closely a Tam m any Hall chieftain in the party m achine that he organized, in his political shrew dness, and in his capacity to foresee trends and to adjust his policies accordingly. His party at first lived up to its nam e, fighting vigor ously for local self-government and improved agricultural credit, and support ing parliam ent as against the crown and the bureaucracy. It also gained great prestige by leading the struggle against the O brenovich dynasty and its proA ustrian foreign policy. With the accession of the Karageorgevich dynasty in 1903 the R adical party cam e to pow er and rem ained in pow er alm ost w ithout interruption until Pashich’s death in 1926. But with its change in status the p arty soon also changed in character. Its leaders dropped their radical phrases and lost their form er interest in political liberties and peasant welfare. G radu ally it became the main party of the rising Serbian bourgeoisie. This process was greatly accelerated after 1918. The possibilities for m oney-m aking were far bigger in the new Y ugoslavia than in the parochial pre w ar Serbia. The small shopkeepers and tradesmen of the pre-1914 period grew to the proportions of big businessmen. And since political power was the quick est road to business success, big business had good reason to consolidate its hold on the Radical party. The party became correspondingly conservative; yet it managed to retain its hold over the Serbian peasantry. The reason was partly Pashich’s great prestige and partly the efficient party m achine which dispensed patronage and made loans. Thus the Radical party remained to the end the strongest party in Serbia. It also rem ained strongly nationalist, the formidable bulw ark of .G reat Serbism. The Croatian Peasant party was the antithesis of the Radical party in almost every respect. It was organized in 1905 by the Radich brothers, two in tellectuals of peasant stock. Antun was the original thinker who evolved the party ideology, while Stjepan was the political organizer and brilliant dema


622 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
gogue who moved the multitudes. Before the war the party had no chance be cause of the extremely limited franchise which allowed less than 1 per cent of the peasants to vote. B ut in the 1921 elections, held under universal suffrage, the party showed that it had the support of the overwhelming majority of the Croatian voters. This gave rise to serious complications because at the end of the war Stjepan Radich had voted against the union of Croatia with Serbia. At the time little attention was paid to him, but now he was the m aster of Croatia. H e was to rem ain the m aster until his assassination in 1928. A nd after that his party continued to receive the support of the great majority of Croatians until the German invasion in 1941. The party owed its success to the fact that it voiced perfectly the griev ances and aspirations of the Croatian peasants. They were heartily sick of war, and a m ain plank in the p a rty ’s platform was pacifism and antim ilitarism . They were determined not to submit again to rule from a distant capital, so the party called for an independent peasant republic. A fter the creation of Yugoslavia it dropped its republican plank, but it dem anded instead a federal state structure with full local government. In economic m atters as well as political the party was strongly egalitarian. It glorified the peasant and viewed the growing big business clique in B elgrade.w ith the traditional distrust of the countryside. Specifically, it dem anded land to the peasants and a drastic reduction of mili tary, bureaucratic, and other state expenses in order to ease the tax burden on the rural population. Obviously there was bound to be serious trouble given this conflict on every crucial point between the leading Serbian and Croatian parties. U nfortunately, Stjepan R adich’s character and tem peram ent increased the friction. He was a m an of great talents, generous impulses, and deep social conscience, but he was also a fuzzy thinker and completely unpredictable. He never knew clearly what he wanted or what strategy he should pursue. Pashich and the other Serbian leaders were alienated by his erratic behavior apart from any question of ideology. It was a great misfortune for Croatia and Yugoslavia that his clear-headed brother died in 1919. The Communist party, to which we now turn, arose out of the prewar Social Democratic parties that had existed in Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, the V oivodina, and Bosnia-H erzegovina. W ith the trium ph of the Bolsheviks in Russia these parties split, the right-wing elements uniting to form the Socialist party of Yugoslavia and the left-wing groups to form the Communist party of Yugoslavia. A few m onths before the 1920 elections the Communist party pro claimed its goal to be the establishm ent of a Yugoslav Soviet Republic which would unite “with all neighboring peoples for the establishment of a Soviet federation of B alkan-D anubian countries, which will be an integral p a rt of the international federation of Soviet R epublics.” 3 T o everyone’s surprise the party won 58 seats in the elections that followed. In the light of developm ents during W orld W ar II it is significant th at m ost of the votes cam e not from the small industrial proletariat but rather from an illiterate peasantry suffering hardships and demanding land. The Belgrade authorities were shocked by the strength of the Commu


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 623
nists. They took advantage of the m urder of the minister of interior by a young Com m unist in 1921 to suppress the party. By a m ajority vote of the assembly the party and its press were declared illegal and the party deputies were un seated. During the entire period to W orld W ar II the party rem ained outlawed, its members being forced to operate underground. As will be recalled from Chapter 31, their effectiveness was undermined, however, by the Comintern resolutions concerning national self-determination which called for the parti tioning of Yugoslavia into several independent republics. But with the outbreak of W orld W ar II and the occupation of the country by Axis forces, the Yugo slav Communists, thanks to their underground experience, were able to rise to the top. Of the other parties in the 1920 elections, the Dem ocratic was by far the largest with 92 seats. It was organized in 1919 and comprised two groups: the Hapsburg Serbs led by Svetozar Pribichevich, and the Independent Radicals who, under the leadership of Ljuba Davidovich, seceded at the beginning of the century from the Radical party when the latter became conservative. The Democratic party later split and never again approached the Radical and Cro atian Peasant parties in parliam entary strength. The Agrarian party, which won 39 seats in the 1920 elections, declined to insignificance thereafter. The reason was partly the land reforms which tempered peasant radicalism, and partly the ability of the Radicals to retain the support of the Serbian peasants. Since the C roatian peasants were loyal to Radich there remained only the Slovenes. But they in turn were attached to the Catholic Slovene People’s party led by F ather A nton Koroshetz. This party served its supporters well, organizing an efficient system of cooperatives and pressing for social legislation. In the political field K oroshetz was interested prim arily in winning autonom y for Slovenia. W hen he failed to achieve this by opposing the Belgrade centralists, he switched his tactics and in the 1930’s struck a bargain with them which gave him w hat he wanted. In addition to the Socialists who, like their opposite num bers in the other Balkan countries, were never able to challenge the Communists effec tively, there remains the Moslem party. Its strength lay in Bosnia and its lead ers were opportunists who before 1914 had supported the Austrian regime and who now supported most of the Belgrade governments. In return they obtained m aterial advantages for their coreligionists, especially positions on the state railroads. Indeed, so m any Belgrade cabinets were able to rem ain in office be cause of M oslem and Slovene votes that a popular saying appeared to the effect that the Moslems and the Slovenes together ruled Yugoslavia. This proved to be justified in the case of the 1921 constitution, which was passed only with the aid of M oslem votes. Pashich was determined to secure a centralist constitution based on that of Serbia with some modifications to meet the needs of the new enlarged state. Radich was unalterably opposed to such a constitution but, since he boycotted the assembly, Pashich did not have to contend with the 50. Croatian votes. Pashich was also rid of the 58 Communist votes after the party had been outlaw ed.T hus he was able to push through the constitution by 223 out of the 419 votes in parliam ent. It is sig


624 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
nificant that the great bulk of the positive votes were Serbian— the Radicals (91) and the Democrats (92). The remaining votes that were needed were virtually bought— M oslems (32), and Slovene Peasant (8). It is also notew orthy that the parties which supported and passed the constitution represented less than half of the popular vote cast for the members of parliament. T he “V idovdan C onstitution,” nam ed after St. V itus’s D ay, the Serbian national holiday on which it was voted and on which Francis Ferdinand was m urdered in 1914, was based on the prew ar Serbian constitution. It provided for a one-cham ber parliam ent and a highly centralized administrative system. The king controlled the army and chose the premiers in accordance with the balance of votes in parliam ent. In practice this gave him wide choice because proportional representation created a large num ber of parties. The prewar con stitution had accorded the Orthodox Church a privileged status, but the new docum ent granted equality and toleration to all religions. Although more liberal in matters of religion, the new constitution placed more restrictions on freedom of press, speech, and public meetings. In fact, despite the customary phrases of W estern liberalism incorporated in the constitution, the police power of the government was without practical limits. A nd so it proved to be in practice during the following years. The constitution did include a long section on social reform, but this proved to be meaningless with the exception of the agrarian reform which was already under way. In short, the new constitution was a re production of that of 1903 with such modifications as were needed to adjust to the new conditions.
POLITICAL PATTERN
Political developments during the two decades between the adoption of the constitution in 1921 and the G erm an invasion of 1941 may be divided, for the sake of convenience, into three periods. The first, from 1921 to 1928, was characterized by political deadlock between the supporters of centralism and of federalism. The second period, from 1929 to 1934, was one of dictatorship, which was established by King Alexander in the hope of ending the political crisis. T he assassination of A lexander in 1934 inaugurated the third period, rule by the regency, which lasted until the Axis occupation in 1941. The outstanding feature of Yugoslav politics during these two decades was the domination of the entire state apparatus by the Belgrade centralists. T his dom ination is clearly revealed by a statistical analysis of the individuals who filled the top posts in the various branches of government. D uring the parliam entary era from December, 1918, to January, 1929— a period of 121 months— Serbians held the premiership for 117 months, ministry of the army and navy for 121 m onths, m inistry of the interior (which controlled the police) for 111 m onths, m inistry of foreign affairs for 100 m onths, ministry of finance for 118 months, ministry of education for 110 months, and the ministry ,of justice for 105 months. Likewise in the era of dictatorship, from January, 1929, to M arch, 1941— a period of 147 months— Serbians held the premiership, the m inistry of the arm y and navy, and the ministry of foreign affairs for 147


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 625
months, the ministry of the interior for 129 months, the ministry of finance for 98 months, the ministry of education for 126 months, and the ministry of jus tice for 132 months. In addition to controlling the main ministries, the Serbians also con trolled the arm ed forces. Of the 165 generals in active service in 1938, 161 were Serbs, 2 were Croats, and 2 Slovenes. Also, all the im portant diplomatic posts, such as the ambassadorships to Paris, Rome, London, and Berlin, were always in the charge of Serb diplomats. Likewise, the four tremendously im portant state financial institutions— the National Bank (the central bank), the State M ortgage Bank, the Postal Savings System, and the C hartered Agricul tural Bank— were always headed by Serbs. Finally, it should be noted that the Serbians, in controlling these focal pow er positions, also controlled a vast am ount of patronage which they utilized effectively as a political w eapon.4 There arises at this point the basic question of how the Serbs were able to m aintain their hegemony in view of the fact that the centralist constitution was supported by parties that received a minority of the popular vote in the 1920 elections. O ne of the im portant factors undoubtedly was A lexander’s com plete control of the army. This control dated from the extremely controversial “Saloniki Affair” of June, 1917. At that time Alexander brought to trial before a court in Saloniki the leaders of the Black H and, including Colonel Dimitrijevich himself. It will be recalled from C hap ter 29 that in the im m ediate p re war years the Black H and under the leadership of the redoubtable colonel had dom inated the army, terrorized governm ent officials and even the court, planned the assassination of Francis Ferdinand, and generally functioned as a state within the state. Prince Alexander, who was more strong-willed than his father, was determined to destroy this rival power before the time came to return to liberated Serbia. Accordingly, the Black Hand leaders were found guilty at the Saloniki trial of various crimes that apparently were trum ped up, such as negoti ating secretly with the Germ ans and planning to assassinate Alexander. Dimitrijevich and two others were executed, and about two hundred other officers were imprisoned or sent to Africa for internment. Having wiped out the Black Hand, Alexander then organized the so-called W hite H and, comprising loyal and trusted officers. He showered favors upon this group during the interw ar period, and in return he was assured of full military support at all times. A nother factor explaining Serbian hegemony in the Yugoslav state was the inability of the opposition to act in concert. Radich m ust bear a good deal of the blame for this situation. He undoubtedly erred in boycotting the assem bly when the constitution was being debated. And in the following years he confused friends and foes alike by his erratic behavior, now defying the gov ernm ent and going to jail, now joining the governm ent and accepting office. Also, small minority groups like the Slovenes and the Moslems made it possible for many cabinets to remain in power by supporting them in return for various concessions. . A final factor explaining Serbian hegemony in Yugoslavia was the dili gent use of all the various legal and extralegal devices that governments every


626 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
where, and especially in the Balkans, have utilized to remain in power. These included patronage, bribery, gerrymandering, rigged elections, unfair electoral laws, and, when necessary, the use of the police and gendarmerie. One specific example might be mentioned. Every politician was eligible for a lifelong pen sion after having served as a minister or an undersecretary for one year. A very large num ber fell into this category, and they all felt strongly constrained to forbear from voicing any opposition to the royal dictatorship established in 1929. All these facts suggest that Radich was not unjustified when he com plained that few non-Serbs were perm itted to hold high office, and even these few were “not in the government but attached to the government.” 5
p o l i t i c a l d e a d l o c k : 1921-1928
Following the adoption of the constitution, the country was ruled for a short while by the same coalition of Radicals, Democrats, and Moslems that had put through the document. On M arch 18, 1923, new parliam entary elec tions were held with the following results: Radicals, 108 seats; Croatian Peas ants, 70; Democrats, 51; Slovenes, 21; Bosnian Moslems, 18; M acedonian M os lems, 14; Agrarians, 10; miscellaneous, 20. Both the Radicals and the Croatian Peasants had increased their representation at the expense of the Agrarians, who were almost wiped out, and the Dem ocrats, who lost heavily. Pashich was able to rem ain in office because R adich again decided to boycott parliam ent. He did so because the Serbians rejected his plan for a new constitution which he had proposed in M ay, 1923. T he rejection is not surprising in view of the fact that he demanded that Yugoslavia should be transformed into a loose con federation in which C roatia should have full autonomy, including her own con stitution and army. Such an arrangement was out of the question for Pashich, who con tinued to rule the country with the aid of the M oslem deputies. But in M arch, 1924, all the opposition groups in the assembly reached an agreement to co operate for the overthrow of the Pashich cabinet. They included the Croatians, who decided to return to parliam ent to vote, and the Davidovich faction of the D em ocrats, which was becom ing disillusioned with Pashich’s centralist rule. Pashich could not retain office against such opposition, so he ordered new elections for February 8, 1925. In order to ensure favorable returns Pashich took legal action against the Croatian party leadership. Radich had visited Moscow during the course of a European tour and had established friendly relations with the Commu nist International. U ndoubtedly this was more in the nature of blackmail against Belgrade than a serious alliance with the Bolsheviks. R adich’s egali tarian peasant philosophy was poles apart from communist materialism, as he himself made clear on his return. Nevertheless, the Belgrade government or dered the dissolution of the Croatian Peasant party on the ground that it had placed itself under the orders of an alien subversive organization. All m eet ings and publications of the party were prohibited, and Radich himself was


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 627
imprisoned. Despite this action, the C roatian Peasant party dem onstrated its continued hold on its followers by winning 67 seats. However, the elections did give the governm ent parties (the Radicals and the Independent D em o crats under Pribichevich) a majority of 162 seats against 153 for the oppo sition parties. At this point Radich made one of his unpredictable turnabouts. On July 14, 1925, he reached an agreem ent with Pashich by which he left his jail cell and became minister of education. By the term s of the agreement the Croats were to accept the dynasty and the centralized state, and in return the Serbs were to grant autonom y at the district level and equalize taxation throughout the country. This coalition regime lasted less than a year. Before long the erratic Radich was denouncing the government of which he was a member. In April, 1926, the cabinet was re-formed without the inclusion of Radich, and the old feud was resumed. L ater in the year, in D ecem ber, 1926, Pashich died. His Radical party now lost some of its cohesiveness, giving Alexander more opportunity to intervene in party politics. In February, 1927, another im portant political de velopment occurred when the Slovene leader, Koroshetz, joined the govern ment. H itherto he had opposed the Belgrade· centralists but had gained noth ing for his efforts. Now he joined them and in return his party was given control over the nom ination of adm inistrative officials in Slovenia. This, of course, did not solve the perennial Croatian problem. Rather, it hardened the lines because the Belgrade government now could count on a large bloc of Slovene as well as Moslem votes. Such was the situation when on June 20, 1928, the political tension culm inated in a wild crime in the Skupshtina. A M ontenegrin deputy of the Radical party pulled a revolver and killed two Croatian deputies and wounded three others. One of the wounded was Radich, who died a few weeks later. The Croatian cause now had a martyr.
A LEX A N D ER ’S D IC T A T O R S H IP : 1929-1934
The Croatian peasants responded to the death of their beloved leader by rioting and demanding “a free C roatia.” Their representatives in Belgrade returned home, vowing to have nothing to do with the “bloody Skupshtina” until a new federal Yugoslavia was created. On January 4 and 5, 1929, Alex ander granted audiences to R adich’s successor, V ladim ir M achek. T he latter dem anded a new constitution reorganizing the state into five federal units. Each unit was to have its own constitution and assembly, and the authority of the federal government was to be limited to such essentials as the army, foreign affairs, customs duties, and currency. A lexander asked the Serbian party leaders whether they were willing to accept such a drastic reorganiza tion. When they replied in the negative Alexander issued a decree on January 6, 1929, abolishing the 1921 constitution and dissolving the Skupshtina. L ater in the m onth he suppressed all parties and established his personal dictator ship.


6 2 8 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
The dictatorship nominally ended on September 3, 1931, when A lexander issued a constitution. This document, which remained in force to the 1941 G erm an invasion, was m erely a legal fig leaf for the royal dictator ship, which continued as before. In com parison with the 1921 constitution, it reduced sharply the powers of the Skupshtina, violated the independence of the judiciary, and established a police state with strict censorship, serious abridgment of individual liberties, and severe penalties for actions furthering separatism. Electoral laws issued a few weeks after the constitution abolished proportional representation and stipulated that the party receiving the plural ity in a national election should receive two thirds of the seats. As a result, the governm ent party in the 1935 elections received 303 seats with 1,746,982 votes, while the opposition received only 67 seats with 1,076,345 votes. In the 1938 elections the disparity was even greater— 306 seats with 1,643,783 votes as against 67 seats with 1,364,524 votes. In establishing authoritarian rule in this fashion A lexander doubt less was moved by patriotic motives. The party squabbles and political dead lock of the preceding years had disgusted him. By tem peram ent and by train ing he was intolerant of such proceedings. B rought up at the court of St. Petersburg, he had no real understanding of constitutional government. The Russian Revolution enhanced his intolerance of political opposition, which he came to equate with sedition and Bolshevism. Thus in establishing his dic tatorship he was sincerely convinced that he was thereby benefiting his coun try and his people. Alexander hoped that he would be able to create by force a Yugo slav nationalism to replace the particularism of the past. With this aim in mind he changed the name of his country from the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. But neither the new title nor the new constitution created the desired national unity. The Croats re mained faithful to the memory of Radich and continued to vote for their Peasant party despite electoral shenanigans and police intimidation. The re sult was that the national dictatorship that A lexander had planned becam e in practice an anti-Croatian dictatorship. It did not follow that all Serbians supported A lexander’s dictatorship. It is true th at m em bers of various Serbian parties served A lexander and thereby gained wealth and high office. But this was true also of am bitious members of the other parties, including the Croatian. The parties themselves, however, remained opposed to the dictatorship. Even the Radical party an nounced in January, 1933: “The internal organization of the State should be established by agreement between the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenians. . . . through freely elected representatives of the people who alone have the right to decide the organization of the country.” 8 All the other m ajor parties, in cluding the Slovenes and Moslems, issued statem ents along the same lines. In other words, Alexander, like Carol in Rum ania, and Boris in Bulgaria, was able to attract individual leaders from the various parties. But these persons


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 629
represented only themselves, and their adhesion to the regime did not add to its strength. Alexander was aware of the fact that his dictatorship had proved a failure. Yugoslav nationalism remained only a phrase. Serbian-Croatian enmity was as sharp as ever. The king, according to several sources, decided to end his dictatorship and replace it with a more democratic and decentral ized arrangem ent. If such was his intention, he did not have the opportunity to put it into effect. On O ctober 9, 1934, he was m urdered at M arseilles, to gether with the French foreign minister, Louis Barthou, by a M acedonian terrorist aided by Italian and Hungarian authorities.
r e g e n c y : 1934-1941
The crime united the Yugoslavs in an unexpected manner. The Serbs were incensed that their own Karageorgevich dynasty should have been vic timized. The Croats had no special love for Alexander, but they did not miss the significance of Italian involvem ent in the m urder in view of Italy’s wellknown aspirations to the Dalmatian coast. This explains the impressive pro cessions that greeted the royal coffin during its passage through the country to Belgrade. The brief moment of national solidarity afforded a chance for some conciliatory gesture to the Croats, but unfortunately the opportunity was allowed to pass. A lexander had provided in his will for a three-m an regency to rule in the nam e of his young son, Peter. Prince Paul, A lexander’s cousin, was the first regent, and in practice he ruled the country from the beginning. He was ill-suited for his task, being a dilettante and m ore interested in his art collec tion than in Y ugoslav politics. He began auspiciously, however, by releasing M achek from prison and pursuing a conciliatory policy in the hope of fur thering a settlement. But a compromise was becoming increasingly difficult because extremist elements were appearing in both the Serbian and Croatian camps. Among the Serbs it was the fascist Yugoslav N ational party consisting of various generals and politicians who opposed any weakening of the 1931 constitution and any concessions to the Croats. At the other extreme was a group of Croatian terrorists led by A nte Pavelich and known as the Ustashi. (T h e w ord m eans “ insurgent,” and in Serbo-C roat it is spelled “ U stasha” for the singular and “Ustashi” for the plural.) This organization had been out lawed for some time and its leaders lived in Italy and Hungary where, among other things, they participated in the planning of A lexander’s m urder. T he new regime began by holding elections in M ay, 1935. We have seen that the electoral law enabled the government to obtain 303 seats to the opposition’s 67, even though it received only 1,746,982 votes as against 1,076,345 for the other side. M achek therefore decided to continue the boy cott of parliament. Paul attem pted to break the deadlock by dismissing the cabinet and appointing a banker, Milan Stoyadinovich, as premier. Liberal circles hoped that this portended a relaxation of the dictatorship, especially


630 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
since Stoyadinovich earlier had written a pam phlet advocating recognition of the Soviet Union. But these hopes were soon to be dashed. Stoyadinovich’s foreign policy, which we shall exam ine in C hapter 37, involved a shift tow ard the Axis and away from Y ugoslavia’s traditional pro-W est orientation. Prince Paul may have been primarily responsible for this shift since he was uninterested in domestic politics and concentrated his attention on foreign affairs. In the domestic field Stoyadinovich did make cer tain concessions. He granted amnesty to ten thousand political prisoners, slightly relaxed the police pressure, and tolerated the activities of the Croatian Peasant party. But these moves were really superficial. Stoyadinovich did not seriously attem pt to reach a settlement of the basic constitutional question. A nd the reason was that he was able to organize a new political party that had sufficient votes to keep him in office. This was the Yugoslav Radical Union, which comprised three elements— a section of the Radical party led by Stoyadinovich, the Moslem party of Bosnia led by Spaho, and the C ath olic Slovene People’s party led by K oroshetz. Koroshetz, as a Catholic, was anxious to settle the Croatian problem. He encouraged Stoyadinovich to negotiate a concordat with the V atican in 1937 giving the Catholic Church a num ber of privileges. It was hoped that this would appeal to the more conservative Croats and induce them to accept a settlement that would not necessitate the introduction of a democratic sys tem. Stoyadinovich defended the concordat by pointing out th at in 1919 all religions had been prom ised full equality. During the intervening years both the O rthodox Christians and the Moslems had received statutory definition of their legal position. Accordingly, he presented the concordat as an overdue application of the principle of equality conceded in 1919. But the O rthodox Church leaders bitterly attacked the settlement, maintaining that certain con cessions went beyond equality and bestowed exclusive privileges on the Catholics. The outcome of the struggle between the defenders and the oppo nents of the concordat sheds a revealing light on the political balance in Yugoslavia at this time. The fascist Yugoslav National Union tried to mobilize the outburst of O rthodox religious feeling against Stoyadinovich by repre senting the concordat as a betrayal of the Serbs to the Italians. The response was hardly what they expected. Violent demonstrations occurred in Belgrade, but the crowds shouted not for a dictator but for a return to democratic in stitutions. Even in Catholic Croatia, where Stoyadinovich had hoped for a favorable reaction, there was general indifference. Many Croatians interpreted the concordat as an attem pt to drive a wedge between the peasants and their clergy and thereby to break the unity of the Croat opposition. M achek washed his hands of the affair by announcing that the Croatians were in terested in political rather than religious reform. The lack of interest, in Croatia, together with the furious opposition in Serbia, led Stoyadinovich to announce early in 1938 that he would not attem pt to pass the concordat, through parliament.


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 631
EVE OF WAR
Out of the storm over the concordat arose an im portant political de velopment. In October, 1937, a united opposition bloc was formed compris ing the Croatian Peasant party, the A grarian and Democratic parties, and the Serbian Radical. The latter consisted of those elements that had refused to join Stoyadinovich in the Yugoslav Radical Union. These parties signed a manifesto setting forth the basis of their collaboration. They agreed that the constitutions of 1921 and 1931 had no validity because they were made without the full consent of the sovereign people. Thus the existing government was held to be without legal status. The opposition bloc therefore demanded that a new and fully dem ocratic electoral law be enacted preparatory to free elections for a constituent assembly. This assembly would then seize the nettle of federalism versus centralism and determ ine the form of government with the authority of an unquestioned popular mandate. Stoyadinovich’s reply to the opposition program was th at constituent elections and a new constitution would divide the country at a time when the international situation was critical. Point was given to his argum ent in M arch, 1938, when H itler annexed A ustria and N azi divisions reached Y ugoslavia’s northern frontier. The mutilation of Czechoslavakia at M unich in September, 1938, further strengthened the prem ier’s position. In order to test public opinion he ordered elections for December 11, 1938. A unique feature of the cam paign was Stoyadinovich’s adoption of fascist “leadership” techniques. H e was accompanied on his electoral tours by uniformed green-shirted youths who greeted him with cries of Vodja! Vodja! ( “Leader! Leader!” ). The returns were significant in several respects. The opposition in creased its vote from 1,076,345 in 1935 to 1,364,524, or to 41 per cent of the total vote. T he 1931 electoral law, how ever, was still in force, and it gave the governm ent party 303 seats to the opposition’s 67. T he regional distribution of the vote was also instructive. Stoyadinovich received 70 per cent of the votes in Serbia and M achek 80 per cent in C roatia and Dalm atia. This was impressive evidence of the deep gulf between Serb and C roat which three years of the Stoyadinovich regime had failed to bridge.. The continued discord in Yugoslavia caused much concern because of H itler’s success in using the Sudeten G erm ans to disrupt Czechoslovakia. The C roatian Ustashi were only too willing to be used in a similar manner, and the presence of Germ an divisions along the frontier removed the Czechoslovak-Yugoslav analogy out of the realm of theory. This situation led Prince Paul to replace Stoyadinovich in February, 1939, with Dragisha Tsvetkovich, a Radical party boss. Tsvetkovich was. a man of limited intelligence but ready to carry out P au l’s orders. In A pril, 1939, P aul did order him to begin negotiations with Machek. The complete disappearance of Czechoslo vakia a month earlier apparently convinced Paul that there was no more time to lose. Two procedures were open for dealing with the C roatian problem .


632 Age oj War and Crisis: 1914
One was to form a coalition cabinet in which representatives of the Croats and of all the Serbian parties would sit together and work out a solution. This would m ean th at Stoyadinovich’s Yugoslav Radical U nion, which still was the basis of the governm ent in Belgrade, would have to abandon its monopolistic position, and that more democratic electoral procedures and governm ental practices would be dem anded for Serbia as well as for Croatia. The second procedure was to open direct discussion between the Belgrade government and M achek to define the powers and territorial extent of an autonomous Croatia. This involved the danger of widening Serbo-Croat dif ferences, but it also gave the governm ent an opportunity to drive a wedge be tween the Serbian and the C roatian parties in the opposition bloc. The gov ernment chose the second method, and after some hesitation Machek agreed to accept negotiations on this basis, which implied betrayal of his allies He did so because of the impatience of his own followers, the pressure of the rapidly deteriorating international situation, and the obvious unwillingness of Prince Paul to consider the demands of the Serbian opposition parties. After weeks of negotiations Tsvetkovich and Machek concluded their Sporazum, or Agreement, on August 26, 1939. It defined the frontiers of the new autonom ous Croatia, «Hotting to it 27 per cent of the territory of Yugo slavia and 29 per cent of the population. C roatia was given full autonom y in internal administration and finances, including the right to elect her own as sembly. In return M achek agreed to enter the Belgrade government as vice prem ier. W orld W ar II began a week after the Agreement was signed. Prince Paul congratulated himself for having handled the old problem so neatly. But the situation in reality was little im proved. The opposition Serbian parties were bitter at having been ignored, and accused M achek of having betrayed the cause of democracy in Yugoslavia. On the other hand, extremist elements in C roatia com plained that M achek should have dem anded more territory and more autonomy. Furtherm ore, the Slovenes and the Moslems immediately began pressing for autonomy rights com parable to those won by the Croats. Thus Yugoslavia was in a state of flux when G erm an armies invaded the country on April 6, 1941 The pressure of the international crisis had con tributed much toward breaking the old log jam of centralism versus federal ism. But now w ar and occupation ended what chance there may have existed for a peaceful settlem ent of Y ugoslavia’s problem s.
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT
Serbia emerged from W orld W ar I greatly enlarged but also terribly devastated. It is estim ated that her battle casualties, on a per capita basis, were two and a half times those of France and three times those of Britain and Italy. In addition, both her army and civilian population suffered heavily from the typhus and other epidemics connected with the war. The death toll appears to have been especially high among the better educated, who had


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 633
served as officers in the arm y and who had functioned in civilian life as teach ers, doctors, lawyers, and so on. This decim ation of the flower of Serbia’s m anhood began not in 1914 but in 1912 with the first Balkan W ar. The South Slavs who had been under .Hapsburg rule had been required to serve in the imperial army, so they also suffered war losses, though not comparable with those of the Serbians. T here is no doubt th at Y ugoslavia, like other E u ropean countries, was held back a good deal in the postw ar years by the loss of such a large portion of her intelligentsia. In fact, many observers attribute the shortcom ings of Yugoslav public life in large p art to the holocaust of the war years. The toll in treasure was com parable to the toll in blood. “W orld W ar I,” a Serbian economist wrote, “brought about a great evenness in the distribution of wealth. Everybody becam e more or less a beggar.” 7 The loss of livestock is typical, the num ber of cattle declining by 27.4 per cent, horses by 35.1 per cent, pigs by 46.6 per cent, and sheep by 54.6 per cent. A gri culture suffered a reduction of its productive capacity because of the shortage of manpower and draft power, the lack of manure and commercial fertilizers, and the destruction or deterioration of housing and of farm implements. T ransportation facilities also declined drastically during the war years. Roads were not properly maintained, many railroad tracks and bridges were blown up, and some of the rolling stock was carried away by the invaders. Yugoslavia began the postwar period with a problem of integration as well as of reconstruction. During the preceding centuries, the various provinces of the enlarged state had advanced to varying economic levels and developed different economic institutions. The former Hapsburg provinces of Slovenia, Croatia, and the Voivodina were much further ahead in both in dustry and agriculture than the former Turkish territories of Macedonia, M ontenegro, and Serbia. On the other hand, Serbia, with its small peasant plots, had a more equitable social structure than the Hapsburg provinces with their large estates and predom inantly foreign landowners. We have seen that this disparity in social organization contributed greatly to the pressure for land reform at the end of the war. Yugoslavia also faced the task of inte grating several fiscal systems and transportation networks. The latter posed a particularly difficult problem because the A ustrian authorities had delib erately sought to isolate Serbia from the Hapsburg Slavs. Consequently, no adequate link existed between the Serbian and Austro-H ungarian railway systems with the exception of the Orient Express trunk line stretching on to Istanbul. Yugoslavia thus found that she possessed a disconnected railway system built with three different gauges. Turning from the afterm ath of war to postwar developments, we find that agriculture rem ained the principal source of livelihood in Yugoslavia during the interwar years. In 1921, 79 per cent of the population was en gaged in this occupation, and in 1938 the percentage had fallen only to 75.. By all odds the outstanding developm ent in agriculture following W orld W ar I was (lie division of the large estates am ong the peasantry. We noted early in


634 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
this chap ter th at approxim ately one fourth of all the cultivated land was distributed after 1918 and that one out of every four peasant families bene fited from the reform. The difficulties of the Yugoslav peasants were by no means permanently solved by this drastic upheaval. In fact, the peasants were at least as badly off by the eve of the second world war as they had been on the eve of the first. The leading factors explaining the plight of the peasantry were the rapid increase in population, the apathy of the government, the operation of the “price scissors,” the lack of credit, and the heavy burden of taxation. The population problem in Yugoslavia was similar to that which prevailed throughout the Balkans. T he total population increased rapidly from 11 .,985,000 in 1921 to 15,973,000 in 1941, a grow th of 3,988,000 or 33V6 per cent in two decades. Em igration did not offer a way out, as it did before 1914, because of the barriers erected by the United States and the British Dom in ions. Between 1930 and 1938 the emigrants exceeded the returnees by only 57,237. A t the same time industry expanded so modestly that it was able to absorb only an insignificant percentage of the annual population increase. Consequently, the growing population had no place to go, and it piled up, year after year, in the already overpopulated villages. In Yugoslavia, as in the other Balkan countries, a much larger number of peasants were forced to eke out a living from each unit of arable land than in the W estern European countries.* It is estim ated th at in 1930 fully 61.5 per cent of the rural popu lation was “surplus,” in the sense that it was not needed for the performance of the agricultural work. The population pressure was particularly disastrous in its effects because of the low productivity of Yugoslav agriculture com pared to that of the W est.f This combination of a constantly increasing population and a per sistently low productivity created a vicious circle that paralyzed the entire Yugoslav economy. The peasants were unable to save a portion of their in come for investm ent to increase productivity. Since increased investm ent is a prerequisite for economic progress it becomes apparent why rural over population brought Yugoslav agriculture to a standstill. And this in turn af fected the rest of the economy, since an impoverished peasantry that consti tuted three fourths of the total population obviously offered no basis for industrial and commercial expansion. A nother factor explaining the plight of the peasantry was the govern m ent’s tendency, after the land h ad been distributed, to leave the peasants to their lot. In 1929, for example, as noted in Chapter 31, the ministry of agriculture was allotted 1.06 per cent of the total budget funds, and in 1931 the percentage fell to a mere 0.76 per cent. This restricted correspondingly the amount of agricultural education that the ministry could conduct. The government also failed to take adequate measures to cope with the peasants’ chronic shortage of capital. It did establish certain institutions to provide
* t Statistics in Chapter 31.


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 635
agricultural credit, but only a small minority of rich peasants possessed the required security to avail themselves of the opportunity. A survey made in 1932 revealed that 35.7 per cent of all rural households were in debt and that many of the rem ainder needed credit but were unable to obtain it. The total peasant indebtedness amounted to between 80 and 90 per cent of the total cash income of agriculture in 1931. And it was also discovered that 45 per cent of these peasant debts were from usurious individual lenders and country storekeepers who commonly charged between 100 and 200 per cent per annum. The government not only failed to take adequate measures to help the peasants but also imposed upon them a disproportionate share of the tax load. In the fiscal year 1931-1932 indirect taxes (stam p duties, customs duties, monopoly taxes, turnover tax, and the like), which bore most heavily on those least able to pay, provided 76.3 per cent of the total revenue from taxes. It is estim ated th a t in the sam e year the total tax load on the peasants am ounted to at least 40 per cent of their total cash income and more prob ably about 50 per cent. This was an extremely heavy tax burden in relation to the low aggregate income of the agricultural population. The government did concern itself with the plight of the peasantry to a certain degree, particularly during the depression years. It declared a m ora torium on peasant debts in 1932 and later drastically reduced these debts. Also, it helped the peasants by im porting fine livestock for breeding p u r poses, by distributing select seeds and grapevines, and by providing at cost various drugs for the control of livestock diseases such as hog cholera. These and other measures undoubtedly helped the peasants to a certain degree. But the fact that they were inadequate to cope with the basic ail ments of Yugoslav agriculture was evidenced by the growing pauperization of the countryside. It was indicated by the unhappy position of the 43 per cent of the peasants who were “surplus.” It was also dem onstrated by the in creasing number of peasants who lost their land or who were unable to ob tain any when they came of age. Five hectares were considered necessary in most regions to support a family. B ut by 1931, 16.8 per cent of the peasants had one hectare or less; 17 per cent had between one and two hectares; and 34 per cent between two and five hectares. Thus 67.8 per cent of the peasants had five hectares or less. T he state of Y ugoslav agriculture was also reflected by the chronic indebtedness of the peasants. In fact there existed not only the disparity between poor and rich peasants, but also that between poor peasants and those nonpeasants who flourished in the villages as country storekeepers, tavern keepers, lawyers, and usurers. Frequently these people did not keep the land that they acquired because of nonpaym ent of debts. They found it more profitable to sell the land and use the proceeds again in usury or in trade. Som etim es they preferred to invest their capital in some urban enterprise, a procedure that further aggravated the acute shortage pf capital in the villages. A peasant spokesm an graphically described his plight and that of his fellow villagers as follows:


636 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Our population is 2,500. We have 400 gospodarstva (families or homes which exist as independent economic units). We have 2,000 acres of soil, of which 300 are not cultivated because occupied by buildings or otherwise un available. That leaves us 1,700 acres, or about four acres per family. Which is not enough. To live at all, even according to our standards, a family of five or six should have at least eight acres to cultivate. But since some of us have any where from twenty to forty acres, most of the families have not even four, and a great many, aside from the ground their shacks stand on, have no soil what ever. . . . In other words, in this village of 2,000 souls and 1,700 fertile acres, two-thirds of us don’t belong, economically speaking. Two-thirds of us are not really peasants, but village proletariat who barely exist— paupers dependent on the resources, the charity of others. . . . Once upon a time one could go to America and with one’s earnings there support from five to ten persons back here. Now America can’t take us any more. Our emigrants are returning to share our misery. We are as caught in a trap.8
The most serious problem confronting Yugoslav statesmen in the in terw ar years was to find some way out of this agricultural impasse. Since emigration no longer was feasible, and since little additional arable land was available, the only remaining course open was to attem pt to increase the pro ductivity of the soil already tilled. This effort met with little success. One reason was the inertia of the tradition-bound, backward-looking peasantry. Even more im portant was the fact that modern agricultural methods were economically unfeasible under the existing structure of Yugoslav agriculture. The overwhelming majority of the peasants were unable to save enough to finance technological innovations or to incur the risks connected with them. Also, the small size of their farms made the use of machinery unjustifiable for both physical and financial reasons. Furtherm ore, the price relationship between agricultural equipment and agricultural produce was so unfavorable to the latter that it discouraged additional capital investment. A nd if credit was needed to finance any innovations, the exorbitant interest rates greatly increased their cost. There were, of course, certain exceptions to this general picture. In the areas north of the Sava and Danube rivers agriculture was considerably specialized and commercialized, and techniques were relatively advanced. But the overwhelming majority of Yugoslav farm households were primarily subsistence units rather than agricultural business enterprises, and their farming methods were correspondingly primitive. The quagmire in which Yugoslav agriculture found itself led many economists and political leaders to the conclusion that the solution was to be found not in agriculture itself but rather in industry. Accordingly, the govern ment sought to stimulate industry in various ways. It invested heavily in transportation and in certain industries, so that by W orld W ar II the govern ment owned and operated all railroads, all telegraph and telephone lines and radio stations, most of the banks, most of river shipping and harbor storage facilities, some large lum ber mills, num erous coal mines, iron mines, and steel plants, several sugar factories, and all processing facilities for tobacco


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 637
and salt. The government also sought to aid industry by raising high pro tective tariffs. In fact, the tariff system introduced in June, 1925, was among the highest in Europe. Finally, the governm ent encouraged industrial devel opment by granting extremely favorable concessions to foreign investors. M ost of the industrial expansion in the interwar years was financed by foreign capital. In 1937, 33 per cent of private corporation financial resources were foreign-owned. These measures stimulated considerable industrial development dur ing the years betw een the two w orld wars. The m ost im portant, as in all Balkan countries, were the agricultural industries— milling, sugar, alcohol, jam , chocolate, and vegetable-oil refining. N ext in im portance cam e the tex tile industry, and then tim ber and woodworking, metallurgy, and the chemical industry. The over-all developm ent is reflected in the following figures:
Number of Number of Value of Year Factories Workers Investment
1918 100.0 100.0 100.0 1923 135.1 137.9 125.5 1928 163.7 , 159.2 135.9 1933 191.7 176.9 149.5 1938 213.1 188.6 154.9
Source: J. Tom asevich, Peasants, Politics and Economic Change in Yugoslavia (S ta n fo rd , C alif., 1955), p. 638.
So far as the econom ic health of Y ugoslavia is concerned, the sig nificance of the above figures is th at the num ber of industrial workers in creased from about 200,000 in 1918 to 385,000 in 1938, but the population of the country increased in the sam e period from 11,600,000 to 15,600,000, or by 4,000,000, of whom about one half were of working age. In other w ords, industry, despite the governm ent’s efforts, was able to absorb only 19 per cent of the new labor force that entered the m arket during these two decades. Equally disturbing is the fact th at in 1938 the flour-milling and sugar industries were operating at only half capacity, beer brewing at one seventh, and industrial alcohol at one fourth. This low rate of production was due to the lack of purchasing power at home and to the vigorous agri cultural protectionism in the im portant Central European markets. But w hat ever the cause, the inability of the agricultural industries to operate at any where near capacity challenges a favorite thesis of Peasant parties in Yugo slavia and elsewhere— that the problem of rural overpopulation can be solved by establishing industries to process agricultural products. In addition to her industries, Yugoslavia was a rather im portant pro ducer of minerals— much more so than any other Balkan country. Many deposits were exploited during the interwar years, the most im portant being (he Bor copper mines and the T repca lead and zinc mines. O ther deposits included bauxite, iron, chrome, antimony, gold, and silver. In many regions


638 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the opportunity to work in mines made it possible for poor peasants to sup plement their meager farm income and to support their families. On the other hand, the mining industry did not begin to meet the problem of agrarian overpopulation, only 27,000 persons being employed in 1931 in the entire industry. Turning to foreign trade we find that 50 to 60 per cent of the coun try ’s exports in term s of value during the interw ar period consisted of agri cultural and livestock products. This composition reflected, of course, the predominantly agricultural character of the Yugoslav economy. More spe cifically, Y ugoslavia’s exports in o rd er of im portance in the late 1930’s were timber, hogs, copper, wheat and flour, corn, meat, hemp, and lead and zinc concentrates. Im ports in order of im portance in the same period were cotton yarn and cotton products, iron and steel and products, machinery and tools, woolen yarn and products, raw cotton, transportation equipment, and elec trotechnical products. Y ugoslavia’s chief m arkets before 1930 were, in order of im por tance, Italy, Austria, and Germany. This created a conflict between Yugo slavia’s econom ic and diplom atic ties. France, with her balanced econom y, had little need for Y ugoslavia’s raw m aterials. Likewise, the neighboring Balkan countries had economies similar to that of Yugoslavia and therefore exchanged few products. The only significant exceptions were Yugoslav food products to Greece and R um anian oil to Yugoslavia. Thus Yugoslavia in 1930 sent 57.7 per cent of her exports to three revisionist powers— Italy, Germany, and Austria. In the same year, 1930, Yugoslavia began to feel the impact of the world depression. The value of her foreign trade fell by 1932 to 38.7 per cent of the 1929 value. The wholesale price indices of agricultural products fell from 100.0 in 1926 and 118.6 in 1929 to 89.3 in 1930, 74.3 in 1931, 67.5 in 1932, and 57.2 in 1933. This unprecedent slump underm ined the entire economy because the level of agricultural prices determ ined the pur chasing power of the great majority of the population. Furtherm ore, Yugo slavia found it exceptionally difficult to recover from this setback because the industrialized countries of Central and W estern Europe were compelled for financial reasons to reduce their imports of raw materials and foodstuffs from Southeastern Europe. It was at this point that a resurgent Nazi Germany stepped in and established her economic hegemony in Yugoslavia and throughout the Balkans. Yugoslavia originally had had a consistently unfavorable trade bal ance with Germany. Germ any then redressed the balance by buying large amounts of corn, wheat, lard, and meat, part of which it sold on the world m arket for free exchange. Thus the Yugoslav trade balance with Germany became favorable in 1933 and in the following years the clearing balance shifted more and more to the credit of Yugoslavia. One reason for this change, as noted in Chapter 31, was the Nazi commercial policy of accumulating blocked balances throughout Southeastern


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 639
Europe and thereby forcing those countries to become economically depend ent upon Germany. The Yugoslavs tried to break out of the German economic orbit but without success. The fact was that they had to depend upon G er many as their chief m arket because the Western powers were unable or un willing to buy more Yugoslav products. This dependence upon G erm any in creased when Yugoslavia applied economic sanctions against Italy from November, 1935, to September, 1936, because of the Ethiopian affair. Trade with Italy dropped from an average of 1,193.3 million dinars between 1933 and 1935 to 238.9 million dinars in 1936, while trade with G erm any jum ped during the same period from 1,098.1 million dinars to 2,126.7. Thus G erm any took first place in Yugoslav trade in 1936, and in the following years she increased her lead tremendously. In 1937 the German share in Yugoslav exports was 36 per cent and in im ports 32.5 per cent, but in 1938, with the Germ an annexation of Austria, it advanced to 42 per cent and 39.5 per cent respectively. Then with the dismem berm ent of Czecho slovakia in Septem ber, 1938, and M arch, 1939, G erm any took m ore than 50 per cent of Yugoslav exports and supplied about 50 per cent of Yugoslav im ports. A t the same time it should be noted that G erm any took over all Austrian and Czechoslovak investments in Yugoslavia, thereby extending greatly her hold over the national economy. With the outbreak of W orld W ar II in September, 1939, Yugoslavia came more completely under G er m an economic domination. In October, 1939, she found it necessary to grant new trade concessions to Germany, especially greater quotas of metals and foods. In fact, the Yugoslav government had to curtail domestic con sumption of m eat, fats, and other foodstuffs in order to meet the export quotas to G erm any and to Italy. The final step in this penetration of the national economy cam e with the G erm an victories in W estern Europe in the spring of 1940. Germany was thereby able to gain control of a large portion of the French, Belgian, and D utch holdings in Yugoslavia. In this m anner Yugoslavia had fallen under German economic domination by April, 1941, when Hitler ordered his troops to march into the country.
SOCIAL AND CU LTURAL D EV ELO PM EN T
The social trends that we noted in Serbia before 1914 * continued to m anifest themselves in Yugoslavia in the interw ar period. Class differentia tion in the villages proceeded apace, not only between poor and rich peasants, but also between poor peasants and nonpeasants who flourished in the vil lages as country storekeepers, tavern keepers, lawyers, and usurers. A nother trend that persisted during these decades was the increasing penetration of the m oney and m arket econom y into the countryside. It is true that m ost Y ugoslav peasant households practiced an essentially subsistence type of agri culture. On the other hand they all had to sell a portion of their produce on
* Sec C hapter 24.


640 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the m arket in order to obtain money for taxes and for essential commodities such as salt, matches, kerosene, and a few household items and agricultural implements. W ith the passage of time the peasants became accustomed to buying more and more commodities and their financial obligations increased correspondingly. The degree to which the peasants became dependent upon the m arket was demonstrated by the devastating effect of the depression and by the need for government action to reduce debts and declare moratoria. Another trend that continued through the interwar period was the friction between peasant and government or, more broadly speaking, be tween village and city. The factors behind this friction were the same as those before 1914, though they became more acute as time passed. There was the same opposition to conscription, especially in Croatia, where strong pacifist sentiment was articulated by the Croatian Peasant movement. There was also the same resentm ent against the high tariffs and governm ent mo nopolies which raised the prices of necessities such as matches, sugar, to bacco, and farm implements. Finally, the peasants continued to begrudge the expenditure of vast sum s ort the arm y and bureaucracy while they, who paid most of the taxes, received virtually nothing in return. N or was their senti m ent altogether unjustified in view of the fact that during the fiscal year 1931-1932 the ministry of war spent 2,188 million dinars and the ministry of interior 590 million dinars, com pared with 178 million by the ministry of public health and 56 million by the ministry of agriculture. Considering next the actual social conditions prevailing during the interwar period, we find that they were uniformly poor, reflecting the under developed economy of the country. Yugoslavia exported considerable quan tities of foodstuffs, but this was made possible by the low domestic purchasing pow er rather than by a true surplus. A study of food consum ption in the late 1930’s revealed a rath er high average p er capita caloric intake of about 3,000 calories a day. But about 77 per cent of the caloric supply was derived from cereals and 41 per cent from corn alone. In some rural areas corn supplied 85 to 90 p er cent of all calories. This diet, deficient in fats and in protective foods of animal origin, resulted in widespread m alnutrition and contributed to a high incidence of disease. Housing was also definitely substandard. A 1938 survey in the Zagreb region, which was by no means the poorest in the country, showed that 73.2 per cent of all peasant houses had only one room for living and sleeping, that in 63.4 per cent of all peasant households there were five o r m ore persons living and sleeping in one room , and that 48.7 per cent of all houses lacked latrines of any kind. Housing was as poor or even poorer in the cities for the low-income groups, which constituted the majority of the urban population. Families of four to six persons frequently lived in one dam p basem ent room which served for living, cooking, and sleeping. One of the most appalling facts established by a survey in 1934 was that 86 per cent of all people suffering from tuberculosis in Belgrade were sleeping in the same rooms with noninfected people, and that 42.6 per cent of them slept in the same bed with noninfected people.0


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 641
Home and personal cleanliness also left much to be desired, partly because of custom but prim arily because of poverty. .Soap, after all, was an expensive commodity which could be afforded only when the need for more essential goods had been satisfied. Surveys in certain Bosnian villages dis closed that no soap at all was used in washing clothes and little if any in washing the person. Clothes were usually washed with the help of a detergent derived from wood ashes by passing warm water through them. The clothes were soaked in this water for several hours, the length of time depending on whether the owners possessed another change. The process was then com pleted by taking the clothes to a nearby stream where they were beaten and rinsed. The combination of bad nutrition, poor housing, and unsanitary sur roundings contributed to the high incidence of disease. In 1937 Yugoslavia had a higher death rate from pulmonary tuberculosis than any other country in Europe: 19.9 persons per 10,000, followed by Rum ania with 17.8, and H ungary with 15.2. It is estim ated th at in the m id-1930’s betw een 400,000 and 500,000 were suffering from tuberculosis out of a total population of 15,000,000. The incidence of m alaria was even higher— between 500,000 and 600,000 people, or 4 to 5 per cent of the total population. Syphilis was also extremely widespread, about 100,000 being infected in 1939 in Bosnia alone. The disease was transm itted not so much by sexual contact as by the use of the same eating and drinking utensils by all m em bers of the family. As a result a large percentage of the infected were children. O ther diseases that were common included trachoma, typhoid fever, dysentery, scarlet fever, diphtheria, chicken pox, and whooping cough. The public health service com bated these conditions as vigorously as possible by improving the water sup ply in rural areas and by spreading health education, including information concerning nutrition. But many obstacles stood in the way of effective con trol, including shortage of funds and of trained personnel, the concentration of physicians in a few cities, the widespread ignorance and superstition, and, above all, the debilitating poverty of the great majority of the population. Education standards in Yugoslavia were also generally low, though great differences prevailed from region to region. The 1921 census showed a national illiteracy rate of 51.5 per cent. But the regional percentages varied from 8.8 per cent in Slovenia to 23.3 per cent in the Voivodina, 32.2 in Croatia, 49.5 in Dalm atia, 65.4 in Serbia, 67.0 in M ontenegro, 80.5 in Bosnia-Herzegovina, and 83.8 in M acedonia. These figures show that in cultural matters as well as economic the form er H apsburg provinces in the north were far ahead of the form er Turkish territories in the south. The Yugoslav government attem pted to reduce the illiteracy rate dur ing the interwar years. Between 1919 and 1940 the num ber of elementary schools increased from 5,600 to 9,169, the num ber of pupils from 650,000 to 1,493,000, and the num ber of teachers from 11,000 to 31,000. Impressive us this increase was, there still w ere in 1940 about 250,000 children who attended no school. In some cases they were held back by their parents who


642 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
needed their labor, but in most cases the explanation was the lack of schools in inaccessible areas. Consequently the illiteracy rate in 1940 still rem ained at slightly above 40 per cent. The educational system, like most other institutions, was firmly con trolled from Belgrade. The ministry of education appointed, promoted, and dismissed all teachers, who had no right of appeal. It was no secret that many of the numerous education ministers used their authority to prom ote rela tives and political supporters. This unhealthy situation, together with the glaring social and economic injustices in Yugoslav society, alienated a con siderable proportion of the teachers.
The more conscientious teachers observed numerous cases of ineffi ciency in the administration, but their efforts to have the law enforced were ham strung because the central government too often supported those responsible lo cally for the mismanagement. In Uchiteljska Iskra, a Left-wing Serbian teachers’ periodical, there are innumerable letters from teachers who had struggled with Commune presidents, etc., to have village schools put in proper repair, kept clean and supplied with heating. But so long as the latter continued to give political support to the politicians in power, nothing was done to punish them. On the contrary, the teachers themselves found that they were labelled as trouble-makers, with disastrous effect upon their hope of promotion. After 1929, even the little safety-valves offered by papers such as Uchiteljska Iskra were denied them. Out of the conflict in which many teachers found themselves involved between loyalty to the ideals of their profession and the crude interpretation of the claims of the state insisted upon by part of the government circles, there naturally tended to arise in teachers’ minds the idea that education could never play its proper role until changes had been made in the state. In the case of Croat teachers, this often took the form of attaching them to the extreme Croat na tionalists and so gave the Yugoslav government an excuse for disciplining them. Other teachers were attracted by socialist ideas as the one hope for effecting the reforms they desired, just as the peasant students looked to Socialism and Com munism to relieve the distress caused by social and economic inequalities.10
The universities were not controlled from the capital as were the lower schools. Although financed by the education ministry, they elected their rectors and deans and appointed their professors through their senates, subject only to confirmation by the minister. The university students also enjoyed a considerable degree of independence through their corporate bodies, even during the most strict years of the dictatorship. Yet curiously enough the universities were outstanding centers of radicalism. The following explanation of this significant phenom enon is worth noting.
Many of the students were sons of poor peasant families. By great efforts their parents had scraped together the small sums necessary to transport them to the capital and to pay their entrance fees. Having once obtained admission to the university the students kept themselves alive by earning a few pence as tramdrivers, waiters and window cleaners. Undernourished and weak in health, worn out by the double strain of physical and intellectual labour, they grew up to hate


Yugoslavia: 1918-1939 643
the system which caused their sufferings. Familiarised by their teachers with the old principles of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity, they saw around them nothing but injustice, repression and silence. Protests against abuses brought down on their heads the persecution of the apparatus of the Dictatorship. They were driven to the conclusion that only revolutionary methods and solutions could improve the lot of the Serbian people and make Jugoslavia a decent country. . . . Like the Russian intellectuals of the seventies who set themselves to “re turn to the people,” the Serbian students devoted themselves to the service of the people. The movement suffered, perhaps, from a certain naive and exalted romanti cism, but it had a serious effect on the life of the Serbian people. Its followers gave many proofs of resolution, courage and sincerity. In a country where learn ing and knowledge enjoy immense prestige, where the peasant’s son who has a university degree is regarded as a prophet in his own village, the movement was bound to have a powerful influence. . . . None of these tendencies were reflected on the surface of political life, in the manoeuvres of the official political parties, in which the younger generation had no say. But beneath the waters new forces were being created.11
In retrospect it may be said that a fitting epitaph on the tomb of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia would be the following three phrases: federalism versus centralism, rural overpopulation, and the alienation of the intelli gentsia.


33. Bulgaria: 1918—1939
D
. V u l g a r i a n h i s t o r y during the interw ar years was more stormy than that of any other Balkan country. Bulgaria was the first to establish an agrarian regime and the first to experience an agrarian reform program. Bulgaria was also the first to witness the violent overthrow of a duly elected government and the brutal murder of the leader of that govern ment. There then followed years of repression and terrorism, highlighted by such events as the blowing up of the Sofia Cathedral and the establishm ent of a military dictatorship and then a royal dictatorship. The violent swing of the pendulum from radical agrarianism to ex trem e reaction appears paradoxical in view of the fact that Bulgarian society was more egalitarian than that of the neighboring countries. The gap between the rich and the poor was not so wide or glaring as in most parts of the Bal kans. Sofia itself was sober, clean, and unimpressive, with its straight orderly streets and rows of modest houses. It had none of the garishness of Bucharest and Belgrade with their new skyscrapers towering incongruously over low, red-tiled Turkish hovels. Thus the turbulence of B ulgarian politics is to be ex plained not so much by the social and economic institutions of the country as by its unfortunate political history. Ferdinand had discredited his dynasty by engaging in two disastrous wars in 1913 and 1915. The widespread popular reaction compelled him to abdicate in favor of his son Boris. Public feeling was so strong that the dynasty might have been eliminated altogether were it not for Allied disap proval of republicanism in the Balkans. In any case, the old prewar order was even m ore discredited in Bulgaria th an in m ost of the peninsula. This enabled the Agrarian leader, Alexander Stambuliski, to establish his regime and to push through a fairly comprehensive program of social reform. Be cause of the revolutionary atmosphere of these years, Boris had no alterna tive but to accept the changes. The bureaucratic-m ilitary oligarchy that had ruled the country before the war, however, had no intention of surrendering 644


Bulgaria: 1918-1939 645
TSARI ВROD ■
(C A R IBROD) T rn io v o ·
(T lrn o vo ) G abrovo
S o fia · B O S IL IG R A D
T1MOK [C o n s ta n ts a
Ruse
(R uschuk) Danube
V a rn a
B u rg a s]
A k h to p o l
P lovdiv
(P hllip pop olis)·
Is ta n b u l
(C onstantinop le)
K avalla
Sea of Marmora
A lexa n droup o lis (D ede agach)
S aloniki
AEGEAN SEA
BLACK SEA
Edirne (A d ria n o p le ) *(M idye ( M idia)
TERRITORIAL GROWTH OF BULGARIA
1878
1885 1913
Principality of Bulgaria Eastern Rumelia
Northeast Macedonia, South Bulgarian Territories, and Akhtopol Enclave
Formation of Principality of Bulgaria by Berlin Treaty Annexation of Eastern Rumelia Western Thrace, Northeast Macedonia, South Bulgarian Territories, and Akhtopol Enclave ceded by Turkey to Bulgaria
Western Thrace Southern Dobruja Western Enclaves ceded to Yugoslavia
1919 Western Thrace ceded to Greece, and Strum itza, Bosiligrad, Tsaribrod, and Timok Enclaves ceded to Yugoslavia 1940 South Dobruja ceded by Rumania to Bulgaria
its prerogatives perm anently. A fter the peak of the postw ar revolutionary wave had passed, it organized a coup against Stambuliski and successfully executed it in June, 1923, with the aid of disgruntled IM RO terrorists. The following years were characterized by reaction and terrorism calculated to put the peasants back in their place. But the opposition was not all stam ped out, as was evidenced in various elections in which, despite severe restric tions, both the Agrarians and the Communists showed considerable strength. Nevertheless, the combination of the dynasty, the army, and the bureaucracy was able without difficulty to maintain the status quo until the outbreak of World W ar'll.


646 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
s t a m b u l i s k i ’s r e g i m e : 1918-1923
Stambuliski formed a government on October 6, 1919, and signed the Neuilly Peace Treaty the following month, on Novem ber 27.* Upon his return to Sofia he ordered elections for M arch 28, 1920. The following results demonstrated strikingly the new political climate prevailing in the country.
Party Votes Seats Agrarians 346,949 109 Communists 181,525 50 Democrats 97,581 24 Populists 60,992 14 Socialists 55,017 9 Progressives 52,733 9 Radicals 41,770 8 Guenadievists 26,181 4 Liberals 23,537 2 886,285 229
These figures show that the Com m unists alone offered any significant opposition to Stambuliski. The roots of the Bulgarian Communist party go back to 1891, when the Bulgarian Social Democratic party was founded. The Socialists gained steadily in strength though they were ham pered by that perennial question which has plagued working-class parties throughout the world, namely, collaboration or noncollaboration with the progressive bour geois parties. The final result was a split into the orthodox, radical, “N arrow ” Socialist party led by Dim itar Blagoev, and the moderate “B road” Socialist party led by Y anko Sakuzov. It is interesting to note that the split occurred in 1903— the year when the Russian Social Democratic party also divided into Bolshevik and M enshevik groupings. In fact, the issues that rent the two parties were roughly similar, Blagoev insisting, like Lenin, upon a highly centralized and disciplined elite party. Before 1914 the “Broad” Socialists had the larger popular following. B ut during W orld W ar I they lost ground because they supported F erdinand’s intervention in the war in contrast to the “N arrow s,” who took the same position on the war question as did the Bolsheviks. At the end of the war the “N arrow s” were able to capitalize on the war-weariness and on the prestige of the Bolshevik revolution. In 1919 they re-formed themselves into the Com munist party of Bulgaria, and at the elections of that year they won a quarter of all the votes and four times as many seats as the Socialists headed by Sakuzov. In December, 1919, the Communists challenged Stambuliski by leading a railway strike that paralyzed transportation and threatened to end in revolution. The Allies, preferring the Agrarians to the Communists, helped Stambuliski to break the strike. We have seen that in the elections that fol
* See Chapter 30.


Bulgaria: 1918-1939 647
lowed in M arch, 1920, the Communists w ere'by far the strongest group in the country next to the Agrarians. In fact, Stambuliski perceived that, although his party by itself did not quite command a majority in the cham ber, his party together with the Communist controlled 70 per cent of the seats. Stambuliski therefore reached an agreement with the Communists whereby he allowed them to function as freely as the other parties, and in return they supported him in parliament. This arrangem ent enabled Stambuliski to rem ain in office and to put his p arty ’s program into effect. T he B ulgarian A grarian party had been founded in 1900 by Dim itar Dragiev. Its platform called for curtailm ent of the growing powers of the crown, economy in administrative expenditures, dis bandm ent of the regular army in favor of a militia, and adoption of a peace ful foreign policy. A ccordingly, the party strongly opposed F erdinand’s role during the Balkan W ars and W orld W ar I. Meanwhile, Stambuliski had entered parliam ent in 1908 and had become the head of the party in 1911. He was of humble peasant stock but had been helped financially by his teacher to study agronomy in Switzerland. Upon his return he m arried his benefactor and plunged into politics with enormous success. Stambuliski was virtually the personification of the Bulgarian peasantry— a huge man with fierce upturned mustaches, great personal courage, strongly held convictions, and blunt and forthright manner. O ne of Stam buliski’s reform s was the distribution of land am ong the peasants. Bulgaria was already a country of small landholders, a farm of over thirty hectares being considered a large estate. Nevertheless, some of the peas ants owned no land at all, and a larger number had only dwarf plots. Stambulisky passed a land reform law in 1920 distributing arable state lands, unused forest and grazing land in dispute between communes, and all privately owned arable land over thirty hectares in extent. The beneficiaries, in order of prefer ence, were landless peasants, owners of dwarf plots, and Bulgarian refugees from regions under foreign rule. As a result of this reform 80.6 per cent of the peasants by 1926 owned the land they tilled; 16.8 per cent owned their plots but found it necessary to rent m ore; and only 2.6 per cent rented all the land they worked. Thus Bulgaria, both before and after W orld W ar I, had a healthier property structure in agriculture than any other Balkan state. A nother im portant Stambuliski measure was the introduction of com pulsory labor service to take the place of the compulsory military training for bidden by the terms of the Neuilly Treaty. The purpose of the labor plan was not only to provide the state with services that it could not pay for, but also to instill in the conscripts a sense of duty to the community and a liking for manual work and open-air living which most Balkan intellectuals considered to be beneath their dignity. The labor law required all men between twenty and forty to serve eight months in the labor corps. Conscripts could purchase ex em ption from all or part of their labor service by paying a special tax varying from 25 to 350 dollars, depending on the wealth of the conscript and the amount of time from which he wished to be exempted. The great majority of the


648 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
recruits chose to work out their obligation, and over the years they built many highways and bridges, repaired old roads and railways, and worked w ithout pay in governm ent factories and forest preserves. Their achievements were considerable, although much manpower was wasted because of the lack of sufficient engineers to direct the work. Stambuliski also reformed the legal system, making justice cheaper and more accessible to the people. A nother reform that was popular with the peasantry was revision of the tax system in order to distribute the tax burden m ore equitably. M eanwhile, in foreign affairs Stambuliski followed the type of foreign policy traditionally desired by peasants— international cooperation, avoidance of war, reduction of army expenditures, and diminution of the role of military men in national affairs. M ore specifically, Stambuliski hoped to unite all the E uropean A grarian parties into a “ G reen International.” Early in 1921 he visited Prague, W arsaw, and Bucharest to mobilize support for his scheme. On his return he stated that the purpose of his “G reen Interna tional” was to unite the peasants of Central and Eastern Europe in order to offset the White International of the reactionaries, who wished to restore the monarchs and landlords, and also the Red International of the Bolsheviks, who were attem pting to 'd estro y all governm ent and individual initiative. “ I have no d o u b t,” he added, “that our ‘G reen International’ will ultim ately free R ussia from the Soviets. A t least, it is destined to free farm ers elsewhere from the unjust restrictions placed upon them by the manufacturers and capitalists, who know nothing about farm ing, and m ake both realize th at the farm er is just as necessary to the life of a country as the workers on the roads, in the factories, o r em ployed in tran sportation.” 1 So far as his Balkan neighbors were concerned, Stambuliski wished first to establish friendly relations with them all. T hen, if possible, he favored a South Slav federation including Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, and even a peninsula-wide federation of all the B alkan states. Article V II of his A grarian party program, which he form ulated while in prison during the war, stated: “The Agrarian Union favors durable and peaceful relations between Bulgaria and her neighbors. . . . It seeks to strengthen these good relations by uniting Bulgaria with the other Balkan states on a federative basis.” 2 Although Stambuliski was far from satisfied with the terms of the Neuilly Treaty, im mediately after its signature he sent letters to the prem iers of Greece, Rum ania, and Bulgaria urging that the past be forgotten and that all B alkan governments collaborate for common security and economic welfare. In addition to these gestures Stambuliski took concrete measures to effect a rapproachment with Yugoslavia. The great obstacle was the Internal M acedonian Revolutionary Organization, or 1MRO, discussed in Chapter 28. This body, which at the turn of the century voiced the aspirations of the M acedonian people and fought with their support against Turkish misrule, had now degenerated into a band of unprincipled adventurers. After the first Balkan W ar it ceased to be a truly M acedonian organization and became, in effect, an instrum ent of the B ulgarian governm ent. D uring W orld W ar 1 it


Bulgaria: 1918-1939 649
fought with the Bulgarian army and was given the adm inistration of Serbian M acedonia. In this task it distinguished itself by its irresponsible violence and terrorism. The debacle of 1918 seemed to discredit the Organization com pletely. The great majority of Bulgarians and M acedonians were alienated by its unprincipled and disastrous behavior, while the Stambuliski government was strongly hostile to it. Despite these unfavorable circumstances, the IM RO continued to exert a pernicious influence on Balkan affairs during the postwar years. One reason was the harsh terms of the Neuilly Treaty, which gave the IM RO the opportunity to pose as the champion of Bulgarian national rights. A nother reason was the severe Serbification policy followed by the Yugoslav govern m ent in its newly acquired M acedonian territories. Petrovs and Popovs were required to become Petroviches and Popoviches. The Organization again was able to capitalize on outraged Bulgarian national sentiment. In addition, the Italian government secretly gave monetary and other aid to the IM RO, con sidering it justifiably as a useful tool for keeping Y ugoslavia and Bulgaria apart. In fact, the Italians twice proposed to Stambuliski that he should join them in a pact directed against Yugoslavia. O n his refusal they backed the IM R O in order to keep the Balkan states at loggerheads. A nd the IM RO repaid them by conducting raids into Yugoslavia and Greece and keeping inter-B alkan relations in a constant turmoil. Stambuliski did his best to curb the IM RO, though with indifferent results because the top army leaders did not wish to see it eliminated. Stambullski also negotiated in A pril, 1923, the Nish T reaty with Yugoslavia p ro viding for better supervision of the frontier. All trees and undergrowth were to be cleared for one hundred meters on each side of the frontier, and sus pected IM RO sympathizers were to be banned from the frontier zones. Stam buliski’s relations with G reece were not so cordial because of the unresolved issue of an outlet to the Aegean. The peace settlement had stip ulated that Bulgaria should have freedom of transit through W estern Thrace and a lease in perpetuity in the port of D edeagach (A lexandroupolis). This failed to satisfy Stambuliski, and at the Lausanne Conference he presented his case. H e declared th at it was unacceptable that Bulgaria’s outlet to the Aegean should be across Greek or Turkish territory and demanded that W estern T hrace be transform ed into a neutral zone in which Bulgaria could build railways and ports. Stambuliski refused a Greek offer to establish a Bulgarian free zone in Saloniki similar to that provided for Yugoslavia. Finally, the Allies decided at Lausanne to leave the solution of the question to direct negotiations between Greece and Bulgaria. Two years later, in October, 1925, the Greek government voluntarily established a free zone in Saloniki for the use of all Balkan states, including, of course, Bulgaria. But the latter rejected this as inadequate for her needs, and the question of an Aegean outlet remained between the two countries throughout the interwar period.


650 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
1923 c o u p
Stam buliski’s policies m et with overwhelm ing popular approval. In the April, 1923, elections his A grarian party won 212 seats com pared with 16 for the Com m unists, 2 for the Socialists, and 15 for all the rem aining parties that had dom inated Bulgarian politics in the prewar years. Confronted with this landslide, the opposition groups despaired of ever unseating Stambuliski by constitutional means. So they resorted to the only alternative avail able and made plans for an armed coup. O f the various elem ents participating in the preparation of the coup, the IM R O was prom inent, hating Stambuliski as it did for his rapproachment with Yugoslavia. Leaders of the old political parties also participated, hoping to be rid of the bold parvenu who had ousted them from their traditional positions. The army leaders also came out against Stambuliski, their profes sional interests having suffered at the hands of the antimilitaristic Agrarians. But not all the conspirators were moved by selfish motives. M any sincere liberals turned against Stambuliski because of his overbearing and tactless manner. He had dealt roughly with his opponents, shutting down the uni versity and abolishing freedom of the press. Also, many of his lieutenants were uncouth peasants, made dizzy by unexpected power and abusing it wildly. This does not mean that the A grarian regime was worse than, or as bad as, the governm ents th at preceded and followed it. Nevertheless, it did have certain glaring faults that drove well-intentioned men into the enemy ranks. W hether or not the king was privy to the plot remains a controversial question, though there is no question th a t Boris heartily detested his prem ier and was delighted to see him go. The leaders who actually planned the coup were Professor Alexander Tsankov, who started his political career as a Socialist and ended as an avowed follower of Hitler; General Volkov and Colonel Damian Velchev of the Officers’ League, and Ivan M ihailov, assistant to the IM RO leader, Todor Alexandrov. These men used the Sofia garrison to seize control of the capital on June 9, 1923. Then they presented themselves at the palace and persuaded Boris to recognize them as the government. Meanwhile Stambuliski, who was at his country home, led a few unorganized and poorly arm ed peasant bands in hopeless resistance. W ithin a few days they were overcome and Stambuliski was taken prisoner. He was handed over to the IM RO terrorists, who sadis tically led him back to his home, m ultilated and tortured him, made him dig his own grave, and finally finished him off. Before the operations were com pleted some thousands of peasants were massacred. During these fateful days the Communists remained quiet, calculat ing that they would be able to profit later from the turmoil. The Communist International severely criticized this strategy and called upon the Bulgarian Com munists to support the A grarians. The Com m unists did stage a revolt in September, 1923, but after stiff fighting were put down. Terrorist bands of the IM RO committed their customary barbarities, slaughtering peasants and


Rumeli Hissar or Castle of Europe, on the Bosphorus, built by Mohammed II in preparation for the siege of Constantinople (General Directorate of Publications, Propaganda and Tourism, Ankara).
Mykonos Island, Greece. The mill is for grinding grain (Peter Buckley).


Turkish influence in Bal kan architecture is shown in this mosque in Constantza, Rumania (Institutul Remin Pentru Relatile Culturale cu Strainatatea), and a street with mosque in Novi Bazar, Bosnia (Yu goslav Information Cen ter) .


Fishermen’s houses, Missolonghi, Greece (Royal Greek Embassy, Information Service).
Rumanian peasant house.




Shepherd in southern Serbia.
Lower part of woman’s folk costume, south western Bulgaria (Ministry of Foreign Af fairs, Bulgarian Peoples Republic). Painted Rumanian Easter eggs.


The typical Byzantine mosaics in Hagia Sophia make an interesting comparison with the mosaics of the St. Clement Basilica; the latter are noteworthy for their approach to the Renaissance and abandonment of the formalism of the Byzantine.


(Left) an interesting example of Slovenian folk art, St. Catharine painted on glass. (Right) the romanesque Cathedral of Zadar, in the Adriatic; (below) the Byzantine-Serbian Basilica of St. Clement in Ohrid, Macedonia. These two thirteenthcentury cathedrals represent eastern and western church architecture in the Balkans.


The old and the new in Istanbul: Suleymaniye Mosque and the Hilton Hotel.
HE
S llll! 'S S M W K M 5QBI
za m m m m
IZ M m m m m
la r a io ii
n iiv iw s22.
**«333951 S3
« I S H llll BUMS
mmmmmmm'm ;s i
mmmmmmm'm i i '
^ IIIIS * mu
■in ·'
lilllll,' ■-H ‘T*Vw ·
-T-S-ymf. 


Bulgaria: 1918-1939 651
w orkers in large num bers. In this m anner B ulgaria’s first and only A grarian governm ent was overthrow n and Tsankov replaced Stambuliski as premier.
r e a c t i o n : 1923-1934
The decade following the 1923 coup was characterized by disorders and outrages that gave Bulgaria an unenviable notoriety. One reason was the free hand enjoyed during these years by the IM RO. It completely domi nated the Petrich district, or Bulgarian M acedonia. There it functioned as a state within a state. The unfortunate inhabitants were required to pay two sets of taxes, one for the Sofia treasury and the other for the IM RO. The basis of the IM R O ’s strength was the large num ber of M acedonian refugees in Bulgaria. Some were assim ilated but m any rem ained uprooted and em bit tered. They provided a reservoir of manpower on which the IM RO could draw for its terrorist cadres. Specifically, the IM RO not only conducted raids into Yugoslavia and Greece but also operated in Sofia, where it assassinated scores of Bulgarian leaders who advocated friendship with neighboring coun tries or som e other policy th at was contrary to the IM R O ’s tenets. T he o r ganization was able to com m it these outragés with impunity because it was favored in high places. T sankov’s w ar m inister, G eneral Volkov, regarded the IM R O as a useful instrum ent for keeping revisionism alive and for getting rid of bothersome political opponents. But the IM RO proved to be a difficult instrum ent to control. It broke into several warring factions that earnestly endeavored to liquidate each other. The main issue was that between the Federalists, who wanted a united and autonomous M acedonia, and the Centralists, who wished to have M acedonia annexed by Bulgaria. Sofia naturally supported the Centralists, or Mihailovists, as they were called after their leader Ivan Mihailov. F or years the Fed eralists and the M ihailovists shot each other almost daily in the streets of Sofia, while the authorities refrained from intervening because of orders from above. The first elections following the coup were held in November, 1923. The results were very different from those of the April, 1923, elections. The traditional parties grouped around Tsankov won 185 seats com pared with the 15 they had gained in April. Contrariwise, the Com m unists and Agrarians together won 62 seats com pared with 212 in April. The huge governm ent majority did not bring peace to the country. The opposition deputies attended parliam ent at the risk of their lives. Some fell victims to IM R O assassins. O n April 16, 1925, a bom b exploded in Sofia Cathedral at a service which Boris was to have attended. He was detained and thus saved, but over a hundred persons were killed in the crowded building. Two Communists were found to be responsible for the crime, though they appear to have acted without party orders. Again there were mass executions, mostly by the M acedonian bands and sonic by the official police. The next shock was the G reek invasion of southern B ulgaria in O ctober, 1925, following a scries of border disturb


652 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
ances. The League of Nations intervened in this case and compelled the Greeks to withdraw and to pay an indemnity.* The Tsankov government was replaced on January 4, 1926, by a new one headed by Andrew Liapchev. The shift did not produce any signifi cant change within Bulgaria. In fact, Liapchev was himself a M acedonian and he allowed the IM R O even greater freedom than it had enjoyed before. His governm ent was never popular, so that in the 1927 elections it received 495,000 votes against 556,000 given to the opposition parties. Y et he ob tained 163 of the 249 seats, thanks to the disunity of the opposition and the m ajority system of voting. D uring the depression years discontent in the country m ounted, culm inating in a clear-cut victory for the opposition parties in the elections of June 21, 1931. The Liberal, Democratic, and Progressive parties combined with a faction of the Agrarian party to form a united front against the government forces led by Liapchev and Tsankov. With the tri umph of the opposition bloc, a new government was formed by the Demo cratic leader, Alexander Malinov, on June 29. He was succeeded on October 12 by another D em ocratic prem ier, N ikola M ushanov. The new regime did not bring about significant changes. The parties within the coalition governm ent quarreled over such issues as protectionism versus freer trade. Also, there was wrangling among the political leaders for spoils and inlluence. M eanwhile the IM R O still ruled unchallenged in the P etrich district and the arm y refrained from taking any m easures against it. The government tolerated the IM RO and the latter reciprocated by tolerating the government. The popular revulsion against this inactivity was manifested in the Sofia municipal elections of Septem ber 25, 1932, in which the C om munists won 19 of the 35 seats. They were not allowed to take office, but the returns did reflect the public’s grow ing exasperation. F urtherm ore, as will be discussed in C hap ter 37, the banding of Bulgaria’s neighbors into the B alkan E ntente in F ebruary, 1934, left Bulgaria diplom atically isolated. This convinced many that a radical change in foreign policy was needed. But this was out of the question so long as the IM RO was allowed the free hand it had hitherto enjoyed. Such was the situation in Bulgaria when a group of arm y officers intervened and imposed a military dictatorship.
M ILITARY AND ROYAL DICTATORSHIP:
1934-1939
Colonel Velchev was the leader of the military coup of M ay 19, 1934. Velchev had been one of the organizers of the revolt that had overthrown Stambuliski in 1923. Since then he had been increasingly alienated by the terrorism , inefficiency, and instability th at had m arked Bulgarian political life. He also became convinced that the political parties were incapable of clean ing house and th at the arm y’s high com m and was unwilling to do anything
* See Chapter 34.


Bulgaria: 1918-1939 653
against the IM RO terrorists. Accordingly, he organized in 1930 the M ilitary League, which included a large proportion of the army officers. Velchev was also connected with the Zveno, a small group of political reformers whose leader was his friend and collaborator in the 1923 coup, Colonel Kimon Georgiev. This civil group, also founded in 1930, had the same general ob jectives as the M ilitary League. Both organizations wished to abolish political parties and establish a government free from the influence of the high com m and and capable of suppressing the terrorists and coping with the political and economic crisis. Meanwhile King Boris, Professor Tsankov, and the high command were also planning to establish a military dictatorship. Velchev and his col leagues got wind of what was afoot and decided to strike on M ay 19, 1934. They gained control of the capital and the leading cities w ithout difficulty. Boris reluctantly accepted the fait accompli and Georgiev formed a govern m ent while Velchev rem ained in the background as “ adviser” The new government was dictatorial but not fascist. It did not intro duce the ideological or demagogic trappings inseparable from fascism. It did dismiss parliam ent, dissolve all parties, and impose an official censorship on the press. But if political freedom was for the m om ent suppressed, so also was the IMRO. One of the most impressive achievements of the new regime was its liquidation of the entire IM RO apparatus within a few days. The ridiculous ease with which this was accomplished revealed that the organiza tion had com pletely lost any popular support that it once may have possessed. It also revealed that the previous governments, despite their frequent prot estations, had lacked the will rather than the m eans of eliminating the IM RO . The new government also reduced peasant debts, reorganized the credit system, and created a new state bank. It attem pted to reorganize edu cation, placing greater emphasis upon technical and scientific branches. Doc tors were encouraged to practice in the villages, where the peasants badly needed medical attention, rather than concentrating in the towns as they had in the past. In its foreign policy the governm ent made two changes that proved popular with most Bulgarians. It restored diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and it sought reconciliation with Yugoslavia. The suppression of the IM RO convinced Belgrade of the sincerity of the Bulgarian overtures. In Sep tem ber, 1934, King A lexander and his queen paid a cerem onial visit to Sofia, where they were warmly received. But a few weeks later A lexander was assassinated in Marseilles by an IM R O member who was assisted by the C roatian Ustashi and by Italian and H ungarian officials. Despite this tragedy, relations between Yugoslavia and Bulgaria continued to remain friendly. The Georgiev governm ent did not rem ain long in office because of the hostility of the king. The relations between Boris and Velchev had long been strained. In 1928 B oris-had dismissed Velchev from his post as com m andant of the Military Academy because he had opposed the policies of General Volkov, the war minister. Rumors now were spread that Velchev


654 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
was using his special influence in the government to arrange for the deposi tion of the king and the establishment of a republic. This does not appear to have been true, though the governm ent did wish to strip the king of such powers as disposing of all prom otions and appointm ents in the army and nominating the war minister In any case, Boris obviously was ill-pleased with a government over which he had no influence whatsoever, so he skillfully undermined it by win ning over royalist-minded officers on the issue of the alleged republican plot. Thus Boris was able to foment a cleavage between Velchev and Georgiev on the one hand and the royalist officers on the other. Finally, Velchev withdrew from politics and Georgiev resigned the premiership. His place was taken by General Pctko Zlatev until April 18, 1935, when a purely civilian govern ment was formed by Andrew Toshev. Both of these men were close to Boris and could be depended upon to do his bidding. But B oris’s closest friend was George Kiosseivanov, who became premier on November 23, 1935, and re mained in office until W orld W ar II. On April 21, 1935, Boris issued a manifesto that symbolized the re establishment of his authority. On the one hand he declared that there would be “no going back,” which was intended as a promise to the army that there would be no return to party politics. On the other hand he undertook to issue a new constitution in the near future to satisfy the popular dem and for some form of representative government. In other words, Boris planned to allow a certain degree of popular participation in government but with no real au thority. On October 21, 1937, he issued an electoral law giving the vote to men and married women but forbidding candidates to run as the represent atives of parties. In fact, all parties rem ained prohibited. Elections were held in M arch, 1938, and, despite much intim idation, about 56 of the 160 deputies elected were in the opposition camp. Yet there was not much that they could do because parliam ent had only consultative powers. During the following years Bulgaria was controlled effectively by a royal dictatorship. Boris sent the army back to the barracks and ordered it to forget about politics. He governed the country through individuals chosen by himself and supported by the police and administrative apparatus. This arrangem ent prevailed until the begnning of World W ar II and thereafter until the death of Boris on August 28, 1943.
ECONOM IC D EVELOPM ENT
B ulgaria’s econom ic developm ent received a serious setback as a re sult of W orld W ar I. Bulgaria lost certain territories that left wide gaps in her economy. One was Southern Dobruja, the most important grain-producing province in the country. In contrast to the rest of Bulgaria, Southern D obruja was a region of large farms in which relatively efficient agricultural techniques were practiced. As a result it produced 20 per cent of the national grain out put, although it constituted only 8 per cent of the area of prewar Bulgaria. T he loss of D obruja w ould have been counterbalanced if Bulgaria had been


Bulgaria: 1918—1939 655
able to keep W estern Thrace, with its rich tobacco fields and Aegean ports. B ut the N euilly T reaty aw arded th at territory to G reece. It is true th at the treaty stipulated that Bulgaria should be afforded facilities in one of the Thracian ports. These ports, however, had not as yet been developed and were of little value without extensive improvement and coordination with railway facilties. As a result, Bulgaria preferred to concentrate her efforts on the development of her own Black Sea ports. The war also retarded Bulgaria by producing enormous budgetary deficits which were covered partly by foreign borrowing and partly by m one tary inflation. The latter progressively deteriorated the exchange value of the currency. Furtherm ore, the Neuilly Treaty saddled Bulgaria with reparations totaling 2,250 million gold francs, an absurdly large sum representing ap proximately 22.5 per cent of her entire national wealth. In the end Bulgaria paid very little of this sum, though she did negotiate and fulfill separate set tlements with Greece and Yugoslavia. A nother deleterious effect of the war was the influx of some 200,000 refugees. Some were provided with plots made available by the land reform legislation. But the majority remained uprooted and em bittered, becoming easy prey for 1MRO propaganda. In 1926 Bulgaria received a League of Nations loan of 2,250,000 pounds to finance the settlement of the refugees. The latter not only caused financial problems but, more seriously, increased the already severe population pressure upon the land. B ulgaria’s m ountainous terrain leaves only 35 per cent of her area available for cultivation. But her population has mounted rapidly since the beginning of the century, partly because of the refugee influx but primarily because of the high birth rate. Starting with 3.7 m illion in 1901, Bulgaria’s population rose to 4.3 million in 1911, 4.8 in 1921, 5.7 in 1929, and 6.3 in 1937.3 At the same time Bulgaria lost the provinces of Southern Dobruja and Western Thrace. This combination of increasing population and decreas ing land reduced the average size of peasant holdings from a little over 6 hectares at the end of W orld W ar I to 4.9 in 1934 and 4.3 in 1946. The in adequate size of the plots was aggravated, as in the other B alkan countries, by the excessive parcelization of individual holdings. The average farm in 1934, which am ounted to 4.9 hectares, consisted of 13.4 plots, and the av erage size of each plot was 0.37 hectares.4 This parcelization wasted much land on roads and boundaries and also ham pered the peasant by requiring him to trudge from one strip to another and by making improvement of agri cultural methods m ore difficult. The net result was that by 1930 Bulgaria had a degree of agrarian overpopulation estimated at 53 per cent. Various measures were taken to cope with this situation. One was land distribution, which we noted earlier in the chapter. This helped only to a very limited extent because of the modest amount of available land. A n other measure, was to bring under cultivation land form erly used for grazing and other purposes. As a result, the area devoted to cereals, which averaged 2.5 million hectares betw een 1908 and 1912, increased to 2. 6 million hectares


656 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
by 1933 despite the loss of Southern Dobruja. Owing, however, to the in creased population, the per capita production of cereals diminished substan tially. The am ount of cereals available for export dropped from 609,169 tons in 1914 to 120,000 tons in 1934. The peasants also tried to meet the land shortage by shifting to intensive crops. The most im portant of these were tobacco, sunflower seeds, soya beans, cotton, hem p, flax, table grapes, and strawberries. Before 1914 the percentage of tilled land sown with cereals was 76, with fodder crops 17, and with intensive crops 7. By the eve of W orld W ar II the percentages had changed to 70, 18, and 12, respectively/’ Despite these measures the position of the Bulgarian peasants re mained precarious during the interwar years. The average income of rural families was less than one third that of urban families. A careful study made in 1934 revealed th at only peasants with five or m ore hectares of land were able to make ends meet. The rem ainder fell increasingly into debt each year. T he significance of this figure is th a t 45.9 per cent of all peasant families fell below the 5 hectare minimum.® A lthough agriculture offered such scanty re wards, about 80 per cent of the population rem ained dependent upon it for their livelihood. T he overwhelm ingly agrarian character of Bulgaria’s econ om y is evident in the fact th at in 1935, 53.5 per cent of the national income was derived from agriculture, com pared with 7.6 per cent from handicrafts and 6.3 per cent from industry.7 The above figures are also significant in showing that handicrafts (tailoring, shoemaking, carpentering, coopering, and building) produced a greater value than industry. Bulgarian industry, like that of other Balkan countries, was held back by lack of capital, of skilled labor, and of trained management. It also suffered from poor natural resources, the only ones of any consequence being lignite and coal. As a result, industry employed only 43,000 persons in 1933. Almost half worked in textile factories, and most of the remainder produced consumers’ goods such as leather and rubber shoes, cigarettes, beer, and soap. Foreign capital played an im portant role in the economy of Bulgaria as of the neighboring countries. In 1936 foreign invest m ents com prised 31 per cent of total capital in banks, 49 per cent in indus try, and 55 per cent in transportation. In international trade the m ost im portant developm ent in the inter war years was the decline of cereal exports in favor of fruits and vegetables, tobacco, animals and animal products, and especially tobacco. The latter was the most im portant export, followed in order of value by animals and animal products, cereals, and fruits and vegetables. These agricultural commodities together accounted for more than 90 per cent of exports, while machinery, metal goods, textiles, chemical products, and railroad cars and m otor vehicles together accounted for more than 80 per cent of imports. Before 1914 Britain and Belgium were prom inent in Bulgarian trade because they imported wheat. A fter the war they gave way to Germany, Aus tria, Italy, and Czechoslovakia, which took the growing tobacco exports of B ulgaria. In the 1930’s B ulgaria becam e increasingly dependent upon G er


Bulgaria: 1918—1939 657
many for both her exports and imports. In fact, her dependency was more m arked than that of any other B alkan country. G erm any’s share in B ulgaria’s exports rose from 10 per cent in 1921 to 30 per cent in 1929, 48 in 1935, and 68 in 1939. Likewise, G erm any’s share in Bulgaria’s im ports rose from 17 per cent in 1921 to 22 per cent in 1929, 54 in 1935, and 66 in 1939.8 This commercial relationship was somewhat similar to that between Mexico and the United States. At the same time Germany acquired control of an increasing proportion of foreign investm ents in B ulgaria when she overran Austria, Czechoslovakia, France, and the Low Countries. Thus Germany effectively dom inated B ulgaria’s econom y even before her troops began to cross the Danube from Rum ania in January, 1941.
SOCIAL AND CU LTURAL D EV ELO PM EN T
Bulgarian peasant families in the interw ar years continued to be largely self-sufficient. They lived off their own land, owning a few sheep, cows, goats, pigs, oxen or w ater buffaloes, horses or donkeys, and poultry. They purchased only a few items such as salt, soda, shoes, sugar (when honey was not used), and coffee to flavor the home-roasted wheat or barley sub stitute. Peasants in isolated villages bought kerosene for their lamps, but an increasing percentage of those living near towns or near central electric sta tions in the m ountains used electricity. It was not only more convenient but also cheaper because the peasants never used more than one small bulb hang ing from the center of the ceiling of each room. The women usually made soap at home with soda and the fat of their own sheep or cows. They also dried herbs, smoked m eat and bacon, made jam and put down cabbages in great vats of salt and water. The men presided over wine making and the distilla tion of a fiery spirit, raki, from various fruits. The houses usually were built of sun-baked mud bricks, covered with a plaster of mud and cow dung mixed with chaff, which, when dry, was whiteor color-washed inside and out. The rich peasants had houses like those in town, consisting of several rooms and furnished with table, chairs, and beds. But the poorer peasants still sat on low, wooden, homemade stools around a wooden table about fifteen inches high. At night they spread their sheepskins or woven reed or maize mats on the ground, the whole family often sleeping in the same room. Health conditions continued to be far below W estern standards. The reasons were the traditional ones— ignorance, superstition, and poverty. This is clearly illustrated in the following account of health practices in a village near Sofia.
If a child became sick, “the first thing was to warm him, for he might have caught cold.” Then he was given some home remedies prescribed by the habi |old women or midwives]. If the child did not then recover, the parents tried everything they knew, hoping that alter some time “everything bad would pass


658 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
away.” In case the child grew worse, they called some of the neighbors or some old woman to come to see him. Only in very serious cases, when the peasants became convinced that nothing could help the child, would they carry him to the doctor. The reason for taking the child to the doctor was to save the extra fee charged for a home visit. Finally, “if God has given the child some more days to live, then the child will recover; if not, then his days are finished and God wants to take the child.” 9
This account explains why 123 out of every 1,000 infants born in 1941 died during their first year of life— a rate of infant m ortality m ore than tw o-and-one-half times that prevailing in the United States. Figures were cor respondingly high for tuberculosis, m alaria, and other diseases requiring ade quate nutrition and control measures to bring them down to Western rates of incidence. Educational standards were also low in Bulgaria, though not quite as low as in the other Balkan countries. The 1934 census showed 20.4 per cent of the males and 42.8 per cent of the females to be illiterate. The law provided for free and compulsory education between the ages of seven and fourteen. About 8 per cent of the children failed to attend school, either because their villages were remote or because their parents objected. The latter was frequently the case among the Moslem population (about 10 per cent of total population), 26 per cent of whose children did not attend school. As in all the B alkan countries, the educational system was badly neglected so far as financial appropriations were concerned. N ot enough schools were available, necessitating two shifts of pupils a day. According to a report in parliam ent in 1924, only 39 per cent of the school buildings were adequate. The teachers were miserably paid and were obliged to pay com missions to various political intermediaries to obtain their posts. Then with every change of government they ran the risk of losing their positions. Under such circum stances it is not surprising th at an appreciable proportion of B ul garian teachers turned to communism as a panacea. W idespread unemployment in the professions also drove some Bul garian intellectuals to communism. The pattern was one that was common to the whole peninsula. The country needed many more teachers and doctors and engineers, but it lacked the m eans to support even those th at it possessed. O n D ecem ber 1, 1935, 555 university graduates were registered as being w ithout work in the city of Sofia alone, 313 of them being under thirty. Since only 792 students graduated from institutions of higher learning in 1934, the figure of the unem ployed in Sofia is impressive. A n official rep o rt in 1935 described the situation as follows:
The need for university-trained persons is so great that the annual supply of graduates could not satisfy it for many years to come. . . . While exact statis tical data are not available, there are many symptoms indicating that all the careers for which the institutions of higher learning prepare are saturated. The universities in Bulgaria and in other countries where Bulgarians study produce more university-trained people than can be absorbed in public offices or by private enterprises. . . . It is therefore evident that the unemployment of intellec


Bulgaria: 1918-1939 659
tual workers in Bulgaria is above all and fundamentally due to the economic crisis. . . .10
Since many university graduates could not find employment in the fields for which they had been trained, they naturally tried to find some post in the bureaucracy. As a result the governm ent offices were cluttered with many more employees than were needed, and the salaries were correspond ingly low. This in turn led to open nepotism and corruption. A governm ent deputy stated artlessly in parliam ent on September 8, 1926: “W hat God gives is for all, but the blessings which the State may confer are first for our kin. T h a t is how we u n derstand dem ocracy. So it was yesterday, is today and will be tom orrow .” 11 Such conditions help to explain why the Bulgarian Communist party probably was the largest and most effective in the Balkans. On the other hand, Bulgaria definitely was not a country of Communists or of intellectuals. A sociological study of Dragalevtsy, a village near Sofia, reveals in fascinating detail how the 80 per cent of the population that tilled the soil continued to live in the traditional pattern.
The sense of belonging to a large mass of kindred spirits, who shared the agrarian point of view, dressed in village clothes, and abided to a great degree by tradition, gave each peasant a “consciousness of kind” which in our [American] society has to find its substitutes in the Farmers’ Union, the Farm Bureau, the National Grange, and a host of other organizations devoted to serving those who farm. This self-identification with a mass of other peasants of course nourished conservatism and made the Dragalevtsy farmer of 1937 feel so secure that he had little incentive to rise above his present lot. . . . Thus Dragalevtsy proved an in teresting illustration of the paradox that a traditional society, while deadly from the standpoint of scientific, material, or intellectual progress, nevertheless accen tuated those traits which made for contentment and for developing a perspective toward death and time which helped keep life on an even keel. There individual maladjustment was at a minimum, for each conforming individual had the back ing of all other guardians of tradition.12
The Bulgarian peasant definitely preferred to live in his village and to continue with his accustomed and satisfying work. But he was also well aware of the obstacles that were arising, especially the growing land shortage as the tiny plots were divided and subdivided among the many children. This is why he sought to educate at least one of his sons in o'rder to attain security and social prestige. As one Dragalevtsy father said to his son upon sending him to school: “ If you d o n ’t study you will plow, sow, and work in the fields, and where will you get th en ?” 13 B ut all too often the son studied, and even graduated with honors, yet found himself not only unemployed but also un fitted and unwilling to take up the plow again. Thus Bulgarian society was deeply ambivalent. One part of it wanted only to be left alone to continue living as in the past. A nother part had con cluded froiii experience that change was necessary and inevitable. This am


660 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
bivalence is significant for the period after W orld W ar II. It explains the reception accorded to the Communist plans for the reorganization of society. Some of the younger elements accepted and even supported these plans. But the bulk of the peasant mass remained suspicious and hostile to the upsetting intrusion from the outside world.


34. G reece: 1 9 1 8 -1 9 3 9
f
U k e e c e e m e r g e d f r o m W o r l d W a r I under circum
stances that were far from happy. H er armies had been routed in Asia M inor, her economy was strained by the great deluge of destitute refugees, her po litical life was em bittered by the conviction and execution of six of King C on stantine’s m inisters and generals who were held responsible for the A sia M inor disaster.* But the dark clouds did have their silver linings. The Lau sanne Treaty and the exchange of minorities virtually settled the traditional irredentist problem with the exception of less pressing claims to southern Albania, British-held Cyprus, and the Italian-held Dodecanese. Also we shall see that land was distributed on a large scale to the peasants during and after the war years. These significant developments presumably should have contributed substantially to political and econom ic tranquillity in the postw ar years. Instead, Greece was to experience economic distress, political strife, and frequent revolution. One reason was the unresolved question of the form of government. Venizelos preferred a constitutional monarchy to a republic, but the violent conflict of the war years and the partisan activities of Constantine I and George II combined to force most of the supporters of the Liberal party into a doctrinaire republican position. On the other hand, the monarchical cause still had m any ardent supporters, particularly in the Peloponnesus. Thus the political question remained a source of dissension until the outbreak of W orld W ar II and even thereafter. The issue of the form of government was aggravated by the readiness of military officers to enter the political arena by exerting pressure behind the scenes or resorting to armed force. This occurred much more frequently in Greece than in the other Balkan countries. The explanation appears to be that in the other countries the dynasties controlled or had w orking arrange ments with the military establishments, and therefore were able to cooperate
* See Chiiptcr 30.
661


662 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
y. y 1
r> Or* Y \ BLAC K SEA
/ \ A IB U L G A R I A \
v^ S ^ cx x A ^
A > ) r \ £· J
» J M i ' \ V* X > ^ llllii. » Edirno : ;;: *o£?
^ y I-H r X * y f v r^-\lllilllh(Adrianople)
£ \ ? X Stftlli .JIB : -.::: ;:;
§/ *W fÇ ? #^ = > >
\ _ / ·?· . { v i o l r
( ^ V y Y * r t l n « : - ' “ ' “' ' · ^ ' \ Lemnos * » f
Corf^ t A ^ . * ,' S AEG EAN 0 \ L ^ y .......
\ ' f o , ( THESSALY ^ ^ ..........._.._ 0 :··;;·■.
^ n y ,r v » \ ^ j ::
° \ \ chio.yjÿ^* '<Smi>,na ^
*■ \ ^ Ê k . V> m * ■: r v O
%. \ XT > ... - . w
^ \M \ \J /
m iles \ ^
TERRITORIAL GROWTH OF GREECE
1832 Original Greek Kingdom 1864 Ionian Islands ceded by Britain 1881 Thessaly and part of Epirus ceded by Turkey 1913 Macedonia, Crete and Aegean Islands ceded by Turkey
1918 Western Thrace ceded by Bulgaria
1920 Eastern Thrace and Smyrna enclave
ceded by Turkey by Sèvres Treaty
(not ratified) 1923 Eastern Thrace and Smyrna enclave retained by Turkey by Lausanne Treaty 1947 Dodecanese Islands ceded by Italy
by Treaty of Paris
with them in maintaining the status quo. In Greece, on the other hand, republican officers gained predom inance in the arm ed forces as a result of the Asia M inor debacle. They forced Constantine to abdicate in 1922 and they executed further coups in behalf of the republican cause in 1925, 1926, 1933, and 1935. W hen the royalists regained political power they naturally purged the army of its republican officers and used it to keep themselves in power. Thereafter the court and the armed forces were on the same side and no more was heard of military coups.


Greece: 1918-1939 663
The final principal cause for instability was the deterioration of the national economy. We shall see that in this respect the plight of Greece was basically similar to that of the other Balkan countries. The high birth rate, the low agricultural productivity, the inability of industry to absorb the popu lation surplus, and the lack of a domestic market adequate to support indus trial expansion— all these condemned the peasants and the urban workers to a low living standard with no hope for the future. Such conditions inevitably provoked political repercussions. To a much greater degree than in the past, G reek politics now reflected the underlying economic difficulties and social cleavages. It was not accidental that the outbreak of W orld W ar II found Greece under a full-fledged dictatorship.
r e p u b l i c e s t a b l i s h e d : 1923-1928
The revolutionary regime established by Colonel Plastiras and other republican officers following the Asia M inor defeat held elections on Decem ber 16, 1923, as a step tow ard the return to constitutional governm ent. T he royalist Populist party abstained, so that the seats were divided among 200 Venizelists, 120 avowed republicans, and 6 Agrarians. King George was per suaded to leave the country while the assembly considered the question of the form of government. The Venizelists preferred to decide the question by a plebiscite, but the republicans insisted on the immediate explusion of the dynasty and the establishment of a republic by vote of the assembly. The latter had their way, securing a m ajority vote in the assembly in favor of a republic. A confirmatory plebiscite, held on April 13, 1924, returned 758,742 votes for the republic and 325,322 for the king. A constitution for the republic was now needed. But a series of in cidents with neighboring countries distracted the republican cabinets and postponed the adoption of a constitution. The most serious affair occurred the previous year, on August 27, 1923, when Italian members of a GreekA lbanian frontier commission were m urdered on G reek soil. Although the re sponsibility for the crime was never established, Mussolini sent a drastic ulti m atum to Athens. W hen it was not accepted unconditionally he bom barded and occupied the island of Corfu. Greece appealed to the League of Nations but Mussolini rejected the “intervention” of the international organization. Nevertheless, the public opinion of Europe expressed itself so strongly through the League that M ussolini found it advisable to evacuate Corfu on September 27. His susceptibilities were saved by the Conference of Am bas sadors in Paris, which awarded an indemnity to Italy on the ground that there had been negligence on the part of the Greek authorities. Greece was also involved in a series of frontier incidents with Bul garia, the most serious occurring in October, 1925, when a Greek soldier and a G reek officer were killed.. In retaliation the Greek arm y crossed the border in force, occupying a considerable portion of B ulgarian territory. Bulgaria appealed to the League and the latter found, following a report by an investi


664 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
gatory commission, that there was no prem editation on either side. The League therefore ordered that Greece should pay an indemnity of 45,000 pounds for violating Bulgarian territory, and that Bulgaria in turn should pay damages for the shooting of the Greek army men. G reece was also engaged in protracted disputes with Y ugoslavia and Turkey. The issue with Yugoslavia concerned an outlet to the Aegean. On M ay 10, 1923, the two countries had signed a convention providing that an area of 94,000 square meters in the port of Saloniki should be under Y ugo slav customs adm inistration (but under G reek law and police adm inistration), and that goods passing between the free zone and the Yugoslav frontier should be exempt from Greek taxes. The Yugoslavs found this arrangem ent unsatisfactory, complaining that the zone was too small for their needs and that railway service between Saloniki and the Yugoslav frontier was too slow and expensive. They demanded that the zone be enlarged and that they be allowed virtually to own the zone and the railway leading to it. T he G reeks rejected this dem and and the issue remained unresolved until a settlement was finally reached in 1929. The differences between Greece and Turkey involved the position of the Patriarchate and of the G reek m inority in C onstantinople. A t the time of the exchange of the minorities it had been agreed that the Greek inhabitants of Constantinople who had been “established” before October 30, 1918, should be exempted from the exchange. The Turks interpreted the term “established” narrowly and sought to expel most of the Greek population. They actually ousted the Patriarch as an “exchangeable G reek.” The dispute was referred to the Permanent Court at the Hague, which decided against the Turkish inter pretation and allowed most of the Greeks who were still residing in C onstan tinople to remain there. The position of the Patriarch was also settled by ar ranging for the election of Greeks who were of the “established” status and who thus could not be expelled. There still remained, however, several out standing issues between the two countries, including the disposal of properties left behind by emigrants from Greece and Turkey, and the return to Constanti nople of Greeks in possession of Turkish passports. These and other questions rem ained unsettled until the G reco-Turkish rapprochement in 1930. Meanwhile there had been a good deal of political instability and cor ruption in A thens. The two leading parties were the Liberal headed by Them istocles Sophoules in the absence of Venizelos, who was abroad, and the Populist or royalist headed by Panayiotes Tsaldares. In addition there were several other small parties led by ambitious politicians such as the ultraroyalist General M etaxas at the one extreme, and the outright republican Alexander Papanastassiou at the other. Under the circumstances cabinets rose and fell until Janu ary 3, 1926, when a doughty republican general, Theodore Pangalos, effected a coup. The general proclaimed a dictatorship with the avowed object of re storing political peace and reviving the economy. As a dictator he was a curi ous phenomenon. He had no new political doctrine to advance. He did not re pudiate democracy as outmoded or impractical. Rather, he was determ ined to


Greece: 1918-1939 665
end the bickering of the numerous parties and to curb the press, which he ac cused with justification of fostering the bickering. He acted with the arbitrari ness of a Turkish pasha, imposing a rigid censorship, seizing newspapers, ban ishing political leaders, and even holding courts-martial. Yet there was a purpose and a benevolence about his ferocity that made it hard to condemn him except, as the liberals did, on principle. A typical measure that aroused the most in terest abroad was his decree forbidding women to wear their skirts more than fourteen inches above the ground. A fter half a year of furious activity Pangalos was ousted by his own Republican G uard on August 22, 1926. New elections were held on Novem ber 7 and this time the Populists participated. The republican parties received a m ajority of only 34 seats in a cham ber of 286. Accordingly, it was decided that a coalition cabinet of all parties should prepare the long-delayed constitu tion. The cabinet was formed but, like most coalitions, it proved a cumbersome instrum ent of governm ent. In fact, it already was in process of disintegration when Venizelos returned from abroad and assumed the prem iership on July 3, 1928. He dissolved the cham ber, abolished proportional representation by pres idential decree, and held a general election on August 19. He received a m a jority over all other parties and governed G ieece for the next four years.
v e n i z e l i s t r u l e : 1928-1933
Venizelos had lived abroad since 1920 with the exception of a few m onths early in 1924, when he tried w ithout success to persuade the cham ber not to depose King George before a plebiscite had been held. Now in 1928 he returned to Athens partly because representatives of all parties had repeatedly requested him to do so in order to end the political instability. A nother reason was the ambition of his wife, a wealthy London-born Greek whom he had m ar ried in 1921 while abroad. The name Venizelos still had irresistible prestige, so th at he was able to assume at once the office of prem ier as well as the leader ship of the Liberal party. On the other hand, the Venizelos of 1928 was not the Venizelos of 1910 who had arrived from Crete to resurrect his m other country. He was now sixty-four years old. The years of living abroad, together with the acquisition of wealth, had blunted his keenness and crusading ardor. He tended to accept things as they were and to overlook corruption and inefficiency. T he fact is th at he had lost interest in the hurly-burly of everyday G reek political life. Instead, he turned his attention to foreign affairs, where he was as successful as usual. Venizelos’ general aim in formulating his foreign policy was to avoid dependence on any great power. The most likely way of achieving this, he be lieved, was to establish friendly relations with the neighboring countries and with those powers especially interested in the M editerranean. Accordingly, Venizelos first signed a treaty of friendship and arbitration with Italy (Septem ber 23, 1928) settling all outstanding questions between the two countries. He thought it unwise at that juncture to challenge the status of the Dodecanese


Islands, which were Greek in population but which had been occupied by the Italians in 1912 during their Tripolitan W ar with Turkey. Venizelos next set tled the troublesom e Saloniki Free Zone dispute with Yugoslavia on M arch 17, 1929. The zone was to remain under Greek sovereignty but Yugoslavia received more privileges in its use. With this issue removed, Venizelos concluded later in the m onth a friendship and arbitration treaty with Yugoslavia. He attem pted to conciliate the Bulgarians by offering them a Free Port in Saloniki or at Alexandroupolis (Dedeagach). The Bulgarians refused, being still hopeful that they would eventually gain full possession of a strip to the Aegean. Thus Veni zelos was only able to arrange for full diplom atic relations with Bulgaria. His greatest diplomatic triumph was the establishment of cordial rela tions with Turkey. Despite baiting by nationalistic elements, he assured the Turks privately and publicly that Greece had no aspirations to their territory and that he wished to settle outstanding issues. A fter prolonged discussions, during which many concessions were made by both sides, an agreement was reached on June 10, 1930. G reece paid 425,000 pounds in settlem ent of the claims of the Turks who had left G reek territory, and Turkey in return agreed to accept the Constantinople Greeks as perm anent residents. A few months later Venizelos went to A nkara where, on October 30, he signed treaties of friendship and commerce. This diplomatic rapprochement was accompanied by a rem arkable change of public feeling between the two countries. Venizelos was warmly welcomed in A nkara, and the Turkish foreign minister received enthu siastic public acclaim when he visited Athens the following year. These diplom atic achievem ents strengthened G reece’s international po sition and prepared the ground for the Balkan pact that Venizelos’ successors were to negotiate a few years later. Meanwhile Venizelos was losing ground at home. One reason was that the republican ranks were far from closed. Many of the republican leaders, resenting Venizelos’ return, which automatically rele gated them to second place, frequently cooperated with the royalists against their own leader. A nother reason for Venizelos’ decline in popularity was the incompetence and corruption of some of his subordinates, whom he defended instead of dismissing. But by far the heaviest blow to Venizelos’ regime was the depression which devastated G reece’s sickly econom y. T he products that Greece normally exported were luxury agricultural items— tobacco, currants, wine, olives, and olive oil. The dem and and the price of such goods naturally dropped sharply during the depression years. Between 1929 and 1934 the gross trade of Greece declined 21.5 per cent in quantity and 70.5 per cent in value, and in the latter year the value of imports totaled 587.78 million gold francs as against exports of only 279.87 million gold francs. In normal years such im port surpluses were largely offset by revenues from tourists, from the large Greek m erchant marine, and from the remittances of Greek emigrants. But the de pression drastically reduced the income from all three of these sources. Venizelos was ill-equipped to meet the emergency. He was a typical nineteenth-century rom antic nationalist who never really understood the new world of depression, unemployment, agrarian indebtedness, and crop surpluses.
666 Age of War and Crisis: 1914


Greece: 1918—1939 667
The difficulty was that Venizelos and his Liberal party had undergone the same process of ossification as Pashich and his Radicals, or the Bratianus and their Liberals. Before W orld W ar I Venizelos’ party had led the reform movement. It divided the large estates and reorganized the schools, the adm inistration, and the army. It represented the rising, progressive middle class of merchants, m anu facturers, bankers, and shipow ners. B ut by the I9 3 0 ’s the ideas of this middle class had changed. It had arrived. It wanted to preserve and retain rather than to change and discard. It viewed with alarm the agitation for reform bred by the depression. The other major political force, the Populist or royalist party, was not any more inclined to adopt a comprehensive reform program in keeping with the seriousness of the situation. But the royalists had the great advantage of being out of office and thus being able to blam e all the trouble on the Liberals. The Populist leader, Tsaldares, exploited this favorable situation to the full by stating unequivocally that he and his party accepted the republic and would work within its framework. Thus he was able to attract the votes of citizens who wished to vote against the governm ent in office but not against the republic. The change in the political climate was revealed by the results of the elections on September 25, 1932. Venizelos lost his m ajority, the Liberal party securing 102 seats against 96 for the Populists and 52 for assorted republican and royalist groups. These returns required a coalition government but Tsal dares refused to associate with the Liberals. Venizelos allowed him to form a royalist cabinet including General M etaxas. When the new government could m uster only 103 votes in the assembly it was forced to exist on the sufference of the opposition. This anomalous arrangem ent lasted until January, 1933, when Venizelos attacked the governm ent’s financial policy and com pelled Tsaldares to resign. Venizelos resumed the premiership, dissolved the chamber, and de creed a new election in order to end the stalemate. The outcome of the election, held on M arch 5, 1933, showed that he had misread the trend of public sentiment as disastrously as he had in November, 1920. His L iberal party declined from 102, to 96 m em bers while the Populist party gained a clear m ajority with 135 seats. Despite this, the total royalist vote comprised only 40.33 per cent of the 1,141,331 votes cast. Furtherm ore, Tsaldares’ reiterated pledges of loyalty to the republic undoubtedly attracted many who were dissatisfied with four years of Venizelist rule but who did not necessarily wish to see the king return. Thus the 1933 election cannot be inter preted as registering a preponderant shift toward the dynasty. This interpretation, which prevailed among republican politicians, was not shared by the republican officers headed by G eneral Plastiras. They were seriously concerned about the future of the republic, -being convinced th at M e taxas and other royalist generals were intriguing behind Tsaldares to secure the return of the king. Also, they had no faith in Venizelos as a defender of the republic, considering him to o weak and inclined to appeasement. Accordingly, Ihcse republican officers staged two revolts— in 1933 and 1935— “ in order to save the republic.” The revolts failed dismally and served merely to hasten the


668 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
outcome that they were designed to prevent. The blundering republican officers contributed substantially to the failure of the Greek republic.
FALL OF THE r e p u b l i c : 1 9 3 3 - 1 9 3 5
On the morning following the election of M arch 5, 1933, the Athenians were awakened by the booming of artillery in the suburbs. General Plastiras, on learning of the election returns, declared himself dictator in a flamboyant declaration announcing that he was intervening by the will of G od to save the nation. He received so little support that within twelve hours he was forced to abandon the attem pt and to flee. N evertheless the ill-advised venture revived party passions, particularly because Plastiras had been the head of the 1922 revolutionary governm ent which had tried and executed the six royalist lead ers. The die-hard royalists now becam e more bold in their cam paign to over throw the republic. G eneral M etaxas introduced a m otion in the cham ber to im peach Venizelos on the ground of com plicity in the coup— a charge that was without any foundation. In the midst of the political storm aroused by this m o tion a brazen attem pt was made on the life of Venizelos. On the night of June 6, 1933, when he was returning with his wife from a dinner party in a suburb, a car full of assassins pursued his car for three miles, riddling it with machinegun bullets. Venizelos escaped unscathed but his bodyguard was killed and his wife and chauffeur were w ounded. T he car used in the attem pt was found aban doned next day; it belonged to the brother of the chief of police of Athens! The outrage caused the smoldering Venizelist-royalist feud to flare up with renewed violence. The various republican leaders were moved to effect a reconciliation with Venizelos, forming a united republican front. They de manded the apprehension and speedy trial of those implicated in the assassina tion attempt. The evidence indicated plainly that the police were the organizers of the crime and that certain unidentified ultraroyalist politicians were the in stigators. The governm ent refused to press its investigation seriously despite bitter protests from the opposition. Finally, on October 3, 1934, Venizelos’ private police arrested a notorious brigand suspected of having participated in the attem pted murder. The government now felt constrained to take action and opened the long-deferred trial early in 1935. Before it could be com pleted an other republican revolt rescued the royalists from their uncomfortable position and undermined the foundations of the republic. The revolt was organized by republican officers who had been placed on the retired list since the 1933 Plastiras coup. They were joined by other officers who were apprehensive because the government had passed a bill pro viding for radical revision of the cadres of the army, navy, and air force. These men were convinced that the government was planning a wholesale purge of the armed forces preparatory to the restoration of the monarchy. Thus they identified their professional interests with the republican cause and, far from regarding themselves as rebels against constituted authority, they felt that they


Greece: 1918-1939 669
were the true defenders of the republic against the machinations of a crypto royalist administration. The insurgents seized the M ilitary College and some barracks in Athens. Units of the fleet put to sea and summoned the garrisons of the provinces by telegraph to join the movement. The only response from the m ainland came from M acedonia, where rebel olficers seized several towns, though not Saloniki. Both in M acedonia and in A thens the revolt was quickly and easily crushed. N ot only was it poorly planned but everywhere it failed to win popular sup port. The people were tired of these perpetual coups, and were not at all con vinced that their liberties would be best safeguarded by the militarists. M eanwhile, the rebel naval officers had arrived with their ships in Crete, where they persuaded Venizelos to assume the leadership of the movement. Venizelos, by his own admission, had known of the preparations for the revolt and had withdrawn his objections to such action in December, 1934, though he had advised his followers to wait “ until they [the governm ent] attem pted to re store the m onarchy.” 1 Possibly the revolt might never have been attem pted if he had not committed himself by implication. Now Venizelos felt that he had no honorable alternative to throwing in his lot with the insurgents. But the failure of the m ovem ent in the capital and on' the m ainland left the rebel naval units stranded. The officers fled to the Italian-held Dodecanese Islands, where Venizelos also arrived on M arch 13. T he net result of the ill-fated coup was th a t it accelerated the process it was designed to check. W ithin eight m onths the republic had collapsed and the king was back in A thens. The royalists quickly took advantage of the anti-Venizelist sentiment engendered by the revolt to purge the entire state apparatus, including the armed forces, the bureaucracy, and the judiciary. Then they hurriedly ordered an elec tion for June 9, 1935. The republicans abstained, claiming that the continu ance of martial law, press censorship, and other repressive measures made a free contest impossible. As a result, the election became a test between the moderate Tsaldares, who headed the Populist party, and the extremist General M etaxas, who headed the Royalist Union. The returns gave Tsaldares 1,074,479 votes and 287 seats, as against 147,245 votes and 7 seats for M etaxas. Tsal dares now made arrangem ents for a plebiscite which would give the people an opportunity to vote directly on the question of whether or not the king should return. But the royalist generals, who now controlled the army, were not at all certain of the outcome of such a plebiscite. So General Kondyles, an estranged Venizelist who had become an ultraroyalist and who had suppressed the revolt of the republican officers, by a show of force compelled Tsaldares to resign. Assuming the premiership, Kondyles summoned parliam ent, of which only a rum p of about fOO appeared. T he m ajority, although royalist, supported T sal dares and refused to work with Kondyles. The latter nevertheless passed de crees through the rump parliament abolishing the republic and ordering a plebi scite for November 3, 1935..The outcom e of the plebiscite was startling. The official figures showed a 97 per cent m ajority for the monarchy. Even Crete,


670 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
which was a solid Venizelist stronghold, was reported to have voted 50,655 to 1,214 in favor of the king. H erbert Low epitomized the plebiscite in a cele brated cartoon showing a bewildered peasant entering the polling station. He is confronted by three fierce-looking men, one with fixed bayonet and two be hind a machine-gun covering the booth of the “Nays.” The inscription reads, “These Greeks do their polling business so much better than we do. Instead of having to vote to get something, you get something you have to vote for.”
m o n a r c h y t o d i c t a t o r s h i p : 1935-1936
King George II arrived in Athens on November 25, 1935. As already noted, he had previously occupied the throne for a brief period from Septem ber, 1922, to December, 1923. The following years he had spent in exile in London. Despite this experience he began his reign with a statesm anlike policy of conciliation. He announced that he wished to forget the past and to rule justly as the King of all Hellenes. He showed that he was in earnest by de m anding a general am nesty for all who participated in the M arch, 1935 re volt. When General Kondyles dem urred, the king paradoxically forced the kingmaker to resign the premiership. He appointed in his place Constantine Demerdjes, professor of civil law at the University of Athens. Demerdjes or ganized a nonparty government and proceeded to liquidate the Kondyles dictatorship. He granted a full amnesty and also reinstated republican civil servants, judges, and university professors who had been deposed by the preceding gov ernments. Demerdjes then held a general election on January 26, 1936, that was noteworthy for its fairness. One surprise of the election was the recovery of the Liberal party, which won 126 seats. A nother was the strong showing of the Com m unists, with their 15 seats. T he net result was a deadlock, the vari ous royalist and republican parties having 143 and 142 seats, respectively. Thus the Communists found themselves holding the balance of power. The election of the Communists marked the advent of a new force on the Greek political scene, a force that was to play an im portant role henceforth, and especially during the occupation years of W orld W ar II. The Communist party of Greece had been organized in 1918 but had rem ained a negligible factor in G reek politics until the I9 3 0 ’s. The landow ning peasantry found little in M arxism to attract them, while the small urban work ing class was too close to its village origins to abandon its traditional peasant frame of mind. Also, the party was continually undermined by Com intern reso lutions calling for an independent M acedonian state.* Most Greeks were natu rally repelled by a party committed to a policy of mutilating the state. It was not until the advent of the depression that the party began to attract many con verts. M ost of the recruits were students and professional men who saw no future in the prevailing social order, but many were refugees who were crowded
* See C hapter 31.


Greece: 1918-1939 671
in the urban centers and who, unable to attain the prosperity they had enjoyed in Asia M inor, turned to communism in their frustration. After the f936 elections, the Communists launched a campaign for a Popular Front with the republican parties. They won their greatest success when they concluded on February 19, 1936, a secret political deal with the Liberal party leader, Themistocles Sophoules, successor to Venizelos. This deal provided that the Communists should vote with the Liberals in order to elect Sophoules president of the chamber. In return the Liberals undertook to pass, within a month after forming a government, various reforms, including reduc tion of the price of bread, m oratorium for small proprietors, amnesty for po litical prisoners, and dissolution of the recently formed special security police. On M arch 6, Sophoules was duly elected president of the cham ber with the aid of the Communist deputies. But under pressure from the king and from royalist military officers, who threatened that they could not remain in different to the formation of a government dependent on Communist support, Sophoules failed to authorize a Liberal government, fnstead, he perm itted Pro fessor Dcm erdjes to form a “n onparliam entary” governm ent on M arch 14, f936. General Metaxas was included in the government as vice-president of the council and minister of war, despite thd fact that his royalist group had won only seven seats in the elections. On A pril 13 Professor D em erdjes died and on the sam e day the king appointed Metaxas prem ier without consulting any party leaders. The Com m u nists urged that the M etaxas government be overthrown by passing a lack of confidence resolution. Sophoules refused on the ground that this might antago nize the royalist officers and precipitate a coup. Instead, Sophoules facilitated the passage of a resolution adjourning parliam ent for five m onths and allowing M etaxas to govern by decree, subject to a parliam entary committee of forty members. The delegation of so much power to M etaxas proved to be the death knell of Greek democracy. M etaxas quickly arrested and deported labor leaders; dissolved the m ost militant trade unions and seized their funds; enacted a Compulsory A rbi tration A ct which declared strikes illegal; and prepared the army for the coup. The Communists retaliated by signing a pact of cooperation with a small Socialist-Agrarian party and by effecting the unification of the rival Unitary (Communist) and General (Reformist) Confederations of Labor. Numerous strikes were organized, demanding higher wages, release of political prisoners, and withdrawal of the recently enacted antilabor legislation. A general strike in Saloniki on M ay 9 resulted in the killing of thirty workers and the wound ing of four hundred. W ith the unification of the rival labor confederations, orders were issued for a nation-wide general strike on August 5. Sophoules now concluded an agreement with the royalist leader, John Theotokes (whose party held sixty seats), to form a coalition government to replace that of Metaxas. On.August 3 Sophoules and Theotokes called on the king to inform him that they were ready to form a government that would have m ajority support. By this time the king had come under M etaxas’ influence


672 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
and had accepted his contention that drastic, extraparliam entary methods were needed to govern the country. It is not know n why the king shifted so sharply from his earlier policy of conciliation and cooperation with the moderate ele ments in both camps. Perhaps he was impressed by resurgence of the Commu nists and the threatening events in Saloniki, and thus made susceptible to the arguments of the brilliant and forceful Metaxas. In any case, the king did not act upon the offer of Sophoules and Theotokes to form a majority cabinet. Instead, twenty-four hours later, on August 4, f 936, he signed decrees that in augurated the Metaxas dictatorship. The decrees declared a state of emergency, dissolved parliam ent without setting a date for new elections, and suspended the provisions of the constitution guaranteeing personal liberties. M etaxas followed up by proclaiming m artial law, arresting about four hundred opposition leaders throughout the country, and mobilizing state em ployees and workers in the most im portant branches of industry. Street demon strations were speedily crushed by the overwhelming force of police and mili tary which had been m arshaled beforehand. The official justification for these measures was that the impending general strike was designed to “overthrow the legal, political and social system of the country.” In this m anner was established the “Fourth of August Regime,” as the dictatorship officially was named. Metaxas made clear the nature of his regime in the following statem ent:
I took the minimum of power ncccssary to facc the Communist danger, hut I am not going to relinquish it until the country is cleared of Com m unism and the social order made unshakable. The G reek press as well as all the Greeks will have to abide by national discipline. . . . F o r the tim e being there is no ques tion of new elections being held. . . . T hose of you who in the past have belonged to parties are now under the obligation of forgetting them utterly; there are no more parties in Greece. . . . The old parliam entary system has vanished for ever. . . ,2
m e t a x a s d i c t a t o r s h i p : 1936-1941
M etaxas faced a difficult task when he became the archigos or fuehrer of Greece. He had gained power by means of a coup rather than a popularly supported revolution. He had no mass following behind him as did H itler in Germ any. H e had no historical tradition to bolster him— no roots in G reek society or civilization. So he appointed a journalist, Theologos Nikoloudes, to the post of undersecretary of press and tourism, with instructions to propound and publicize an official ideology. The outcome was a novel thesis to the effect that the history of Greece experienced three periods of national greatness and all three, m aintained Nikoloudes, were under authoritarian regimes. The first was the Golden Age of the fifth century b .c ., when Pericles ruled as a virtual dictator behind a democratic façade. The second was the Byzantine period, when the Greeks flourished for a thousand years under an imperial autocracy. The third period of national greatness was the dictatorship of M etaxas— the Regime of the Fourth of August.3 Nikoloudes did not depend upon exhortations alone. He muzzled the


Greece: 1918-1939 673
press with regulations forbidding the publication of inform ation on a long list of topics that might em barrass the government. Education was also strictly con trolled. On orders from Athens the following provincial order was made gen eral for all G reece:4
Protocol No. 534 Yanina, February 26, 1937
t o t h e p r in c ip a l s o f t h e 1 2 t h e d u c a t io n a l d is t r ic t
Taking into consideration that controversies arising from the teaching of m ate rial, for which the students are not sufficiently mature, may create among them unfortunate misconceptions at the expense of the attainment of our educational goal, we order: A ) That during the teaching of the course on natural history, do not include the Darwinian theory or that material connected with the appearance of man on earth at the end of the Tritogene geological period. This, not because the scien tific consciousness should be chained, nor because scientific deductions disprove religion, for, in the words of Bacon, “ Little science com bats religionandgreat science elevates it,” but because apparent conflicts between science and faith might be understood as fundamental conflicts at the formative age of youth, and thus undermine the prestige of science or of religion, and B) In the teaching of ancient G reek in the 6th High School grade,om it the funeral oration of Pericles, substituting this with some Platonic dialogue, be cause the funeral oration, truthfully grand of dem ocratic ideas, may be mis understood by the students as indirect criticism of the vigorous governmental policy and, in general, of the trend of the present State. We say m isunderstood, because the N ational G overnm ent in reality is furthering dem ocratic ideas and properly conceived liberty by striking at demagogic tendencies and sources of decay. Because, however, adolescence does not have the ability for induction and fo r the tiresome search for truth, and is prone to the form ation of beliefs based only upon em otions, it is advisable that the brilliant pages of Thucydides be left for those years when the G reek youth, sufficiently m ature, may hear from uni versity professors an analysis of the beauty of the ancient texts. Otherwise, there exists the probability that these pages will produce the same ruinous and disinte grating results that they did during the period of the Peloponnesian War, when they were recited to the unstable populace of Athens by the great Pericles, who presented so brilliantly the victories of democracy to the intellectually unpre pared A thenian rabble, that it overestim ated its strength and destroyed with its anarchistic arrogance the wonderful works which dem ocratic ideas had created in a more suitable period.
W hile ordering adherence to the above instructions, we feeg our colleagues not to interpret them as motivated by a reactionary spirit, but rather by the desire to further the genuine interests of the students and the wider and higher interests of our country.
T H E GENERAL SU PE R IN T E N D E N T OF T H E 12TH D ISTRICT
D . P a po u l ia s
The most ambitious attem pt of Metaxas to control the Greek youth . was the establishment of the National Youth Organization, or EON. This was created in 1937 and was modeled after the G erm an and Italian youth bodies.


674 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Its members were provided with uniforms, were given some training by army and navy officers, and were required to present the fascist stiff-arm salute. On the occasion of the first Congress of the Regional Commanders of the EON, held in January, 1939, M etaxas delivered a speech which was reported in the newspapers as follows:
W hat are the aims of the organization? King! ( Tem pest of applause, acclam ations and m anifestations o f all types.) King! Country! Religion! Family! Rebirth of Greece and the Fourth of August Regime! (Prolonged applause and acclam ations.) This latter point, the fourth of August regime, I underline, be cause it is the security, the vigilant safeguard of the others. W hen we did not have it, when we did not have the F ourth of A ugust Regime, you saw to w hat depths fell m onarchy, religion, country, family, and all.
Concerning the reception accorded to the EON Metaxas stated:
The schools, at the outset were hesitant. Only the primary schools joined with a great, a magnificent enthusiasm. The secondary schools hesitated at first to aid us. . . . The reason for this is that at the national M inistry of E ducation there was originally a defiance which gradually disappeared, but the tone was set. But the Y outh [of the EON], little by little, without threats or violence, and only by persuasion, managed to win over and conquer the secondary schools almost entirely, teachers and pupils alike. . . . In the Universities we encountered at the outset much resistance . . . as much from the students as from a large proportion of the teaching personnel. Did you know this? Of all those who fought and who gave us our liberty in 1821, not one was an intellectual leader. I do not wish by this to belittle the value of intellectual work. But allow me to say that I con sider it a secondary question in comparison with the importance of character. (A pplause.) As for the teaching personnel, I admit that I found a certain resist ance, not on the part of all, but of some. But since I assumed the portfolio of Public Instruction, I have found a greater comprehension and conviction, and even enthusiasm, so that I am certain that all will go well.5
An im portant person in the M etaxas regime, in addition to Nikoloudes, was the minister of interior, Constantine M aniadakes. As the head of the ubiqui tous security forces he came to represent the most hated aspects of the dictator ship. His police were free to break into any house and search it at any time of the day or night, and to arrest any suspected citizen without a warrant. The prisoners were taken to a “security com m ittee” which existed in every prefec ture and which consisted of the prefect, the chief of the gendarmerie, and the attorney. This commitee could condemn prisoners to exile merely on grounds of suspicion. The prisoner had the right of appeal, but in the interval he was shipped to an exile island whence his appeal could be made— and almost invari ably rejected. There were two principal types of political prisoner— workingclass members of the underground who were usually Communists, and prom i nent members of the opposition parties. The latter, as a rule, were middle-class liberals, republicans, sometimes even royalists who were antagonized by the excesses of the dictatorship, even though it had the blessing of the king.


Greece: 1918-1939 675
The dictatorship was not all regimentation and repression. M etaxas w orked hard to cope with the problem s of his country. T here is no doubt about the vigor and sincerity of his efforts, as even his critics will concede. T he con troversy arises concerning the effectiveness of his efforts. In the field of labor legislation, for example, he established a minimum daily wage rate of 55 drach mas (about 50 cents at the time), and he gave all workers two weeks’ annual vacation with pay, or two weeks’ double pay in place of the vacation. This m eant a substantial improvement for the lowest-paid unskilled laborers. Col lective agreements were signed with the various labor groups, such as railwaymen, clerks, civil servants, bank employees, and factory workers. These agree ments defined the length of the working day, the wages of the various categories of workers, the length of the vacation, and similar matters. A Compulsory A rbitration Act declared all strikes illegal and provided for the arbitration of all labor disputes by ministry of labor representatives. A ccording to official sta tistics, 44,217 such disputes were settled during the first two years of the regime. In addition, the workers were provided with medical clinics and working m oth ers were assured medical care and monetary compensation at childbirth. Critics of the dictatorship argued that most of this legislation was still born because of the absence of free trade unions. This made it easy for the em ployers to ignore or evade the law. They paid wages below minimum level to their employees and threatened to denounce them to the secret police as Com munists if they made trouble. They forced their employees to sign receipts for wages higher than those actually received. They classified workers in a lower wage category than that to which they really belonged by virtue of their skills. The opposition further charged that the public health legislation was also largely futile because the government failed to provide the funds neces sary to put it into practice. The best case for the dictatorship probably can be made on the basis of its extensive public works program , including roads, government buildings, and fortifications. The program increased the debt sharply and brought on a m arked inflation. But it did provide m uch-needed employment and it also strengthened the defenses of the country. In conclusion there is little doubt th at the dictatorship was never pop ular. M etaxas him self had none of the politician’s gifts. H e was a brilliant of ficer, as he dem onstrated during the B alkan W ars and W orld W ar 1. But when he attem pted to build up a royalist party of his own he attracted very little support. He had only six followers in the cham ber when h e assumed power. In fact, his predisposition for authoritarian rule may stem in large degree from his disillusioning experiences with party politics as well as from his tem peram ent and military training. It is difficult to gauge the attitude of the inarticulate mass of peasants and urban w orkers tow ard the M etaxas regime. But there is no doubt of the deep hostility of the intellectuals, the politicians, the professional people, and the class-conscious workers led by the Communists. The question arises how M etaxas contrived to retain pow er until his death in 1941 despite the opposi tion of such im portant elements of Greek society. One reason was that most of


676 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the old political leaders happened to die within the space of a few monthsGeneral Kondyles on January 31, 1936; Venizelos on M arch 18; Demerdjes on A pril 13; and Tsaldares on May 16. Thus M etaxas was fortuitously rid of the outstanding politicians who might have led the opposition against him. A n other reason was the lack of unity among the opposition forces. On the one hand were the Communists, who operated underground, organizing strikes and demonstrations, and who continued to favor a Popular Front as they did in the pre-M etaxas period. On the other hand were the old-line party leaders and re publican military officers who did not wish to associate with the Communists and who were divided among themselves as to whether they should direct their efforts against M etaxas alone, or against both M etaxas and the king. The final and most im portant reason for M etaxas’ success in retaining power was the unswerving support he received from the king. The army was the source of power in Greece, and the army with its royalist officers took orders not from M etaxas but from the king. The latter was not dependent upon Me taxas as V ictor Em m anuel was upon Mussolini. King George could have rid himself of M etaxas whenever he had so wished. But he did not choose to do so, apparently regarding the dictatorship as preferable to any political arrange m ent that might have taken its place. In the light of later developm ents tw o features of this situation in G reece on the eve of W orld W ar II are w orth noting. One is that the C om m unists alone operated effectively in the underground and that this experience was to enable them to organize and lead a national resistance movement during the occupation period. T he oth er is that the king’s consistent support of M etaxas later enabled the Communists to discredit the dynasty by identifying it with fascism and dictatorship.
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT
W orld W ar I was responsible for two developments that profoundly affected the economy of Greece— the influx of refugees and the distribution of land among the peasants. A pproxim ately 1.5 million refugees inundated a coun try with a population at the time of only 5.5 million. These refugees came partly from Asia Minor as a result of the 1922 military disaster, partly from Bulgaria by virtue of the Neuilly Treaty, and partly from Russia following the 1917 revo lutions. Thus Greece, exhausted by three wars, and after having given hospital ity to refugees following the Cretan revolts of 1867 and 1897 and the Balkan W ars of 1912-1913, now found herself faced by the problem of supporting and settling a mass of immigrants equal to a quarter of her own population. In these circumstances the League of Nations came to the aid of Greece. The Geneva Protocol, signed on September 29, 1923, established the Refugees’ Settlement Commission consisting of two foreign members nominated by the Council of the League, and of two Greeks appointed by the Greek government. The League also sponsored two loans totaling thirteen million pounds to Greece to finance the work of settlement. The bulk of the refugees settled in rural areas, mostly in the newly acquired territories of M acedonia and Thrace. They


Greece: 1918-1939 677
formed small rural colonies totaling 1,954, of which 1,047 were in M acedonia, 574 in Thrace, and 333 in other districts. A considerable num ber of the refu gees chose to start afresh in urban centers, especially in the Athens-Piraeus re gion, where overnight great new suburbs appeared bearing nostalgic names such as “New Smyrna” and “New Ionia.” The refugees contributed substantially to the economic development of the country. They increased tremendously the cultivated area in the north, they developed flourishing m arket gardens near urban communities, and they introduced a number of new industries, such as carpet weaving and specialized pottery manufacturing. Generally speaking, however, the refugee influx probably aggravated G reece’s chronic econom ic difficulties arising partly from too many people and too few resources. The other im portant economic development following W orld W ar I was the distribution of land. This was hastened and extended by the deluge of destitute refugees. We saw in Chapter 25 that by the end of the nineteenth century peasant proprietorship predom inated in “old” Greece. The province of Thessaly acquired in 1881 was dom inated by Moslem landlords with their large estates or chifliks. By 1914 the num ber of chifliks had been somewhat reduced, though not by more than a third. Then with the addition of M acedonia and Epirus (1913) and W estern Thrace (1919), the land problem became acute be cause chifliks were prom inent in these form er Turkish territories. It is estim ated th at in 1920 a total of 2,259 chifliks existed in Greece, distributed as follows: Macedonia, 818; Thessaly, 584; Epirus, 410; “old” Greece, 363; Thrace, 84.“ With the coming of the refugees, land distribution became essential in order to provide them with a means of livelihood. The legal basis for land re form had been provided by the national assembly, which had revised the con stitution in 1911, giving the governm ent the right to expropriate land for public purposes. The first series of land distribution acts had been passed in 1917. They authorized the government to expropriate state and church lands for di vision among the peasants. If these properties proved insufficient to meet local needs, the government could purchase estates above certain stipulated acreages. U nder the terms of this law the government distributed 53,700 hectares of state land and 48,000 hectares of church land. Then with the coming of the refugees more legislation was passed regulating the disposition of various prop erties available in the new provinces. As a result, an additional 1,142,000 hec tares were divided, of which 592,130 were vacated by departing Turks and Bulgars; the remainder consisted of former church, state, and private holdings. The m agnitude of the reform is indicated by the fact th at the lands distributed constituted 38 per cent of the total cultivated area of Greece.7 Despite this extensive land distribution, Greek agriculture, like that of all the Balkan countries, was in an unsatisfactory state during the interwar period. The reasons were basically the same in Greece as in the other coun tries. Rural overpopulation stood out in its usual prominence. The total popu lation rose steeply from 2.6 m illion in 1907 to 5.5 in 1920, 6.2 in 1928, and 7.6 in 1951. This increase was due mostly to the influx of refugees. But it should be noted that the population will continue to grow rapidly in the future


678 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
because of the extremely high birth rate which leaves a net annual increase ranging from 1.3 to 1.5 p er cent. Since the G reek population falls in the cate gory of so-called young populations, the ratio of productive age groups (fifteen to sixty years) to total population is constantly rising. The ratio stood at 57.4 per cent in 1940. It was estim ated at 61.4 per cent in 1950, with the prospect of reaching 63.3 per cent in 1960 and 64.5 in 1970. Increasing population with limited land resources has resulted in a very dense rural population. The number of people dependent on agriculture per unit of arable land is in G reece, as in the other B alkan countries, m uch higher than in the W est.* Consequently m uch of the village population is “surplus,” the percentage being estim ated at betw een 40 and 50. This situation is especially serious because Greek agriculture has remained stagnant— the same crops, the same methods, and the same low productivity. About 60 per cent of the population on the eve of W orld W ar II de pended on agriculture for its livelihood. M ost of the arable land— about 74 per cent— was used for the cultivation of grains— wheat, corn, barley, oats, and rye. Nevertheless, Greece imported an average of half her grain requirements — a major cause for her chronically unfavorable trade balance. The principal commercial crops continued to be tobacco, currants, olives, and olive prod ucts. In 1938 they accounted for 68 per cent of the value of all exports. These crops were particularly suitable for Greece because they required heavy labor investment. W hereas 25 man-days per hectare were needed for grains, 328 man-days were needed for tobacco, including local processing. Considerably greater quantities of these commodities could have been grown, but the de m and was restricted and highly variable. Because of their luxury character they were the first to be elim inated in foreign m arkets in case of economic trouble, as Greece discovered to her cost during the depression. The over-all productivity of Greek agriculture, like that of the other B alkan countries, is m uch low er than W estern levels, f O ne reason is the nat ural environm ent— p oor soils and inadequate rainfall. A nother reason is the small size of the plots which excludes the introduction of more efficient capitalusing m ethods of production. According to the 1950 census, the average size for all G reece is about 8.1 acres. This figure does not m ean m uch because the amount of land needed to support a family varies tremendously according to the nature of the crop. T he highest average is in the w heat plains of Thessaly and M acedonia, where it reaches 13 acres. T he lowest is in the tobacco regions of M acedonia and Thrace, where the average family farm is 3 /4 to 1 1 /2 acres. In between are the olive- and currant-growing areas of Crete, the Pelo ponnesus, and the Ionian Islands, where the average family farm is from 2 1 /2 to 5 acres. Taking into account the essential factor of the type of crop grown, it has been estimated on the basis of the 1929 census that 37.6 per cent of the G reek farm ers in that year had insufficient land to support their families at a locally accepted standard of living.8
* t Statistics in C hapter 31.


Greece: 1918-1939 679
The deleterious effects of the small size of peasants’ plots are accentu ated by the parcelization of individual holdings. The agricultural census of 1929 recorded 5,356,819 separate land parcels of an average size of 0.75 to 1 acre.9 The average farm consisted of 5.6 different holdings. This dispersion of plots increased the distance between village and fields and made for waste of m an power and draft-animal power. Also, precious land was wasted because of the innumerable footpaths and markers between the various parcels. Finally, agricultural productivity was kept down by the extremely low level of technology. Only 1,700 tractors were to be found in the entire country on the eve of W orld W ar II. This represented 218 agricultural workers per tractor, com pared to 122 in B ulgaria, 8 in D enm ark, 5 in Sweden, and 3 in B ritain.10 Likewise, 3.3 pounds of fertilizer were used per acre, com pared to 19.4 in Italy, 27.5 in France, and 24 9 .4 in H olland.11 Sim ilar backw ardness was evident in irrigation, drainage, soil research, and use of seeds. It is im portant to note here, as elsewhere in the B alkans, the close re lationship between rural overpopulation and low productivity. The consolida tion of land parcels would be a step forward from the technological viewpoint because it would save labor and m ake w orth while the use of a certain am ount of machinery. But given the prevailing overpopulation, these measures merely would further increase the percentage of “surplus” population and add to the strains on the social structure of the country. Turning to industry, we find that it expanded substantially during the interw ar period. One reason was the refugee influx, which provided a greatly enlarged m arket as well as abundant cheap labor. M ore im portant was the high protective tariff adopted in the m id-1920’s and extended and intensified during the 1930’s. As a result, the index of industrial output rose as follows: 1913, 100; 1921, 260.7; 1925, 322.1; 1929, 359.6; 1932, 342.2; 1935, 477.3; 1938, 5 3 7 .1.12 T he industries continued to be concentrated in the A thensPiraeus and Saloniki regions, which are accessible and have a relatively large market and labor reservoir. The most im portant prewar industries, on the basis of the number of persons employed, power used, and the value of total produc tion, were (1 ) the food industry,processing domestic agricultural products (flour milling, olive oil and wine pressing, canning, confectionery and edible pastes, alcohol); (2 ) textiles, especially the cotton industry, which used mainly Greek cotton; and (3 ) the chemical industry, processing mostly local raw materials and producing fertilizers, paints and varnishes, dyestuffs, soap, resin, turpen tine, and various chemicals and drugs. W ith the exception of a few textile, chemical, paper, cigarette, and building material factories, employing a con siderable number of workers and equipped with up-to-date machinery, most of the prewar Greek factories (92 per cent of the total) were no more than small w orkshops, em ploying from one to five men and using little or no power. The growth of industry had its negative as well as positive aspects. Greece, like the other Balkan countries, paid dearly for the increased num ber of factories because of the high tariff protection (20 to 150 per cent ad valorem ),


680 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
which m eant for the consum er high prices and usually inferior quality. The m ost im portant point, however, is th at G reek industry, like th at in the rest of the peninsula, did not begin to absorb the annual population increase. The urban population in 1928 was 33 per cent of the total, and in 1940 it was 33.73 per cent. Thus most of the farm population increase between 1928 and 1940 was forced to remain in the already overpopulated countryside. Greek foreign trade remained essentially the same after W orld W ar I as before. The one exception was that Greece, like the other Balkan countries, becam e increasingly dependent on the G erm an m arket in the late 1930’s. The proportion of Greek exports taken by Germany rose from below 20 per cent between 1929 and 1933, to 43 per cent in 1938. Likewise, the percentage of G reek imports from G erm any rose from about 10 between 1929 and 1933 to 31 in 1938. A p art from this trend there was the traditional dependence on a few “luxury” types of export commodities. Tobacco took the place of currants as the m ain export, accounting in 1938 for 45.5 per cent of the value of all exports. The other principal exports in 1938 were currants, 12.4 per cent; olives and olive oil, 9.8 p er cent; and wine, 2.9 p er cent.13 In the same year, 1938, Greece imported three fourths of the raw ma terials used by her industry, one third of the cereals she consumed, and sub stantial quantities of machinery and other manufactured goods. As a result, Greece continued to suffer from the traditionally unfavorable balance of her trade. In the past the deficit had been largely covered by invisible receipts, the most im portant being em igrant remittances and income from shipping services. T he latter rem ained im portant, but em igrant rem ittances fell off sharply with the depression. In 1934 they am ounted to less than one quarter of what they had been in 1930. In addition to an unfavorable balance of trade, Greece also faced the problem of a crushing debt and corresponding interest paym ents. As noted in Chapter 25, following the Greco-Turkish war of 1897 the great powers im posed on Greece an international control commission with extensive authority over the national economy. This continued to function during the interwar years. Nevertheless, the debt load of Greece became ever heavier, being in creased by the debts incurred during W orld W ar I, by the high cost of refugee settlem ent, and by the sharp drop in national income during the depression. By 1929 the per capita public debt was about 100 dollars, which was somewhat more than the average per capita income in that year. By M arch 31, 1940, the public debt am ounted to $630 million, and the claim of the foreign debt on the national income was 9.25 per cent for Greece, as against 2.98 per cent for B ulgaria, 2.32 p er cent for R um ania, and 1.68 per cent for Y ugoslavia.14 The combination of limited foreign markets, low productivity in agri culture and industry, and an extremely heavy debt load meant a continuation of the low per capita income. In fact, the income probably decreased because it is estim ated th at during the twelve years preceding W orld W ar II the average annual rate of income growth was about 1.2 per cent while the average annual rate of population increase was 1.3 per cent. As a result, the national income


Greece: 1918-1939 681
per capita in 1939 is estim ated to have been $75, com pared to $125 for B ul garia, $140 for Italy, $283 for France, and $469 for the United K ingdom .'5 T he plight of the poor in G reece was actually worse than these figures indicate because of the unequal tax burden. Indirect taxes during the interwar years contributed between 75 and 82 per cent of all tax proceeds. Thus a large pro portion of the income of the poorer classes was taken away in the form of levies on necessities. In conclusion, it is w orth noting that although G reece’s natural resources are scanty com pared to those of some other countries, nevertheless they are adequate to support the existing population at a considerably higher standard of living than that prevailing during the decade before or after W orld W ar II. T he political and econom ic crisis that developed in Greece after W orld W ar II stim ulated studies of the ailing Greek economy by several foreign missions. All agreed that Greece has the natural and human resources for a much higher standard of living than has ever prevailed. Typical is the work of the U N R R A C om m ittee on the D evelopm ent of the Productive Resources of Greece. The Subcommittee on Mineral Resources published a 250-page study on the Mineral Wealth of Greece. Its findings open new horizons for the economic future of the cduntry. For example, the Supreme Financial Council in 1933 estim ated the available deposits of lignite as 5 mil lion tons certain, 27 million tons probable, and 156 million tons possible. It is known today that the basin of Ptolemai's alone holds 1 billion tons of this fuel. The committee concluded that Greece has abundant supplies of bauxite, chromite, magnesite, and that geologic indications suggest substantial deposits of high-grade iron ore, lead, zinc, and other minerals. The U N RRA scientists pointed out the significance of those findings:
We believe that the arbitrary and superficial views about the poverty of the country in mineral resources are quite incorrect, and we hope that they will be discarded entirely after systematic research to discover the real natural endow m ent of the nation. . . . Research should be extended to all branches. . . . The hydroelectric resources, the fisheries, and even agriculture, are mostly terra in cognita. . . . The State has never attempted to plan a systematic program for the m ineral resources. Individual initiative is likewise responsible. . . . N atu ral resources exist for substantial industrialization. . . . The industrialization of the country on the basis of the mineral wealth and the hydroelectric resources promises to correct to a significant degree the three basic weaknesses of the pre-war econ omy, th at is, the low national income, the chronic unem ploym ent of labor, and the nightm are of balancing im ports and exports.10
These are not the dreams of starry-eyed idealists. The most com prehensive study of the economic potentialities of Greece has been made by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Its mission to Greece found just what the U N RRA Committee found:
Greece has resources and people capable of sustaining far higher pro ductive levels than those so far attained. The country can very materially increase


682 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
its per caput production and national income, probably to double or triple its present level within two or three decades. This can be done by effective develop ment and use of water potentialities for irrigation and hydroelectricity, by the education of its citizens in modern technologies, by the development and use of improved agricultural methods, and by the expansion of industry to use unem ployed labor effectively.17
T hese reports suggest th a t G reece is not necessarily doom ed to poverty and social unrest and political instability because of her dense popu lation and com paratively m eager resources. T he roots of G reece’s econom ic difficulties are to be found in the use, or misuse, of her natural resources. The following analysis by Professor Adam Pepelasis, an expert on Greek eco nomic development, points up the retarding and distorting influence of poli tics upon economics in Greece:
It is not difficult to explain why G reece has not succeeded in raising the level of living of its people. A careful survey of the econom ic history of G reece for the period 1830-1940 reveals clearly two facts— lack of a systematic and consistent economic policy, however defined— and administrative inability to implement those few measures initiated by progressive politicians. With reference to agriculture, there was no coherent policy until 1917 when the Ministry of Agriculture was established. During this whole period Greece was faced with two great agrarian questions. The first was that of the “national lands” formerly owned by Turks which became the property of the State. This problem was solved in the w orst fashion as the lands were sold at auction to city people with no knowledge of farming. The other problem was the distribution of latifundia. Although the question cam e into prom inence in 1882, it was not effectively answered until after W orld W ar I. With the establishment of the Ministry of Agriculture and under the strong impact of the modernizing policy of Venizelos appeared the beginnings of some consistent agricultural policy. But the consequent military and political upheavals prevented it from becoming effective or a perm anent part of G reek political life. Professor Sideres w rote in 1934, “A fter a century of free national life our agricultural policy is again where it started.” Before the war no public service attem pted a survey of the agricultural resources and potentialities of Greece, a predominantly agricul tural country. Such a survey was undertaken only after the last war by FAO. T he fisheries were neglected for a hundred years. In the early 1920’s the legisla tion concerning fisheries was the same as in 1830, and this in spite of the fact that fresh fish are an im portant source of protein in the G reek diet. T he FA O M ission to G reece reported, “T here is no record of any scientific research (on fisheries) having been undertaken, and it is evident from clauses of legislative enactments that existing regulations were not based on scientific findings.” Simi larly, there was no systematic study on the part of the public adm inistration of the mineral wealth and the hydroelectric potentialities of the country. W hatever at tempts were made were on paper or by private individuals. U N RRA surveyed these resources in 1947. Industrial policy began with the establishment of the Ministry of N a tional Econom y in 1911 and was intensified during the interw ar period. This field


Greece: 1918-1939 683
of economic policy has been characterized by bureaucratic rigidity and short sightedness. In the 1920’s and 1930’s protectionism was the general them e of Greek industrial policy. As a result, all sorts of industries came into existence under protectionist measures taken offhand, with no consideration as to the ad visability of the establishments or to the future world economic situation. It is not an exaggeration to say that by trade policy G reek officials al ways understood a mess of detailed regulations concerning imports and exports rather than the laying down of general principles in prom oting exports, regulat ing imports to the best advantage of the domestic economy and coordinating for eign trade policies with other domestic policies. T he inadequacy of the G reek adm inistrative service is also revealed in the field of taxation. The taxation system is unequal, em phasizes indirect taxes, and is very complex in its structure. Thus, for example, as reported by the FA O Mission, twelve different taxes were collected on cotton at various stages in the m anufacture and shipment of cotton between Thessaly and the factory at Volos (a distance of about twenty-five miles). Generally, G reek economic policy and social legislation have been whimsical, fickle, self-contradictory, and unplanned.18
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL D EV ELO PM EN T
Low national income meant low living standards. Food consumption in G reece on the eve of W orld W ar II is estim ated to have been betw een 2,300 and 2,500 calories daily per capita. This placed Greece at the bottom of the scale for Europe together with Albania and Portugal. Not only was the quantity of food extremely low; the quality was very poor. Only one fifth of the protein came from animal sources as com pared with one third to one half in W estern Europe. Consum ption of dairy products and meat was low even for the Balkans. The following figures on food consumption in Greece and the United States in 1948 are relevant, at least for purposes of general comparison, for the prewar period.
Annual Consum ption (Pounds per Capita per Year) in Major Food Categories in Greece and the United States, 1948


684 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
H ealth conditions inevitably reflected the low income and poor nu trition. Infant mortality rates in Greece, as in the other Balkan countries, were more than double those in W estern Europe. M alaria was one of the most terrible scourges, the incidence in the interw ar years being approxi mately 30 per cent of the population. In certain years the quantity of quinine im ported into G reece was reported as am ounting to 5 per cent of the w orld’s production. Malariologists estimated that about 30 million man-days per year were lost because of this disease. Thus m alaria represented a serious drain upon both the health and the w ealth of the G reek people.18 G reat progress has been made against the scourge by the N ear East Foundation, the Rocke feller Foundation, and UNRRA. Mass DDT-spraying throughout the country after W orld W ar II reduced the disease to insignificant proportions— a truly epoch-making accomplishment for malaria-ridden Greece. No such success has attended the campaign against tuberculosis, the prim e killer in Greece. Some 2 5 ,000 died of it each year, establishing a death rate alm ost ten times as high as that in the U nited States. This figure is re vealing because tuberculosis, probably m ore than any other ailm ent, is a gauge of a country’s housing and nutrition. O ther com m on diseases are am oebic dysentery, typhoid, and trachom a. T he over-all death rate in the in terw ar years averaged about 15 p er 1,000. If we com pare this with the Am erican rate of 10.6 in f938 we see that Greece had a m ortality rate more than 40 per cent higher. In the field of education Greece in m odern times has had one of the highest rates of illiteracy in Europe. The 1928 census showed 40.9 per cent of the population over eight years of age as illiterate. For women and girls the record was far worse: 58 per cent could not read or write as compared with 23.5 per cent of the males. After 1928 illiteracy decreased rapidly, falling by 1940 to an estim ated 27 per cent. The figure undoubtedly rose dur ing the chaotic years of W orld W ar II and immediately thereafter. In Greece, as in other underdeveloped countries, there was a large discrepancy between the number who started acquiring an education and those who proceeded far with it. In 1 9 3 6 -1 9 3 7 , for exam ple, 967,588 children attended the ele mentary schools, 90,709 the secondary schools, and 10,561 the universities. Education in G reece has been poor in quality as well as inadequate in quantity. The chief defect has been the inordinate emphasis on the classical period and classical subjects. This can be explained partly as the natural re action of a small, poor country with a past of towering greatness. A nother factor is the extrem ely centralized ch aracter of the educational system. The organization of the schools, the curriculum, the courses, and their content are prescribed by the Higher Educational Council in Athens, which works with the minister of education and his staff. The eighteen members of the council are usually eminent classical scholars and their interests are naturally reflected in the educational system they devise for the elementary and sec ondary schools. The study of the classical period consists too frequently of sterile note learning of historical facts and of ancient grammar, etymology,


Greece: 1918-1939 685
and syntax. Insufficient effort is m ade to understand the philosophical, ethical, and social systems of the ancients as products of the times, or to analyze w hat the significance of those systems might be for present-day society. Such a curriculum, needless to say, has little relevance to the life and problems of the graduating students. A similar disparity between educational practice and social needs exists in higher education. Of the university graduates of 1938, 45 per cent became lawyers and 33 per cent doctors; most of the rem ainder trained in science and the humanities. A realistic catalogue of the trained men that the country needed would have shown very different percentages. But this at once raises fundamental questions of social and economic organization. Greece certainly needed m ore doctors, especially in the rural areas. G reek doctors, like those of other Balkan countries, tended to congregate in a few large cities. They did so for econom ic as well as for obvious social and cul tural reasons. The impoverished peasantry simply lacked the financial re sources to support doctors in their respective localities. The same holds true in the fields of agronomy and other sciences. The schools of Theology and Philosophy of the University of Saloniki had two and a half times as many students as the Agriculture and Forestry School, while the School of Law had eleven times as many students as the Veterinary Departm ent. Certainly the proportions should have been different, given the objective needs of the country. But if two or three or four tim es as m any agronom ists and veteri narians had been trained there arises the question of how they could have found employment within the framework of the prevailing agricultural sys tem. The governm ent’s departm ent of agriculture offered alm ost the only o p portunity for em ploym ent, and its m eager budget could afford few agron om ists and veterinarians. T hus in G reece, as in the rest of the Balkans, the country needed more scientists than it trained, but actually it could not utilize the few that it possessed. This explains why a num ber of the most dis tinguished Greek agronomists and other scientists accepted positions in the U nited States during the interw ar years. T here is no doubt th at G reek stu dents have shunned vocational education and scientific careers because of the traditional prejudice against m anual work and preference for a whitecollar job. O n the other hand, it is also true that, given the existing structure of G reek society, the governm ent is the m ain source of jobs, and a law yer’s education is the m ost acceptable qualification for such jojbs. Since no business representatives scour Greek universities, as they do the Am erican for trained scientists, the students understandably study law in the hope of filling some miserably paid government position. A nother problem arising from the classics-oriented system of educa tion is that of language. G reece has been cursed in m odern tim es by the u n resolved issue of whether to use the vernacular or a rather artificial literary language that is close to classical G reek. T he issue has persisted because for various reasons, discussed in C hapter 7, classical G reek has not followed the same course as classical Latin. W hereas Latin gave way to several Romance


686 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
languages, ancient Greek has survived, or rather has been revived, in a cor rupted form known as the katharevousa, or purist language. But during the centuries of Turkish rule, a demotike, or vernacular language, developed with simplified gram m atical constructions and with a limited num ber of Slavic, Albanian, Turkish, and Italian words. The vernacular differs as much from the purist language as modern English does from that of the time of Chaucer. This has created serious problems because the average citizen who has at tended school only a few years or not at all simply cannot understand a speech or read a book couched in the purist. Nevertheless, the purist was established by governm ent decision in 1849 as the official language. Hence forth it was used in the adm inistration, the schools, and the newspapers. The Higher Educational Council, consisting largely of classical scholars, naturally has supported the purist. The church also has backed it, and th at institution has been an extremely im portant factor in education because the ministry of education and religion are one and the same. In its own m inistrations the church continues to use, untranslated, a fourth-century liturgy and a firstcentury scripture. In the last two decades of the nineteenth century a group of out standing poets and authors began to cham pion the vernacular as the people’s living language in contrast to the artificial and sterile purist. Thereafter most of the outstanding literary figures took this position. As a result, the lan guage question became a lively political issue in which the liberal-m inded generally favored the vernacular and the traditionalists the purist. It is easy in retrospect to mock the traditionalists as impractical archaizers who have been out of touch with reality. Y et their effort to “purify” the language is understandable if not fitting. After G reece won her independence it seemed intolerable to many patriots that they should be constantly reminded, through the presence of foreign words in their vocabulary, of the black days of na tional servitude. So they set out to eradicate linguistic traces of foreign domi nation and to create a renascent language that would serve as the symbol of a renascent nation. In addition to this nationalist factor there was also a very practical consideration behind the purist drive. The centuries of domination by different foreign rulers had prom oted linguistic differentiation to the point where the various dialects had become almost incom prehensible to all except their respective users. Furtherm ore, when the country was liberated it was discovered that among the babel of dialects no single one was sufficiently prom inent to afford a basis for a national language. Thus the educated class, with its classicist tradition and preference, naturally decided that it was neces sary to manufacture a national language on the basis of classical and ecclesi astical Greek. After more than a century of rivalry the purist and vernacular lan guages have reached a fairly clear division of fields. T he purist is used in all governm ent work, in business correspondence, nonfictional books and treatises, law courts, and form al conversation. T he vernacular is the language of conversation, of trade, of popular periodicals and song, and most liter


Greece: 1918-1939 687
ary works. In the schools the two are mixed in the lower grades, making it difficult for the pupils to understand either. T he higher one progresses in the educational system the m ore the purist predom inates. In conclusion, it is apparent that the combination of factors responsible for the understandable yet misguided effort to revive an ancient language has resulted in much w asted effort in the schools, in an onerous am bivalence in literature, and in a serious discord between the language of the people and that of their gov ernm ent.


35. Rumania: 1918-1939
L ______________________________________
on the threshold of a dazzling future. New provinces had been acquired which more than doubled the population and area of the country. These provinces possessed industries and natural resources that raised R um ania’s economic status trem endously. Also, a thorough land reform program was effected in the immediate postwar years, giving rise to hopes for a prosperous peasantry and social stability. These rosy prospects failed to materialize. Indeed, the history of R um ania in the interw ar years was in certain rcspccts more dismal than that of the other Balkan countries. Only Rumania nurtured a genuine mass fascist movement with all the paraphernalia of virulent anti-Semitism and dem a gogic trappings. Also, Rum ania was the only Balkan country that was muti lated at the beginning of W orld W ar II without any resistance from within or assistance from without. Various factors explain this melancholy outcom e. In the field of eco nomics Rumania experienced the same impasse as the other Balkan countries — low agricultural productivity, rural overpopulation, and a weak industry incapable of absorbing the surplus population and raising the national in come. In politics there was the usual gulf between the rulers and the ruled, but it was com plicated by King C aro l’s am bitions and m achinations, which ended in outright dictatorship. Finally, in international affairs Rum ania was in a peculiarly hazardous position. She had been able to realize all her terri torial aspirations at the end of W orld W ar I because of the power vacuum that existed at that m om ent in E astern Europe. B ut the vacuum was filled in during the 1930’s by the revival of G erm any and the Soviet U nion. As a re sult, R um ania was subject to overwhelming pressures which culm inated in the partitioning of the country and in its dom ination first by Germ any and then by the Soviet Union.


Rumania: 1918—1939 689
l a n d r e f o r m : 1918-1921
A drastic land reform program was effected in R um ania in the im mediate postwar years. Although there was much controversy concerning the am ount of land to be distributed, it was universally agreed that some reform was inevitable because of the revolutionary situation that prevailed at the time. Rum anian troops on the M oldavian front were in close contact with Russian soldiers who were organizing soviets under Bolshevik influence. A t the same time the government had suffered disastrous military defeat and the country had been occupied by the Central Powers. Under these circumstances the old o rd er in R um ania had been discredited as well as shattered. “This is the state of m ind in the country,” declared a R um anian professor on M ay 27, 1917, “disbelief in the governm ent, disbelief in Parliam ent, disbelief in


690 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the constituted authority. . . . Today as yesterday revolution appears to the Rum anian peasant the only possible means for him to resolve the great case between him and the proprietors of estates.” 1 King Ferdinand met the crisis by visiting the front in April, 1917, and making the following declaration to the troops:
Sons of peasants, who, with your own hands, have defended the soil on which you were born, on which your lives have been passed, I, your King, tell you that besides the great recompense of victory which will assure for every one of you the nation’s gratitude, you have earned the right of being masters, in a larger measure, of that soil upon which you fought. Land will be given you. I, your King, am the first to set the example; and you will also take a large p art in public affairs.2
A fter the armistice had been signed Ferdinand issued a new procla m ation on Novem ber 12, 1918, reaffirming his pledge of 1917. The follow ing m onth, on Decem ber 15, he signed a decree defining the terms of land reform in the Old Kingdom. All arable crown, foreign, and absentee proper ties were to be completely expropriated. A nother 2 million hectares were to be expropriated on a sliding scale from private properties of over 100 hec tares. Expropriation was to be based on properties rather than on proprie torship, to the advantage of the landowner with multiple holdings. Com pen sation was to be based on a num ber of factors but was not to exceed twenty times the regional rental rate. Payments to proprietors were to be made by 5 per cent state bonds redeem able in fifty years, the state contributing up to 35 per cent of the cost. These terms were modified by a later reform law passed on July 17, 1921. The political background of the new law was as follows. The Liberal leader, Ion Bratianu, who had succeeded the Germanophil Premier Alexan der M arghilom an in November, 1918, found it necessary to resign on Sep tember 27, 1919, as a protest against the terms of the Paris Peace Confer ence. A transition government held elections on November 8, 1919, which were conducted fairly and which, as a result, produced surprising returns. The Liberals lost almost all of their seats to two new parties— the N ational party of Transylvania headed by Alexander Vaida-Voevod and the recently formed Peasant party of the Old Kingdom headed by Ion Mihalache. These two parties formed a coalition government and introduced a new and more radical land reform bill. The old parties and the king opposed the measure vehemently. Ferdinand finally dismissed the government despite the fact that it held a substantial parliam entary majority. The war hero, General Alexan der Averescu, was selected to be the new premier. He immediately held new elections and won a m ajority for his People’s party, thanks to the usual con trol techniques as well as to his own great personal popularity. Averescu then passed the new reform law of July 17, 1921, m entioned above. It was a more carefully drafted law than that of 1918, and it introduced several changes, such as basing expropriation on proprietors rather than on properties. The


Rumania: 1918-1939 691
net result of these two land measures was that a total of 2.8 million hectares changed hands in the Old Kingdom. Land reform was also effected in each of the newly acquired provinces through individual laws that took into account local geographical factors, previous agrarian conditions, and political circumstances. These laws were on the whole more radical than that pertaining to the Old Kingdom. One reason was the more revolutionary atmosphere in the provinces. In fact, both Transylvania and Bessarabia had voted for union with Rum ania on the ex plicit condition of thorough land reform. Also, the fact that most of the land owners were foreigners further encouraged radical land distribution. The total amount of land expropriated throughout Rumania amounted to about 6,000,000 hectares, of which about 3,900,000 hectares were dis tributed to some 1,393,000 peasants. The remaining 2,100,000 hectares were used for communal grazing lands and woodlands as well as for the creation of a land reserve from which public needs such as the building of roads, model farms, and town extensions could be satisfied. The most im portant im m ediate effect of this land distribution was that it stopped the wave of revolutionary Bolshevism at the Dniester River. The peasants now had land and no longer were interested in challenging the status quo. The Peasant leader, Mihalache, acknowledged this effect of the re forms when he declared: “The ruling class has made only such concessions as were necessary to assure its own existence. The reforms have been a kind of safety valve.” 3 They did indeed serve effectively as a safety valve. Even in the later years communism never won the following in Rum ania that it did in the other Balkan countries. The reason was not only the land distribution but also the traditional antipathy of the Rumanians for everything Russian. The Rumanian Communist party labored under the additional disadvantage of being obliged to support the Com intern line calling for the detachm ent of Transylvania, Bessarabia, the Dobruja, and Bukovina on the grounds of na tional self-determination. Thus communism and treason came to be regarded in Rum ania as completely synonymous. The party was still further weakened in public esteem by the fact that many of its leaders belonged to the minority groups— Hungarians, Bulgarians, and Jews. Finally, the Communist party was fiercely repressed from the beginning and was outlawed in 1924. The net result was that communism never had the popular support and the tight or ganization in Rumania that it did to the south of the Danube. Land reform proved successful politically but not economically. It failed to solve the basic and long-standing problems of Rum anian agriculture. It is true th at the reform laws were politically m otivated and therefore were not form ulated w ith these econom ic problem s in mind. Y et their failure in the economic field was to have far-reaching consequences on all aspects of R um ania’s developm ent during the interw ar period.


t
l i b e r a l r u l e : 1922-1928
R u m an ia’s political institutions were patterned after those of the West. The constitution adopted in 1866 was a modified translation of the Belgian constitution, while the two prewar parties bore the tim e-honored labels of Conservative and Liberal. But in actuality there was little relation ship between the theory and practice of Rum anian politics. Elections were held periodically but in alm ost all cases signified very little. It is not unfair to say that in both the prew ar and postwar periods the country was ruled by a few for their own benefit. This was true to a greater or lesser degree of all the Balkan countries. But the gap between form and content, between the oligarchy and the mass, was perhaps greatest in Rumania.
Politics, which retained a distinctly Phanariot flavor, was the art of taking advantage of the amorphous character of the peasantry. Rumanian elec tions were notorious for their corruption, ballot stuffing, and general unrelia bility as measures of public sentim ent. Perhaps only two elections in the entire [interwar] period were at all free and fair, and both produced a m arked upset in political life. In most cases elections were “m ade” in advance. M any governm ents were in power through no popular m andate whatsoever but merely through politi cal arrangements; dismissals were equally arbitrary and only occasionally resulted from the loss of popular confidence. It would be futile and misleading to attem pt to explain the course of Rumanian politics by an analysis of the elections.1
The outstanding change in the political pattern in the years imme diately following W orld W ar I were the disappearance of the Conservative party and the rise of the National Peasant party. The Conservative party, which was based primarily on landowning interests, suffered because of its Germanophil position during the war and because of the breakup of the estates following the war. As a result, the first phase of postwar politics, from 1922 to 1928, was dom inated by the L iberals. This was followed by a brief interlude of Peasant rule from 1928 to 1930. The third period, 1930 to 1938, was m arked by the disintegration of all the parties and the trium ph of King Carol. The fourth and final period was that of royal dictatorship culminating in C aro l’s ignom inous flight in 1940. The Liberals dominated Rumanian politics until 1928 because they had supported the victorious Allies during the war and because they enjoyed the confidence and support of King Ferdinand. They received an unpleasant shock from the 1919 elections, but Ferdinand saved the situation by dis missing the V aida-M ihalache governm ent and installing G eneral A verescu as premier. The Liberals did not object to this appointment because the popular general served as a useful lightning conductor. They gladly allowed him to handle the explosive land reform problem and to crush a general strike that developed in October, 1920. Then, after the storm and strife had passed, the Liberals withdrew their support from the general and forced him to resign.
692 Age of War and Crisis: 1914


Rumania: 1918-1939 693
O n January 19, 1922, they assumed office under Ion Bratianu, son of the prewar Liberal leader. The Liberals rem ained in office until N ovem ber, 1928, with the ex ception of one interlude from March, 1926, to June, 1927, when General Averescu was premier for a second time. But again he was dependent upon the Liberals for a majority and again the Liberals ousted him after he had served their purpose. T heir long tenure in office did not mean that they en joyed general support in the country. In fact, it is extrem ely doubtful that they did so, for they had few followers in the new provinces and they had to contend with the strong opposition of the Peasant party in the Old Kingdom. The Liberals were able to hold power as long as they did because the king backed them, because the opposition was divided, and because they resorted to crude electoral manipulations and to repressive police measures, usually in conjunction with staged Com m unist scares. The most noteworthy policies pursued by the Liberals were indus trialization and administrative centralization. The techniques and results of industrialization will be considered later in this chapter. C entralization was effected in a m anner rem iniscent of Prem ier Pashich in Yugoslavia. The L ib erals held elections in M arch, 1922, and won by a landslide, gaining 260 seats as against 17 in the 1920 elections. T he fact that the Liberals conducted the elections was not unrelated to their phenomenal turn of fortune. Indeed, the opposition parties challenged the validity of the election and withdrew from parliam ent. Bratianu seized the opportunity to pass hurriedly a new constitu tion in M arch, 1923. The key article was the first one, which stated, “T he K ingdom of R um ania is a unitary and indivisible state.” This m ade clear the basically centralist character of the constitution. As in the case of Yugo slavia, the newly acquired provinces protested violently and demanded au to n o m y . The strongest opposition came from Transylvania. The inhabitants of that province resented the efforts of Bucharest banks to gain control of their industries. They were equally hostile to the hordes of officials sent from the Old Kingdom to govern them. With justification the Transylvanians com pared these officials unfavorably, in term s of honesty and efficiency, with the H apsburg bureaucrats of the prewar years. The struggle against the cen tralist constitution stimulated the organization of the National Peasant party in 1926, which was a fusion of the National party of Transylvania and the Peasant party of the Old Kingdom. The Transylvanian leader, Dr. luliu Maniu, soon became the head of the new party. So long as Ferdinand was alive the N ational Peasants had no hope of com ing to pow er. B ut F erd in an d ’s death in July, 1927, was followed in N ovem ber of the sam e year by that of Ion B ratianu. F erd in an d ’s son, Prince Carol, had renounced his right to the crown some two years earlier because of a liaison with Mme Lupescu disapproved by the court and government. Conse quently, a regency, was now appointed to rule during the m inority of C arol’s


young son, King Michael. These changes at the top encouraged hopes that a new government at last would be tolerated. The National Peasant party in creased its pressure, sending thousands of peasants on a demonstrative “m arch on Bucharest.” Reluctantly the regency finally yielded, entrusting M aniu with the form ation of a government and the holding of elections. The latter were held on December 12, 1928, and are generally considered to have been the freest of the whole interwar period. The National Peasants won an overw helm ing victory, gaining 333 seats as against 13 for the Liberals. It was hoped that this represented the beginning of a new era.
p e a s a n t r u l e : 1928-1930
The Maniu government failed dismally to meet the expectations of its supporters. Its failure was one of the m ost depressing features of R u m ania’s history betw een the wars. It also proved to be a fateful turning point in the country’s political course. T he advent of the P easant governm ent in November, 1928, represented the culmination of a political struggle that had begun at the end of W orld W ar I. Accordingly the g o v ^n m en t took office on a wave of national enthusiasm and optimism. Its failure to relieve the agrarian problem and to m aintain its political power produced widespread disillusion m ent. W hen the governm ent resigned in O ctober, 1930, R um ania began the long descent culminating in the disasters of 1940 and 1941. Thus the failure of the M aniu government ended the possibility of a peasant democracy. M aniu did try to help the peasants with several measures. The Lib erals had im posed very heavy export duties on cereals in order to finance their industrialization program. Maniu now repealed these duties, which the peasants had resented keenly as a discriminatory tax burden. M aniu also at tempted to raise agricultural prices, to encourage cooperatives, and to intro duce more rational agricultural methods. A nother measure was a law passed in 1929 abolishing the restrictions on the right of peasants to sell plots that they had received through the land reforms. The reasoning was that free sale of land would lead to concentration of holdings and thus create a solid peas ant middle class. A num ber of peasants did accumulate medium-sized hold ings, but a much larger num ber sank down and became a rural proletariat of landless o r dw arf peasants. In fact, a fatal weakness of the governm ent’s agrarian program was that it benefited only the minority of well-to-do and wealthy peasants. It did nothing for the rural proletariat, which comprised 75 per cent of the peasantry in 1930 and certainly a higher percentage a decade later. A lso, the w orld depression ruined the governm ent’s efforts by u n der mining the drive to raise agricultural prices and by m aking it difficult to fi nance projects for rural education and aid to cooperatives. Much more im portant than its agrarian program was the N ational P easant governm ent’s decision to throw the country open to foreign capital. The Liberals had followed a nationalistic economic policy, seeking to de velop R u m an ia’s resources with R um anian capital. F o r this reason they had
694 Age of War and Crisis: 1914—■


Rumania: 1918—1939 695
raised high protective tariffs and imposed heavy export duties. To the peas ants this meant high prices for the m anufactured goods they bought and low prices for the agricultural produce they sold. In effect they were being forced to pay the cost of industrialization. Accordingly, M aniu now adjusted the tariff structure to protect only those industries that showed some promise of growth. Also, he eased the restrictions on the investment of foreign capital, with the result th at large sums were invested during his brief tenure in office. These investments eased the economic situation, even if only for a short time and at the cost of creating new problems. But politically the influx of foreign capital proved an em barrassm ent for M aniu because a num ber of his lieu tenants were involved in shady deals with W estern businessmen. A nother m ajor economic measure was the negotiation of a loan of 72 million dollars for currency stabilization and railway construction. The loan was floated in W ashington, London, and Paris in February, 1929. Again the government was doomed to disappointment because the onslaught of the depression before the end of the year blasted the hopes for prosperity and stability. In fact, the governm ent was dogged steadily by ill fortune in the economic field. The 1927 and 1928 crops failed badly. The 1929 crop was excellent but the market was already shrinking. In the following years ex ports dropped catastrophically in both quantity and value. A nd the govern ment could do nothing in the face of the world-wide crash. At this critical juncture, when the National Peasants were experi encing a perceptible decline in popularity, Carol dram atically returned to R um ania on June 6, 1930, and reclaimed his throne. Maniu had sanctioned his return for a variety of reasons. One was the desire to avoid the disad vantages inherent in the regency, which still had many years to go before M ichael reached his m ajority. A n o th er was C aro l’s obvious popularity in Rum ania, which the National Peasants hoped to exploit to their own ad vantage. Perhaps they also expected that Carol would express his gratitude by favoring them in the coming years just as Ferdinand had backed the Lib erals in the 1920’s. But C arol, instead, showed his gratitude by turning upon his benefactors and forcing them out of power. As mentioned above, Carol had become attached to an adventuress, nam ed M agda Wolff Lupescu. He had promised M aniu that he would sever this connection, but no sooner had he regained the throne than he brought her to Bucharest. M aniu resigned in protest in October, 1930. This proved to be his second fatal error. The first was his decision to allow Carol to return. A nd now he chose to force a showdown with Carol over an issue that was insignificant and unpopular. “Bourgeois sexual morality,” it has been pointed out, “ is probably less esteem ed in R um ania than anywhere else on the C onti nent. It was not the right issue on which to base the whole conflict between Democracy and Dictatorship.” 5 M aniu’s resignation m arked the end of R um ania’s brief experim ent with true constitutional government. There arises the question why the ex perim ent ended so feebly and anticlimactically. The most im portant single fac


696 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
tor probably was the shattering impact of the world depression. The National Peasants had lowered the tariffs in order to stimulate international trade but instead the depression dried up the channels of world commerce. Exports dropped in volume and even more in value. The national income fell off cor respondingly and the governm ent in office was inevitably held responsible. If it is recalled th at the w orld crash w reaked political havoc in dem ocracies of long standing, it becomes understandable that the new Peasant government in R um ania should have gone under. A nother factor explaining the fate of the Maniu government was the peculiar origin and nature of the N ational Peasant party itself. We have seen that it was a fusion of the National party of Transylvania and the Peasant party of the Old Kingdom. The latter represented a radical agrarian move ment, at least in its earlier phase. But the N ational party had arisen in the prewar years as a defender of the Rumanian peasants against the Magyar overlords and thus was inclined to be m ore national than peasant in its out look. The Peasant party had denounced the Liberals as the spokesmen of the ruling classes and financial interests, whereas the National party had opposed the Liberals primarily because they were the advocates of administrative cen tralism. In other words, the Peasant party was essentially a horizontal or ganization while the National was vertical. The fusion of two such disparate bodies inevitably produced ambiguity and vacillation. The downfall of the National Peasant government was due also to certain failings in M aniu’s leadership. M aniu was a man of conviction and utter incorruptibility. His strength of character stood out in the laxness and opportunism of R um anian public life and gave him an influence which is otherwise difficult to explain. On the other hand, there was a strong negative and passive streak in M aniu’s character that prevented him from giving ade quate leadership. Certainly he was no match for the forceful and opportunistic m onarch that he allowed to return to Bucharest. M aniu’s tendency to w ith draw on occasions when positive action was needed is illustrated in the fol lowing speech he delivered in February, 1932:
Today the nation is deprived of its constitutional rights; we are on the threshold of bankruptcy, both economic and moral; we see anarchy enthroned in men’s souls and hatred fomented in the provinces, and in the murmur of this growing dissolution one hardly hears the voice of national conscience, one and undivided. . . . In such solemn moments you ask for my guidance. I shall offer you none. You have both intelligence and conscience. I pray you to revere the memory of the sufferings which brought about the consummation of the national unity.0
c a r o l ’s t r i u m p h : 1930-19 38
T he following analysis of C aro l’s character helps to explain why the N ational Peasants were eclipsed and why R um anian politics during the 1930’s were so turbulent and unhealthy.


Rumania: 1918-1939 697
Superficially brilliant and basically ignorant, gifted with enormous energy and unlimited lust for power, a lover of demagogy, melodrama and bombastic speeches, he was determined to be a Great Man, the Saviour and Regenerator of his country. His impressionistic mind was filled with admiration of Mussolini, then still the most picturesque figure on the European political stage, and he set himself to imitate him. In his untiring work, which lasted for ten years, he com bined a little of the terrorist methods of the Duce with much of the well-tried Balkan procedure of corruption and intrigue. . . . For a decade the history of Roumania consisted of this man’s flamboyant gestures and cunning manoeuvres, set against a drab background of peasant misery and police oppression.7
C arol’s shrew dness and w ill-to-pow er are seen in the fact th at he started as a barely tolerated monarch and ended as the undisputed master of his country. He climbed to power by fomenting dissension within the political parties and breaking them one by one. He won over the more ambitious poli ticians with favors and flattery and set them against the old leaders. His first success was with his form er tutor, Professor Nicholas lorga, a historian of international reputation who was also prom inent in the N ational Peasant party. By playing upon his immense vanity Carol persuaded lorga to break with his party and to form a governm ent on April 18, 1931. By June 6 of the following year lorga had outlived his usefulness and was forced to resign. Carol replaced lorga with Vaida, another Peasant leader whom he had successfully em broiled with M aniu. V aida held elections on July 17, 1932, and won 45 per cent of the votes compared with the 80 per cent the party won in 1928. Nevertheless, he received a majority of the scats in ac cordance with the provisions of the electoral law. But a Peasant majority by this time had little significance because the party was hopelessly divided. Carol had won over a number of promising young Peasant leaders and irre vocably estranged them from Maniu. Carol conducted his intrigues against the Liberals as well as the N ational Peasants. Ion B ratianu, who had died in 1927, was succeeded as head of the party by his brother Constantin. The latter was hostile to the king and consequently received the same treatm ent as M aniu. Carol enticed a num ber of Liberal politicians to his cam p, including George Tatarescu, whom he allowed to form a government. Tatarescu held elections on Decem ber 20, 1933, and won the majority customarily obtained by the party in power. H e rem ained in office for four years but this did not m ean that this was a period of L iberal dom inance com parable with th at of the 1920’s. T here was a growing cleavage between Tatarescu, the head of the government, and Constantin Bratianu, the head of the party. Furtherm ore, Carol by this time held the leading strings of political pow er regardless of who filled the position of premier. During the four years of Liberal rule the fascist Iron Guard gained ground rapidly. This was a novel development in the Balkan Peninsula, where no other fascist movement has ever won a genuine mass following. The Iron G uard's success was due partly to a strong ethnic nationalism arising from


698 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the old feeling of isolation in a surrounding sea of Slavs. This was aggravated by the traditional fear of the neighboring and ever-threatening Russian colossus. Also, anti-Semitism, which has been endemic in R um ania since the winning of independence, provided a congenial atm osphere for a native fascist movement. The depression had the same effect, causing many R u m anians to turn in despair from the old parties to the crusading Iron Guardists. Finally, Carol contributed a good deal to the rise of the Iron G uard by providing it indirectly with funds, presumably with the aim of using the or ganization to further his own designs. The founder and leader of the Iron Guards was Corneliu Codreanu, a tall, handsome, and impressive young man with powerful and compelling features. As a student Codreanu gained nation-wide notoriety by shooting the police chief of Jassy for trying to stop his anti-Semitic activities. In 1927 he organized the League of the Archangel Michael, which in 1930 he renamed the Iron Guard. His efforts were not taken seriously until Carol began to sub sidize him and until the depression provided a favorable environment for proselytism . By the 1930’s m any R um anians had becom e disillusioned by both the Liberals and the Peasants and were ready to try something new. Codreanu now came forth with promises of ending the misrule of professional politicians, wiping out administrative corruption, eliminating the unpopular Jew ish m iddlem en, and distributing land to all the peasants. M any R um anian voters, impressed by the contrast between the old politicians on the one hand and the crusading young Iron Guardists on the other, accepted these promises at face value. In this m anner an extrem ist student organization grew to the proportions of a fascist mass movement. The change in the political climate was revealed with the elections of December 21, 1937. The Tatarescu government received only 36 per cent of the votes, falling below the 40 per cent required to obtain the majority of seats. The National Peasants polled 21 per cent of the votes (com pared to 45 per cent in 1 9 3 2 ), the Iron G uards 16 per cent (1 .2 per cent in 1932), and another fascist party, the National Christians led by Octavian Goga and A lexander Cuza, received 9 per cent of the votes. If account is taken of the great advantage enjoyed by the party in office, the elections clearly reflected a growing lack of confidence in the Tatarescu government. The alternative was to call again upon the Peasants, but Carol refused to do this because of his dislike for Maniu. Instead, he turned to Goga as the least dangerous of the fascist leaders. Goga proceeded to act upon his anti-Semitic principles in flamboyant fashion. Jews all over the country were hounded and beaten and driven out of business. Econom ic life was disrupted to such a degree that the British and French ministers protested. Carol intervened on February 10, 1938, ending the farce by dismissing Goga. Then he announced that parliam entary rule had proved impossible and that he was compelled in the interests of the coun try to establish a dictatorship. Thus, after eight years of patient endeavor,


Rumania: 1918-1939 699
Carol rid himself of the political parties and became the undisputed master of the country.
r o y a l d ic ta to r s h ip : 1938-1940
Carol acted quickly to establish his personal regime after he dismissed Goga. He abolished the 1923 constitution and prom ulgated in its place a corporatist constitution on February 20, 1938. The new document greatly in creased his prerogatives and allowed no role for the political parties. Carol then turned against the Iron Guard, which had served as a useful weapon against the parties but which now was no longer needed. In fact, it was a potential threat to the royal dictatorship. So Carol ruthlessly and violently attacked it, outlawing it, and imprisoning Codreanu in April, 1938. In N o vember of the same year C odreanu and thirteen of his followers were shot “while attempting to escape.” Carol now was supreme. In December, 1938, he launched his own organization, the Front of National Rebirth, to take the place of the disbanded parties. C arol was by no m eans the international playboy he is frequently depicted. He considered himself to be “the first peasant, the first laborer and the first public servant” of his realm. He worked furiously to fulfill the duties of his self-imposed roles. But there was no meaning or direction to his efforts. N ow that he finally had suprem e power he was at a loss w hat to do with it. He made speeches exhorting his subjects to work together in a disinterested spirit for the welfare of the country. But no one took him or his speeches seriously. He was surrounded by incapable and unprincipled politicians who operated in the traditional m anner behind the façade of the royal dictatorship. Despite the hollowness of his regime, Carol was secure because the parties were gone and he could rely on the army and the police. But he had nothing solid with which to resist an attack from the outside. The tragedy of his dictatorship is that it left R um ania with no leadership worthy of the name. Carol had no trustworthy advisers at a time when the international situation was becoming increasingly dangerous. As for the masses, they had become thoroughly disillusioned and apathetic after witnessing the fate of the Liberals, the N ational Peasants, and finally the Iron Guardists. Thus R u mania, like Yugoslavia, lacked spirit and cohesiveness when the national crisis came in 1940. Just as Yugoslavia crumpled with little resistance be fore the Germ an onslaught, so Rum ania without a struggle yielded Bessarabia and northern Bukovina to Russia (June 2 7 ), northern Transylvania to Hun gary (August 3 0 ), and southern D obruja to Bulgaria (September 7 ).* The climax came on Septem ber 6, when Carol and Mme Lupescu fled the coun try in W ild W est fashion with revengeful Iron G uardists in pursuit. W hen the pair crossed the frontier their railway train was pock-m arked with bullet holes. In this ignominious m anner the shining prospects with which R um ania began the interwar era faded away.
* See C hapter 37.


700 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT
P rio r to W orld W ar I R um ania’s econom y was limited to agriculture, lumbering, and petroleum production. The provinces acquired at the end of the war brought new resources and new industries. G reater Rum ania now had textile, sugar, chemical, and metallurgical industries as well as fairly ex tensive natural resources, including petroleum , lignite, iron, lead, zinc, salt, and rich forest lands. The first task was to integrate the economies of the several provinces into a cohesive national unit. The various currencies that were in circulation— the Rum anian leu, the A ustro-Hungarian crown, and the Russian ruble— had to be consolidated into a single currency. The rail way lines needed to be rerouted, having been designed originally to serve the A ustro-H ungarian and Russian economies. New links were built to center the railw ay system upon B ucharest, and the various gauges that existed in the provinces were converted to the standard gauge prevailing in the Old King dom. The whole complex of commercial and financial relationships, disor ganized by the war and by the transfer of territories, had to be reoriented and placed upon a functioning basis. The first m ajor economic m easure undertaken by the Bucharest gov ernm ent was the distribution of land. We have seen that this was carried out on a tremendous scale involving 6,000,000 hectares of land and 1,393,000 peasant beneficiaries. But land reform did not solve the agricultural problem in R um ania any more than it did in the other B alkan countries. T he difficul ties arose from the usual twin dilemma of rural overpopulation and low pro ductivity. R u m an ia’s population was just over 18 million at the time of the 1930 census and probably about 20 million when W orld W ar II began. This represented a population density of 61 p er square kilom eter, which was less than that of most Western European countries. But a much larger percentage of the population lived off the land (78 per cent) than was the case in W est ern Europe. As a result, substantially more people were dependent upon each unit of arable land in Rum ania than in most W estern European countries.* This heavy population pressure upon the land led to severe fragm entation of private properties. In 1941 over 58 per cent of the plots were less than 3 hectares. A nother result of the population pressure was a high degree of rural underemployment. A survey made by Rum anian economists in 1933 revealed that only 43.66 per cent of the potential energy of agricultural labor was being used in farm work. A nother investigation of 200 farm s of less than 3 hectares and of 100 farms between 3 and 5 hectares showed that on farms under 3 hectares only 38 per cent of the available labor was being utilized; and on farms between 3 and 5 hectares, only 60 per cent.8 The large num ber of dwarf properties arose in part from the unequal
* Statistics in Chapter 31.


Rumania: 1918-1939 701
distribution of land. It appears that the land reforms of 1918 to 1920 were not enforced as thoroughly as had been assumed. Also, a good deal of land that had been distributed during the reforms had since been sold by poor peasants who were unable to make ends meet. By 1941 properties of over 100 hectares com prised 16 per cent of the privately owned land. O n the other hand, if all holdings over 100 hectares had been divided am ong the peasants owning less than 5 hectares, the average size of their plots would have risen from the 2 hectares shown by the 1941 census to only 2.7 hectares. This indicates that in Rum ania, as in the other B alkan countries, the solution to the agricultural problem lay in increased productivity rather than in more land distribution. This is borne out by the experience of H olland, where a slightly higher num ber of people lived off each unit of arable land. But agricultural productivity in H olland was much greater than in Rum ania, with the result that the Dutch farm er enjoyed a standard of living far above that of the Rumanian peasant. M ost of R u m an ia’s farm lands continued to be devoted largely to grain cultivation. A slight shift did occur toward industrial plants such as sunllower and soybean. But the percentage of arable land under cereals dropped only from 87 to 82 during the interw ar years. R um ania’s wheat yield during the four-year period 1928-1932 was below that of any Balkan state except Greece, averaging 9.5 quintals per hectare, as contrasted with a French yield of 14.8 and a Danish yield of 29.4 quintals per hectare during the same years. The reasons for the low productivity included limited use of fertilizers, a primitive crop-rotation system, low quality of livestock, shortage of agricultural equipm ent, prevalence of strip farming, and lack of moistureconservation measures necessary in a country with rich soil but uneven rain fall. During the depression years the Rumanian peasants suffered severely because the prices of the agricultural products they sold dropped far more than the cost of the m anufactured goods they bought. This price scissors, which operated in all the Balkan countries, affected the Rum anian peasants as follows:


702 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
The deleterious impact of this “price scissors” was aggravated by the failure of the government to provide adequate credit facilities for agricul ture. A national bank existed to aid commerce and a Society for Industrial Credit to aid industry, but there were no provisions for agricultural credit on a similar scale. As a result, the peasants paid dearly for the money they borrowed. In 1931 a League of Nations investigation of agricultural credit in Eastern Europe found that in Rumania the banks of agricultural credits charged 9 to 13 per cent, private banks 12 to 15 per cent plus a quarterly commission of 1 to 3 per cent, and private lenders from 12 to 30 per cent.9 The Rumanian peasants also suffered from the discriminatory nature of the national tax system. M ost of the revenue came from indirect taxes on consum ption goods rather than from income levies. In 1935-1936, income and other direct taxes provided 22.8 per cent of the total revenue compared with 44.9 per cent from consum ption taxes, 12.3 per cent from taxes on property transactions, 12.1 per cent from turnover taxes, and 7.9 per cent from custom s duties.10 T he net result of this situation was th a t the R um anian peasantry sank progressively deeper into debt. In 1938 the interest charge on debts equaled 10 to 11 p er cent of the average gross incom e on 6,000 farms. By 1931 this rose to 35 per cent.
The position of Rumanian agriculture during the interwar years can not be analyzed adequately in a vacuum. To understand the reasons for its difficulties it is necessary to exam ine its relationship with other branches of the national economy, and particularly with industry. All Rum anian govern ments, with the exception of the short-lived N ational Peasant adm inistration, took strong measures to stimulate industrial growth. The Liberals began dur ing the 1920’s with a nationalistic econom ic policy, seeking to develop R u m ania’s resources with R um anian capital. They passed four laws in 1924 reg ulating a wide range of industrial activities— hydroelectric power, natural gas, petroleum, mines, railroads, river navigation, postal services, telephones and telegraphs, and government monopolies. The laws stipulated that foreign cap ital in these enterprises could not exceed 40 per cent and that at least three fourths of the personnel and two thirds of the boards of directors were to be Rumanians. Since the subsoil had been nationalized under the constitution, all mines and oil wells were in the form of concessions which would ultimately revert without indemnity to the state, although existing enterprises were to be guaranteed their holdings for a period of fifty years. These regulations discouraged foreign investors and compelled the Liberals to attem pt to build up industry with little outside aid. They adopted a protective tariff system in 1921, and increased the duties in 1924, 1926, and 1927 until Rumania had one of the highest tariff walls in Europe. The Liberals also imposed heavy export duties on agricultural products, some times equaling 50 per cent of the value of the commodity. The prime purpose of these export duties was to provide revenue for industrialization purposes. They were successful in this respect, yielding in certain years more revenue than the im port duties.


Rumania: 1918-1939 703
Both the export and the im port duties bore heavily on the peasants. The latter were, in effect, shouldered with the cost of the industrialization program. Consequently, one of the first and most im portant measures of the N ational Peasants w hen they cam e to office was to reverse the L iberal eco nomic policies. They repealed the export duties, threw open the doors to foreign capital, and restricted im port duties to those fields in which domestic industry showed some promise. But the National Peasants held power for only two years. The governments that followed reverted to the policy of forced industrialization. One reason was the spread of agrarian protectionism among the industrial states during the depression years. This undermined the international grain m arket and stim ulated R um ania, as well as the other Balkan countries, to develop her own industries. A nother reason was the growing international tension in the 1930’s, w hich created a desire for a strong arm am ent industry at home. Industrialization during the 1930’s was encouraged not only by protective tariffs but also by im port quotas and restrictions, tax exemptions, state subsidies, special transport rates, obligatory use of certain locally pro duced goods, and monopolies granted to industries considered nationally de sirable. These measures weie successful in raising industrial productivity, especially in heavy industry. Between 1927 and 1937 the output in quantity of capital goods increased by 57.4 per cent com pared to a 45 per cent in crease in consum er goods. Steel production, which hit a high of 143,511 m etric tons in 1928, and dropped to a low of 103,046 in 1932, rose to 276,532 in 1938. The general index of m anufacturing production rose from 100 in 1913 to 136.9 in 1929, then dropped to a low of 111.9 in 1932, and thereafter rose steadily to 167.8 in 1934, 175 in 1936, and 177.9 in 1938." In terms of capital investment, the chief industries in order of im portance were chemical (chiefly petroleum ), food processing, metallurgical, and textile. In terms of value of output, the order was food processing, tex tile, chemical, and metallurgical. The petroleum industry was noteworthy because of its strategic and economic significance. The Rum anian oil fields were the only ones of any size to be found in E urope outside the Soviet Union. Less than 25,000 workers were em ployed in the oil fields and re fineries in 1938. But their output accounted for 46 per cent of the value of all R um anian exports, 22 p er cent of total railw ay receipts, and 15 per cent of total budget receipts. Approximately 90 per cent of the oil was extracted by foreign firms. The high point of Rum anian oil production came in 1934, with 8.5 million tons of crude oil, or 4.05 per cent of total world output. My 1938 production had fallen to 6.6 million tons or 2.41 per cent of world out p ut.12 T he decline was due to the fact that the existing oil fields were being exhausted and exploration for new fields was discouraged by restrictions on foreign prospectors and the lack of domestic capital and technical knowledge. Rum ania also possessed sizable mining and lumber industries. The chief minerals were lignite, salt, iron, gold, silver, and copper. Rich timber resources wore available in T ransylvania and Hukovina, lum ber com prising I 1,7 p e rc e n t


704 Age oj War and Crisis: 1914
of the value of all exports in 1938. The mineral resources were far from ade quately surveyed and exploited; on the other hand, the forests were wastefully lum bered, young trees as well as old being felled. The Rum anian economy, like that of the rest of the Balkans, came in creasingly under G erm an control in the late 1930’s. D uring the early depres sion years Rum ania was able to hold her own against Germany because of her oil exports, which she was able to m arket at a time when cereals were a glut. As late as 1937 the G erm an share in R um anian trade was no greater than it had been in 1929. T hen the situation changed drastically with G erm any’s an nexation of A ustria and Czechoslovakia. G erm any now dom inated all South eastern Europe, and R um ania gravitated tow ard G erm any for political as well as economic reasons. W hereas G erm any in 1937 had provided 28.9 per cent of R um anian imports and taken 22.3 per cent of R um anian exports, the figures in the next year had risen to 40 and 26.5 per cent, respectively.’* Then on March 23, 1939, Germany imposed on Rumania a treaty that definitely subordinated R um ania’s econom y to that of the Reich. T he principal aim of this treaty, which was to run for five years, was to expand and diversify R um anian agricultural production. Germ any was to aid in promoting the culti vation of agricultural products of interest to its economy, especially foodstuffs, oilseeds, and textile plants. Germ any also undertook to aid industries for proc essing agricultural products and to supply machinery for exploiting mineral and petroleum resources. These and other provisions were designed to develop Rum ania into a producer of vegetable and mineral raw materials for the Ger m an industrial economy. This was advantageous to G erm any because it gave her m ore security from blockade. O n the other hand, it reduced R um ania to a semicolonial status vis-à-vis Germ any. Indeed, G erm an economists specifi cally stated that Rum ania should concentrate on raising her output of food stuffs and raw materials, and should restrict her industrial activities to the processing of agricultural products. In conclusion it should be noted that Rumania remained an overwhelm ingly agrarian country despite the strenuous government efforts to promote industry. T he 1930 census showed 78 per cent of the population engaged in agriculture and forestry. Industry did little to aid this large majority of the population. In fact, the tax structure compelled the peasantry to bear a large proportion of the cost of industrialization. In return, industry was not able to absorb the excess labor force that was accumulating in agriculture in the ab sence of a more intensive cultivation. Between 1929 and 1939, personnel em ployed in manufacturing industries increased by 90,000, or by about 10,000 a year. By contrast, the annual excess population in the countryside has been estimated at between 100,000 and 200,000. Industry also failed to aid agricul ture by providing it with the facilities for increasing productivity. A Rum anian economist has made this point as follows:
With all the accelerated rhythm of the process of industrialization, the cultivation of the soil and the raising of livestock have not received any stimulus


Rumania: 1918-1939 705
toward intensification; food industries based upon agricultural produce have not developed; the textile industry, while well advanced, has neglected native textile plants—flax and hemp— it has stimulated the cultivation of cotton only in the last years, and has provided no incentive for improving the quality of wool; the oil industry has been unable to cause an increase in the production of oleaginous plants, and the introduction of the soy bean in recent years is the result solely of the influence of foreign commercial relations. Finally, the rudimentary and in sufficient technical investment in agriculture and the minimal importance of chemical fertilizers illustrate the absence of any positive influence in this direction by the metallurgical and chemical industries.14
Thus the growth of R um anian industry did not help the peasants, either by intensifying agriculture or by absorbing the surplus rural population. Dr. Henry R oberts, an authority on R um ania’s econom ic developm ent, has reached the following negative conclusion concerning this interwar period:
Despite the agrarian reforms of 1918-21, an independent small peasantry was not established; instead, dwarf holdings, insufficient to sustain a peasant family, predominated. So long as there was no alternative field of employment for peasants driven below the margin of subsistence, the appearance of a larger class of medium peasants by no meanS compensated for the increasing fragmen tation and subdivision of the majority of peasant holdings. On the other hand, industry, which was regarded as a means of raising the level of productivity and of draining off 'surplus agrarian population, seems to have had the effect of reducing purchasing power and of aggravating the difficulties of the countryside. In general, one receives the impression that the Rumanian economy in attempt ing to lift itself by its bootstraps had merely driven the feet through the soles.15
SOCIAL AND CU LTU RA L DEVELO PM EN T
G reater Rum ania was not an ethnically homogeneous state. The census of 1912 showed that the Old Kingdom had a population of 7.2 million, of which over 92 per cent was Rumanian. With the territorial expansion at the end of W orld W ar I the proportion greatly changed. The 1930 census reported a population of alm ost 18 million, of which only 73 per cent was Rum anian. The largest minority was the Hungarian, amounting to almost 8 per cent of the population. Then came the Jews, Ukrainians, and Germans, each comprising between 4 and 5 per cent. Turks, Bulgarians, gypsies, and Russians made up most of the remainder. In 1919 Rum ania signed a minorities treaty only after the Allies had presented as an alternative the surrender of some of her recent territorial gains. Despite the provisions of the treaty the minorities were on the whole poorly treated. The Jews suffered from the traditional anti-Semitism which became especially virulent w ith the rise of the fascist m ovem ents in the late 1930’s. The Hungarians were the,m ost disaffected and outspoken, partly because of the m anner in which the H ungarian estates in T ransylvania were divided, but also because the Hungarians had traditionally looked down upon the Rumanians,


706 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
who now were the overlords. The Ukrainians and other minorities in Bessa rabia justifiably complained of the wretched Rum anian administration. In fact, Bessarabia has been described as “perhaps the most mis-governed province in E u ro p e.” 10 T he G erm ans, who lived m ostly in the form er H apsburg provinces, came increasingly under the sway of National Socialism during the thirties. Finally, the Bulgarians in southern D obruja resented the settlement of R um a nian colonists in their midst. Thus the minorities remained an unassimilated and divisive element in G reater Rum ania. The m ajority of them probably wel comed the partitioning of the country in 1940. Class stratification and inequality probably were more m arked in R u m ania than in any other Balkan country. “The unm istakable signs of luxury spending— palatial villas and flats in the residential sections, large automobiles, yachting clubs, and Parisian fashions— were in startling contrast to the condi tions in the countryside. . . . The colorful costumes and picturesque folk dances of the R um anian peasantry should not obscure the fact that in 1930 nearly half the population was illiterate and in 1938 one child in five died before it was a y ear old.” 17 Scientific investigations of village life were conducted during the 1930’s by the distinguished R um anian sociologist, Professor D im itrie G usti, and his students. Their valuable studies brought to light the true plight of the peasantry and served to narrow the gulf between city and village. Gusti had an opportunity to ameliorate the conditions he studied after being appointed di rector of a public C ultural F oundation by King Carol in 1934. H e sent team s of doctors, veterinarians, and farm experts to various villages with the aim of com bating illiteracy and improving public health and village life in general. The effort attracted international attention. A n American scholar reported the campaign as follows:
All treatment and medicine are free. . . . Home industries and coopera tives are encouraged. The team, however, imposes no ready-made plan; it merely assists the village to plan and carry out some short and practicable step in the long path which leads out of its present blind-alley. The team organizes libraries, peasant schools, singing circles, and evening meetings, mingling instruction with amusement after the manner of the itinerant American Chatauqua. The village intelligentsia and more energetic peasants soon begin to run their own meetings and lectures, and continue them after the team leaves. . . . The cultural work in the villages has one unexpected side: the enlightenment of the urban population. . . . Through literature, lectures, films, and expositions the Institute is trying to give the city a true picture of village life. Perhaps its most powerful weapon is the direct contact of the teams with the peasants. These enthusiastic and highminded young men and women carry away from their summer’s work a new understanding of the moral and artistic wealth of the Rumanian village, as well as a deeper sympathy for its economic and social needs.18
G usti’s w ork, rem arkable though it was, did n o t begin to scratch the surface so far as the peasants were concerned. The teams visited only a hand ful of R u m an ia’s 15,000 villages. F u rth erm ore, they could do little about the background economic factors that were largely responsible for the deplorable


Rumania: 1918-1939 707
social conditions. According to League of Nations estimates, the average per capita income in 1937 was between 60 and 70 dollars a year. This inevitably led to serious dietary deficiencies. Food consum ption and living standards appear to have improved appreciably during the immediate postwar years. Between 1913 and 1927 annual per capita consumption (in kilograms) of sugar rose from 4.59 to 5.94; of cotton goods, from 2.26 to 2.82; of paper, from 1.41 to 2.50; and of soap, from 0.20 to 0 .4 1.19 B ut during the depres sion years living standards again fell markedly. A num ber of surveys made during these years showed £hat the caloric content of the peasant diet was ade quate but its quality very poor. The principal food was maize in the form of corn meal. Meat, eggs, milk, and other protective foods could rarely be af forded. An indication of the inadequacy of the national diet was the reappear ance of pellagra on a scale reminiscent of the prewar years. Low income and faulty diet led to poor health conditions. Rum ania had the highest infant m ortality rate in E urope and was second only to Yugo slavia in the death rate from pulmonary tuberculosis. There was the usual con centration of médical facilities in the cities to the neglect of the countryside. In 1938 R um ania had 4.6 doctors per 10,00Q inhabitants, but only 1.1 in the ru ral districts. T he latter figure, it is interesting to note, is the sam e as th at for In d ia .20 In the field of education R um ania faced the sam e problem s as the other Balkan countries. Illiteracy was high and the professions were overcrowded. Before 1914 the illiteracy rates were approximately 40 per cent in Transyl vania, 60 per cent in Bukovina and the O ld K ingdom , and 94 per cent in Bessarabia. The Rumanian government spent considerable sums on education following the war; yet the 1930 census showed that almost 50 per cent of the population remained illiterate. The great majority of the students who were able to continue to higher educational institutions avoided the technical and agricultural schools. They chose, instead, the traditional classical type of edu cation in order to prepare them selves for a w hite-collar position, preferably in a governm ent office.
The sons of peasants, that is all the coming life-blood of our nation, fall over each other in their anxiety to get into the secondary schools. The ma jority, of course, are left on the way and fail to reach the University. What be comes of these young men? Do they return to the village?* No. Do they take up some trade? Never. They come to the town to swell the pitiful mass of applicants for official posts. . . . The pupil of a technical school, if he discovers in himself a gift for study, will pass to a theoretical school [lycée], but the unsuccessful pupil of a lycée will abandon it but never enter a technical school. He becomes an official.21
T he validity of the above statem ent is indicated by the fact th at in 1925 the United Kingdom had 10.7 university students per 10,000 people and R um ania 6!8, but by 1932 the proportion had changed to 12.1 and 19.7.22 A t lirst the graduates poured forth by the lycées and universities were able to find


7 0 8 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
governm ent posts because of the great need for officials in the new G reater Rum ania. But before long the supply exceeded the demand. Some were left un employed but a large num ber managed to enter government service. The result was that both the civil and military bureaucracies were badly overcrowded and were extended far beyond the financial means of the state. This in turn meant very low salaries for public servants. A study undertaken in May, 1941, of a group of state employees in the Central Institute of Statistics revealed that on the average 62.3 per cent of the personal budgets of employees were devoted to food, 13 p er cent to housing, and 11 p er cent to clothing. It is understand able that civil servants living under such conditions should have been suscepti ble to bakshish. Thus we see that R um ania suffered from the same vicious circle common to all underdeveloped regions— a weak economy, an overcrowded bureaucracy, low salaries, and widespread corruption.


36. Albania: 1918-1939
^ . l b a n ia b e c a m e i n d e p e n d e n t when the Conference of
A m bassadors decided on December 20, 1912, in favor of a new Albanian state.* Soon afterward W orld W ar I intervened and Albania almost disappeared dur ing the ensuing years of chaos and occupation. But in 1920 Albania was ad mitted to the League of Nations as a sovereign state. Independence, however, proved to be largely iflusory because of unavoidable dependence upon Italy for economic aid. The history of Albania between the two wars demonstrates graph ically that a country that is not economically viable has no chance of surviving unless it receives disinterested assistance from some international organization. The Albanians repeatedly applied to the League of Nations for economic aid but were rejected. They had no choice but to turn to Mussolini, who provided them with financial and technical help. Mussolini naturally expected com pen sation, which he obtained in the form of increasing control over the economy and arm ed forces of Albania. The logical next step was the outright occupation of A lbania, which M ussolini effected in A pril, 1939. Thus A lbania came under foreign occupation on the eve of W orld W ar II. H er neighbors were to suffer the same fate only two years later.
o c c u p a t i o n : 1914-1918
As noted in Chapter 27, Albania sank into a state of anarchy follow ing the departure of Prince W illiam in Septem ber, 1914. N ot even a nom inal central authority existed any longer. Each region became absorbed in its own local problems. In the south the main concern was to resist Greek territorial aspirations. The north, with its Catholic population, tended to look to AustriaHungary for support against the surrounding South Slavs. In the central part of the country, which was overwhelmingly Moslem, there was considerable feeling in favor of the restoration of O ttom an rule. U nder these circum stances
* See C hapter 27.
709


710 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
it is not surprising th at the great powers were able to do as they wished in Albania during the war years. W ithin a short time the country was occupied by at least seven foreign armies— Italian, Austrian, French, Greek, Serbian, M ontenegrin, and Bulgarian. During the first year of the war the attitude of both the Allies and the C entral Powers toward A lbania was determ ined mainly by their anxiety to win Italy and Greece to their respective sides. This consideration prom pted the Allies in October, 1914, to allow Greece to occupy southern Albania on con dition that the occupation be temporary, that Greece should withdraw when ever the powers requested her to do so, and that she should agree to an Italian occupation of Valona (Vlona). In O ctober and November, 1914, G reek troops occupied southern Albania, including the towns of Koritsa (Korce) and Argyrokastron (Gjinokaster), which had been awarded to Albania by the 1913 Pro tocol of Florence.* From the beginning the Greeks paid no attention to the conditions stipulated by the Allies. In January, 1916, they allowed deputies from southern A lbania (or northern Epirus as they called the region) to sit in the Greek chamber. In April, 1916, a royal decree announced the incorpora tion of the territory with Greece. The Allies protested and were able to secure the exclusion of the “Epirote” deputies from the chamber. But the disputed area remained under full Greek control. The Serbians and Montenegrins occupied adjacent Albanian territory in June, 1915, without prior arrangem ents with the Allies. Using border inci dents as pretexts, the M ontenegrins entered Scutari (Shkoder) in the north, while the Serbians occupied central Albania, including Elbasan and Tirana (T irane). The Serbians did not extend their zone to Durazzo (D urres) on the coast, contenting themselves with a strategic line commanding the coastal plains. Meanwhile, the Italians also had taken steps to safeguard their inter ests in Albania. Their main concern was to obtain the magnificent harbor of Valona, situated only sixty miles from the Italian coast and controlling the en trance to the Adriatic. On October 30, 1914, they occupied Saseno Island com m anding the entrance to V alona. O n D ecem ber 16 they occupied the harbor itself. The Italians strengthened their foothold in A lbania by the terms of the secret Treaty of London (April 26, 1915) under which they entered the war. The treaty gave to Italy “full sovereignty over Valona, the island of Saseno and surrounding territory of sufficient extent to assure defence of these points. . . The treaty also stipulated that if Italy received all the other territories assigned to her in the Alps and the A driatic, then she would “ not oppose the division of N orthern and Southern Albania between Montenegro, Serbia and Greece, should France, G reat Britain and Russia so desire.” Finally, central Albania was to become a “small autonomous neutralized State,” and was to be repre sented by Italy in its foreign relations.1 Thus the powers, which in 1912 had guaranteed the independence and neutrality of Albania, in 1915 agreed to the partitioning of the entire country.
* See C hapter 28.


Albania: 1918-1939 711
T he Allies did not have their way altogether in A lbania. Bulgaria’s intervention in September, 1915, enabled the Central Powers to overwhelm the Serbians and M ontenegrins and to take their places in central and northern Albania. By February, 1916, the A ustrians were ensconced in Scutari and Durazzo while the Italians held on in Valona. Later in the year the Allies de cided to force the Greeks out of southern Albania because they distrusted the royalisKjegime in Athens. Accordingly, the Italians took over Argyrokastron and even Yanina in Greece proper, while the French General Sarrail, who com m anded the Saloniki front, extended his positions eastward until he occupied Koritsa and effected a junction with the Italians. Thus by the end of 1916 northern and central Albania were under the Austrians, the Valona and Argyrokastron regions were under the Italians, and the Koritsa region was under the French. All the occupation authorities granted a certain measure of self-rule in order to ease the burden of adm inistration and to conciliate the local population. O n June 3, 1917, the Italian comm ander went so far as to issue a proclamation calling for a united and independent Albania “under the shield and protection of Italy.” A part from the question of how far the “shield and protection” would extend, this proclam ation reflected a shift in Italian policy. W hen Italy negotiated the 1915 L ondon Treaty she was prepared to divide Albania with Serbia, M ontenegro, and Greece. But now, in 1917, she was no longer willing to do so. And the reason was that she was becoming alarmed by the specter of a large South Slav state which threatened to take the place of A ustria-H ungary as a rival in the Adriatic. Accordingly, Italy now was determined to check the Slav menace by getting as much of the Adriatic Coast as possible for herself, and by setting up a large Albania be tween the Slavs and the sea. The surrender of Bulgaria in September, 1918, forced the Austrians to evacuate Albania. French, Serbian, and Italian forces followed on the heels of the retreating Austrians, reaching Scutari on November 5. W hen the war ended on N ovem ber 11 the Italians were in possession of m ost of A lbania, with the French in Koritsa, and the Serbs on the left bank of the D rin River. The Allies decided to continue this occupation arrangem ent until the Peace Conference settled the fate of Albania.
IN D E P E N D E N C E r e g a i n e d : 1918-1920
The Albanians had been too disorganized to play & decisive role during the war years. But now that hostilities had ceased, they took measures to safe guard their interests. O n D ecem ber 25, 1918, forty-eight delegates from all parts of Albania met in Durazzo and established a provisional government. This government sent a delegation to the Paris. Peace Conference, where there also appeared delegations from Albanian colonies in the United States, Con stantinople, and Rumania. The chief aim of the A lb an ian s was to regain the frontiers draw n in rough form in 1913 by the C onference of A m bassadors. But the A lbanians found themselves in a difficult position when the negotiations began. A ustria


712 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
Hungary, their chief defender in the prew ar years, no longer existed. The Greeks, Serbians, and M ontenegrins were pressing their claims as vigorously as in the past. A nd Italy wavered erratically from the position she had taken in 1917 in favor of a large A lbania. O ne reason f o r Italy’s vacillation was th at she was having difficulty realizing all her claims in the Adriatic because of President W ilson’s opposition, and therefore she wished to obtain com pensation in A l bania. Another reason was that Italy was weakened at the end of the war by widespread Bolshevism and war-weariness. This led her to seek a quick settle m ent with A lbania’s neighbors rath er than hold out for the 1913 frontiers of A lbania. These considerations explain the secret Venizelos-Tittoni agreement of July 29, 1919, by which Italy was to support Greek claims in southern Albania and the two T hraces, and G reece to support Italian claims to sovereignty in the Valona area and to a mandate for the remainder of Albania. Britain and France were willing to accept this bargain in order to facilitate territorial settle m ents elsewhere. In fact, on January 14, 1920, Lloyd G eorge, Clem enceau, and Nitti agreed that Italy should have all of Istria and Fiume, that Yugoslavia in return should get northern Albania, while the rest of the country should be divided as stipulated in the Venizelos-Tittoni agreement. This plan was defeated by the vigorous representations of the Albanian delegation and by the lirm opposition of President Wilson. The Albanians worked hard countering the Greek argument that race and language did not count and that the decisive consideration was national consciousness. They re plied that the population of southern Albania was overwhelmingly Albanian precisely in national consciousness as well as in race and language. They argued that the Greek statistics were based on the erroneous assum ption that all who belonged to the Orthodox Church were necessarily Greeks, whereas the great m ajority were A lbanians in every respect. M ost im partial experts since then have taken the position that the disputed area is, in fact, predom inantly A lba nian. An American scholar has concluded:
Albanian nationalism had always been suppressed under Turkish misrule and Greece had been given the upper hand with every opportunity to Hellenize the population by means of the Greek Orthodox Church and Greek schools teaching the Greek language. . . . Given freedom to develop naturally without restrictions, saving only those that would safeguard as far as possible the rights of minorities, there can be little doubt that a few years’ time would see “Northern Epirus” thoroughly Albanized. Inclusion of the district in Greece, on the contrary, would probably be opposed by a far stronger Albanian sentiment among the population than had been supposed to exist, and seems contrary to the principle of the independence of small nationalities. On the whole, then, judging the matter solely on the merits of the case, the Albanian argument seems by far the stronger, and is upheld by the reports of an investigating committee sent out later by the League of Nations. . . .2
M ore effective than the arguments of the Albanian delegates was Wil son’s unyielding stand against the partitioning of A lbania. On M arch 6, 1920,


Albania: 1918-1939 713
he flatly opposed giving A lbanian lands to Yugoslavia as com pensation for Fiume and other Adriatic territories that Yugoslavia would relinquish to Italy. “A lbanian questions should not be included in the proposed joint discussion of Italy and Yugoslavia . . . the President must re-affirm that he cannot possibly approve any plan which assigns to Yugoslavia in the northern districts of Al bania territorial com pensation for what she is deprived of elsewhere.” 3 Wilso n ’s(unequivocal position caused the B ritish-French-Italian plan for the parti tioning of Albania to be shelved. No other agreement was concluded before the conference disbanded. Thus by default Albania escaped partitioning. Although Albania had been rescued at the Peace Conference she was still occupied by foreign armies. The nationalist leaders now undertook the work of political organization and military preparedness necessary to liberate the country. They convened a National Congress at Lushnja on January 28, 1920, and decided to hold a general election. The deputies that were elected m et in T irana on M arch 27, 1920, as a N ational Legislative Assembly. T hus began the parliam entary life of Albania. During the following months various measures were taken to prepare the country for independent statehood. T irana was selected as the capital, its inland and central position protecting it from both the Italian fleet and the neighboring Balkan countries. A government loan was floated to which A lba nians at home and abroad generously subscribed. The delegates also debated the question whether the country should remain a principality or declare it self a republic. They decided to postpone decision until territorial integrity was assured and foreign influence eliminated. In the m eantime Albania was still nominally a principality, because Prince William had not formally abdicated. Accordingly, the assembly elected a High Council of Regency consisting of one representative of each of the four religions— Bektashi Moslem, Sunni Moslem, R om an Catholic, and Orthodox. Finally, the assembly established a Committee of National Defense to organize the armed forces. M eanwhile, the Italians were linding it increasingly difficult to m ain tain their position in A lbania because of war-Weariness and disaffection at home. The communists and socialists, who were at the height of their strength during these immediate postwar years, staged strikes to prevent the sending of soldiers and war materials to Albania. By May, 1920, the Italians had found it neces sary to evacuate all A lbania except V alona. The following m onth the A lbanian Committee of National Defense sent an ultimatum to the Italian commander to withdraw his troops immediately from Valona. Upon refusal the Albanians at tacked and were repulsed only with the greatest difficulty. In reply to appeals for reinforcements the Italian minister for war confessed, “ Internal conditions of country [Italy] do not permit sending of troops to Albania. A ttem pt to do so would provoke general strikes, popular demonstrations, gravely injurious to solidarity of Army, which must not be exposed to such hard tests.” 4 Italy obviously was in no condition to m aintain her hold on V alona. O n August 2, 1920, she accepted the inevitable by signing an agreem ent for


714 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the evacuation of the port, though she was to keep her forces on Saseno Island. A month later, on September 2, the last Italian troops left Albania. The year 1920 marked a turning point for modern Albania because of the departure of the Italians and also because in that year A lbania was adm it ted into the League of Nations as a sovereign and independent state. W hen the League Assem bly debated the question of A lbania’s m em bership, France sup ported the Greek and Serbian protests that Albania was not a well-defined po litical entity. But England strongly backed the A lbanian application and secured its acceptance. On Decem ber 17, 1920, A lbania became a full m em ber of the League of Nations. This recognition did not settle the vexed question of frontiers. In fact, Yugoslav troops made a new sortie into A lbania in October, 1921. Finally, on November 9, 1921, the Conference of Ambassadors voted for the reaffirmation of the 1913 frontiers. By 1922, all Yugoslav and G reek troops were withdrawn from Albania, though it was not until July 30, 1926, that Greece and Yugo slavia, together with Britain, France, and Italy, signed a final agreement fixing A lbania’s frontiers. The League of Nations Council eased the way for the new state by appointing in 1921 a commission with instructions to check on the withdrawal of foreign troops in A lbania and to report any foreign intervention in dom estic Albanian affairs. This commission subm itted on May 12, 1922, a report which may be taken as the birth certificate of the new Albania.
. . . the argument is still put forward that the Albanians are not inher ently a nation, that they will always be unable to exist as an independent modern State and that sooner or later the country is certain to be divided up among its neighbors. This argument in itself constitutes a serious menace to the independ ence of the country. The Commission, after thorough study of the whole Al banian question, was led to the conclusion not only that an Albanian nation exists, but that its existence is a necessity. . . . They are united by common customs, age-long traditions and even lan guage, the difference between the Gheg and the Tosk languages being at bottom nothing more than a difference of dialect. Although differences in religion occa sionally have some effect upon the politics of the country, the fanatical manifes tations so frequent in other countries which are divided in religion are very rare in Albania. . . . Moreover, the sufferings endured in common during the Balkan wars and the world war, in all of which Albania was a theatre of operations, gave a new impulse to Albanian nationalism which has extended to all the classes of the population. . . . Albania possesses not only the nationalist feeling, which is a factor in the formation of an independent nation, but also the material resources which are essential to its economic existence. . . . To sum up, it seems clear that the essential elements of a prosperous Albania exist [and] that this little country possesses all the conditions necessary for the formation of a politically and economically independent State. . . .5


Albania: 1918-1939 715
PROBLEM S OF INDEPENDENCE
T he League com m ission testified to A lbania’s potentiality as an “eco nomically and politically independent state.” But it also emphasized that the potentiality was still far from realization. “We must not delude ourselves so far as to believe th at this result is already achieved. On the contrary, the country is stilf in a sim ilar situation to th at of several of the B alkan countries im m edi ately after their liberation from Turkish domination. Its social and political or ganization is, indeed, only beginning.” 0 Albania did, in fact, face a host of basic problems at this time, and one of the most serious was her appalling poverty and general lack of development. She had no railways whatsoever and only a few roads connecting the chief towns. Industry was almost exclusively of the handicraft variety. The mineral resources lay unexploited and unsurveyed. Agricultural techniques were rudi m entary and wasteful. M uch fertile soil lay untilled because of m alarial swamps th at could not be drained because of lack of funds. The value of all the exports in 1921 am ounted to 42 0 ,0 0 0 dollars, and the budget in the sam e year totaled 3.6 million dollars. General economic development was obviously needed, both to raise living standards and to provide the economic base necessary for modern state hood. The League .commission warned that stagnation at the prevailing level “would be the greatest danger to the maintenance of the independence of the country. A lbania is geographically in and of Europe. She m ust partake of its economic current. If her present rulers prove unfitted for the task, some other regime would inevitably replace them — such is the teaching of history.” 7 We shall see that A lbania was to find it difficult to m ake her way into the “economic current.” Instead, she was caught helplessly in a whirlpool. Eco nomic development required capital, but Albania was unable to produce capital precisely because she was underdeveloped. In other words, she faced the same dilem ma that confronted all underdeveloped countries, including her own Bal kan neighbors. A nother problem facing A lbania at this time was her cultural back wardness. No educational system existed because of the ban on Albanian schools during the centuries of Turkish rule. Even the language was inadequate for literary and educational purposes. The vocabulary was retarded and the differ ent dialects spoken in the north and south needed to be fused into a national language. The small percentage of the population that was educated had at tended foreign schools— Greek in the south, Italian along the Adriatic, and A ustrian in the north. Deep-rooted political problems also plagued the new state. Centuries of Turkish misrule had bred a general distrust of all government. M ost A lba nians wished only to be left alone. This was especially true of the mountaineers of the north and east whose social organization resembled that of the Scottish highlanders of earlier times. Even in the rest of the country conditions were


716 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
singularly unsuitable for modern parliam entary government, given the wide spread illiteracy and the unlimited power of the local feudal lords. Furtherm ore, the question of the form of government was of immedi ate concern because the N ational Congress that had met at Lushnja in January, 1920, had adopted only a provisional political arrangement. Consequently, a perm anent constitution had to be adopted sooner or later, and this raised the controversial question of which form of government was most suitable for the country. Some favored a republic and others a monarchy. The League com mission w arned that “the task of the C onstituent Assembly will be an ex trem ely difficult one, and it is quite possible th at an effective solution may not be found im m ediately. T he result will be an indefinite period of instabil ity. . . . ” 8 This warning proved prophetic. Albania was to experience political turm oil for five years until a “strong m an” arose in the person of A hm ed Zog to impose his authority by forceful means. Finally, the new Albania had to face basic social problems, particu larly that of land reform. This was especially acute in the south, where the Moslem beys owned large estates worked by O rthodox Christian tenants. Thus the land issue was com plicated by the religious factor. Furtherm ore, many of the Orthodox Albanians spoke Greek, which added the further complication of G reek irredentist claims to the agrarian and religious problems. This explains why the question of southern A lbania has been so com plcx and why it has con stituted a perennial issue between Greece and Albania. Fortunately there are available the valuable reports of Professor J. J. Sederholm of Finland who, as a member of the League commission, traveled in all parts of A lbania between 1921 and 1923. Sederholm estim ated th at the M oslems and the O rthodox C hristians were about equal in num bers in south ern Albania. The Moslems spoke Albanian but many of the Christians spoke both A lbanian and Greek. In such cases he considered the language spoken at home to be the m other tongue. Sederholm estim ated that those who spoke G reek at home-—the Grecophones— constituted at the most 17 per cent or one sixth of the total population of southern Albania. For this reason he concluded that “the decision taken by the Powers in fixing the southern frontiers of Albania was on the whole a just and wise one.” 9 Yet Sederholm noted considerable friction between Moslem and Chris tian Albanophones. The cause for the strife, he reported, was to be found in economic and social considerations rather than in the difference in religion. More specifically, a few Moslem families during the Turkish period had ac quired the best lands and had filled the top governm ent posts. The Christian A lbanians resented this discrimination and were emboldened by the fact that across the border, in nearby Greece, the situation was reversed. The Christians were also strengthened by the considerable emigration to the United States after 1900. Almost all the emigrants were Christians, and many returned with radically new democratic ideas concerning political institutions and social rela tionships. In fact, these em igrants played a significant role in the winning of A lbanian independence. A nd once they had shaken off Turkish domination


Albania: 1918-1939 111
they naturally looked forward to sweeping changes. They particularly wanted agrarian reform in order to divide the estates of the Moslem beys, and they also wanted political reform in order to gain a voice in the government of their country. But radical changes did not occur overnight in A lbania any more than they did in Greece, Serbia, and the other B alkan countries when they gained their independence in the previous century. ^ M any of the O rthodox Albanians inevitably became disillusioned and discontented, and they directed their resentment against Ahmed Zog, the M os lem bey who seized power and ruled the country as Zog I until W orld W ar II. Despite this disaffection Sederholm concluded that the Albanophone Christians, as distinct from the Grecophones, were too nationalistically minded to turn from Tirana to Athens. “ It seems to me certain that no revolutionary move ment is now being prepared within Southern A lbania. T he C hristian population is pacific, and its feelings for G reece are not those of an irredenta, but only those for a country which has been the source of their culture and the enemy of the hated T urkish regim e.” 10
p o l i t i c a l i n s t a b i l i t y : 1920-1924
The cleavages in the new A lbanian state were reflected in the political parties that appeared in parliam ent in 1921. O ne was the Progressive party led by Shevket V.erlazi of central A lbania, the largest landow ner in the country. This group was unalterably opposed to land reform and, in general, wished to preserve as much as possible of the older order bequeathed by the Turks. The other party was the Popular or reform party. The returned emi grants from the United States were particularly influential in this body and im bued it with their philosophy of immediate and radical change. The outstanding leader of these reform ers was Bishop F an S. Noli, who first rose to prom inence among the Albanians in the U nited States. Noli was born in 1882 in an A lba nian village in E astern T hrace. He was educated in a G reek elem entary school and in a G reek gym nasium . For a tim e he lived in A thens; in 1903 he moved to Egypt, where he taught in a Greek school. While in Egypt he first became aware of the Albanian nationalist movement through resident Albanian mer chants. It was these com patriots who persuaded him to sail to the United States and provided him with passage money. In the U nited States Noli quickly became the leader of his illiterate fellow countrymen. His greatest contribution was the organization in 1908 of the A lbanian A utocephalous O rthodox Church with himself as the first head. Never before, not even in the m other country, had the Albanians had the op portunity to worship in their own church with the service conducted in their own language rather than in Greek. W hen an independent Albania was estab lished in 1920 the A m erican A lbanians were allowed to elect one of their num ber to the national assembly. The person that they selected was their Bishop Noli, who had in the m eanw hile found tim e to graduate from H arvard U niver sity. Noli returned to A lbania with m any Of his countrym en, all determ ined, alter their heady experiences in A m erica, to uproot the old order with its back


718 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
wardness and corruption and exploitation. The radical philosophy impelling these men was set forth frankly in the columns of Dielli, the newspaper of the American-Albanian nationalist organization, Vatra.
The Albanians in America and their organization, Vatra, are men who have tasted enough freedom to enable them to understand the real reason for the sufferings of the people, and it is they who are leading the people’s struggle. . . . Vatra has now opened warfare against Albania’s internal enemies, against those who are enemies of freedom. . . . Albania has fallen into bad hands, into the hands of those who have never wished for her welfare, who always fought against the national cause under the TUrks. The majority of those who now fill government positions were formerly tools of Turkey and have always tried to skin the poor. Vatra is not going to surrender its struggle until it wipes away the injustices committed in Albania against the people. Vatra is going to strive, as it has always done, for a civilized and cultured Albania.11
Another leader of the Popular party at this time was Ahmed Zog, who had an entirely different background and outlook from Bishop N oli’s. Zog was born in 1895, the son of the chieftain of the M ati district in central Albania. Both his father and grandfather had been pashas in the Turkish service, and one of his ancestors had risen to be grand vizir. Zog attended military schools in M onastir and Constantinople. W hen the first Balkan W ar began, he hurried home from Constantinople to defend his ancestral lands, though still only seven teen years old. From then on Zog was seldom in the background. He possessed precisely the qualities necessary for a public career in the A lbania of his time — daring, decisiveness, sober realism, and utter ruthlessness. He was active during W orld W ar 1 until interned in Vienna by the Austrians. In the first Al banian government formed after the war he headed the key ministry of interior. He used this office to strengthen his personal position and to prepare the way for the climb to the top. In family background, in education, and in experience, Zog was precisely the opposite of Noli. In contrast to the thoroughly demo cratic and socially conscious O rthodox bishop, Zog was interested primarily in power for himself. This did not mean that Zog did not have the interests of his country at heart. But the fact rem ains that he was a ruthless Realpolitiker in contrast to the idealistic and rath er im practical bishop. Zog’s single-m inded pursuit of power, together with his undoubted ability, enabled him to realize his ambitions and to rule Albania during most of the interwar period. The Popular party formed a government on December 14, 1921, in which Noli served as foreign minister and Zog again occupied the ministry of interior. A lthough still under thirty years of age Zog resolved to disarm all civilians in the lowlands, a dangerous and unpopular task, given the traditions of the country. Zog also antagonized the highlanders in the northeast because he refused to support their irredentist aspirations to the Kosovo area in Yugo slavia which was predominantly Albanian. These factors contributed to the out break of a revolt in M arch, 1922. Noli took the opportunity to resign because he already had clashed frequently with Zog and wished to dissociate himself from his policies. O ther ministers also resigned but Zog rem ained in the men


Albania: 1918-1939 719
aced capital. His bravery and presence of mind, together with the assistance of the British minister, who negotiated with the rebels, enabled Zog to ride out the storm. Zog’s prestige was greatly enhanced by this affair, and on D ecem ber 2, 1922, he became prem ier in nam e as well as in fact. In his speech to parlia ment he declared his intention of founding “a fully civilized W estern state” and of following dem ocratic procedures.12 His opponents derided his statem ent, pointing out that he was already exercising power dictatorially. They also noted his engagement to the daughter of Shevket Verlazi and forecast that he would be more interested in safeguarding existing vested interests than in transform ing Albania into “a W estern state.” Accordingly, Noli and other reformers left the Popular party and or ganized an opposition bloc which attracted many disparate groups that were against Zog for one reason or another. Noli was the leader of this bloc, and the m ost articulate elem ent in it were the O rthodox C hristians from the south. These people were becoming increasingly disillusioned because independence had failed to materialize their aspirations. They still did not have the role in government that they felt they deserved. The,estates of the Moslem beys were still intact despite the talk of agrarian reform. And they paid the larger share of the taxes since their part of the country was the most developed; yet they received little in return because m ost of the national revenue was spent in Tirana on the army and the bureaucracy. Thus Professor Sederholm reported early in 1923 that “ there is at present a strong discontent am ong the C hristian population in Southern A lbania. W hile we noted it last year, mainly am ong the people who had been educated in G reece, it m ust now be stated that the dis content has spread also to the nationalists |A lbanophones] in the Koritza re gion.” 13 Despite this disalfection in the country and the criticism of the oppo sition in parliam ent, Zog did make some progress during his premiership. He disarm ed a large part of the population and established order in many regions where brigandage traditionally had been an accepted form of livelihood. This assertion of government authority obviously was essential for independent state hood. But it did not satisfy those elements of the population that were more interested in social change than in state power. Accordingly, Zog failed to win a m ajority in the elections of January, 1924. N oli’s followers won 35 of the 95 seats, while Zog had the support of two groups which together won 40 seats. Zog resigned the following m onth and was succeeded by the landowner Shevket Verlazi. The opposition, needless to say, considered this change quite insignif icant and continued to agitate for a new government. The opportunity came with the murder on M ay 5, 1924, of Avni Rustem, a reform leader who had organized the liberal Union of Young Albanians. The opposition deputies ac cused Zog of being involved, directly or indirectly, in the crim e. They boycotted the cham ber, leaving it without a quorum , and issued a proclam ation stating that Zog still dom inated the governm ent and dem anding that he leave the coun


720 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
try. The reformers were joined by various disaffected groups, including some army leaders and northern chieftains. The movement reached such proportions that the government fell and Zog fled to Yugoslavia. On June 17, 1924, Noli formed a cabinet and issued an ambitious nineteen-point reform program . T he following selections indicate its scope and tem per: “4. To uproot feudalism, free the people, and establish democracy definitely in A lbania; 5. T o introduce radical reforms in all branches of the adm inistration both civil and m ilitary; 9. To balance the budget by radical econom ies; 11. To am eliorate the condition of the farm ers so as to ensure their economic independence; 15. To introduce judicial reforms; 18. To organize the departm ent of education on modern and practical lines so that the schools should produce capable citizens, good patriots and able workers. . . .” 14 This program remained almost wholly on paper. One reason was that Noli was able to stay in office only five m onths. A nother was that Noli’s cabinet was by no means united behind him. Some of the members had supported him because of their dislike for Zog, but now that they were in office they were un willing to go along with him on many of his proposed reforms. Thus Noli was able to accom plish little m ore than balance the budget. He erred fatally in not reorganizing the armed forces into a dependable instrument. And he supplied the opposition with effective ammunition when he extended diplomatic recog nition to the Soviet Union, even though he was merely following the example of B ritain’s L ab o r governm ent. W hile Noli was floundering in T irana, Zog was in Belgrade preparing his comeback. He secured the assistance of the Yugoslav government, which presumably assumed that henceforth he would do their bidding. On December 13, 1924, Zog crossed the frontier at the head of a force which included, in addition to his A lbanian followers, 1,000 volunteer soldiers and 16 officers from the Yugoslav regular army, 800 soldiers and 40 officers from General W rangel’s W hite R ussian refugee arm y that had found asylum in Y ugoslavia, as well as artillery and machine guns from the Yugoslav governm ent arsenal. The first attack was made by Yugoslav frontier forces with the intention of opening a path for Zog. Thus the loyal Albanian units were overwhelmed and Zog was able to proceed to Tirana with little resistance. On Christmas Eve he entered the capital as Noli fled to Italy. O n January 22, 1925, the rum p of the N a tional Assem bly proclaim ed A lbania a republic, and on January 31 it elected Zog president of the republic for a seven-year period. In retrospect it is clear that N oli’s radical reform program was bound to arouse last-ditch opposition from the powerful vested interests. It might have had some chance only if an organized and militant mass movement had existed to push it through against all opposition. But such a movement did not exist when Noli came to office. N or was he a sufficiently experienced politician to stimulate such a movement by immediate and far-reaching changes. Noli him self later perceived this flaw in his strategy: . . by insisting on the agrarian reforms I aroused the wrath of the landed aristocracy; by failing to carry them out I lost the support of the peasant m asses.” 15


Albania: 1918-1939 721
Having advanced himself to the presidency of the republic, Zog then took steps to assure his perm anent occupancy of the position. At home he crushed all opposition by the usual punitive measures. He outlawed Noli and his followers who had lied abroad; he imprisoned or executed the opposition leaders who remained behind; and he placed his own men in com m and of the army and gendarmerie. Zog also secured a constitution (M arch 7, 1925) which concentratcd state power into his own hands. As president he could appoint and dismiss ministers, veto bills passed by parliam ent, decree fresh elections, initiate changes in the constitution, and control all appointm ents to top posts in the army and bureaucracy. Having consolidated his position within Albania, Zog looked abroad for economic assistance in order to develop his country and, incidentally, to buttress his regime. Previous governments had also sought foreign economic aid. The League of Nations had sent an expert to Albania in 1922 to study the economic and financial condition of the country. He prepared a program of development and recommended a foreign loan of twenty-two million dollars to finance it. The A lbanian governm ent requested League assistance in raising the loan, offering to submit to any control the League wished to impose. The League failed to undertake the task, partly because of the unsettled financial state of E urope at tha't time and also because of the opposition of ccrtain powers. In retrospect it is clear that disinterested financing of A lbania through the League would have been a profitable investm ent in Balkan peace. But re peated appeals for financial aid brought no response. W hen Noli was premier he personally attended the League Assembly and asked:
But do tell me, Mr. Secretary-General, why you refuse to give Albania a loan to enable her to get on her feet. . . . The answer is very easy to give. You will find it in Shakespeare: “Words, words, words!” and that is to say, in plain English, hot air, that’s all. Oh! “It is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” 16
A m onth later Zog was in office. Realistically he looked elsewhere for the assistance the League had refused. Although Yugoslavia had backed him in his rise to power, he now turned instead to Italy. One reason was that Italy appeared at the time to be a less dangerous power to lean upon than Y ugo slavia. The Serbs traditionally wanted a small Albania, while the Italians, in the face of the new Yugoslav state, normally would prefer as large and as strong an A lbania as possible. F urtherm ore, A lb an ia’s natural econom ic ties were with Italy, two thirds of her trade being with that country. Thus Zog on M arch 15, 1925, concluded with an Italian financial group an agreement that had farreaching consequences. The agreement provided that the Italian group should establish the National Bank of Albania which was to have the exclusive right of issuing paper currency, coining metal money, and negotiating government and municipal
p r e s i d e n t z o g : 1925-1928


722 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
loans. The bank was to have its adm inistrative seat in T irana but in practice its operations were directed from Rome. W ithin a m onth after the bank began operations it was to organize the Com pany for the Economic Development of Albania, commonly known as SVEA. This company undertook to procure a loan of ten million dollars for Albania, to be used exclusively for public works — roads, swamp drainage, agricultural development, and construction of ports. The repaym ent of capital and interest was to be guaranteed by a lien on the Albanian customs duties and on the state monopolies of salt, cigarettes, and m atches. The capital invested in both SVEA and the bank was almost entirely Italian. Albanians and foreigners were free to participate, but very few availed themselves of the opportunity. The Italians themselves did not regard this venture as a normal business enterprise that could be justified on economic grounds. R ather, they regarded their investm ents in A lbania as an instrum ent of Italian diplomacy. Speaking to a meeting of stockholders, the president of SVEA declared:
Due to the special character of our company, springing from and living in the orbit of a happy and much vaster political conception of the relations be tween Italy and Albania, our attainments unfold themselves in a sphere so supe rior and so foreign to the internal results of a balance sheet that it is a legitimate wish on your part to prefer to hear what our activities have contributed to the development of the program of Italo-Albanian collaboration.17
T here is no doubt that A lbania profited econom ically from these ar rangements with Italy. For the first time the country had a national currency in place of the dozen different foreign currencies which had previously circu lated. Also, the interest burden proved in practice to be light because the Ital ians were not strict about repaym ent schedules. Instead, they granted still more loans to Albania, some on ludicrously easy terms. In 1931, for example, Italy agreed to provide a series of annual loans extending over a period of ten years and limited to a maximum of two million dollars in any one year. The loans were to draw no interest, and the date and m anner of repayment were to de pend on the financial condition of Albania! But Italy made it clear that the annual payments to Albania would depend on “the continuation of full and sincere technical and political collaboration betw een the two governm ents.” 18 Obviously, Italian economic aid to Albania was politically inspired. The generous loans were to be used as an entering wedge to gain control of a country that Italian policy makers considered to be necessary for their national security. As early as June, 1926, only fifteen months after the first economic agreem ent, Italy apparently began to im pinge upon A lbania’s sovereignty. R e ports from Tirana alleged that Italy demanded, in virtual ultimatum form, that she be given control of A lbania’s econom y, arm ed forces, and foreign relations. The details of this episode rem ain obscure, though it does appear that Italy did make certain dem ands and then drew back in the face of British representa


Albania: 1918-1939 723
tions. W hether or not Italy presented these alleged demands at this time, the fact remains that she soon won all these concessions. Before the end of the year, on November 27, 1926, Zog felt constrained to sign the Tirana Pact with Italy. This was a “friendship and security” treaty in which the signatories agreed to cooperate to m aintain “the political, juridical and territorial status quo in A lbania” and also undertook “not to conclude with oth£r powers, political and military agreements to the prejudice of the other party. . . .” 18 Y ugoslavia reacted strongly against this pact, regarding it as a long step toward an Italian protectorate over Albania. She severed relations with Albania for a month and exchanged bitter recriminations with Italy de spite a friendship treaty that she had concluded with that country in 1924. The basic difficulty was that the Tirana Pact brought to the surface the ever-present rivalry between Yugoslavia and Italy in the Adriatic. Because of this rivalry the Albanian policy that Italy considered to be necessary for her security was regarded on the other hand by Yugoslavia as a menace to herself and to peace in the Balkans. Italy proceeded on her chosen course, concluding a year later, on N o vember 22, 1927, a twenty-year defensive military alliance with Albania. This was followed by increasing Italian control over A lbania’s arm ed forces. Italian arms and ammunition were introduced. A military mission under General Pariani reorganized the A lbanian army. A lbanian officers went to Italy for advanced training. Fascist instructors arrived to organize A lbanian youth and to give it premilitary training on the fascist model. The public works financed by Italian loans consisted largely of strategic roads and bridges. Likewise, the port of Durazzo was modernized and enlarged to make it suitable for large-scale land ing. Thus A lbania becam e Italy’s bridgehead in the Balkans. These developm ents consolidated Zog’s position, at least on the sur face. He now com m anded sizable armed forces, while Italy was committed to supporting the “political status quo” in Albania. Zog took the final step upward in 1928 when he elevated himself to kingship. Although his term as president had run little m ore than half its appointed course, he held elections for a con stitutional assembly in July, 1928. On September 1 this body unanimously pro claimed Albania “a democratic, parliamentary and hereditary kingdom,” be stowing the title “Zog I, King of A lbanians,” on the former president. Three m onths later, on D ecem ber 1, 1928, a m onarchical constitution was adopted which again left most state power to Zog. He had authority to appoint and dis miss premiers, com m and the arm ed forces, veto parliam ent bills, suspend legal procedures for political crimes, conclude agreements with other nations, and proclaim war in case of aggression.
k in g z o g : 1928-1939
Zog ruled from Septem ber 1, 1928, until A pril 7, 1939, w hen he was com pelled to flee before an Italian invasion. D uring this eleven-year period he introduced many reforms, though they proved more impressive on paper than


724 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
in practice. For example, his Agrarian Reform Law of April 17, 1930, provided for the expropriation, with com pensation, of one third of each bey’s estate. The lands thus acquired were to be resold on easy terms to the peasants. The operation of this law was reported as follows: '■
It seems, however, that too long a time has elapsed between mooting this reform , passing the law, and putting it into execution. The other day G overn m ent officials went down to Fier in Myzeqe to expropriate certain lands, and found that the owner had so sub-divided it among the various members of his num erous family by ante-dated deeds of sale or gift that there was nothing left to expropriate. The same thing has happened near T irana also. A t Elbasan, too, a certain youthful Bey received early inform ation that grazing lands were to be exempt from expropriation, then evicted his tenants at almost a m om ent’s notice, burned their houses, and turned down to grass all the land they had formerly c u l tiv a te d . 20
Zog also reorganized completely the laws of the land, adopting a penal code based on the Italian model (1928), a civil code patterned after the N apole onic Code (1929), and a commercial code modeled on French and Italian ex amples (1 9 3 2 ). But again there was considerable discrepancy between law and practice. Even Zog himself continued to practice traditional Turkish govern ment customs, such as direct interference with the courts of justice and personal discrim ination in selecting and prom oting officials. Parliam entary elections were held regularly, but signified little because of the apathy and ignorance of the electorate and the intimidating power of the local beys and gendarmes. The following descriptions of the functioning of parliam entary governm ent in A lbania dem onstrated how skin-deep Zog’s reform s proved to be:
T he calm in which these elections [1932] are being conducted is very striking, particularly to those who have known the heat and fever of a Greek contest. The townspeople arc so uninterested that for days on end the newspapers appear w ithout' referring to the elections, and most of the country people are voting only because the local gendarm es have ordered them to go and do so. The fact is that for the populace Parliam ent is not an instrum ent of governm ent, and a deputy is only an im portant man to whom the King has granted a large salary, as he has granted small salaries to smaller men all over the country for doing nothing but keep the peace.21
As was confidently expected by all observers, the Parliam entary elections held in A lbania on January 31 [1937] ended in a sweeping victory for the G ov ernm ent, which succeeded in winning 100 per cent of seats. T he youngest of the Balkan States, having spent its infancy am id falling dem ocracies and diverse ex perim ents in corporate and other forms of dictatorial government, has evolved a system which conserves all the names of democracy— parliament, elections, can didates, voters— but which has excluded all uncertainty and all chance that Op position candidates may be elected. One of the first results of such a system is the complete apathy of the people. In the election of voters, for each district elects a num ber of representatives who go to vote in the name of the whole dis trict, there were districts in which only 18 men out of 187 cast their votes. A number of intelligent and educated young men put up as Opposition candidates,


Albania: 1918-1939 725
but the m achinery is such that it is well know n in advance that not one of them would be elected. The 58 G overnm ent candidates elected are mostly men who have been deputies before, and who belong to the parties supporting the Govern m ent in practically the same proportion as those who m ade up the last parlia m ent.22
In foreign affairs Zog attem pted to keep Italian influence under con trol as much as possible. In 1932 he rejected a proposal for a customs union with Italy and later concluded trade agreements with Yugoslavia and Greece in order to loosen Italy’s econom ic strangle hold. T he next year he dismissed some of his Italian military advisers and, by nationalizing education, closed the Italian schools in A lbanian towns. Rom e reacted by sending a squadron that suddenly appeared before Durazzo on June 23, 1934. The Albanian gov ernm ent agreed to open negotiations, and in the end accepted more Italian aid and also the control that went with it. During the following years Italian influence in the arm y and the national econom y steadily increased, reaching the point where Italian settlers were allowed to colonize certain areas in A lbania. Zog was caught in the contradiction of his own strategy. On the one hand, he was unable to curb the Italians, ujjon whom he had leaned for so many years. On the other hand, the tightening Italian strangle hold increas ingly turned his own nationalistic subjects against his rule. Disaffection spread am ong all segments of the population— particularly the youth, but also among army officers, Rom an Catholics, and conservative M oslem landowners. A plot against the regime was uncovered in 1932, and a revolt broke out in 1935. Zog married a Hungarian countess, Geraldine Apponyi, on April 27, 1938, hoping that an heir would strengthen his position. The best man at the wed ding was the Italian foreign minister, Count Ciano. The day after the cere mony Ciano wrote in his diary: “ I leave A lbania more firmly convinced than ever of the need for a radical solution.” 23 Zog’s reign, despite his m arriage, was drawing to a close.
ITA LIAN OCCUPATION
W hen Ciano returned to Rom e he presented his plan for a “radical solution” to Mussolini. The latter agreed enthusiastically, especially because he was becom ing increasingly jealous of H itler’s victories in C entral Europe. A month earlier the Fuehrer had annexed Austria but now Mussolini looked forward to scoring his own trium ph in Albania. Ciano at once began preparations for taking over Albania. He bribed the chiefs so that they would be on his side when the moment came. For a while he considered arranging for the assassination of Zog, having found an Albanian who was ready to perform the deed for ten million lire. Zog got wind of these preparations and sent a pathetic message to Ciano on October 13, 1938. “A lbania now is in Italy’s hands, for Italy controls every sector of the national activity. T he King is devoted. T he people arc grateful. Why do you want anything m ore?” 24


726 Age of War ahd Crisis: 1914
T his plea fell on deaf ears. H itler’s annexation of B ohem ia and M oravia on M arch 15, 1939, spurred the Italians to seek solace in Albania. “ It is useless,” wrote Ciano, “to deny that all this concerns and humiliates the Italian people. It is necessary to give them a satisfaction and com pensa tion: A lb an ia.” 25 M ussolini and C iano agreed to present an ultim atum to Zog, demanding that he accept an Italian protectorate. “It seems probable that King Zog will give in,” wrote Ciano. “There is, above all, a fact on which I am counting: the com ing birth of Zog’s child. . . . I cannot im agine G eral dine running around fighting through the mountains of Unthi or of M irdizu in h er ninth m onth of pregnancy.” 28 On M arch 25, Zog received the ultimatum to sign a “treaty” trans forming A lbania into an Italian protectorate. He tried to stall for time but the British envoy told him that he could expect no aid. Britain did not wish to m ar her relations with Italy. Nevertheless, Zog continued to stall. On April 2 he asked for time to call the council of ministers to reach a decision. Musso lini refused and gave orders for the invasion. On Good Friday, April 7, Italian warships began bombarding the coast, and landings were made at several points. Two days earlier the queen had given birth to a boy, who was nam ed Prince Leka or Skender, after A lbania’s national hero. C iano observed cynically, “ How long will he be an heir to the A lbanian th ro n e?” 27 T he Italian arm ored colum ns gave the an swer as they entered T irana the day after the landings. Zog and his family fled over the m ountains to Greece. The Italians encountered no resistance, either military or diplomatically. Their total casualties were twelve killed and fifty-three w ounded. O n A pril 10, C iano w rote exultantly in his diary: “ R e action abroad begins to lessen. It is clear above all th at the British protests are m ore for domestic consum ption than anything else. News from Albania is good; m ilitary occupation is carried out according to plan and without obstacles.” 28 Ciano went to Tirana on April 12 to make arrangements for the ad ministration of the new Italian possession. He convened the Albanian assem bly, which obediently voted to abolish the 1928 constitution and to offer the crown to King V ictor Em m anuel III. The latter now assumed the title King of Italy and Albania and Em peror of Ethiopia. Albania henceforth was ruled by an Italian viceroy functioning in the nam e of the king. C iano’s notes on his reception in T irana are not w ithout significance. “The crowd receives me trium phantly; there is a certain am ount of coolness, especially among the high school students. I see that they dislike raising their arms for the Rom an salute, and there are some who openly refuse to do it even when their com panions urge them. . . . I see the eyes of some patriots flaming with anger and tears running dow n their faces. Independent A lbania is no m ore.” 29


Albania: 1918-1939
ECONOM IC DEVELOPM ENT
Albania developed substantially during her two decades of independ ent existence between the world wars. Yet even in 1939 she still remained by far the most backw ard state in Europe. A lbania was less touched by W estern civilization and m ore rem ote from the general life of the C ontinent th an any other country. H er retardation was evident in every aspect of her economic and social life. Agriculture was the principle economic activity, occupying at least 80 per cent of the population. M uch of the best land was held in large estates by great landowners, which included the Moslem beys, the Christian churches, and the Moslem religious orders. This left about 40 per cent of the peasant families landless. Zog attem pted to correct the situation with his land reform of 1930, but, as noted above, the law was not effectively en forced, Farm ing techniques changed little in the course of centuries. An iron plow was used in southern Albania, but a wooden ox-drawn plow was the most comm on in the rest of the country. The same crop was resown in the same field year after year. W hen the yield began to fail, the land was left fallow, a procedure which put about 20 per cent of the land out of cultiva tion. The principal crops, in order of importance, were corn, which was the mainstay of the peasant diet, wheat, oats, and barley. Fruits were grown in sheltered places, but only w hat was surplus for hom e requirem ents found its way to local markets. The olive tree was extensively cultivated along the coast and was found as much as fifty miles inland. Vines were cultivated in the south, much of the produce being used to produce the popular and fiery wine spirit known as raki. The A lbanian peasant was far less productive than his B alkan neighbors, who in turn were am ong the least productive in Europe. The following analysis by an Italian authority explains the reasons for the backwardness of Albanian agriculture and the obstacles in the way of progress.
A lbania is a country endowed w ith resources th at have not been suffi ciently utilized. W ith m odern methods of cultivation it could support normally a population considerably larger than the actual population, and there are prob ably no inconsiderable riches in the subsoil. But it is also true th at to bring agri culture up to the level it has reached in other civilized countries, in addition to enterprise and technical capacity, a very large capital would be needed for ma chinery and supplies. T here is not enough of this. Even if there were, the products thus obtained would not be m arketable because of the lack of roads. Hence if we are to think of a productive Albania, at the very beginning the problem of means of com munication must be solved. Furtherm ore, for the extension of cul tivation a radical solution would unquestionably call for control over the waters which today are quite w ithout rule and curb. T here exist, it is true, very fertile plains like the Muzakija, but-they are cursed with m alaria and are uninhabitable. To make them sanitary would involve heavy expense, with long preparation and skill and method in carrying but the work.


r
An obstacle to the developm ent of modern agriculture lies in the areas occupied by latifundia, particularly numerous on the plains of the center and the south. . . . These large estates remaining undivided from generation to generation are ill utilized and give poor yields. On the other hand the condition of agriculture is m uch better in the southeast region in the basin of K oritsa where landed p ro p erty is closely subdivided and w hither em igrants come back enriched from A m erica.30
Stock raising is a traditional and im portant occupation in A lbania, as is evident in the fact that in 1938 about 31 per cent of the country’s area was in pasture com pared to 11 per cent in arable and orchard land. F o r the little cash that he needed, the average A lbanian peasant looked more to his livestock than to his fields. He grew corn to feed his family, but his animals supplied him not only with draft power and a little meat, but also with wool, m ohair, and hides. In fact, live anim als and anim al produce com prise the largest percentage of the total value of Albanian exports. In 1937 the live stock, cheese, hides, and wool exports totaled 5,159,000 gold francs, com pared to 1,726,000 gold francs from agricultural products (chiefly eggs, beans, olives, olive oil, tobacco, and cigarettes), and 1,695,000 from asphalt and petroleum. Despite this prominence, stock-breeding methods were as primitive as those of agriculture. The cattle were small and'poor, largely be cause of the starvation diet during the winter months. Probably more than half the cattle were draft animals, milk cows being of less value in the pre vailing economy. The peasants obtained their milk supply from their goats, while cow ’s milk usually was sold in the towns. T he potential value of A lbanian forests is considerable, 36 per cent of the country being w oodland, com pared to 31 per cent pasture and 11 per cent arable. But there was no systematic exploitation of this resource before W orld W ar II because of the problem of transportation. The rivers, rushing through precipitous gorges, were unsuitable for floating timber, while the best woodland areas had neither roads nor railways. Consequently, very little lumber was produced. The mining industry likewise was in its infancy prior to W orld W ar II. Here again the lack of transportation was a basic handicap; moreover, no extensive surveys had been made. The only resources that were exploited to an appreciable degree were asphalt and petroleum. The latter was controlled completely by an Italian company subsidized by Rome. The company spent large sums drilling in the m odest A lbanian oil fields, presum ably because the domestic Italian resources were quite inadequate and the A lbanian fields were close enough to be securely available in case of war. Finally, the Italians discovered two fields, one near Berat and the other near Valona. They built a forty-four-mile, eight-inch pipeline to Valona and thence shipped the crude oil to refineries in Trieste, Leghorn (L ivo rn o ), and Bari. A nnual production rose from 7,000 barrels in 1926 to 273,000 in 1936, 752,000 in 1938 and 1,659,000 in 1940. N o large industrial establishm ents existed in A lbania prior to W orld
728 Age of War and Crisis: 1914 


Albania: 1918-1939 129
W ar II. Instead, there were mostly cottage industries supplementary to agri culture or stock raising, and catering mainly to the needs of the household. Each of the half-dozen leading towns had a flour mill and three or four addi tional factories, including dairies, cigarette factories, distilleries, brickworks, breweries, fish canneries, wagon works, and soap factories utilizing olive oil. Transportation facilities were as underdeveloped as industry. On the eve of W orld W ar II A lbania possessed no railways with the exception of two narrow-gauge lines each less than twenty miles in length. R oad building in the modern sense was introduced by Austrian and Italian occupation troops during W orld War II. The Italians continued the work after the war by pro viding money and technical help. The road system they developed was de signed with strategic as well as economic aims in mind. The main line ran along the coast through Scutari, Durazzo, Tirana, Valona, and Argyrokastron. Also, two lines of good road crossed the country east to west: one in the north from Scutari to Prizren and the other in the center from T irana to Koritsa. Altogether a total of approximately 500 miles of surfaced road existed by the eve of W orld W ar II. Because of the backw ardness of the national econom y, A lbania’s im ports consisted largely of m anufactured goods. But since agriculture also was at a low level of productivity, it was necessary to im port appreciable quanties of wheat, corn, and rice in order to m eet the food requirem ents of the country. In - addition, miscellaneous colonial products, such as coffee, sugar, and spices, were imported. A part from these commodities the imports con sisted of m anufactured goods, such as machinery, metals, textiles, ceramics, oil products, vehicles, dyestuffs, explosives, chemicals, and paper. These were paid for by the exportation of raw m aterials— hides, wool, crude oil, asphalt, lum ber, livestock, cheese, eggs, olives, and olive oil. Italy far outranked all other countries in Albanian trade, absorbing in 1939 about 65 per cent of A lbania’s exports and providing about 40 p er cent of her im ports. A lbania’s total commerce was extremely low, even when calculated on a per capita basis. This reflected the low productivity and low living standards of the population. In 1936, the sum total of exports and imports divided by the population— in other words, the volume of trade per head of the populationwas 2Vi times as great in Bulgaria, 1% times in Yugoslavia, IV2 times in Greece, and 31 times in G reat Britain.
SOCIAL AND C U LT U R A L D E V E L O PM E N T
Social conditions and institutions reflected their primitive economic background. The simplest peasant huts comprised a single room with a cen tral hearth and with walls of stone, wood, or earth. Construction differed in various parts of the country, with thick-walled, fortresslike houses prevailing in the north, and lighter houses with m ore windows in the south. Sleeping bunks and couches were built into the walls and a low ceiling under the gable roof served as a floor to a loft, with access by a ladder. Home industries


730 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
included basketry, woodwork, spinning, knitting, and weaving of rough cloth. Transportation was by donkeys, mules, and a few horses with wooden pack saddles for goods and travelers alike. The towns were few and poorly developed, being retarded by the lack of transportation facilties. Consequently they were little more than bazaars for the surrounding countryside. As noted above, they had a few essential industries for the processing of local materials. They also had tan ners, potters, coppersmiths, and tinsmiths who met the needs of the local peasantry. The town shops held the reserves of foodstuffs, wool, leather, and m anufactured imports. Very im portant were the guesthouses, cafes, and bar b er shops, which served as the centers of social life. T he outstanding buildings were the mosques, churches, baths, and the private dwellings of officials, merchants, and landowners. No drainage facilties were available, and water supply was limited to private wells and cisterns and a few public fountains. Only Tirana, Durazzo, and Valona boasted residential suburbs of European layout. The other towns were distinctly Oriental in appearance, with their mosques and bazaars and narrow winding streets, ill-paved and ill-kept. The following population figures of the six largest towns illustrate the retardation of A l b ania’s urb an centers.
Town Population in 1916 Population in 1939
Tirana 1,200 35,000 Scutari 30,000 Koritsa 10,000 22,500 Elbasan 12,000 14,000 Berat 8,500 11,000 Valona 6,500 10,000 Durazzo 600 9,000
Living standards corresponded to the level of the national economy. Maize bread, cheese, cucumbers, melons, and onions were the staple foods. M eat, eggs, milk, and butter were rarely eaten by the peasants or by the poor in the towns. Such expensive foods could be afforded only by the wealthy few, and what they did not consume was exported abroad to pay for the coffee, sugar, and m anufactured goods that were imported. The poor diet, together with the almost complete lack of public health services, left the population very vulnerable to diseases. The greatest scourge was malaria, which probably was more widespread and devastating than anywhere else in Europe. Tuberculosis, influenza, and syphilis were the other most common diseases. No reliable statistics are available on causes of death because deaths were not always reported and ailments frequently were incorrectly diagnosed. Education was in a rudim entary state, 85 per cent of the population being illiterate on the eve of W orld W ar II. No university existed, so that


Albania: 1918-1939 731
the few students who could afford higher education were obliged to continue their studies abroad. Albania did not produce a national encyclopedia, a national dictionary, or a translation of the Bible into the native language. A lbania, in short, was by all odds the most backw ard state of Europe, hav ing remained largely outside the streams of Contintental developments and progress.


37. Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941
T .„
J . he B alkan P eninsula, because of its location at the crossroads of three continents, has oscillated back and forth between foreign dom ination and varying degrees of independence. F o r alm ost five centuries the peninsula was under the rule of the Ottom an Turks. With the decline of O ttom an strength it appeared that Russia and Austria would divide the Balkan lands as they did Poland. This fate was avoided because of various factors, including Austro-Russian rivalry, Western intervention, and Balkan nationalism. Consequently the nineteenth century witnessed the appearance of several Balkan states, some independent and others autonomous. These states, however, were surrounded by the Austrian and Russian empires, which dom inated the entire peninsula and owned outright large portions of it, such as Dalm atia, Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Transylvania, Bukovina, and Bessarabia. Thus millions of South Slav and Rum anian peas ants were subjects of the Romanov and Hapsburg dynasties rather than citi zens of the small, independent Balkan states. This half-free, half-subject status of the Balkan peoples changed over night with the disintegration of the Austrian, Russian, and O ttom an empires during W orld W ar I. Out of the imperial ruins emerged G reater Rumania, an enlarged Greece, and the new Yugoslav state. For the first time in history, Balkan frontiers were drawn on the basis of the principle of the self-deter mination of peoples. The trium ph of this revolutionary principle proved possible because of the power vacuum that developed in Southeastern Europe with the collapse of the prew ar imperial structures. In other words, the large new Balkan states owed their existence to an unprecedented power vacuum that, by its very nature, was bound to be transitory. It follows that the inevi table revival of Germ any and Russia sometime in the future would inexorably undermine the foundations of the new Balkan states. Theoretically, this Damocles sword could have been banished by the unification of the new states into a bloc sufficiently strong to resist any out
732


side pressure. In fact, this was precisely the aim of the Little Entente formed by Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Rumania, and of the Balkan Entente comprising Yugoslavia, Rumania, Greece, and Turkey. President Benes de fined the Little Entente as “ an organization of Central Europe in which our liberated countries have been their own masters, without the predominating influence or dom ination of any G reat Power.” 1 Likewise, the Rumanian foreign minister, Nicholas Titulescu, declared that “thanks to the Balkan Entente the G reat Powers would net be able to pit one of us against the other and thus plunge this part of the world into a war which means a greater conflagration than that of 1914.” 2 These expectations that an aggregation of small states would be able to function with the strength and cohesion of a great power proved to be illusory. The Little and Balkan Ententes never withstood the strains for which they were devised. The centrifugal pull of the great powers was too strong. At each critical juncture one or the other of the small states gave preference to its great-power relationships over its relations with its putative allies. Consequently, the decisive aspects of interwar Balkan diplomacy were the Balkan policies of the great powers rather than the relations among the Balkan states. Hence the organization of this chapter, which concerns itself first with the French and Italian alliance systems in Eastern E urope and then, -after the fruitless interlude of the Balkan Conferences and B alkan Entente, traces the ascendancy of Germany to the outbreak of W orld W ar II and to the occupation of the entire peninsula by the Axis.
FREN CH ALLIANCE s y s t e m : 1 9 2 0 - 1 9 2 7
During the years following the peace settlement France was by far the strongest power on the Continent. No state could challenge her primacy, Germ any having been humbled, Italy being torn by domestic strife, Soviet Russia fighting for survival, and Britain remaining aloof. U nder these cir cumstances France now, like Bismarckian Germ any after 1870, sought to build up an alliance system to preserve the favorable status quo. Renewal of the prewar Russian alliance being out of the question, the only feasible alter native was to link up with the new succession states in Central and Eastern Europe. The latter were as interested as France in preventing both the re surgence of Germ any and the spread of Bolshevism. The succession states did not wait for French initiative before taking steps to preserve the peace settlement. In 1920-1921 Yugoslavia, Rumania, and Czechoslovakia banded together to form the Little Entente, the basic purpose of which was to prevent the Hungarians from upsetting the Trianon Treaty or restoring the Hapsburg dynasty. The first alliance that France concluded with the new succession states was with P oland in 1921. This rem ained a key link in the chain of French alliances because Poland was almost twice as large as any other suc cession state and was indispensable as a barrier to Russia and a counterpoise
Diplomatic Developments: 1918—1941 733


734 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
to Germany. Poland in turn form ed an alliance with Rum ania in the same year. The two countries were natural allies because both had taken extensive territories from Russia at the end of the war and both were therefore appre hensive of a Russian comeback in the future. Since Poland and Rum ania had a common frontier and together stretched from the Baltic to the Black seas, the two countries were holding the neck of Europe against Russian intrusion from the East. In addition to the tie with Poland, France linked herself with the Little Entente by signing a treaty of friendship and alliance with Czecho slovakia in 1924. France then completed her connections with the Little Entente by concluding alliances with Rum ania in 1926 and Yugoslavia in 1927. This series of treaties m arked the high point of French ascendancy in the Balkans and Eastern Europe. Henceforth the French alliance system was subjected to steady Italian undermining which unwittingly proved to be the entering wedge for Germ an expansion a decade later.
ITALIAN A LLIANCE SYSTEM 1 1926-1930
Italy emerged victorious but embittered from World W ar I. Turkish nationalism in Asia M inor and President W ilson’s opposition in Paris pre vented her from acquiring the extensive territories prom ised in the secret Treaty of London of 1915. During the immediate postwar years, Italy was unable to do much toward satisfying her territorial ambitions because of serious unrest at home. The advent of Mussolini to power in O ctober, 1922, made possible a more vigorous foreign policy. Mussolini silenced all opposi tion at home and then turned to expansion abroad. Four months after assum ing office he declared: “ It is necessary to have the courage to say th at Italy cannot remain for ever shut up in one sea, even if that sea be the Adriatic. Besides the A driatic there is the M editerranean, and there are other seas th at may interest us. . . . I need not repeat that Treaties are transactions which represent agreem ents, points of equilibrium . N o T reaty is eternal. . . .” 3 It will be recalled from C hapter 34 that in September, 1923, M usso lini dem onstrated that he was to be taken seriously by bom barding and oc cupying Corfu island off the west coast of Greece. Although he evacuated the island a month later, his debut in international affairs was not forgotten in Athens, Belgrade, and other Balkan capitals. In fact, it was eastward to ward the Balkan Peninsula that M ussolini was looking covetously at this time. “Now Italy can only move in an easterly direction,” he declared after the 1924 Fiume Agreement, “the fact being that on the west there are na tional states which have taken national form and to which we can send noth ing except our labour. . . . Therefore the lines for the pacific expansion of Italy lie tow ards the east.” 4 In seeking to expand eastward Mussolini came into conflict first with Yugoslavia, the large new state across the Adriatic, and ultimately with France, the protectress of the general Continental status quo. He combated


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 735
this opposition by gaining complete domination over A lbania and by backing the revisionist states— Austria, Hungary, and Bulgaria. He also resorted to secret subsidizing of fascist and terrorist groups in other countries. In the Balkans he aided the Ustashi in C roatia and the IM R O in M acedonia. As noted in Chapter 33, the latter organization served Mussolini well by con ducting raids into Yugoslav and Greek territory and thus eliminating any possibility of Balkan unity that would have blocked his penetration. In 1929 the leader of the Ustashi, Dr. A nte Pavelich, fled from Yugo slavia to Italy, whence he continued to direct his operations with the coopera tion of the IM RO. It was this conspiratorial gang that was responsible for the m urder of King A lexander of Yugoslavia in 1934. In the final analysis Mussolini did notJaave sufficient strength to attain the ambitious goals he set forth in his grandiloquent speeches. Thus his gunrunning and subsidizing of terrorists served only to widen the fissures within and among the Balkan countries, and to contribute substantially to the turbulence of Balkan politics during the interwar period. M ussolini’s diplom acy becam e overt in 1926, when he rejected a French and Yugoslav proposal for a tripartite treaty to stabilize the Balkans. As noted in Chapter 36, in November of the same year he concluded a treaty with Albania committing the signatories to “mutual support and cordial col laboration,” and expressing their com mon interest in the preservation of the political, juridical, and territorial status quo in A lbania. T he signatories also undertook to refrain from any political or military agreement with a third power prejudicial to the interests of the other. Yugoslavia reacted violently against this pact, pointing out that the guarantee of the political status quo gave Italy a basis for complete control over Albania. In June, 1927, Yugo slavia broke off diplom atic relations with Albania and rum ors spread of impending war. Five months later, on November 11, 1927, Yugoslavia an nounced her treaty of friendship with France. W ithin two months Mussolini countered with the announcem ent of a new twenty-year military alliance with Albania. Its terms converted Albania into a virtual Italian protectorate and provided Mussolini with a jumping-off place in the Balkan Peninsula. Italy had considerable influence in Bulgaria as well as in Albania. In August, 1928, Italy sharply refused to join Britain and France in urging the Bulgarian government to curb IM RO activities. In July, 1929, an Italian naval and air squadron paid a visit to Bulgaria, in the course of which G eneral Italo Balbo made a speech encouraging Bulgaria to press her claims to Yugo slav M acedonia. In the spring of 1930 Bulgaria granted Italy a free harbor at V arna and a virtual m onopoly of the autom obile trade in all of Bulgaria. The high point of this rapprochement came in O ctober, 1930, with the m ar riage of King Boris of Bulgaria with Princess Giovanna of Italy. It should be noted that Mussolini effected a tie not only with re visionist Bulgaria in the Balkans but also with revisionist A ustria and H un gary in Central Europe. T he details of Italian diplom acy in the latter region lie outside the scopc of this study. Suffice it to note here that the peak of


736 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Italian influence in C entral Europe was reached with the signing in 1934 of the Rome Protocols with A ustria and Hungary providing for economic co operation and for consultation on political matters. Italy completed her diplomatic incursion into the Balkans by ne gotiating friendship and arbitration treaties with R um ania (Septem ber 16, 1926), Turkey (M ay 10, 1928), and Greece (September 23, 1928). Musso lini had hoped that the last two agreements would lead to a tripartite ItalianG reek-Turkish bloc that would strengthen his position in the eastern M edi terranean. But both Greece and Turkey were wary of the Italian dictator. In fact, Greece used her new tie with Italy to press Yugoslavia into settling the long-standing dispute over the free zone in Saloniki. O n M arch 18, 1929, Greece and Yugoslavia reached an agreement concerning the administration and operation of the free zone. This settlement was not a source of pleasure for Mussolini, who was interested in isolating Yugoslavia from her neighbors. He was also disappointed by the outcome of the Greco-Turkish Treaty of Friendship, Neutrality, and A rbitration signed in O ctobcr, 1930. This treaty settled several issues that had arisen as a result of the exchange of minorities several years earlier.* Mussolini had encouraged the Greco-Turkish rapprochm ent in order to com plete his eastern M editerranean triangle. But the Greco-Turkish tie, once achieved, proved to be one of the strongest bulwarks of the status quo in the Balkans. N either Greece nor Turkey was willing to allow herself to becom e the pawn of M ussolini’s expansionist strategy.
B a l k a n c o n f e r e n c e s : 1930-1933
In the early 1930’s the outstanding diplom atic developm ent in the Balkans was the attem pt to organize a bloc strong enough to resist the pulls and pressures of the great powers. The attem pt was made at that time be cause the agreements reached by Greece, Yugoslavia, and Turkey in 1929 and 1930 had removed m ajor sources of discord. This did not mean that all Balkan problem s had been solved. Bulgaria and Greece were still divided over the issue of an outlet to the Aegean. Bulgaria and Rumania were at odds over the treatm ent of Bulgarians in the D obruja. Yugoslavia still regarded A lbania suspiciously, while France and Italy backed their respective pro tégés in the peninsula. Nevertheless, inter-Balkan relations were better at the end of 1929 than they had been in years, and this im provem ent was a factor in the calling of the B alkan conferences. A nother factor was the world-wide economic depression that de scended in 1929. We saw in C hapter 31 and later chapters th a t the B alkan countries, being predom inantly agricultural, were particularly hard hit by the disproportionate drop in agricultural prices during the depression. In addition to the drop in prices there was a considerable decline in the quantity of ex ports. This was due partly to lack of purchasing power and partly to agrarian
* See Chapter 34.


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 737
protectionism in Central and W estern Europe. W heat production in France, G erm any, Czechoslovakia, and B ritain together increased by some 15 per cent between 1925-1929 and 1930-1934, while that of the agrarian coun tries in Eastern Europe fell appreciably. This situation drove home the lesson that purely national measures were incapable of coping with an international economic crisis. Accordingly eight Eastern European agrarian states— includ ing Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Rum ania— held two conferences in August and O ctober, 1930 in W arsaw and Bucharest. T he aim was to form a custom s union that would be able to bargain on equal terms with the industrialized states of W estern Europe. A few more conferences were held, but gradually the meetings merged with those of the League of Nations Commission of Inquiry ror European Union. Nevertheless, the mere holding of these con ferences pointed the way to sim ilar action in the political field. These circumstances led Alexander Papanastassiou, leader of a small agrarian party and form er prem ier of Greece, to propose a semiofficial con ference to consider the possibilities of a Balkan federation. Fie gained the support of the International Bureau of Peace at Geneva, and the first Balkan Conference met in A thens O ctobcr 5 -1 3 , 1930. T he best description of this conference, and of those following, has been given by Papanastassiou.
Though based on Ihc national groups, composed of politicians, repre sentatives of peace organizations, universities, and professional organizations, and though its decisions do not obligate the governm ents, Ihis organization has never theless an official character, not only because the governments of the six coun tries support the activities of the national groups, but also because the delegations of each country to Ihc Conferences are chosen after consultation with the gov ernm ent, and these governments arc represented at each Conference by their diplom atic officials (w ho follow the deliberations in the capacity of observers) in the country in which the Conference meets.5
A total of four conferences were held, the first, as we have seen, in A thens, the second in Istanbul (O ctober 2 0 -2 6 , 193 1), the third in Bucharest (O ctober 2 2 -2 9 , 1 9 3 2 ), and the fourth in Saloniki (N ovem ber 5—11, 19 3 3 ). The results of these conferences were very similar to those of the League of Nations in Geneva. A number of commissions were established during the
conferences to deal with nonpolitical matters such as Communications, Eco
*
nomic Affairs, Intellectual Cooperation' and Social and Health Problems. These commissions prepared a num ber of valuable and constructive projects, some of which were put into operation. These included the exchange of uni versity professors and students, the establishment of a Balkan Historical In stitute and a Balkan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and the adoption of plans for a Balkan L abor Office and a Postal Union. In regard to political issues, however, the Balkan Conferences were no more successful than the League of Nations. From the outset the Com mission on Political Relations was faced with the task of reconciling sharply conflicting interests and viewpoints. It prepared a Balkan Pact of Nonaggres


738 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
sion, but little progress was made tow ard its adoption. The Bulgarian repre sentatives persistently refused to consider any proposals that involved formal acceptance of the existing frontiers and demanded that the Bulgarian-speak ing populations of Greek and Yugoslav M acedonia be granted the minority rights they claimed. Attem pts to reconcile the Bulgarians by modifying the provisions of the Nonaggression Pact met with no success. The Bulgarians de scribed their attitude to the pact in the following note to the U nited States Secretary of State, Cordell Hull:
In spite of the pressure which has been brought to bear on her, Bulgaria has been unable to see her way to signing a pact which would crystallize for all time the actual status quo in the Balkans which has been established mainly at her expense. Bulgaria could see no reason to accord voluntary endorsement to penalties imposed upon her by a dictated peace treaty, and further to aggravate her position by renouncing, without even a hint of compensation, the hope deeply imbedded in the nation’s heart for a revision of the T reaty, though by peaceful m eans.6
The basic difficulty was that Bulgaria refused to accept the Neuilly Treaty as final and therefore rejected any pact that involved recognition of the status quo. This attitude caused considerable concern to Bulgaria’s neigh bors. A n isolated Bulgaria obviously was no threat, but as long as she refused to accept a nonaggression pact so long she would continue to offer a foothold to any great power desirous of interventing in the Balkans. N or was this merely a hypothetical danger by 1933. Italy still was very much interested in revisionist B ulgaria. In fact, she had been largely responsible for B ulgaria’s negative position at the Balkan Conferences. When Bulgaria celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of her independence in October, 1933, Italian spokes men used the occasion to proclaim their continued support for Bulgaria. M oreover, the rise of Hitler to power and his bellicose statements regarding the Versailles settlement and the need for Lebensraum stimulated the revision ist m ovem ent throughout E urope and aroused the apprehension of Bulgaria’s neighbors. Accordingly, they sought to counter the increased danger by strengthening the ties among themselves.
BALKAN E N T E N T E : 1934
B ulgaria’s neighbors decided to come to an agreem ent am ong them selves in the hope that Bulgaria would join them later to form a Balkan-wide bloc. A fter negotiations carried on in Geneva and Belgrade, a four-power Balkan Pact— Greece, Yugoslavia, Rum ania, and Turkey— was initiated at Belgrade on F ebruary 4, 1934, and signed at A thens five days later. T he sig natories bound themselves to guarantee mutually the security of the existing Balkan frontiers and to consult with one another in case they were threat ened. They also undertook not to em bark upon any political action in rela tion to any other Balkan state without the consent of the other signatories. The pact was declared open to any other Balkan countries whose adherence


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 739
would be “the object of favorable examination by the contracting parties.” An additional protocol, the terms of which were not made public for some weeks after signature, declared that the pact was not directed against any power. Its object was to guarantee Balkan frontiers against aggression by a Balkan state, but it would also come into operation against a Balkan state which joined another power in an act of aggression against a signatory. In October, 1934, the foreign ministers of the four states met at Ankara, where they prepared and adopted the Statutes of the Balkan E n tente. They provided for regular meetings of the Perm anent Council of die Entente, consisting of the foreign ministers of the member states. They also made plans for economic collaboration, for the establishment of a Balkan Bank, and for integration of legislative activities. The Entente thus was de signed to carry on much the same type of work as the Balkan Conferences had in the past, with the im portant difference that the Perm anent Council would be able to make decisions and take action where the Conferences had been only able to make recommendations. This overlapping led to the can cellation of the fifth Balkan Conference, which was to have been held in Istanbul. The Balkan Entente had replaced the Balkan Conference. The two, however, were not similar: Indeed, the differences between them were fundam ental. T he B alkan Conference had striven to bring all the Balkan states together on some program , limited though it might be, in the hope that it would be expanded gradually as outstanding issues were settled. The Balkan Entente was more restricted, having been organized for the pur pose of maintaining the status quo and therefore automatically directed against revisionist Balkan states. Even in regard to this objective the Entente was limited. The Soviet am bassador in A nkara drew attention to the possi bility that in the event of hostilities between the Soviet Union and Rumania, Bulgaria might be draw n in on the Russian side, in which case Turkey, by the terms of the pact, would be obliged to support Rum ania against Bulgaria and therefore against Russia. Such action on T urkey’s p a rt would contravene the Turko-R ussian treaty of neutrality of 1925. In order to avoid this diffi culty the Rum anian government issued a written declaration to the effect that it would expect no aid from Turkey in the event of a conflict with the Soviet Union. W hen the terms of the pact were made public, the opposition in Greece, led by Venizelos, attacked the government on the ground that it should have taken similar precautions t6 ensure that Greece would not be come involved in war with Italy as a result of the obligations which she had undertaken in regard to the protection of Y ugoslavia’s frontiers. In these cir cumstances the Greek government asked for and received assurances from the other three governments that under no condition would the application of the pact involve Greece in hostilities with a great power. The significance of these reservations lies in the fact that they narrowed the pact to a purely anti-Bulgarian instrument. So long as Bulgaria remained isolated and the great powers refrained from 'm ilitary or diplom atic intervention in the Bal kans, the E ntente could operate effectively. T o state these conditions is to


740 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
reveal the futility of the pact. The Entente was to prove as short-lived as the first B alkan alliance of the 1860’s and the second of 1912-1913.*
BALKAN E N TEN TE U N D ER M IN ED : 1 9 3 4 - 1 9 3 7
The Entente began to show signs of cracking almost as soon as it was organized. The principal reason was the pressure of resurgent Germany. H itler’s success in rearm ing G erm any, first clandestinely and later in open defiance of the treaties, was the first shock for the Balkan allies. M ore serious was the reoccupation and refortification of the R hineland in 1936, which ef fectively isolated both the Balkan and Little Ententes from France. A t the same time Germ any was rapidly extending her economic influence through out Southeastern Europe. The percentage of Hungarian, Yugoslav, Rumanian, Bulgarian, and G reek imports from G erm any rose from 19.5 in 1933 to 35 in 1937, while the percentage of their exports to Germany increased during the sam e period from 16 to 27. M oreover, the exports of these countries to Germany were considerably greater than their imports, so they found them selves tied by a double bond to Germany— as the principal m arket for their products and as a debtor who would liquidate his debts only with exports. This Germ an economic hegemony, which became increasingly pronounced during the late 1930’s, inevitably had diplom atic repercussions. T he Balkan countries could not afford to antagonize their principal customer because, as noted in C hapter 31, there was none other able or willing to purchase their goods. These developm ents altered fundam entally the balance of forces in Central and Eastern Europe and thereby undermined both the Balkan and Little Ententes. The new situation has been analyzed aptly as follows:
The five South-East European anti-revisionist states, in their relations with one another, were now faced with the question whether a pair of ententes which had originally been made mainly with an eye to Hungary and Bulgaria should be built into a larger structure of alliances covering Europe as a whole and involving the risk of a collision not only with Hungary and Bulgaria but also with Italy and Germany, or whether the original arrangements would cease to be operative, even within their narrow regional limits, now that the two local vortices of post-war political disturbances round Hungary and round Bulgaria were being caught up into a maelstrom of European dimensions.7
It was the latter course which was adopted, particularly when it be came apparent that the W estern powers were unwilling or unable to oppose effectively G erm an and Italian aggression. As each crisis arose, one after another of the Balkan states hastened to loosen their ties with the threatened country, and thereby, as events were to prove, ensured their own ultimate destruction. The first blow was the assassination of King Alexander of Yugo
* See Chapters 21 and 28.


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 741
slavia at Marseilles on October 9, 1934. It was quickly established that the assassins were members of the 1MRO and of the fascist Croatian Ustashi or ganization. For years they had been subsidized by the Italian and H ungarian governm ents. In fact, two of those im plicated in the crim e sought refuge in Italy, where the fascist government refused their extradition. Feeling ran high in Yugoslavia, but the French government, wishing at all costs to reach an agreement with Italy against the rising Germ an menace, put pressure on Yugoslavia to adopt a conciliatory attitude. Thus the affair was glossed over in the League Council, to which it was referred. Nevertheless, the death of Alexander was a serious setback for the Balkan and Little Ententes and for the entire French alliance system, which the Yugoslav king had consistently supported. T he next blow suffered by the Balkan E ntente was M ussolini’s con quest of Ethiopia in 1935-1936 despite League of Nations sanctions. All the members of the Entente applied the sanctions and suffered heavy economic losses in the process, particularly Y ugoslavia and R um ania. F urtherm ore, the Entente members, together with France, entered into a reciprocal undertak ing with Britain providing for mutual aid in case any signatory were attacked by Italy because of the application of sanctions. Despite these sacrifices and comm itm ents, Mussolini had his way in Ethiopia and the League was forced to drop the sanctions in the early sum m er of 1936. The Ethiopian fiasco had im portant consequences in the Balkan Peninsula. It demonstrated to the Entente members that they could not rely upon the League of Nations for security against aggression. It also revealed the weakness and vacillation of Britain and France, who had been primarily responsible for the failure to impose adequate sanctions against Italy. Finally, the Ethiopian W ar weakened the ties between France and her allies in Cen tral and Eastern Europe because Hitler took advantage of the general pre occupation with Ethiopia to reoccupy the demilitarized Rhineland on March 7, 1936. The W estern powers again failed to take action, so Hitler proceeded to fortify the Rhineland by constructing the Siegfried Line. This develop ment altered fundamentally the European balance of power. Heretofore the Little and B alkan Ententes had calculated that if the Reichswehr struck to the southeast, its right flank would be exposed to a French counterattack across the Rhineland and southern Germany. Now, however, the German armies could operate with impunity behind the protecting Siegfried Line. W hat this m eant for Central Europe and the Balkans was stated frankly at the time by the French foreign minister, Pierre-Etienne Flandin: “French alliance with the Little Entente was now valueless. In the future France could not hope to give effective assistance to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia or Rum ania, in the event of G erm an aggression. . . . In my opinion, the last chance of saving central and eastern Europe from Germ an domination has been thrown away.” 8
T he proceedings o f the Balkan Entente C onference held in Belgrade May 4 -6 , 1936, reflected the new international situation. The main concern


742 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
of the Entente members now was to make certain that their obligations would not involve them in a war with a great power. General M etaxas was particu larly insistent on this point because the problem of obligations under the pact had become a political issue in Greece. The opposition was charging that Greece had been secretly committed to action in case of an Italian attack upon Y ugoslavia, a contingency which at the time did not seem at all im probable. Consequently M etaxas, with the support of the Turkish representa tives, sought to limit the obligations of the Entente members as much as pos sible. Despite strong opposition from Yugoslavia and Rum ania, the GrecoTurkish viewpoint prevailed. It was agreed that the liability for mutual de fense should be limited to purely B alkan exigencies and that in all other cases the obligations of the Entente members should be restricted to the action required by the League Covenant. W hen the conference ended, M etaxas sig nificantly rem arked that “the Entente has now become more diplomatic than military.” 9 The reoccupation of the Rhineland in M arch, 1936, had further re percussions in the Balkans. Only four months later, in July, 1936, Turkey secured the right to fortify her Straits. Turkey had raised this demand reg ularly since 1933, and now she had her way by the provisions of the M ontreux Convention, which replaced the Lausanne Treaty of 1923.* The M ontreux Conference, like the earlier one at Lausanne, developed into a conflict of interests between Russia and Britain, but with the difference that France now was on the Russian side. Russia wanted egress from the Straits for the purpose of securing her com m unications with her French ally. Britain wished to obtain com pensation for permission to Russia to send her fleet into the M editerranean, which would affect the balance of power in that sea. But Britain was isolated at M ontreux; hence the resulting convention represented a balance between the national security of Turkey and the power interests of Russia. The new provisions laid down by the M ontreux Convention were these: (1 ) The principle of freedom of passage for m erchant vessels through the Straits was reaffirmed. (2 ) N on-B lack Sea powers might send only light surface vessels into the Black Sea, with a limitation on their aggregate ton nage; but Black Sea powers might send capital ships of any size into the M editerranean. (3) The International Straits Commission was abolished and its functions were transfered to Turkey. (4 ) Turkey was allowed to close the Straits in time of w ar or of an im m inent threat of war. (5 ) Turkey was given permission to remilitarize the Straits immediately. The resurgence of Germany and the discrediting of the League prin ciple of collective security affected Central E urope as well as the Balkans. The first indication was the dismissal of the veteran R um anian foreign min ister, Nicholas Titulescu, on August 29, 1936, long known as an ardent Francophile and as a supporter of the League and of the two Ententes. His dismissal foreshadowed a fundam ental shift in Rum anian foreign policy.
* See Chapter 30.


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 743
Rum ania at this time was torn between two possible courses of action. The first, dictated by the needs of the Little Entente and the German threats to Czechoslovakia, involved an alliance with Russia, the powerful ally of the French and the Czechs. This was the policy advocated and pursued by Titulescu. The alternative course was a conciliatory attitude toward Germany and Italy, and a closer relationship with Poland, the latter country having drifted away from France and followed an independent course since conclud ing a nonaggression pact with Germany in January, 1934. Arguments for this alternative policy included the fear of Russian designs upon Bessarabia and the danger of becoming a corridor for Russian armies marching to the relief of Czechoslovakia. The dismissal of Titulescu and the appointm ent of Victor Antonescu to his position was a clear indication that R um ania had selected the latter course. A ntonescu, it is true, em phasized th at R um anian policy would not be altered. But more significant than his assurances was the m arked strength ening of Polish-Rum anian ties. During the autumn of 1936 a num ber of visits were exchanged between political and military leaders, and agreements were signed for technical and cultural cooperation and for “close military collab oration” between the two countries. In view of the Polish-G erm an N onag gression Pact and the well-known hostility between Poland and Czechoslo vakia, the rapprochement of Rumania and Poland naturaly raised doubts regarding R um ania’s position in the Little E ntente and her com m itm ents to Czechoslovakia. C ertainly by the end of 1936 R um ania’s position had shifted considerably from the days when Titulescu had so actively espoused the principle of the “indivisibility of peace.” The slackening of the Little Entente ties was manifested at the Bratislava Conference of the Entente Council held on May 7 -8 , 1936. The council announced that greater elasticity had been agreed upon in relation to extra-D anubian affairs. Unable to reconcile the divergent attitudes of its m em bers, the council decided that Czechoslovakia’s treaty with the Soviet Union should involve no obligation upon Rumania and Yugoslavia, and that the latter countries should be free to assume any attitude they wished toward G erm any and Italy. The final step in the disintegration of the Little E ntente was reached at the conference held in Belgrade in April, 1937. Czechoslo vakia, in mortal danger from Germany, proposed enlarging the military clauses of the pact to include a guarantee of full military assistance in case of aggression from any quarter. R um ania and Yugoslavia rejected this pro posal and thereby sealed the fate of the Little Entente. The shift of Rum anian foreign policy under Antonescu was paralleled by a more marked shift of Yugoslav foreign policy under M ilan Stoyadinovich. M ore than any oth er B alkan country, Y ugoslavia feared Italy’s am bi tions in the Balkans, especially after the E thiopian affair. Y et the decisions o f the Belgrade C onference of the Balkan Entente in M ay, 1936, elim inated any likelihood of aid for Yugoslavia in case of an Italian attack. Accordingly, Prem ier Stoyadinovich, in Ihc fucc of strong popular opposition, abandoned


744 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the traditional pro-French policy, which had been followed by Alexander, and came to terms with Bulgaria and Italy. On January 24, 1937, he signed the pact with Bulgaria which provided simply that “there shall be inviolable peace and perpetual friendship between Bulgaria and Yugoslavia.” Nothing at all was said either about renunciation of territorial demands or about Bul garian entry into the Balkan Entente. Much more disturbing was the Italo-Yugoslav agreement of March 25, 1937. Czechoslovakia and the members of the Balkan Entente had been informed as to the general conditions, but under Italian pressure the treaty had been rushed through before its final text could be com m unicated to Y ugoslavia’s allies in accordance with the procedure laid down in the statutes of the Little and Balkan Ententes. Both countries agreed not to attack each other, to rem ain neutral in case of unprovoked attack by a third power, and to consult on matters affecting their common interests. Italy made substantial commercial concessions, extending to Yugoslavia the tariff profercnces hitherto reserved for Austria and Hungary under the Rome protocols, and doubling the Yugoslav export quota. It also prom ised to am eliorate the lot of the Croat-Slovene minority in Italian Istria and to refrain from encour aging the Croat terrorist Ustashi. In return, Yugoslavia recognized the Ethi opian Empire, made a reciprocal pledge to prevent anti-Italian activities within its borders, agreed to increase im ports of Italian goods, and promised to respect the existing frontiers of Albania. These terms were favorable to Yugoslavia. Yet Stoyadinovich en countered much opposition from his com patriots and from his allies in the two Ententes. Yugoslav democratic elements viewed the treaty as a short sighted desertion of the W estern liberal camp for the sake of immediate tem porary gains. Likewise, the Belgrade Conference of the Little Entente (April, 1937) criticized Stoyadinovich for concluding the pact without previous con sultation and for starting a system of bilateral accords that were contrary to the spirit of the two Ententes. In retrospect it does appear that the ItaloYugoslav treaty is significant as a sym ptom of a general E uropean trend from collective security to bilateral pacts. Indeed, it may be said that it reflected the general decline of W estern dem ocratic prestige. This is startlingly evident in the following explanation that Stoyadinovich gave to Ciano concerning his new foreign policy:
We do not and have not received anything from France. Economically she is a zero for Yugoslavia. W e have contracted several debts in F ran ce and we are repaying them at a usurious rate. Militarily she, together with Czechoslovakia, has been our principal supplier of armaments. But she has not given us a single bayonet as a gift. W e have paid for what we have received. . . . I should add that the cultural and moral influence that France has exercised in our country has been truly pernicious and divisive. Their press and literature are expressions of the Jewish, Masonic, and communistic mentality of Blum’s France. . . . Should Germany attack Czechoslovakia we would, with weak and uncer


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 IAS
tain help from Rumania, be obliged to invade Hungary in order to help the Czechs. Even if we could occupy Hungary completely (and I consider this highly difficult), we would arrive at the Czech borders only in time to meet with the remnants of the defeated Czech armies. Behind us would be Hungary, occupied but hostile. Before us the victorious German armies. A most unpleasant situation, this, and a risk that we cannot inflict upon the Yugoslav people. . . . While rela tions between Yugoslavia and Rumania will remain unchanged— that is, loyal and cordial, those between these two and Czechoslovakia will be reduced to the level of an empty formality. . . . 1 do not have any regard for the League of Nations. I am a member and must continue to be a member, more because of public opinion and inertia than because of my personal conviction. . . . The pact that I signed with you . . . is most assuredly a pact outside and perhaps even against (he League of Nations, and constitutes proof of my scant sympathy for Geneva.10
g erm an ascen d an cy : 1938-1939
During the year 1938 both the Balkan and the Little Ententes were crippled by the Germ an annexation of Austria and of the Sudetan regions of Czechoslovakia. Only a few years earlier Yugoslavia had warned that if any pow er intervened in A ustria she would do likewise. But now, in M arch, 1938, A ustria disappeared completely from the map of Europe without a single protest from any of the great powers. Under the circumstances the Yugoslav governm ent felt constrained to announce that it “ held the point of view that the A ustrian question was an internal G erm an affair.” 11 Despite this form al disavowal of interest, the fact rem ained that the Anschluss altered drastically the strategic situation in C entral and Southeastern Europe. H itler now was in a position to isolate Czechoslovakia and to dom inate the Danube Valley. M astery of Vienna gave him control of the main comm unication routes to the Balkan Peninsula and brought him to the frontiers of Italy, Hungary, and Yugoslavia. The significance of these facts could not be overlooked by the Balkan states. They tried to cope with the rising tide of revisionism by coming to terms with Bulgaria. On July 31, 1938, the president of the Entente Council signed a Treaty of Friendship and Nonaggression with the Bulgarian foreign minister by which the allies recognized B ulgaria’s right to rearm and agreed that the clauses of the Lausanne Convention providing for the demilitarization of the frontiers between Bulgaria, Greece, and Turkey should be allowed to lapse. In return, Bulgaria agreed not to attem pt to change her existing fron tiers by force and to subm it all disputes with her neighbors to arbitration or judicial settlem ent. It is interesting to note that the agreem ent said nothing about the permanence of the territorial status quo or about Bulgarian mem bership in the Entente.
T he partitioning-of C zechoslovakia in the fall o f 1938 disrupted the Little Entente and threatened the Balkan Entente. The members of the latter organization held conferences in N ovem ber, 1938, and February, 1939, but


746 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
could think of nothing to do. They realized that some move was necessary to appease Bulgarian revisionism, but they were afraid to make any concession lest the situation pass beyond their control. King Carol, for example, con tended th at if he satisfied B ulgaria’s dem ands for D obruja he would leave his country open to similar demands from Hungary and Russia. The truth of the m atter, however, is th at the basic issue no longer was Bulgaria. R ather, it was the struggle between the great powers, which rapidly was involving the entire C ontinent. It is conceivable, though im probable, th at a genuine B alkan agreem ent of the type envisaged by the B alkan Conference, including all the Balkan states and based on the principle of the Balkans for the Balkan peo ples, might have succeeded in keeping the peninsula out of the maelstrom. C ertainly this could not have been accom plished by the Balkan Entente as it was constituted in 1939. Thus in the last few months before the outbreak of W orld W ar II the decisive factor was the battle for influence in the Balkans waged by Germany and Italy on the one hand and Britain and France on the other. First G erm any followed up the partitioning of Czechoslovakia in N ovem ber, 1938, by taking over the entire country on M arch 15, 1939. Sev eral days later, on M arch 23, Germ any imposed on Rumania a treaty that subordinated R u m an ia’s econom y to th at of the Reich. As described in C hap ter 36, within another fortnight, on A pril 7, Mussolini sent his legions into Albania, completing his hold over the country that he had dom inated for m ore than a decade. B ritain and France retaliated on April 13 with unilateral guarantees of the independence of R um ania and Greece. On M ay 12 a joint declaration was issued in London and A nkara that, pending the conclusion of a formal agreement, the British and Turkish governments would aid each o ther in case of an act of aggression leading to w ar in the M editerranean area. A similar Franco-Turkish declaration was issued on June 24. These prelim inary arrangem ents were replaced on O ctober 19 by a fifteen-year m utual-aid pact signed by Britain, France, and Turkey. Meanwhile Hitler had concluded his nonaggression pact with Stalin on August 23. On September 1 he invaded Poland and thereby precipitated W orld W ar II. The extent to which the Balkan states were helpless victims in the face of these unfolding events is dram atically revealed in the following extemporaneous address that Hitler delivered to his generals when he was about to sign the pact with Stalin.
I have decided to go with Stalin. On the whole there are only three great statesmen in the world: Stalin, myself and Mussolini. Mussolini, the weakest, has not been able to break either the power of the crown or that of the church. Stalin and I are the only ones who see only the future. So I shall shake hands with Stalin within a few weeks on the common German-Russian border and undertake with him a new distribution of the w orld.12


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 747
BALKAN EN TEN TE DESTROYED: 1 9 3 9 - 1 9 4 0
That the Balkan states managed to remain out of the world war for several months after it began was due not to their strength or skill but rather to the fortunate accident that it did not suit the interests of any of the bel ligerents at this time to extend hostilities to the peninsula. The Germ anRussian Nonaggression Pact, however, contained the seeds of future conflict over the Balkans. The pact required the signatories to refrain from aggression against each other, either individually or in alliance with other powers. It also stipulated that each party rem ain neutral in case the other were attacked by a third power. Issues arising between the two signatories were to be settled by arbitration and the treaty was to remain in force for ten years. These were the terms made public to the world. But on the same day, August 23, 1939, Molotov and Ribbentrop signed a “Secret Additional Protocol” defining spheres of influence “in the event of a territorial and po litical rearrangem ent” in E astern E urope. Russia was to have Finland, E s tonia, Latvia, eastern Poland, and the Rumanian province of Bessarabia. To G erm any fell L ithuania and the rest of Poland. The significance of this dem arcation line dividing Eastern Europe betw een G erm any and Russia is that it stopped at the D anube. It was not carried beyond into the Balkan Peninsula because neither Germany nor R us sia wished at this time to be involved in that region. Furtherm ore, Italy now declared her neutrality because of her military unpreparedness. This left no one to molest the Balkan states, which thus gained a reprieve of several m onths. During this period of peace there was considerable diplomatic activity in the Balkans. Italy was concerncd about the possibility of Russian penetra tion across the Danube and tried to organize Hungary, Rumania, and Yugo slavia into a defensive bloc. Likewise, Turkey tried to combine with Greece, Bulgaria, and Rum ania to form a group under Allied auspices. Neither of these efforts succeeded and they were abandoned when Russia turned her back upon the Balkans in December, 1939, to wage war against Finland. A few months later, on February 2 -4 , 1940, the Balkan Entente held a meeting in Belgrade. The delegates confined themselves to platitudinous remarks about their desire for neutrality and peace. M ore significant was their failure to reach an agreement for effective m utual aid in case of attack from without. Accordingly, it was tacitly agreed that it was up to the various mem bers to deal individually with the great powers in order to preserve their neutrality. The Balkan Entente had become a paper organization lacking unity, independence, and effectiveness. This was dem onstrated all too clearly when the Soviet Union and Italy intervened in the Balkans in the sum m er and fall of 1940. The Soviet Union moved first, impelled by the spectacular G erm an conquest of France in May and June, 1940. T he Russians had already exploited their pact with Germany to acquire eastern Poland, the Baltic states, and strategic bits of


7 4 8 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Finnish territory. Now the Russians set out to strengthen their position in the Balkans as a counterweight to the German successes in the West. On June 24, 1940, they resumed diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia after a lapse of over twenty years, thereby emphasizing their interest in Balkan affairs. A day earlier M olotov informed the Germ an am bassador of his intention to take not only Bessarabia, already assigned to Russia by the 1939 treaty, but also Bukovina, a province which had never belonged to Russia. The Germ an gov ernm ent expressed surprise at this additional claim, but an agreement was reached when M olotov decided to demand only the northern part of the province which was inhabited predominantly by Ukrainians. On June 26 the Soviet government addressed a tw enty-four-hour ultimatum to Bucharest de m anding the surrender of Bessarabia and of northern Bukovina. King C arol’s advisers were divided in the face of this emergency. Professor Iorga, for ex am ple, urged resistance, while luliu M aniu favored com pliance in order to be free to face Hungarian demands for his native Transylvania. W hen Germany and Italy both advised acceptance of the ultimatum, Carol decided to sur render. Thus the Russians gained considerable territory, pushed the frontier a safe distance away from Odessa, and also gained access to the Danube River. The loss of Bessarabia and nothern Bukovina started the dism em ber ment of Rumania. Hungary demanded Transylvania and Bulgaria the Dobruja. Meanwhile Rum ania had reacted to her loss of territory by turning to Germany. A new pro-Nazi government had withdrawn from the League of Nations, expressed sympathy for the ideals of the Nazi-dom inated “New E urope,” and dismissed British managers and engineers from the Rumanian oil fields. These developments posed a serious dilemma for Germ any. She approved of the new R um anian governm ent and highly prized R um ania’s resources. She therefore wished to spare Rum ania as far as possible. On the o th er hand, she also had to give some support to Bulgaria and H ungary in order to assure their loyalty to the Axis. Germ any and Italy at first encour aged the three Balkan governments to negotiate an agreement by themselves. The ensuing talks failed and rising nationalist feeling in Rumania opposed the cession of more territory. The Axis was alarmed at the prospect of a Balkan w ar that could end in the destruction of the valuable Rum anian oil fields. To forestall such a disaster the Axis intervened and dictated its V ienna Award on August 30, 1940. This partitioned Transylvania along an eastwest line, the northern part going to Hungary. About one million Hungarians and over a million Rum anians came under H ungarian rule, while over half a million Hungarians were left in Rum ania. A week later, on Septem ber 7, Rum ania was obliged to cede to Bulgaria southern D obruja, a province with a predominantly Bulgarian population of 400,000. In two months Rumania had lost more than a third of her territory and some three million Rum anians as well as about two million subjects of non-Rum anian national origin. This wholesale dismemberment provoked a violent reaction within the country. King Carol abdicated in favor of his son


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 749
M ichael and fled the country ignominiously on Septem ber 6. A n authoritarian regime was established under General Ion Antonescu, who became the R u manian Duce or “Conducator.” The fascist Iron G uard now became the only legal political organization in the country. These developm ents in R um ania put an end to the B alkan Entente for all practical purposes. Rum ania had received no support from her Balkan allies in the same m anner that Czechoslovakia earlier had been abandoned by her Little Entente partners. Rumania now turned her back on her Balkan neighbors and entered the Axis camp. When the Axis Powers issued the Vienna Award they agreed at the same time to guarantee the integrity of Rum anian territory. General Antonescu accepted this guarantee and made it clear against whom it was directed when, on Septem ber 6, 1940, he defined Rum anian policy as follows: “Rum ania, on her own initiative, has entered the political sphere of G erm any and Italy. Consequently it is not permissible to attack the Axis Powers in any way. With regard to the W estern Powers an attitude of reserve must be m aintained, with the limits of objective inform a tio n .” 13
h i t l e r ’s f a t e f u l d e c i s i o n : j u l y 31, 1940
T he developm ents in R um ania not only m arked the end of the Balkan League; much more important, they rellected a fateful decision made by H itler a few months earlier on July 31, 1940. On that date the Fuehrer held a conference with his top army and navy commanders. He was advised that a successful invasion of Britain that fall was highly im probable. H itler then made his momentous decision to invade Russia the following spring. He reached his decision through the following reasoning:
In the event that invasion [of England] docs not take place, our action must be directed to eliminate all factors that let England hope for a change in the situation. . . . Britain’s hope lies in Russia and the U nited States. If Russia drops out of the picture America, too, is lost for Britain, because elimination of Russia would tremendously increase Japan’s power in the Far East. . . . Russia is the factor on which Britain is relying the most. . . . W ith Russia smashed, Britain’s last hope will be shattered. Germany then will be master of Europe and the Balkans.
Decision: Russia’s destruction m ust therefore be m ade a part o f this strug g le . Spring 1941. The sooner Russia is crushed, the better. Attack achieves its purpose only if Russian state can be shattered to its roots with one blow. . . . If we start in May 41, we would have five months to finish the job in.14
The decision to invade Russia had im portant consequences for the Balkan countries. It is frequently asserted that R ussian-G erm an differences in the Balkans brought the two countries to w ar in 1941. The sequence ap pears to have been precisely the opposite. First Hitler decided to attack Russia because a cross-C hannel invasion appeared too hazardous. T hen in preparing for the cam paign in the east he took various steps in the Balkans


750 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
that antagonized the Russians. One of these steps was the Vienna Award and the Axis guarantee of R um an ia’s integrity. T he Soviet governm ent com plained that it should have been informed about the Vienna negotiations and that the guarantee to Rum ania was unnecessary. More serious for the Rus sians was the dispatch of G erm an troops to R um ania in O ctober, 1940. B er lin informed Moscow that these were “training troops” being sent to “in struct” the Rum anian army. But at the same time a secret Germ an order stated that the “real task” of the troops was to prepare the Rum anian army to participate in the forthcoming invasion of the Soviet Union. A t this point, when Hitler was occupying Rumania, Mussolini launched his blundering invasion of Greece. This ill-fated move was to force Hitler to undertake a Balkan campaign and thus to postpone his attack on Russia from the spring to the summer of 1941.
ITA LIA N -G REEK W AR I 1940-1 9 4 1
O n October 28, 1940, the Italian ambassador in Athens demanded of Prem ier M etaxas that Italian troops be allowed to occupy “certain strategic points on Greek territory.” He warned that any resistance would be “crushed by force of arm s.” 15 M etaxas rejected the ultim atum and the Italo-G reek War began. Only four months earlier, when Mussolini had attacked France on June 10, 1940, he had proclaimed to the world: “I declare categorically that Italy has not the slightest desire to draw into the conflict any other nation. . . . L et Sw itzerland, Y ugoslavia, G reece, T urkey and E gypt m ark my w ords.” 1(i Various factors explain why Mussolini forgot so quickly this assurance of peace and declared w ar against Greece. One was his disappointing experience in France. He had hoped to win glory and territory at the expense of that country but Hitler had vetoed his demands. The Fuehrer wished to use the French colonies and the French navy against the British and he feared that if he allowed Mussolini a free hand the colonies and the navy might go over to the Free French forces of General de Gaulle. In addition to this frustration, M ussolini had been alienated by H itler’s sweeping successes and highhanded methods. Although they were supposedly allies, H itler had gone on from tri um ph to trium ph without consulting or notifying his Italian partner. The latest case had been the occupation of Rum ania early in October, 1940. “Hitler always faces me with a jait accompli,” complained Mussolini to Ciano. “This time I am going to pay him back in his own coin. He will find out from the papers that I have occupied Greece. In this way the equilibrium will be re established.” Ciano com m ented in his diary: “The Duce seems determ ined to act now. In fact, I believe that the miltary operation will be useful and easy.” 17 The Italians thus undertook their Greek adventure with the hope that it would offer a way out of their difficulties. In Greece they expected to save face, to regain prestige, and also to acquire valuable bases that would make


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 751
B ritain’s position in the eastern M editerranean very difficult. Furtherm ore, M ussolini’s advisers assured him th at there would be no serious opposition. General Visconti Frasca reported: “We should be able to take care of the Greek forces . . . and complete the occupation of the region [Epirus] in ten days or two weeks.” W hen Mussolini asked him, “W hat do you know about the m orale of the G reek arm y?” the general replied, “They don’t like to fight. W e’ve planned o u r operation so as to im press them with the fact th at we can crush them within the space of a few days.” 18 Thus assured, the Italians began to manufacture incidents, going so far as to bomb and torpedo Greek warships in G reek ports. Since Athens refused to be provoked, there followed the ultimatum and the declaration of w ar on O ctober 28, 1940. F ro m the outset M ussolini’s G reek adventure proved to be ill-fated. His troops expected a triumphal procession to Athens but experienced a very different reception. After pushing some distance across the Greek-Albanian frontier they suffered a decisive defeat at the battle of M etsovo on November 11. The crack Italian Alpine “Iulia” division, count ing on its tanks and supporting air force, had advanced along the valleys toward Metsovo without bothering to occupy some higher positions on their rear. Greek m ountain regiments made a forced night march and occupied the heights overlooking the Italians in the valleys. At dawn they swooped down and, after some hard fighting, the Italians broke and fled. The Metsovo battle served as the model for future Greek victories. Taking advantage of the difficulties of the ponderous Italian arm ored divisions in the mountains of Epirus, the Greeks invariably made for the high ground and from there cut off and surrounded the enemy below. By mid-November they had driven the Italians back across the frontier into Albania. On No vember 22 the Greeks captured Koritsa, the third largest town in Albania and defended by six Italian divisions totaling seventy-two thousand men. The Greeks also took A rgyrokastron, the fortified base of the Italian Eleventh Army, as well as the port and naval base of Santi Q uaranta, which in happier times the Italians had renam ed P orto E dda, in honor of M ussolini’s daughter, Countess Ciano. Mussolini suffered not only humiliating military defeat but also diplo matic failure. Before beginning the invasion Mussolini had tried to reach an agreement with Yugoslavia and Bulgaria for the partitioning of Greece. Yugo slavia and Bulgaria had no desire to be surrounded by Fascist Italy, so they rejected the overture and warned Athens of what was afoot. After the defeat of the Italians in Greece. Hitler revived the plan for a joint partitioning of Greece. “Yugoslavia should have Salonica,” the Fuehrer told Ciano, “Bul garia, her outlet to the A egean, and Italy the rest of G reece.” 39 B ut the South Slavs were even less disposed to accept this scheme now that Italy had been driven back into Albania. Instead of attacking Greece, Yugoslavia concluded a nonaggression and friendship treaty with Hungary on December 12, 1940. T he signatories of this pact hoped to extend it later into a neutral


752 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
bloc including Bulgaria, Turkey, and possibly Greece if the Italo-G reek W ar ended in a negotiated peace. N ot only did Mussolini and Hitler fail to unite the Balkans against Greece; they saw their archenemy, Britain, gain a foothold in the peninsula. B ritain had guaranteed the independence of Greece on April 13, 1939, at the time that Italy invaded Albania. Consequently, Churchill promised full sup port to Greece when M etaxas appealed for aid following the Italian invasion. As a m atter of fact, the British strengthened their position in the eastern M editerranean substantially by securing permission to land forces on the strategic Greek islands of Crete and Lemnos. In return, the British sent to Greece five squadrons of bom ber and fighter planes which bom barded A l banian ports and Italian communications. M ussolini found hum iliating defeat in G reece in place of the glory he had expected. Amid these disasters Mussolini instructed his ambassador in Berlin, Dino Altleri, to report to Rome. Alfieri has left a vivid description of Mussolini as he saw him early in December, 1940:
I found the Duce plunged in the depths of depression. I had never fore seen him looking so dispirited. His face was pale and drawn, his eyes swollen and tired, his expression sad and preoccupied. He looked all the more dejected inasmuch as he was wearing a shirt with a grotesquely large turn-down collar, and he had not shaved for at least two days.20
O PERATIO NS M ARITA AND BARBAROSSA:
D E C E M B E R , 1940
Mussolini had called Alfieri to discuss the advisibility of requesting G erm any to mediate between Italy and Greece. Hitler, however, did not need to be asked to intervene in the Balkans. He was being forced to do so as a result of his decision in July, 1940, to invade Russia. He had sent troops to Rum ania in October, 1940, in preparation for the invasion. Now he could not sit back and allow Britain to consolidate her foothold in G reece. T o have done so would have created an intolerable threat to his right flank when his armies marched eastward. He would have been risking a repetition of the 1918 Allied offensive from Saloniki. This, then, was one reason why Hitler decided to send his arm ies into the Balkans in the spring of 1941 before un dertaking the Russian campaign. Certainly he was not motivated by senti ments of loyalty to Mussolini. According to Field M arshal Wilhelm Keitel, “ Hitler was extremely angry about . . . the dragging of the Balkans into the war and only the fact that Italy was an ally prevented a break with M usso lini.” 21 H itler was also impelled to intervene in the Balkans because of in creasing friction with the Soviet Union over that region. This was manifested during M olotov’s visit to Berlin on N ovem ber 12, 1940. T he G erm ans had invited M olotov in order to assuage the Soviets, who had reacted frigidly to the signing of the Germ an-Italian-Japanese Tripartite Pact on September 27,


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 753
1940. Hitler did not expect his conversations with M olotov to affect his plans to attack Russia. O n the eve of M olotov’s arrival he ordered th at “regardless of what outcome these conversations will have, all preparations for the East already orally ordered, are to be continued.” 22 H itler did not expect anything from M olotov’s visit nor did he m ake any serious effort to reach an agreement with the Soviet foreign minister. Churchill has noted and emphasized this point clearly. “The Berlin conversa tions m ade no difference to H itler’s deep resolve. . . . H itler’s heart was set on destroying the Bolsheviks, for whom his hatred was mortal. He believed that he had the force to gain his main life-aim. . . . He must have known . . . that the proposals which he made [to Molotov] fell far short of Russian am bitions.” 23 Hitler proposed to Molotov that Russia join the Tripartite Pact of Germany, Italy, and Japan for the purpose of partitioning the British Em pire— “a gigantic world-wide estate in bankruptcy of 40 million square kilo m eters.” M olotov replied that Russia had no objection in principle to asso ciating herself with such an undertaking but first “there were issues to be clarified regarding R ussia’s Balkan and Black Sea interests with respect to B ulgaria, R um ania and T u rk ey .” 24 On N ovem ber 25 M oscow subm itted proposals that defined precisely R ussia’s claims. So far as the Balkans were concerned, Moscow demanded “the establishment of a base for land and naval forces of the U.S.S.R. within range of the Bosporus and the D arda nelles by means of a long-term lease.” Moscow also required that Germany and Italy should recognize that “B ulgaria is geographically located inside the security zone of the Black Sea boundaries of the Soviet Union and that it is therefore a political necessity that a m utual assistance pact be concluded between the Soviet Union and Bulgaria which in no way shall affect the in ternal regime of Bulgaria, her sovereignty or independence.” 25 Hitler made no effort to negotiate on the basis of the Moscow pro posals. As Churchill has observed, “No effective answer was returned to this document. No attempt was made by Hitler to split the difference. Issues so grave as these might well justify a prolonged and careful study in a friendly spirit by both sides. T he Soviets certainly expected and aw aited an answ er.” 20 N o answ er was forthcom ing, the basic reason being that Hitler had in mind not a compromise settlem ent but rather his July decision to invade Russia. Preparations for the invasion had been continued uninterruptedly, and now, in D ecem ber, 1940, a m onth after M olotov’s departure, he issued di rectives for the invasion of the Balkans and then of Russia. Since the issuance of the directives followed the failure of the M olotov negotiations it appears superficially that a causal relationship exists between the two events. It would be more correct, however, to say that both the failure of the negotiations and the issuance of the directives were the direct and logical result of H itler’s original decision to turn from the English Channel to the Russian plains. H itler’s resolve to carry through his decision was fortified by his apprehension concerning B ritain’s foothold in G reece and by his sus


754 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
picion, after M olotov’s dem ands, th a t the K rem lin intended to establish con trol of Bulgaria and Turkey and then, perhaps, to join forces with the British to encircle the Reich. U nder these circum stances Hitler issued his directives for O peration M arita and Operation Barbarossa— directives that were to prove so fateful not only for the Balkans but also for Europe and indeed, the whole world.
December 13, 1940. Directive No. 20. O peration M arita. Because of a dangerous situation in A lbania it is doubly necessary th at the British endeavor be foiled to create air bases under the protection of a Balkan front, which would be dangerous above all to Italy as well as to the Rum anian oil fields. M y plan, therefore, is (a) to form a slowly increasing task force in Southern R um ania within the next months, (b) after the setting in of favorable weather, probably in M arch, to send the task force for the occupation of the Aegean N orth coast by way of Bulgaria, and if necessary to occupy the entire G reek m ainland.27 December 18, 1940. Directive No. 21. O peration Barbarossa. The G er man Arm ed Forces must be prepared to crush Soviet Russia in a quick campaign even before the conclusion of the war against England. . . . Preparations are to be com pleted by May 15, 1941.28
H ITLER IN TERV EN ES: APRIL 6, 1 941
The period between December, 1940, when Hitler decided to strike eastward, and April, 1941, when he invaded Yugoslavia and Greece, was characterized by a triangular diplomatic tug of war among Germany, Britain, and the Soviet Union for the support of the Balkan states. Germany won this contest because she was able to back her arguments with superior force. The Soviets proposed a treaty of mutual assistance to the Bulgarians on November 25, 1940, but were turned down, for the Bulgarians by this time were too involved in the Germ an war plans to be able to shift their orientation. Likewise, General Sir Archibald Wavell met with failure when he went to Athens and A nkara in m id-January, 1941, to consult about or ganizing resistance against the expected G erm an invasion. In both capitals he was turned down because the help he could offer was insignificant com pared to what was needed to meet the Germans. The Greeks stated that they would need nine British divisions, together with large-scale air forces, in order to hold their lines. Wavell could offer only one artillery regiment, one antitank regiment, and about sixty tanks. The Greeks naturally concluded that if they accepted British aid they would merely provoke the Germans with no possibility of successful resistance. By contrast, Hitler was able to force Bulgaria to his side because of the Germ an divisions that he had massed across the Danube on Rumanian soil. O n January 3 Bulgaria agreed to the entry of G erm an troops; on January 10 the troops began to cross the Danube from Rum ania; and on March 1 Bulgaria formally adhered to the Tripartite Pact. Russia, who already had m ade clear her interest in Bulgaria, protested strongly against the G erm an


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 755
advance into the heart of the Balkans. But by this time Hitler had enough divisions lined up along the Russian frontier to feel free to ignore the pro tests from Moscow. H itler also tried to draw Turkey and Yugoslavia into the Tripartite Pact but without success. The adhesion of Bulgaria, however, sufficed for his purposes, since it opened the route to the G reek frontier. With the appearance of Germ an troops across the Danube the Greeks appealed to the British on February 8 for aid against the impending invasion. Two weeks later a British mission arrived in Athens headed by Foreign Secre tary Anthony Eden. It was quickly determined that the Greeks would resist the Germans at all cost and that the British would give all possible aid. But differences and misunderstanding developed on the question of strategy. The British understood that only covering detachments would be left in the Metaxas Line along the Bulgarian frontier, and that the main British and Greek forces would be concentrated at the Aliakmon Line running along the hills west of the V ardar River. On the other hand, the Greek commanding officer, General A lexander Papagos, maintained that this arrangem ent was contingent upon Yugoslav aid against the Germans. Since this was not forth coming, Papagos insisted on keeping three of his six available divisions in the M etaxas Line. He also held that it was unfeasible to withdraw any troops from the Albanian front because an Italian offensive was expected and ade quate transportation facilities were lacking. Prime M inister Churchill and his cabinet were so discouraged by this situation that for a moment they inclined toward leaving the Greeks to their fate. But Eden and his military advisers, who were on the spot in Athens, recommended that they stand by the Greeks regardless of the consequences. “N o doubt,” E den reported, “our prestige will suffer if we are ignominously ejected, but in any event to have fought and suffered in Greece would be less dam aging to us than to have left G reece to her fate.” 29 C hurchill accepted this recommendation and in early M arch British reinforcements began to arrive in Greece. Meanwhile, the Yugoslavs had been pressed on the one hand by the British to join Greece and Turkey in a Balkan front, and on the other by the Germans to accept the Tripartite Pact. The Yugoslavs had little choice be cause, with G erm an troops in Bulgaria, they were surrounded on three sides. They tried to appease the Fuehrer by offering a nonaggression pact but were - rejected. In the end they capitulated to a virtual ultimatum and on M arch 25, 1941, Premier Dragisha Tsvetkovich and Foreign M inister Tsintsar-M arkovich signed the Tripartite Pact in Vienna. The terms were favorable to the Yugoslavs: no Germ an troops would pass through their country and no terri torial cessions would be demanded. On the contrary, Hitler promised that eventually the Yugoslavs could have Saloniki. The explanation for these generous conditions is that Yugoslav neutrality was im portant for both O p eration Marita and Operation Barbarossa. Premier Tsvetkovich and his foreign minister returned on M arch 26 to a hostile capital. T hat midnight a group of army and air force officers


756 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
executed a lightning coup. W ithin an hour and a half they seized all govern m ent buildings, the radio center, and the barracks. Early in the dawn Prince Paul resigned as regent and young Peter was proclaimed King Peter II of Yugoslavia. A military governm ent took office under G eneral Dushan Simovich, the chief of the air force who had led the coup. Public opinion was known to have been strongly opposed to the capitulation to the Axis Powers. Yet the world was surprised by this sudden revolt and by the tumultuous en thusiasm of Belgrade’s populace. T he A llied m inisters were cheered w her ever they appeared, while enthusiastic crowds paraded in the streets shouting “Better W ar than the Pact.” Less than a fortnight later war did come in the form of a devastating aerial bom bardm ent of the capital. The new Yugoslav governm ent did its best to avoid a showdown with H itler. It assum ed a correct position of neutrality and declared th a t it would adhere to all previous pacts. As a token of friendly disposition to the Axis the government rejected British proposals for consultation following the coup. These gestures and asurances failed to protect Yugoslavia from G er m an retribution. Equally futile was a pact of friendship and nonaggression which the new government concluded with the Soviet Union on the night of April 5 -6 , 1941. A few hours later, at six in the morning of April 6, the Germ an blitz began. The assurances of the Simovich government to Berlin had been wasted effort from the outset. Hitler had decided to destroy Yugoslavia al m ost as soon as he learned of the coup. He felt that he had made great con cessions to bring Yugoslavia into the Axis camp. The Belgrade revolt dem on strated that they had been in vain and that the country could not be trusted. An unreliable and basically hostile Yugoslavia he regarded as an intolerable threat to his com m unications during the forthcom ing campaigns against Greece and Russia. Accordingly, he called his generals together the day following the Belgrade coup and gave orders for a simultaneous invasion of Greece and Yugoslavia.
T he F uehrer is determ ined, w ithout waiting for possible loyalty declara tions of the new governm ent, to m ake all preparations in order to destroy Y ugo slavia militarily and as a national unit. N o diplom atic inquiries will be m ade nor ultimatums presented. Assurances of the Yugoslav government, which cannot be trusted anyhow, in the future will be taken note of. T he arm y will attack as soon as the means and troops suitable for it are ready. . . . The war against Yugoslavia should be very popular in Italy, H ungary, and Bulgaria, as acquisition of territory can be promised to these states, namely the Adriatic coast to Italy, the Banat to H ungary, and M acedonia to Bulgaria.30
SWASTIKA OVER THE BALKANS
The Germ an invasion of Greece and Yugoslavia proved to be an ir resistible blitz. In less than three weeks H itler’s Luftwaffe and Panzer divi sions overwhelmed all resistance and reached the southern capcs of Greece.


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 757
One reason for this outcome was the gross discrepancy between the forces that Hitler had massed for the invasion and those that the British were able to spare from the N orth African front. Junior British officers had foreseen this gap and submitted to General Wavell a paper drawing attention to the dangers of the proposed campaign. Wavell returned the paper with a short note w ritten across the top in his own hand. It read: “ ‘W ar is an option of difficulties,’ Wolfe. A .P .W .” 31 The officers were im pressed m ore by the spirit than the judgment of their chief, and secretly proceeded to prepare plans for evacuation before the expeditionary force had even landed. The German invasion was also facilitated by the failure to coordi nate the Greek and Yugoslav defense plans. Not until April 3 was a meeting held in northern G reece between British, G reek, and Yugoslav m ilitary rep resentatives. The conversations proved to be fruitless. They revealed that the Yugoslavs had a greatly exaggerated idea of the strength of the British forces in Greece and had made no serious preparations to meet a G erm an attack. Three days later the G erm an invasion began and no further contact with the Yugoslav army was effected. The Balkan campaign opened with the furious air bom bardm ent of Belgrade in the early morning of April 6. The Luftwaffe disregarded Bel grade’s status as an “open city” and inllictcd casualties estim ated at 15,000 to 25,000. Simultaneously, the Lujtwaffe swept without resistance over the whole of Yugoslavia and Grcece. The key port of Piraeus was reduced to a shambles. Railway centers were devastated, crippling transportation facilities. The Yugoslavs were particularly hard hit by these air blows because their army was not fully mobilized and most of it was concentrated in the north. Meanwhile the British air force was too weak to counter the Luftwaffe or to conduct effective tactical operations against G erm an ground units. Instead, it bombed Sofia by night, an operation which had some psychological reper cussions but which left the invaders unharmed. The German com mand of the air cleared the way for swift and de cisive operations by the motorized divisions. They converged on the four Yugoslav army corps in the north, supported by Hungarian troops which crossed the Danube and by Germ an and Italian forces advancing toward Zagreb. The main Yugoslav forces thus were driven in confusion southward, _allowing the Germ ans to enter Belgrade on April 13. M eanwhile, other G er m an divisions were advancing even more rapidly through the lightly defended passes of southern Yugoslavia. Starting from Bulgaria, they struck across to the V ardar Valley and down the V ardar Pass toward Saloniki. This thrust separated the Yugoslavs from the Greeks and turned the M etaxas Line, which was cut off from the rest of Greece. Even more serious was the advance of other German units from the V ardar Valley southwest across Yugoslav M ace donia to Prilep, M onastir, and into Greece near Fiorina, many miles behind the Anglo-Grcek forces holding positions to the west of Saloniki. The G er m ans had outflanked the Aliakm on I.ine as well as the M etaxas Line. T o


758 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
complete the rout, other German units struck south from Bulgaria and, after hard fighting, pierced the M etaxas Line and raced for Saloniki. in this m anner the battle for the Balkans was decided in the first seventy-two hours of the campaign. The Germans speeded their victory by conducting political as well as arm ed warfare. In Yugoslavia they shrewdly exploited the rift between the Serbians and the Croatians. They spared the Croat cities from the air raids and conducted radio propaganda presenting the Axis forces as the “liberators” of the C roat nation. Also, they incited the Croat regiments to revolt against their leadership, which was almost exclu sively Serbian. Scattered mutinies did occur, and the Yugoslav fleet, m anned by C roat seamen, was slowly paralyzed. W hen the G erm ans reached Zagreb on April 9, the leader of the fascist Croatian Ustashi, Ante Pavelich, entered the city amid the roar of German tanks and established a “Croatian National Government.” On April 16 General Simovich authorized the remaining Yugo slav arm y groups to surrender, and the following day King Peter fled the country in a British plane. N o counterpart existed in G reece to the Serbo-Croatian schism and to the Ustashi movement. But there did appear a certain amount of defeatism and fifth-columnist activity among a few top military and civilian leaders. These men had served loyally against the Italian invaders, but they considered resistance against the G erm ans as well as the Italians to be a futile sacrifice. This was especially true of the generals com m anding the armies in Epirus and western Macedonia. Headed by G eneral George Tsolakoglou, they opened armistice negotiations with the Germ ans despite explicit orders to the contrary from Athens. The national government at this time was led by Alexander Koryzes, who had become premier when Metaxas died on January 29, 1941, during the Italian War. Koryzes now committed suicide on April 18, goaded to the act by the disasters at the front as well as by the discovery of treason within his own cabinet. He was succeeded by Em m anuel Tsouderos, who gave orders that resistance be continued. Tsolakoglou and his fellow officers again disregarded instructions and on April 20 concluded an armistice with the Germans. Tsolakoglou later was rewarded by being made the first quisling prem ier of Greece. Foreign observers have testified to the crippling effect of this vacil lation and treason in high places. The London Times correspondent reported at the time:
The masses of the nation were always united and had no thought but of victory, cost what it might. When Germ any attacked them they did not falterthey could “take” it. N ot so their G overnm ent, whose conduct of the w ar becam e definitely vacillating. There were several quislings in the Cabinet, and many pro vincial governors and senior officers and officials were pro-G erm an. Defeatist tendencies became only too apparent in the administration, but the Greek people rem ained lion hearted until the end.32


Diplomatic Developments: 1918-1941 759
Likewise, Field M arshal Lord Wilson, the British com m ander in chief in the M iddle East, wrote some years later:
Towards the Germans I sensed the feeling to be lukewarm. Under the M etaxas dictatorship certain Nazi ideas had been adopted. . . . Our position in G reece in 1941 was really a paradox in that in our struggle against totalitarianism we should be supporting one Fascist governm ent against another. It is to this that most of the subsequent troubles of the G reek G overnm ent can be traceable as it started the war, to use a m ilitary cliché, “on the wrong foot.” 33
Tsolakoglou’s surrender did not end the fighting in Greece. AngloGreece forces were still in the field in the northeast. But their efforts to stem the G erm an tide were of no avail. The Greek units in the M etaxas Lines were cut off and isolated beyond hope of re-establishing contact. The British and Greek divisions along the Aliakmon Line were also outflanked but at least were able to retreat southw ard. First they fell back upon a Mt. Olympus Line. When they were not able to hold out there, on April 20 they retreated further south to a Thermopylae Line. Next day G eneral Wavell and King George agreed that further resistance was futile and that evacuation should be started. Evacuation proved to be difficult because in Greece the British lacked the air cover they had enjoyed at Dunkirk. Detachments of Anzac troops held a thirty-mile line from Thermopylae to the Gulf of Corinth against six enemy divisions while their com rades retreated southward. The chief port of Piraeus had been rendered unusable by repeated bombings; hence the British troops crossed the Corinth Canal and reached the ports along the southern tip of Greece. A lucky series of moonless nights (April 2 4 -3 1 , 1941) aided the evacuation operations. In all a little over 50,000 men were taken out safely, representing about 80 per cent of the forces origi nally sent into Greece. The Germ ans did not stop in Greece. Less than a m onth later they launched their spectacular air-borne invasion of Crete and captured the island in a fortnight of furious fighting. British units had been located in Crete for several months but had not anticipated an air attack because Greece was 180 miles to the north. Their defense arrangements were designed only to secure Suda Bay as a refueling base for the British navy. Following the evacuation -o f Greece, 27,000 Im perial troops were landed in Crete, but most of their antiaircraft artillery had been lost. H urricane fighters in A frica, 350 miles to the south, were too far away to give support. The first G erm an parachutists landed in Crete on M ay 20. Their losses were very heavy during the early days but nothing could stop the steady stream of glider trains and troop-carrier planes once airfields had been sejzed for their landing. The British navy retained control of the sea and prevented Germ an convoys from reaching the island, though in doing so it suffered heavily from Luftwaffe attacks. The G erm ans were not stopped by


760 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
the failure of their sea-borne reinforcements to reach the island. They con tinued to pour in troops by air and by May 25 were able to capture the strategic airfield commanding Suda Bay. British garrisons at other airfields stood their ground but were isolated from each other as Germ an parachutists cut their communications along the northern coastal road. As more Germ an reinforcements arrived the pockets of resistance were overcome one by one, and by June 2 organized resistance ceased. The evacuation of Crete proved more difficult than those of Dunkirk and Greece. The survivors climbed over the m ountain ranges of the interior to the southern coast. By day they hid in caves until the night when they were able to board destroyers which carried them to Alexandria under a rain of enemy bombs. A total of 16,500 men were brought safely back to Egypt but 13,000 were lost in Crete in addition to 2,000 during the evacuation. H itler now had a golden opportunity in the M editerranean which he might have exploited with every chance of success and with the prospect of overrunning the entire M iddle East. In addition to the trium ph in the Balkans his armies had won an equally impressive victory in N orth Africa under the able and energetic General Erwin Rommel. Wavell had gained the initial success in N orth Africa when, between December, 1940, and February, 1941, he pushed the Italians back from the Egyptian frontier to Tripolitania. Im mediately thereafter the British forces were weakened by the withdrawals for the Greek campaign. At the same time the Germans rushed reinforcements to N orth A frica to bolster their Italian allies. British intelligence underesti mated the strength of these reinforcements, so that when Rommel attacked on M arch 31, 1941, he was able to sweep all before him. In less than a month he captured Benghazi, Bardia, and all of Cyrenaica. The victories in the Balkans and in N orth Africa presented Hitler with the opportunity to execute a gigantic pincer operation upon the Suez through Libya and Egypt on the one side and Turkey and Syria on the other. But the Fuehrer allowed this opportunity to pass because, as a Germ an dip lomat observed, Hitler was moving “along a mental one-way street against R ussia.” 34 Instead of exploiting the prom ising situation in the M iddle E ast, he moved his divisions from the Balkans to the eastern front. So hurriedly did he make this transfer that he did not allow his soldiers enough time to do a thorough job of “mopping up” in Yugoslavia— an oversight for which he was to pay dearly later. W hen the G erm an Panzer divisions finally crashed across the Soviet frontier on June 22, 1941, the entire Balkan Peninsula was under Axis rule. The swastika fluttering over the Acropolis was the symbol of the “new order” that now prevailed. This “new order” was to last until the fall of 1944, a period of almost four years during which Greece and Yugoslavia suffered the trials and exactions of enemy occupation while the other Balkan countries continued to serve as Axis satellites.


3 8 . O c c u p a tio n , R e sista n ce, a n d L ib e ra tio n :
1 9 4 1 -1 9 4 5
n
U a lk a n f r o n t i e r s changed only slightly as a result of W orld W ar II. The m ap of the Balkan Peninsula after W orld W ar II closely resembled that following W orld W ar I. And yet the later war had such a trem endous im pact upon all the Balkan countries that it represents a m ajor turning point in the history of the entire peninsula. Its influence, how ever, was exerted on the structure of domestic institutions rather than upon the configuration of national frontiers. The great afterm ath of World W ar II was social revolution in contrast to the national revolution that characterized the earlier conflict.
The origins of the social revolution that accompanied W orld W ar II are manifold. One was the shattering cflcct of the Axis occupation which dis credited the old regim es in the satellite countries (R um ania and Bulgaria) and completely destroyed those of the occupied countries (Yugoslavia, Greece, and A lbania). A nother was those resistance movements which flared up under pre dom inant Com m unist leadership in the occupied countries and which reached such proportions and com m anded such fierce loyalties that they soon over shadowed the governments-in-exile led by the prew ar politicians. A final factor was the massive intrusion of the Red Army which dealt the final blow to hopes for the restoration of prew ar institutions and regimes. Only in Greece was British influence strong enough to check this formidable combi nation of revolutionary forces. In the rest of the peninsula the national re gimes that had been set up only a generation earlier were replaced by radically new creations.
In this chapter we shall consider the nature and influence of the first two of these revolutionary forces— the occupation and the resistance move ments— leaving to the following chapter the strife between Russia and the W est and the pcacc settlem ent that finally ensued therefrom .
761


762 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
PA TTER N O F O CC U PA TIO N AND RESISTA NCE
One significant feature of Axis rule over the Balkans was the sub stantial difference between the position of the satellite countries, Rumania and Bulgaria, and that of the occupied countries, Yugoslavia, Greece, and A lbania. It is true that the satellites were ruthlessly exploited for both hum an and material resources. Nevertheless, they did have their own governments and they did succeed in escaping the worst consequences of foreign dom ina tion. In Rumania, for example, M arshal Antonescu permitted the Peasant leader, Iuliu M aniu, to express his opposition to governmental policy through out the war period. King Boris in Bulgaria allowed a similar latitude to the heads of the moderate opposition groups, and, more important, he refused to involve his country in the war against Russia despite heavy pressure from Berlin. The situation was quite different in the occupied countries, where the Axis authorities were free to do as they wished with no one to say them nay. They set up puppet regimes to camouflage their rule, but these proved to be of little significance. They were known to be the creations of the foreign masters, so they comm anded little respect or support. By contrast, both Boris and Antonescu had considerable popular backing, at least until the fortunes of the Axis began to take the downgrade. A nother characteristic of the war years was the great difference am ong the Balkan peoples in the degree of their resistance to foreign rule. For various reasons the satellite nations offered the least resistance. They had escaped the excesses of full occupation and thus were not goaded to resistance by sheer despair as was the case with the Greeks and the Yugo slavs. Also, many nationalistically m inded citizens in the satellites swung over to the Axis camp because of the extensive territories that their countries were allow ed to acquire during the early days of the w ar. It is true th at a certain am ount of resistance was to be found in the satellites, but it was mostly of a nonviolent and rather ineffective variety em anating from Anglophile court circles and from certain political parties that were sufficiently m oderate to be tolerated in parliament. Open arm ed resistance was rare in R um ania and, if not so rare, still far from common, in Bulgaria. The situation prevailing in the occupied states was altogether differ ent. The governments of these countries were obviously of the quisling variety and were thoroughly disliked by the mass of the people. Resistance under these circumstances was a natural and patriotic m anifestation of defiance against the foreign rulers and their hirelings. Resistance was also stimulated by the rigors and excesses of the enemy occupation and by the loss of ex tensive national territories. The latter factor was especially im portant in Greece and Yugoslavia because of the wholesale mutilation of those coun tries. These various considerations explain why resistance was more extensive and m ore violent in the occupied portions of the peninsula. On the other hand, it should be noted th at throughout the B alkans, and, indeed, in the


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 763
whole of Europe, resistance was a discordant movement that was seriously weakened by deep-rooted dissension. The dissension arose basically because some wished to resist in order to expel the enemy and restore the prewar status quo, and others in order to expel the enemy and create a new postwar society. This division represented essentially a continuation of prewar political struggles. Those who had sup ported the prewar dynasties and regimes wished to restore them after the occupation, while those who had opposed them now seized the opportunity to work enthusiastically for a new postwar society. This division naturally had an economic basis. In general, the “haves” wanted resistance and the old status quo while the “have-nots” wanted resistance and social revolution. There were, of course, certain exceptions to this generalization, particularly among the younger generation. A good many sons and daughters of the “haves” were alienated by what they considered to be the injustices of their society and devoted themselves to the cause of revolution and social reor ganization. The “haves” and the “have-nots” differed not only as to postwar ob jectives but also as to the immediate strategy to be employed against the enemy. The “haves” tended to be more passive because they had more to lose and were more vulnerable to reprisals. Accordingly, they wished to limit resistance primarily to organization and preparation, and opposed largescale arm ed uprising until it could be coordinated with an Allied invasion from the outside. This, generally speaking, was the position taken by all the anti-C om m unist resistance leaders, including luliu M aniu in R um ania, N ikola Petkov in Bulgaria, D razha Mihailovich in Yugoslavia, John Zevgos in Greece, and Abas Kupi in Albania. The “have-nots,” by contrast, having nothing to lose and everything to gain, preached and practiced all-out resistance against the enemy. This gave them an im portant advantage over their more cautious and conservative rivals. Furtherm ore, they were led by the Communists, who were by far the m ost experienced and effective in underground work. A s a result, the radical, Communist-led resistance organizations soon attracted many more followers than the so-called “national” groups, which were discovering to their cost that it was much more difficult to m aintain guerilla armies by waiting than by fighting. This development serves to explain a phenomenon which otherwise seems inexplicable, namely, the collaboration of sincerely patriotic citizens with quislings and with occupationists. The more the “have-nots” assumed the leadership of the resistance struggles, the more likely it became that the post war regimes would be of a revolutionary and Com m unist-dom inated charac ter. This prospect drove many members of the “nationalist” organizations to choose collaboration as the lesser of two evils. This may appear extreme and unwarranted at first glance, but it becomes perfectly understandable upon further consideration. A “nationalist” about to embark upon the course of collaboration would have defended his conduct somewhat as follows:


764 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
T he liberation of our country will be determ ined by the strength of Brit ain, the Soviet Union and the United States. If they win, our country will be freed. If they lose, our country will rem ain under the G erm ans. T here is nothing we can do w hich will affect the outcom e appreciably one way or the other. So why shouldn’t we concentrate on our own problem — the m enace of the Com m unist-controlled resistance organization? We m ust fight it in order to prevent it from controlling our country after liberation. Our natural allies in this fight are the Germans and their quisling government. Why should we not join forces with them ? This will not delay or hasten liberation. R ather it will ensure a sensible, non-Communist, postwar regime.
This reasoning and this course of action were followed by certain “nationalist” leaders in each of the occupied Balkan countries. Typical was the case of Stylianos Gonatas, who before the war had been prominent in the Liberal party of Greece. During the occupation, however, he was so appalled by the threat of the Communist-controlled resistance that he supported the collaborationist Security Battalions. These were Greek troops that were or ganized by the quisling governm ent in A thens, arm ed by the G erm ans, and utilized to assist the Axis forces in their campaigns against the resistance bands. In a letter that G onatas sent to the prem ier of the government-in-exile in the spring of 1944 he adm itted that the Security Battalions were arm ed by the Germans. But then he asked:
W here else could they obtain arms if not from the Germans? . . . Most people do not regard the Germ ans as a threat to the future of Greece, especially after the w ar has been decided in favor of the Allies, but they do foresee a ter rible danger for the country in even a tem porary post-liberation C om m unist dom ination, and they prefer to ally themselves even with the devil in order to exclude the possibility of such dom ination. The arm s which these people ISecurity Battalionists] have received from the G erm ans will not be used against the Allies. Everyone may be absolutely certain that this will never happen.1
The “devil” that G onatas was ready to ally himself with was fully aw are of this unbridgeable rift in the ranks of the resistance. A G erm an re port analyzing the political situation in Greece between Septem ber I and O ctober 3, 1943, described the Communists as
the most dangerous because they represent the most active group, and because they have considerable forces available and are very well organized. The other political parties are slowly permeated with the thought that a further development of the Com m unist P arty signifies the greatest danger. In this connection it is significant to note that it is the so-called A nglophiles who are the m ost persistent in demanding that the Germans take action against the Communists.2
SATELLITE RUM ANIA
R um an ia’s course during W orld W ar II was as turbulent and erratic as it had ben during the first holocaust. In 1916 she had joined the Allies, then concluded a separate treaty with the Central Powers, and finally emerged


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 765
as the new G reater R um ania with rich provinces gained from both her enemies and her allies. Now, during W orld W ar II, R um ania was the first B alkan state to be partitioned, the first to throw in her lot with the Axis, the first in the magnitude of her war effort in behalf of the Axis cause, and finally the first to change sides and to throw open the door into the Balkans and Central Europe for the advancing Red Army. We saw in Chapter 37 that King Carol was forced to abdicate on Sep tem ber 6, 1940, after having yielded without a struggle Bessarabia and northern Bukovina to Russia, northern Transylvania to Hungary, and south ern D obruja to Bulgaria. C aro l’s young son, M ichael, succeeded to the throne, but the real ruler of the country now was Ion Antonescu, a talented and am bitious general of the regular army. Antonescu established a government that represented a compromise between the old ruling class and the revolutionary fascist Iron G uard.* His deputy prem ier was Horia Sima, the new leader of the G uard following the execution of Codreanu in N ovem ber, 1938. But the relations between the two elements in the government were never close. The G uardists did not trust A ntonescu, nor did he them. T he basic difficulty was that Antonescu wanted to establish an efficient, arm y-dom inated regime while the various elem ents in the unruly Iron G u ard w orked at cross-purposes for such objectives as social revolution, division of the land, elimination of the Jews, ending of corruption, and revenge on those who had massacred their leaders in 1938. T he G uardists broke loose repeatedly, inciting bloody Jewish pogroms, massacring political prisoners, and assassinating public personalities whom they disliked for one reason or another. In November, 1940, they m urdered two distinguished professors who had been prom inent in politics, the historian Nicholas lorga and the economist Virgil Madgearu. Antonescu was finally forced to take measures to restore order. The Guardists had counted on the support of the Germ an troops that had been arriving in the country since October, 1940. But this support did not m ate rialize despite the ideological affinity between the Guardists and the Nazis. T he explanation is to be found in the fact th at G erm any needed for her p u r poses a disciplined Rum anian army and a productive Rum anian economy. These were m ore likely to be attained by A ntonescu’s m ilitary dictatorship than by the Guardist terror squads. Hence the paradox of Nazi approval for the suppression of one of E u ro p e’s earliest fascist m ovem ents. Antonescu now established a dictatorship that left the army and the Germans in complete control of the country. The old bureaucracy continued to conduct the administration while military men moved into the cabinet posts. Antonescu enjoyed the confidence and trust of Hitler probably more than any other head of a satellite state. He was far from servile or obsequious to the German dictator. In fact, he was one of the few who dared to stand up to the F u eh rer’s harangues. This independence appears to have im pressed Hitler, as did also A ntonescu’s enthusiastic anti-Slavism. W hen H itler con
* F o r details on the Iron Gimrd, see C hapter 35.


766 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
fided his plans for invading Russia, A ntonescu exclaimed, “Of course I shall be with you from the very first day. . . .Y o u can always count upon Rum ania for fighting the Slavs.” 3 W hen the invasion began on June 22, 1941, A ntonescu prom ptly sent his troops marching into Bessarabia after issuing a bom bastic proclam ation. It is difficult to gauge R u m anian public reaction to this attack upon Russia because all political parties had been abolished on February 15, 1941. The only resolute opponents to the war were the Communists, but they were inconsequential because they were a mere handful and almost all imprisoned. T he form er political leaders naturally disliked A ntonescu’s dictatorship but they approved of the intervention because it offered an opportunity to regain B essarabia and north ern Bukovina. Some R um anians also hoped that if they fought loyally beside the Germans they might be rewarded with the return of northern Transylvania from Hungary. These considerations presumably explain why the Liberal party leader, Constantin Bratianu, and the Peasant party leader, Iuliu M aniu, both publicly supported the intervention against Russia. The thinking of the peasant masses cannot be surmised but there is little doubt th at the w ar received substantial support from the articulate elements of the population. R u m an ia’s w ar effort was considerable, both in the econom ic and military realms. She exported to G erm any invaluable oil supplies, large quan tities of grains and other foodstuffs, and the output of her sizable munitions industry. She also sent about thirty divisions to the front in 1941. A t first these troops met with little resistance, overrunning Bessarabia easily and cap turing the large port of Odessa. In the enthusiasm of the moment A ntonescu prom oted himself to the rank of marshal and ordered Odessa to be renamed Antonescu! A t this point began a new and sadder phase of the war. The con quest of the Crimea and the storming of the great Sebastopol fortress were largely the work of the Rum anians. But they paid for these victories with ex tremely heavy casualties. In the sum m er of 1942 some fifteen Rumanian divisions participated in the offensive toward Stalingrad. The catastrophic defeat that ensued was as much a Rum anian disaster as it was German. Meanwhile disaffection was spreading within Rumania. One reason was the appalling bloodletting and the growing realization that it was destined to be in vain. A nother was the unceasing drain of the country’s w ealth as the G erm ans continued to take out foodstuffs, oil, and m unitions. Also, some of the opposition leaders, including Maniu and Bratianu, had turned against the w ar as soon as it was extended beyond B essarabia into R ussian territory. These men had naively assumed that it would be possible to wage only a “little w ar” to regain the lost provinces and then to retire from the scene. W hen A ntonescu persisted in rem aining by H itler’s side they m ade repeated but futile protests to Antonescu, demanding that R um ania should regain Transylvania from Hungary rather than squander her strength on the Russian steppes:


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 767
T he country is suffering a long and continuous haem orrhage. . . . H ave you any docum ent in writing such as Ion Bratianu took care to obtain before entering the [first] W orld W ar beside F rance, England, and Russia, w hich assures us the return of lost Transylvania? . . . Continuation of the war in present con ditions cannot lead to the reintegration of the country, but only to the complete extinction of the country, exposed to the H ungarian peril. In consequence, while there is still time, G erm any m ust be inform ed that you have already done every thing which Rum ania can do, without exposing herself to grave disasters; that Rum ania has made sacrifices which H ungary and Bulgaria have not made. T herefore w ithdraw troops from Russia! . . ,4
Despite this disaffection no mass resistance movement developed in R um ania as in Yugoslavia, Greece, and Albania. The Rum anian Communists organized a Patriotic Front in the summer of 1943, but it lacked the popular appeal of similar Communist-led organizations in other Balkan countries. O ne reason was M an iu ’s refusal to participate because of conflict over the question of Bessarabia. M aniu insisted that Rum ania should keep the “lib erated” province, while the Communists, as might be expected, dem anded th at it be “restored” to the Soviet U nion. M aniu’s stand does not by itself explajn the weakness of the Patriotic Front. M achek in Croatia also refused to join the Partisans, but it did not prevent the latter from becoming the major force in their country. It is necessary to take into account, therefore, other im portant factors that were operating in Rumania. One was the status of Rumania as a satellite country. This confronted would-be resistance leaders with the prospect of com bating a Rum anian government and a R um anian arm y as well as G erm an forces. Also, many Rum anians were strongly anti-Com m unist and anti-Russian because for them Russia was the country that coveted Bessarabia, whereas for the Yugoslavs Russia was the great Slav country that would bring liberation. Finally, the Rum anian Communists were generally regarded as un-Rum anian and anti national, not only because they were mostly Jews but also because they had supported the Soviet seizure of the Rum anian provinces in 1940 and because they now favored the “restoration” of those provinces to the Soviet Union. These various factors serve to explain the lack of popular support for R um ania’s P atriotic F ro n t. T he few guerrilla bands th a t did operate in scat- tered localities were of negligible significance. Even Soviet accounts con cede that “the struggle against Antonescu did not attain the stage of a mass national uprising.” 5 Likewise, an Am erican who traveled through Rumania in 1944 at the time of liberation reported that “there was a good deal of vague talk about their deeds of derring-do, but I could never obtain any specific exam ples.” 6 T he significance of this situation is th at it allowed the course of events to be decided from above and from the outside rather than from below. When the Red Army neared the D anube in the fall of 1944 many dram atic repercussions ensued in Rumania. But the initiative came not from mass organizations within the country but rather from the court in Bucharest


768 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
and from the Allied Powers that began to compete for the waning predom i nance of Germany.
SATELLITE BULGARIA
Bulgaria during W orld W ar II played a comfortably modest role, being spared the exhausting resistance struggles of her occupied neighbors and the equally exhausting war effort of Rumania. The fact that Bulgaria did not have a common frontier with either Germ any or the Soviet Union helped her to remain aloof from the great campaigns that convulsed the Con tinent. Also, the traditional Russophile sentiment in Bulgaria was so strong that no serious effort was made to align the country with Germany against the Soviet Union. Furtherm ore, Boris, who was neither intimidated nor in toxicated by H itler, exploited these advantages to the full in order to lim it as far as possible his commitments to the Axis. We saw in C hapter 37 that Boris had found it necessary to join the Axis on M arch 1, 1941. G erm an troops then poured into the country and used it as a base for their attack upon Yugoslavia and Greece on April 6. The role of the Bulgarian army in these operations was unim portant. With the subjugation of the peninsula, Bulgaria was allowed to take from Yugo slavia her M acedonian lands and from Greece the eastern part of Macedonia and the province of W estern Thrace. Bulgarian troops also occupied a part of Serbia, where they perform ed garrison duties for the Axis overlords. In the later stages of the war, when Germ an troops were needed on other fronts, the Bulgarians were forced to extend their garrison commitments to additional parts of Greek M acedonia and Serbia. The Bulgarian government made every effort to absorb the Greek and Yugoslav territory it had annexed. In Yugoslav M acedonia it opened some eight hundred schools and sent teachcrs and priests to Bulgarize the inhabitants. The city of Skoplje was endowed with a national theater, a li brary, a museum, and an institution of higher learning nam ed King Boris University. The general policy of the Bulgarian occupation authorities was to win over the inhabitants of the form er Yugoslav lands with generous treat ment. This apparently proved unsuccessful because, by the end of 1943, M acedonian partisans under T ito ’s leadership were offering arm ed resistance. The Bulgarian occupation forces retaliated with harsh measures which served only to fan the flames of revolt.
Bulgarian policy from the outset was much more ruthless in the for m er Greek lands. Since there were few Slavs in these regions, the Bulgarians here sought not to convert the local population but to eliminate it in one way or another and to replace it with Bulgarian colonists. Greek citizens were conscripted, deported, deprived of their property, and in various other ways hounded until they sought refuge in flight. These measures explain why p op ular feeling in Greece during the occupation was m uch m ore bitter against, the Bulgarians than against the Germans or the Italians. The early years of the w ar were comparatively uneventful for Bui


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 769
garia. The only significant development in 1942 was the organization of the Fatherland Front in the middle of the year. The Communist leader, Georgi Dimitrov, who had gained international fame by defying the Nazis during the Reichstag fire trial, had urged the establishm ent of a “F ro n t” organization during his broadcasts from Moscow, where he spent the war years. This Com m unist strategy proved more successful in Bulgaria than in Rum ania, where the Patriotic Front had attracted little support. One reason was that the Communist party of Bulgaria had always been much stronger and better organized than its counterpart in R um ania. Also, the Bulgarian Com m unists did not have to face the opprobrium of favoring the cession of national terri tory as did the Rum anian Com m unists in the case of Bessarabia and Bukovina. These factors explain why the Communists were able to organize the Fatherland Front, together with the Social Democrats, the left-wing Agrarians led by Nikola Petkov, and the Zveno group led by Kimon Georgiev. The latter group consisted of intellectuals and military men who were associated with the review Zveno and who had close relations with the army. The Fatherland Front adopted a twelve-point program including the breaking of relations between Bulgaria and the Axis, the re-establishm ent of civil lib erties, and the suppression of fascist organizations. It should be noted that some opposition groups existed outside the Fatherland Front, the most prom i nent being the Democratic party led by Nikola M ushanov and the right-wing Agrarians led by Dimiter Gichev. These parties were overshadowed, how ever, by the Fatherland Front, which was more active and which was strongly supported in Soviet radio broadcasts. By the summer of 1943 guerrilla or Partisan bands began to offer arm ed resistance in the mountainous areas. The bands failed to grow to the proportions of a mass national resistance movement comparable to those that developed in the occupied Balkan countries. The main reason was that m ost Bulgarians suffered very little from the war and hence saw no point in •assuming the great risks of resistance. In fact, the peasants, who constituted the majority of the population, prospered during the war because they were paid high prices as an incentive to increase production. In one village near Sofia it was found that the num ber of radios had risen from three or four in 1937 to over one hundred by the end of the war. Furtherm ore, only a few thousand G erm an troops were stationed in the country and they behaved - most correctly. Under these circumstances not many young men felt impelled to join the Partisans in the mountains. Those that did found themselves fight ing not the Germans but the Bulgarian army and gendarmerie, which was a m uch less popular thing to do. The Bulgarian forces were extremely efficient and ruthless, so that the Partisans were reduced to hit-and-run tactics. They usually raided a village, shot the mayor, the policeman, and other function aries if they were particularly obnoxious, destroyed the village land register and other records, looted the village dairy, made a few propaganda speeches to the villagers, and then (led to the safety of the nearby m ountains. O n A ugust 28, 1943* King Boris suddenly died in Sofia under cir


770 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
cumstances that remain a mystery to this day. It was widely assumed at the time that the Germans were responsible for his death because only three days earlier Boris had had a particular stormy session with Hitler. On the other hand, Germ an records made available after the war do not substantiate this assumption. Rather, they show that the Germans themselves tried to investi gate the death of the Bulgarian king. In any case the removal of Boris from the scene aided the Partisan cause. Boris was succeeded by his son, Simeon, who was only six years old, so the country was ruled by a regency headed by B oris’s brother, Prince Cyril. T he latter was strongly pro-G erm an, with the result that the subservience of Sofia to Berlin now becam e much m ore m arked than in the past. The new political course aroused considerable opposition and thus created an atmosphere that was more favorable for Partisan activity. Allied air raids, which began to punish Sofia in 1943, also aided the Partisan cause. In October, 1943, the Central Committee of the Fatherland Front began to circulate news bulletins. About the same time a trickle of British arms began to reach the Bulgarian bands. They were dropped by parachute to the British liaison officers within Serbia and then transferred to the Bulgarian Partisans. In a few cases the British officers rem ained with the Bulgarians and partici pated in their operations. The bands were nominally under the orders of the F ath erlan d Fro n t but in practice they were dom inated by the Com m unists. The leaders of the bands were usually Communists and the entire resistance struggle depended largely on the Com m unist underground apparatus for its functioning. D uring 1944 the position of the Sofia governm ent became increas ingly difficult as the R ed Arm y neared the Balkans and as the Anglo-Am erican air raids became more severe. In May, 1944, a new government was formed under a form er Agrarian, Ivan Bagrianov. It was markedly less sub servient to the Axis than its predecessor. It released fifteen thousand political prisoners, set free relatives of Partisans who had been held as hostages, and relaxed the anti-Jewish measures. O n August 22 the foreign minister declared that he would seek peace with the W estern powers and that he would evac uate Serbian and Greek territory occupied by Bulgarian troops, but he added that M acedonia and Thrace were “Bulgarian by right.” The following day M arshal A ntonescu was overthrown in Bucharest. This changed the situation in the Balkans overnight and made inconsequential the Bulgarian reservations concerning M acedonia and Thrace. The all-impor tant fact now was that the advancing Red Army had an open path into the Balkan Peninsula. This presented the Fatherland Front and the Communistled Partisan bands with an opportunity hitherto denied to them. The approach of the Red Army also suddenly brought to the fore the hitherto muted issue of postwar power relationships in the Balkans. Was the waning hegemony of Germ any to be replaced by that of the Soviet Union or of the W estern powers?


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 111
OCCUPIED YUGOSLAVIA
Partition. The Axis Powers, having overrun Yugoslavia in April, 1941, set about dismembering the state. Slovenia was divided into two parts, the northern two thirds going to Germany and the southern third to Italy. The Germans followed a policy of denationalization in their zone. They de ported Slovene intellectuals and professionals and brought in G erm an settlers from Bessarabia, Bosnia, and Austria. Also, they proscribed the Slovene language in the schools and the adm inistration, and called up the young men to serve in the G erm an army. Because the Italians were not so severe in their zone, a considerable num ber of Slovenes fled southw ard for security. The Voivodina was also divided by the Axis, the western part going to Hungary and the eastern (the B anat) being placed under a special admin istration dom inated by the local G erm an minority. M acedonia, as we saw earlier in this chapter, was taken over by the Bulgarians, who proceeded to apply a Bulgarization program. W estern M acedonia and the province of Kosovo in southw estern Serbia w ent to Italian A lbania, their populations being in fact largely A lbanian. M ontenegro was taken over by the Italians, who attem pted to set up an autonomous adm inistration. The Italians also annexed large parts of Bosnia, Herzegovina, and Dalm atia which, together with Albania, gave them full control of the Adriatic Sea. There remained of the old Yugoslavia only two rum p states with puppet status— Serbia and Croatia. Ante Pavelich, the leader of the Ustashi, the terrorist organization, was installed as the Fuehrer, or Poglavnik, of Croatia. The frontiers of this new “independent” state were extended to the east to include most of Bosnia-Herzegovina at the expense of the Serbs. But at the same time Croatia was deprived of the larger part of Dalmatia, which was taken by Italy. In May, 1941, Croatia was proclaimed an independent kingdom and the throne was offered to the Duke of Spoleto, a member of the Italian house of Savoy. The duke accepted the offer, but he found the pleasures of Rome too attractive to renounce, so he never assumed his royal office. “The K ing,” wrote the Italian foreign minister, Count Ciano, in his diary on November 17, 1941, “wants the Duke of Spoleto to leave Rome. . . . In fact, the behavior of this young m an is quite absurd. He is living with a well-known society girl and takes her about in his private car. He frequents restaurants and bars and gets tight. . . . H e is a fine m an to be a King!” 7 C roatia thus rem ained a kingdom w ithout a king. T hroughout its brief exist ence it was an “independent” state with no real independence. Its most stra tegic territories were occupied by Axis forces and the rem ainder soon fell to Chetnik and Partisan units. Serbia was even more closely controlled than Croatia. It'w as subject to the authority of the local G erm an com m ander and its frontiers were re duced to those that had prevailed before the Balkan W ars. When resistance began to manifest itself, the Germ ans attem pted to enlist some popular sup port for them selves hy persuading G eneral Milan Nedich to form a “G overn


772 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
ment of National Salvation.” Nedich, who had been chief of staff of the pre war Yugoslav arm y, now played a role akin to that of Petain in France. He did not have ideological ties to the Axis as did Pavelich in Croatia. Rather, he considered himself the tem porary representative of the exiled King Peter until the war was over. The Germans allowed him to form a small military force called the Serbian State Guard. They were careful, however, to retain full control over the country because of its im portance in Balkan strategy. They m aintained garrisons in the cities and the communications routes and they kept close watch over the actions of the Nedich regime. N ot only was Yugoslavia partitioned but its peoples were persecuted and their traditional feuds were purposefully exacerbated to the point of m ass fratricidal butchery. Yugoslav A lbanians, organized in their fascist-led Skanderbeg Division, conducted an indiscriminate massacre of Serbians. Like wise, the H ungarians and the G erm ans of the Voivodina killed thousands of Serbs in that area. The Bulgars in M acedonia did not shed so much blood, but they did use every pressure to convince or compel the local inhabitants to regard themselves as Bulgarians. The worst situation prevailed in Croatia, where the slogan of the Pavelich regime was “Za dom sprem ni” or “ Ready for the F atherland.” By this was m eant that there was no room for Serbians in the new C roatian state. The Ustashi accordingly set out to exterm inate one portion of the Serbian population and to force the rem ainder to become Croatians. There followed a series of St. B artholom ew ’s N ights against the O rthodox Serbians and also against the Jews. Some members of the Croatian Catholic hierarchy endorsed the butchery and participated in the forcible conversion of Serbians to C athol icism. The Moslems joined in the massacres, so that Yugoslavia was rent by a virtual religious war with Catholics and Moslems allied against the O rthodox and the Jews. In 1942 Pavelich boasted that “G reat deeds were done by G er mans and Croats together. We can proudly say that we succeeded in breaking the Serb nation, which, after the English, is the m ost thick-headed, the most stubborn and the most stupid.” 8 The Serbians, needless to say, retaliated wherever they could, and they exacted bloody vengeance, especially in BosniaHerzegovina and the neighboring Sanjak. Y ugoslavia’s future appeared hopeless indeed. N ot only was the country mutilated and the people driven to wholesale massacres, but the pre w ar leaders had failed in their responsibility to provide guidance. This was especially true of Vladimir M achek, whose Peasant party still commanded the support of most of the Croatian peasants. Y et M achek withdrew from politics after advising his followers to obey the regime of the Ustashi. Yugo slavia thus became a hell of blood and torm ent and destructive hatreds. O ut of this hell emerged the searing yet purifying fires of the resistance. First Resistance. During the first days of the occupation the Yugo slavs were in a state of shock and bewilderment. Their army had been de stroyed, their king had fled abroad, and their state had been torn to pieces brutally and, apparently, irrevocably. The occupation, however, proved to be


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 773
less solid than appeared on the surface. The Germans turned against Russia immediately after their Balkan campaign. They did not have time to disarm thoroughly the scattered Yugoslav army units. N or could they afford to leave strong garrisons behind them when they smashed across the Russian frontier on June 22, 1941. Thus it proved possible for a few bold leaders to begin the resistance struggle within a few weeks after the occupation. One of these resistance leaders was a regular arm y officer, Colonel D razha M ihailovich, who in the early sum m er m ade his way from H erze govina to central Serbia. His followers came to be known popularly as Chetniks, a Serbian term with revered historical associations. A Chetnik was lit erally a member of a Cheta or a military detachment that had fought against the Turks in the nineteenth century. T he first C hetnik bands were now o r ganized in Bosnia, w here the Serbians were forced to defend themselves against the murderous attacks of the Ustashi. A part from this primary aim of self-preservation the Chetniks generally tended to be strongly nationalistic, or, in other words, anti-C roatian and anti-Com m unist. U nder the stress of the national emergency, Chetnik bands were organized in traditional fashion by local leaders in various parts of the country. T he most disciplined groups were ■those under the direct supervision of M ihailovich in Serbia proper. O ther bands in M ontenegro, Bosnia, Herzegovina, and D alm atia operated virtually independently and had little in com m on with one another apart from a general ideological affinity. This loose organization and the lack of discipline were to be im portant factors in M ihailovich’s failure to build up an efficient army. The other resistance leader was the secretary-general of the Com m unist party, Josip Broz, usually known as Tito. A Croatian by birth and a machinist by trade, he had served in the A ustro-H ungarian army during W orld W ar I and had been taken prisoner by the Russians. During the Bol shevik Revolution he sided with the Communists and received a thorough training in C om m unist tactics. On his return to Yugoslavia he played a prom inent role in the Com m unist underground, eventually rising to head his party. He worked mostly from Zagreb, but with the establishment of the Ustashi regime in Croatia he transferred his headquarters to Belgrade early in May, 1941. His activity during the two m onths’ period between the occu pation of Yugoslavia and the invasion of Russia has remained a m atter of dispute to the present. His enemies accuse him of complete inactivity, while his lieutenant, the journalist V ladim ir Dedijer, claims in his diary to have received a party leaflet on A pril 12 calling “on all its best sons to defend their country against Hitler.” With the G erm an attack upon the Soviet Union, a wave of emotion engulfed the Yugoslavs, whether Communists or not. The intensity of feeling was com parable with that which had brought about the Belgrade coup three months earlier. With the brother Russians on their side, the Yugoslavs arose in July in a scries of unorganized revolts. T he Serbians were the most prom i nent in this spontaneous and incoherent m ovem ent. M any of them joined the


774 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Chetnik bands, but the Communists, with their superior organization, were also able to exploit the mass enthusiasm to strengthen their forces. The G erm ans, surprised by this spontaneous upheaval, were soon confined in Serbia to the Belgrade region and the M orava Valley. T ito now sought to apply the official C om intern policy of a People’s Front of all patriotic forces against the foreign invaders. Between September and November, 1941, he held several conversations with M ihailovich and reached vague agreements for common action. But instead of cooperating, the C hetnik and C om m unist P artisan bands were soon at each o th er’s throats. Their tragic feud was to be a m ajor factor determining the course of events in Yugoslavia until the trium ph of the Partisans and the establishment of the Communist Tito regime at the end of the war. Certain clear-cut issues explained the bitter struggle between the two cam ps. O ne was their basic incom patibility in political outlook. M ihailovich, the royalist army officer, regarded the Communists as lawless and atheistic criminals. The Communists, in turn, looked upon Mihailovich as the repre sentative of the reactionary prewar regime they had fought for years. Thus the interw ar struggle between the m onarchist government and its opponents was now continued by the Chetniks and the Partisans. And the stake at issue was the nature of the postwar regime— whether it should be the monarchy restored or a radical new government of Communist complexion. A nother fundamental difference between the Chetniks and the Parti sans concerned the strategy to be employed against the Axis. M ihailovich, an orthodox military man, opposed large-scale armed resistance because the enemy was overwhelmingly strong and the end result could only be merci less reprisals upon the defenseless civilian population. He believed that the bands should lie low and husband their resources until a propitious m om ent arrived, such as an Allied invasion from the outside. By contrast, the Parti sans preached, and practiced, uncompromising and continual resistance. Their slogan was, “A ttack the enemy wherever and however you can.” The Ger mans retaliated with savage reprisals— the burning of villages and the shoot ing of ten, fifty, and even a hundred inhabitants for every G erm an casualty. Mihailovich was appalled by the bloodshed, especially because the Serbians usually were the victims. By November, 1941, the Chetniks and the Partisans were irrecon cilable enemies and openly at war with each other. A t the same time the Axis forces counterattacked on a large scale, using arm or and aircraft. By the end of the year both the Chetnik and Partisan bands had been scattered. The Germans then massacred thousands of Serbians and imprisoned or deported to forced labor other thousands. In the industrial town of Kragujevac they shot eight thousand people, including several hundred school children. This bloodshed appeared to vindicate M ihailovich, who now lapsed into com para tive inactivity in accordance with his strategy. The Partisans continued their relentless resistance, though they withdrew from the Serbian plains to the protecting mountains of Montenegro, Bosnia, and Herzegovina. There they


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 775
established a firm base for their resistance movement, which was to make them the masters of Yugoslavia within three years. Tito’s Partisans. T he Partisans gained tw o im portant advantages when they moved their base of operations to the central m ountain massif of Bosnia, Herzegovina, and M ontenegro. One was the ruggedness of the terrain, which gave them protection against the enemy and an opportunity to employ their hit-and-run tactics. A nother was the poverty of this region, which made it unattractive to the enemy and unworthy of his attention. The Germ ans were interested primarily in three sections of Yugoslavia: the D alm atian coast as a possible objective for an Allied landing; the northern D anubian plains with their cities and food surplus; and the M orava-V ardar Valleys as the main route from the Balkans to Central Europe. Between these three regions lay the mountain strongholds of the Partisans. The Partisans gradually mastered the art of guerrilla warfare through the bloody process of trial and error. Beginning with small arms and limited ammunition, they learned that positional warfare was impossible against a well-trained and well-armed enemy supported by arm or, artillery, and air craft. The only alternative was to hit and run— to strike at the enemy where he was the most vulnerable and then to escape to the mountains or woods. All gains had to be regarded as tem porary. Villages and small towns cap tured by sudden attacks were abandoned when the enemy counterattacked in force. Villages and towns changed hands repeatedly, each time becoming more battered and losing more inhabitants. The Axis authorities retaliated with savage reprisals against the pop ulace for supporting the Partisans. These tactics boomeranged, engendering such hatred and bitterness that multitudes flocked into the ranks of the resist ance. Also, many were reduced to the position where they literally had noth ing to lose but their lives by taking up arms. With their houses burned, their orchards destroyed, and their animals and crops confiscated, they were driven •to adopt the Partisan thesis that only implacable resistance held hope of in dividual and national survival. This bloodshed and devastation, together with the national and reli gious hatreds depicted above, constitute the background out of which emerged the extraordinarily effective resistance movement led by Tito and his Com mu nists. T he success of the C om m unists becom es m ore impressive if it is re called that at the time of the Axis invasion their party had 11,879 full mem bers and 14,873 Communist Youth members— a total of less than 27,000. One reason why this handful of Communists was able to dominate the re sistance movement was their organization and discipline. Their party had been badly split during much of the interw ar period, but Tito had reorganized and tightened it when he becam e secretary-general in 1937. The new men that he appointed to positions of responsibility now proved their worth in the resistance struggle. Brigadier Fitzroy Maclean, the head of the British Mission to T ito ’s headquarters, was greatly im pressed by the spirit and dis cipline of the Partisans:


776 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Living as we did among the Partisans, we came to know them well, from T ito and the other leaders to the dozen or so rank and file who acted as our bodyguard and provided for our daily needs. All had one thing in com m on: an intense pride in their M ovem ent and in its achievements. F or them the outside world did not seem of immediate interest or importance. W hat m attered was their W ar of National Liberation, their struggle against the invader, their victories, their sacrifices. . . . W ith this pride w ent a spirit of dedication, hard not to adm ire. T he life of every one of them was ruled by rigid self-discipline, complete austerity; no drinking, no looting, no love-making. It was as though each one of them were bound by a vow, a vow part ideological and part m ilitary, for, in the conditions under which they were fighting, any relaxation of discipline would have been disastrous. . . .”
A nother factor explaining the effectiveness of the Communists was their strategy in organizing a national rather than a Com m unist resistance movement. They invited to the Partisan ranks all who were willing to fight against the enemy. Their slogan was “ Death to Fascism, Freedom to the People”— sentiments to which no patriotic Yugoslav could take exception. In this manner the Communists were able to attract to their side many who were nationalists rather than Communists. At the same time the Communists did not lose sight of their ultimate revolutionary goal. A united national effort was needed against the foreign occupationists, but after that would come the long-awaited social revolution. The Com m unists realized full well that a re sistance struggle, especially if C om m unist-led, would in itself clear the way for postwar social change. M aclean was told this by Tito himself when the two men first met in September, 1943:
We talked of politics in general. I said that I was a Conservative; he, that he was a Communist. We discussed the theory and practice of modern Com m u nism. His them e in its broad lines Was that the end justified the means. H e de veloped it with great frankness. I asked him whether it was his ultimate aim to establish a Com m unist State in Jugoslavia. H e said that it was, but that it might have to be a gradual process. For the moment, for instance, the Movement was based politically on a “popular front” and not on a strictly one-party system. At the same time, the occupation and the war were rapidly undermining the foun dations of the old political and economic institutions, so that, when the dust cleared away very little would be left, and the way would be clear for a new sys tem. In a sense the revolution was already in progress.10
A third factor that helped the Communists to rise to the top was their adoption of the principle of self-determ ination for all nationalities. W hen the war began, the Communists were by no means prepared to deal with the na tionality problem. The Comintern during the interwar years had insisted on the principle of self-determination, including the right of separation. This form ula involved or implied the disintegration of Yugoslavia, or, at the very least, the separation of Yugoslav M acedonia and its inclusion in an independ ent M acedonian state. This was in line with Soviet policy which sought dur


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 111
ing those years to revise the Versailles settlement. It was unacceptable, how ever, to the Yugoslav Communists, who split into “right” and “left” wings on this issue. Thus the party had not defined its position on the nationality prob lem when the war began. The occupation, and the subsequent outburst of national and reli gious hatred deliberately fanned by the enemy, compelled the Communists to reconsider the entire nationality problem . T he outcom e was T ito ’s article, “T he N ational Problem in the Light of the N ational L iberation W ar,” first published in Septem ber, 1942, and later frequently reprinted in several la n guages. Tito stated that the liberation war and the national question were “ inseparably joined” and that the several Yugoslav nations had the right of self-determination, even to the point of separation. Although this article was only a statem ent of general principles, it attracted many to the Partisan camp. All the other Yugoslav parties were organized in practice, if not in theory, on exclusive national or religious lines. Only the Partisans now had an all-Yugo slav organization and program based on national toleration. Thus many Yugoslavs accepted Com m unist leadership as the only alternative to the de struction of the Yugoslav state and the mutual exterm ination of the Yugoslav nationalities. The fourth and final factor explaining Com m unist success was their adoption of local National Liberation Committees as natural and extremely effective instruments for expansion and adm inistration. The precise nature of the Partisan adm inistrative system will be analyzed later. Suffice it to note here that the first N ational Liberation Committees were organized sponta neously in Serbia by the peasants during their uprising in the sum m er of 1941. Before the end of the year they were wiped out by the Germans, but the Communists recognized the potentiality of such popularly elected com mittees and initiated them wherever they went. The committees continued to function even in areas that the Partisans were forced to evacuate before enemy offensives. Thus a network of N ational Liberation Committees spread over most of the country, whether liberated or occupied, and formed the or ganizational basis for resistance and administration. In the same manner that the Russian Bolsheviks adopted the soviets that had been organized sponta neously by the workers during the 1905 revolution and utilized them to con duct the 1917 revolution, so the Yugoslav Communists adopted the National Liberation Committees that had also been organized spontaneously by the peasants, and utilized them as the basis for resistance and administration. The strength of the Partisans varied a good deal from region to region. F or reasons noted, above they were always strongest in the mountains of Bosnia, Herzegovina, and Montenegro. They were least influential in Ser bia and the Voivodina because of the flat terrain, the local Chetnik tradition, and the large G erm an and Hungarian forces assigned to control these strategic areas. Resistance was also difficult in Slovenia, for this region was physically separated from the Partisan strongholds and it was care fully watched by both the G erm ans and the Italians because of its strategic


778 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
location on the routes to the M editerranean. Nevertheless, a considerable Slovenian Partisan movement developed, especially in the Italian zone. In July, 1942, the Italians launched an offensive against the Slovene Partisans but without lasting results. Thereafter the Partisans grew steadily in strength under the leadership of Boris Kidrich and Edward Kardelj, who maintained a precarious liaison with T ito ’s headquarters. In M acedonia the local population at first welcomed the Bulgarian occupation forces. But before long Bulgarian rule had become as unpopular as the Serbian had been before the war. A curious contest now developed between the Yugoslav and Bulgarian Communist parties as to which one should lead the resistance struggle in M acedonia. The two parties betrayed a chauvinism regarding M acedonia not unlike that of their respective govern ments. In August, 1941, the Comintern decided in favor of the Yugoslav party, apparently because the Bulgarian comrades were considered too passive tow ard the Russo-Germ an struggle. Tito sent one of his trusted lieutenants, the M ontenegrin Svetozar Vukmanovich, to organize the M acedonian resistance. He won considerable support with the Partisan program of a federal Yugo slavia in which the “M acedonian nation” would enjoy full equality with other peoples. By the sum m er of 1943 Partisan bands were in the field and V uk manovich had established liaison with the Partisan bands in A lbania, Greece, and Bulgaria. In Croatia the Partisans met with more success than anywhere else outside the mountain areas. The Partisan principle of self-determination and federalism appeared to offer the only alternative to the Serbian hegemony of the past and the Serb-Croat massacres of the present. M ihailovich, with his G reat Serb ideology, was naturally repugnant to the Croatians. Even the venerable M achek, the head of the Croatian Peasant party, had remained passive and had withdrawn from politics. Pavelich, who had been installed by the Axis as the Poglavnik, or fuehrer, of Croatia, had been discredited by his failure to resist the Italian annexation of Dalmatia. Thus the younger generation in C roatia turned to T ito ’s Partisans in increasing num bers. Pavelich’s “ Independent C roatia” shrank steadily until it included only a few cities and railway lines. Partisan bands sometimes held the suburbs of Zagreb for days at a time. W hen Pavelich visited Hitler in April, 1943, the Germ an officials rem arked that a mayor had never been received by the head of a state with so much ceremony. The G erm ans knew that their Poglavnik con trolled little more than the city of Zagreb. M ihailovich’s Chetniks. W hile the Partisans had been organizing their resistance movement, the royal Yugoslav exile government had pro moted Mihailovich to the rank of general and appointed him in January, 1942, to the position of minister of war. These honors did not enable Mihail ovich to hold his own against the Partisans. N ot only did he fall far behind his Communist rivals, but he ended by collaborating with the enemy occupa tion forces. This does not mean that Mihailovich was a fascist-minded traitor like Pavelich. In fact, he had associated before the war with liberal, anti


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 779
G erm an political elem ents. It is said th at his prom otion in the m ilitary hier archy had been retarded because of his opposition to what he considered to be his governm ent’s pro-A xis foreign policy. T hus the explanation for M i hailovich’s course during the occupation period is not to be found in any ideological predilection for fascism. R ather, the explanation lies in his politi cal and military preconceptions which proved totally inadequate for dealing with the problems of occupied Yugoslavia and which led him almost inexora bly toward disaster. Mihailovich was above all else an ardent Serbian nationalist in his political outlook. H e believed th at one of the m ain reasons for Y ugoslavia’s military collapse had been the lifth-columnist activties of the Croatians, who had betrayed their country. He felt strongly that the Serbs should dominate the Yugoslavia of the future. M ore specifically, he wanted postwar Serbia to be greatly enlarged by the addition of Macedonia, M ontenegro, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and a large part of Croatia. This G reater Serbia would then be in a position to overshadow Croatia and Slovenia and thus control the Yugo slav state. It is scarcely necessary to add th at this Pan-Serbism had little chance of com peting successfully with T ito ’s, slogans for federalism and selfdeterm ination of peoples. M ihailovich was handicapped by his conservative social views as well as by his G reat Serbism. He wanted to restore the prewar social order and the Karageorgevich dynasty, to which he was devoted. He hated the Comm unist-dom inated Partisans because he feared, with justification, that their aim was to establish a Communist Yugoslavia and to abolish the dynasty. The fate of the dynasty was almost an obsession with M ihailovich. His loyalty to King Peter was probably as deep-rooted as his Serbian nationalism . H e was aware th at the king’s popularity was steadily declining during the occu pation years but this served only to intensify his devotion to the crown. This m arked quixotic streak in M ihailovich’s character further decreased his chances against the realistic Tito. Finally, M ihailovich was also ham pered by his cautious military strategy. He was appalled by the torrents of Serbian blood that had been shed in the two world wars. He feared that this decimation would weaken the position of the Serbs vis-à-vis the other Yugoslav peoples. He wished to stop the bloodletting, and for this reason he opposed indecisive and costly skirmishes with a superior enemy. Instead, he decided to remain quiet and husband his resources until the day the Allies landed in Yugoslavia. Then he would m uster five hundred thousand m en and drive the G erm ans out of (lie country in one great cam paign. This strategy proved to be im practical for two reasons. One was that the Allies wanted action against the enemy and distributed their arms on the basis of deeds accomplished. The other was that a guerrilla army could not be m aintained indefinitely while waiting for possi ble developments at an undefined future date. By their very nature guerrilla forces either grow by fighting and winning, or remain inactive and degenerate into dispirited and undisciplined bands.


780 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
M ihailovich eventually realized that his program and strategy were inadequate under prevailing conditions. In January, 1944, he called the Con gress of St. Sava, nam ed after the patron saint of the Serbs. The purpose of the gathering was to liberalize the program of the Chetnik m ovement in order to attract wider support. The Congress passed resolutions in favor of federalism, constitutional monarchy, and social and economic reforms. But by this time such resolutions were too late. The Allies already had discounted the Chetniks as a resistance force, while the Partisans were so strongly en trenched in so many parts of the country that Mihailovich could not hope to challenge them seriously. M ihailovich now was forced by the circumstances of his position to collaborate with the enemy. He believed that the defeat of the Axis depended upon the Allied Powers rather than upon his Chetniks. Accordingly, he con sidered his prim ary duty to be the destruction of the Communists, whom he regarded a greater m enace to Yugoslavia than the G erm ans, who in any case were doomed. But he was not strong enough to fight the Partisans alone, and the Allied Powers were unwilling to give him assistance. The only alternative was to collaborate with the Ustashi and the Axis forces, which were also anti-Partisan. Thus the course of events forced Mihailovich, who was both anti-G erm an and anti-Croatian, to collaborate with the Germans, the Italians, and the Ustashi. As early as June 6, 1943, Prime M inister Churchill received the following report from his chiefs of staff: “ It is clear from inform ation available to the W ar Office that the Chetniks are hopelessly com prom ised in their relations with the Axis in Herzegovina and Montenegro. During the recent fighting in the latter area, it has been the well-organized partisans rath er th an the C hetniks who have been holding dow n the Axis forces.” 11 T ito’s Triumph. T he Partisans have defined seven main offensives launched against them by the Axis High Com m and. The first was in November-D ecem ber, 1941, when they were driven out of Serbia and forced to retreat to Bosnia, Herzegovina, and M ontenegro. The second was in January, 1942, when the enemy attacked their positions in Bosnia. The Partisans lost heavily but they managed to retain control of an area on either side of the headwaters of the Drina River. Tito used this as a base for resting his ex hausted men and raising fresh recruits. In June, 1942, combined ChetnikItalian forces launched the third offensive in M ontenegro, driving the local Partisan units into Bosnia. Tito counterattacked with considerable success, liberating the territory along the Bosnia-Croatia border, including the city of Bihach, which became the Partisan political center. The existence of Partisan-controlled territory near Zagreb and near im portant railway lines led the Axis authorities to organize a fourth offensive. This was an all-out operation that continued from January through M arch, 1943. The units included Germans, Italians, Ustashi, and Chetniks. Tito was able to break through the closing trap by attacking the Chetnik forces assem bled along the Neretva River to block the way into Herzegovina. The Chet niks broke and fled, leaving behind m any documents revealing their relations


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 781
with the enemy. Brigadier M aclean examined these documents and then sent a report to Churchill that contributed to the cessation of British support for M ihailovich. Tito regrouped his forces in the m ountains of M ontenegro, where he faced a fifth Axis offensive in the sum m er of 1943. This time the G erm an and Italian high commands were determined that the Partisans should not escape destruction. They gathered a total of some 120,000 men against the 20,000 weary veterans that Tito could muster. In addition to this six-to-one numerical superiority, the Germans employed new techniques especially de signed to cope with guerrilla warfare. These included the use of bloodhounds, the laying of ambushes, and the constant supplying of fresh troops to the front lines in order to m aintain unrem itting pressure against the exhausted Partisans. A nother device was the construction of numerous small stone and steel fortresses designed to checkmate Partisan infiltration tactics. This offen sive proved to be the bitterest test of Partisan strength and morale. The Germ ans expected Tito to try to break through to the southeast into the Sanjak. Instead, he attacked in the northw est and after severe losses was able to advance into Bosnia. The resilience and popularity of the Partisan movem ent was dem onstrated now by the fact that by mid-August the influx of fresh volunteers had balanced the losses suffered during the fifth offensive. Furtherm ore, Tito immediately counterattacked and recovered much of the territory he had form erly held in Bosnia and D alm atia. The collapse of Italy in September, 1943, strengthened the Partisans immensely. They disarm ed several Italian divisions, thereby acquring suffi cient arms to increase their troops by 80,000. By November, 1943, they were able to liberate large parts of Slovenia, the Croatian littoral, Dalm atia, M ace donia, Bosnia and Herzegovina. By contrast, Mihailovich gained little from the Italian surrender because he had withdrawn his Chetniks to southwestern Serbia following his defeat during the fourth offensive. The mounting strength of the Partisans forced Mihailovich to cooperate more and more with the Axis and the Ustashi. His refusal to attack the im portant railway lines running through Serbia finally caused a breach between him and the Allies. He re ceived no further supplies from the Allies after the summ er of 1943, and in May, 1944, the British withdrew their mission from his headquarters. Meanwhile, in December, 1943, the Axis launched the sixth offensive against the Partisan forces in Bosnia, Croatia, and Dalmatia. The Partisans were forced to abandon most of Dalm atia, the offshore islands, and certain inland regions. But, as in the past, they were able to counterattack, and in January, 1944, they regained much of the lost territory and made advances elsewhere. The seventh and final offensive in the summer of 1944 was on a considerable scale but was not confined to a restricted area. Its aim was to protect the Germ an lines of communication that were being increasingly harassed by the resurgent Partisans. The offensive petered out by July except in Serbia, where the fighting was particularly bitter. Serbia continued to be the center of operations henceforth because of


782 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
its crucial im portance for the crumbling Germ an outposts in the Balkans. The G erm an high com m and made every effort to retain control of the vital M orava-V ardar route against the Partisans and the Red Arm y advancing from the East. The Partisans converged upon Serbia from Macedonia, M onte negro, and Bosnia, winning im portant victories in August, 1944. By Septem ber 6, units of the Soviet Red Arm y reached the Yugoslav frontier. A few days later Bulgaria capitulated and Bulgarian troops joined the Red Army in the push into Serbia. O n Septem ber 11 P artisan units reached the D anube. The following day Partisan and Soviet officers met to coordinate the cam paign against the Axis armies. On September 28 the Partisan supreme com mand reached an agreement for joint operations with the Red Army, with the understanding that civil authority in the liberated areas should be vested in the Partisan National Committee of Liberation. On October 20, 1944, after seven days of bitter fighting, Belgrade was taken by the Partisan First Proletarian Corps aided by Soviet tanks and artillery. The Germans now organized a new defense line at Srem, to the west of Belgrade. They defended this position tenaciously in order to keep open an escape route for their troops scattered in the Balkans. Not until April, 1945, were they driven back from the Srem front. By the middle of M ay the last Axis units were rounded up and the fighting on Yugoslav soil ended. In the final stages of the war the Partisans received decisive aid from both the Soviet and Bulgarian armies. They could not have liberated Yugo slavia unaided because the Germans had concentrated in Serbia the units they had evacuated from Bulgaria, Greece, and Albania. Nevertheless, most au thorities are agreed that the struggle for the liberation of Yugoslavia was to an overwhelming degree the work of the Partisans. Prime M inister W inston Churchill described the situation in Yugoslavia as follows in a report to the House of Commons on February 22, 1944:
General Mihailovitch, I much regret to say, drifted gradually into a po sition where some of his commanders made accommodations with Italian and German troops, which resulted in their being left alone in certain mountain areas and in return doing nothing or very little against the enemy. . . . The Partisan movement soon outstripped in numbers the forces of General Mihailovitch. Not only Croats and Slovenes but large numbers of Serbians joined with Marshal Tito, and he has at this moment more than a quarter of a million men with him and large quantities of arms taken from the enemy or from the Italians. . . . These forces are at this moment holding in check no fewer than fourteen out of twenty German divisions in the Balkan Peninsula. . . . Of course, the partisans of Marshal Tito are the only people who are doing any effective fighting against the Germans now.12
Partisan Administration. The Partisans developed an administrative system that they applied in the territories they liberated. W hen they occupied a village or town they first destroyed the existing political structure. They shot as quislings and traitors those gendarm es and civilian officials who had


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 783
been particularly obnoxious. They burned police stations and all public records such as land registers, fiscal documents, and the archives of the police and law courts. The Partisans then set up their own state mechanism in the form of N ational Liberation Committees in villages, districts, and regions. In theory these committees were elected by the populace and re flected its views. But inevitably, under prevailing conditions, the voters and the candidates were limited to supporters of the Partisans, who in some areas constituted a majority and in others a minority. The committees discharged the functions of local government and represented the civilian arm of the Partisan movement. They directed agriculture and the primitive local indus trial enterprises. They enrolled recruits and gathered supplies for the Partisan forces. They acted as organs of public safety, upholding law and order, and combating speculation and banditry. They also conducted anti-illiteracy and political propaganda campaigns, including the publication of several news papers. National Liberation Committees were also organized in enemy-oc cupied regions by the underground Communist party. Their duties were manifold and their contributions invaluable.· They gathered funds and raised recruits for the Partisan armed forces. They organized sabotage in industrial centers.and collected intelligence data concerning enemy operations and re sources. One of their most spectacular achievements was the collection and smuggling of food supplies from the fertile plains areas to the Partisan bri gades in the mountains. This operation was necessary because the mountain regions of Yugoslavia had never been able in peacetime to feed their own population, let alone the tens of thousands of additional consumers now gath ered in the Partisan ranks. The first nationally representative body organized by the Partisans m et at Bihach in Bosnia on Novem ber 26 and 27, 1942. It was a congress attended by representatives from all parts of Yugoslavia, liberated and oc cupied, and the delegates included well-known members of most of the pre war political parties. The congress elected a body called the Anti-Fascist Council for the N ational Liberation of Yugoslavia, commonly known by its initials A VNOJ. The Communists conceived and called the congress in order to gain as broad a basis as possible for their Partisan movement. They calcu lated that they could entrust the nominal control of the Partisan organization to a representative body through which they could quietly and unobtrusively have their way while preserving the illusion of dem ocratic procedure. In this m anner they hoped that, without yielding control of the resistance move ment, they would be able to attract wider support both within the country and from the W estern powers. This strategy succeeded brilliantly. The presidency of the A VNOJ was accepted by a prom inent and respected figure, Dr. Ivan Ribar. He was known as the former speaker of the historic constituent assembly that had outlawed the Yugoslav Communist party more than twenty years earlier. It was not known that for some years lie had been a close friend of T ito ’s. The


784 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
National Liberation Committees were nominally subordinated to the A VNOJ, though the dominant force and the binding cement continued to be the Com munist party. The AVNOJ issued the so-called Bihach Manifesto, a pro gram enumerating the six aims of the Partisan movement. These included “the liberation of the country,” “the inviolability of private property,” and “no radical changes whatsoever in the social life and activities of the people.” In view of T ito ’s frank avowal to B rigadier M aclean that his aim was a C om munist postwar Yugoslavia, these statements appear to be deliberately false and misleading. The manifesto also stipulated: “All the most im portant ques tions of social life and State organization will be settled by the people them selves through representatives who will be properly elected by the people after the end of the w ar.” 13 T ito and his lieutenants undoubtedly were con vinced that, in view of their leadership in the liberation struggle, they would be the “representatives of the people” at the end of the war. Thus there would be no real conflict between the plans for a Communist Yugoslavia and the promise of dem ocratic procedure. The sixth point in the Bihach Manifesto was particularly im portant: “The N ational Liberation M ovement fully recog nizes the national rights of Croatia, Slovenia, Serbia, M acedonia and all other regions. . . . It guarantees that the national rights of all the peoples of Y ugo slavia will be preserved.” 14 The Bihach assembly and its manifesto had a trem endous im pact upon the country. Tito had already proved himself to be a genuine resistance leader. Now he appeared to be also a conciliatory statesm an who offered a rational solution to Y ugoslavia’s basic nationalities problem and who pro posed to deal with the other problem s in a dem ocratic and m oderate fashion. Little wonder that increasing numbers of Yugoslavs now rallied to the side of Tito and his Partisans. The sweeping victories of the Partisans following the collapse of Italy in September, 1943, induced them to call a second plenary session of the AVNOJ at Jajce in Bosnia. The meeting, which was held on November 29, 1943, transform ed the AVNOJ into a legislative and executive body. A presidium of sixty-seven members, with Dr. Ribar as president, was estab lished and invested with executive powers. Thirteen acting ministers were appointed, headed by Tito, who also served as acting minister of national defense. F o r the first tim e T ito ’s nam e, Josip Broz, was m ade public, and he was invested with the title of m arshal. Finally, a resolution was passed forbid ding the king and his government-in-exile to return to Yugoslavia until the people decided the form of government they preferred. “The so-called Yugo slav G overnm ent ab ro ad ,” proclaim ed the assembly, “is deprived of all the rights of a legal G overnm ent.” 15 In this m anner Tito attained his goal of revolution through the fires of resistance. The struggle at home had been fought and won. The final out come now awaited the readjustm ent of great power relationships that would follow inevitably with the crum bling of H itler’s Reich and the developm ent of a power vacuum in the Balkans.


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 785
OCCUPIED GREECE
Occupation and Partition. Greece, like Yugoslavia, was partitioned by the Axis conquerors. The Bulgarians took eastern M acedonia and Thrace, and the Albanians the northern part of Epirus. The Germans occupied the most strategic territories, including Athens, Saloniki, the province of Evros on the Turkish frontier, as well as Crete and certain other islands. The Italians occupied the rest of the country, which left them the rulers of most of Greece. The G erm ans did not have the opportunity in Greece that they did in Yugoslavia of fomenting strife between religions and nationalities. A ccord ingly, they selected prom inent G reek personalities to function as puppet pre m iers in order to m ake foreign rule m ore palatable. T he first of these prem iers was General George Tsolakoglou, who had surrendered the Epirus armies to the G erm ans * and who now rem ained in office from A pril 30, 1941, to D ecember 2, 1942. His successor was professor Constantine Logothetopoulos, related by marriage to General von List, com m ander of the German Balkan campaign. Logothetopoulos was replaced on April 7, 1943, by a well-known royalist politician, John Rhalles, who remained prem ier until the liberation of Greece in O ctober, 1944. These officials, in order to win the support, or at least the toleration, of the Greek people, conducted a vigorous propaganda based primarily upon anti-Communism and anti-Slavism. They sought to exploit the traditional fear of Slavism in Greece, dating from the series of wars with the Bulgarians and the Russian espousal of Bulgarian territorial aspirations in the nineteenth century. A ccordingly, the puppet officials in Athens branded their opponents in the resistance movement as “agents of international Slavic Com munism .” They pictured the war as a gigantic conflict between eastern hordes bent on establishing a Slavic-Communistic domination over Europe, and the Germ an armies, which were waging a noble struggle to save European civilization from this double threat. It followed that every Greek patriot had the duty to cooperate with the Athens government and the Germ an occupation au thorities in com bating the enemy within the gates, that is, the “Com m unistic” resistance groups. The following extract from a handbill distributed widely in occupied Greece in the sum m er of 1944 illustrates this propaganda campaign:
Come to your senses, Greek Andartes [guerrillas]. Open your eyes, re cover your wits. Do not kill unjustly and do not strike your brothers in order to serve Britain and the Bolsheviks. The former writhes now like an expiring beast. The latter are nothing more than Slav nationalists who wish to absorb all Europe, drown its culture, assimilate us with the other Slavs of the Balkans, and put in practice Peter the G reat’s Satanic Pan-Slavic plans for making us helots, slaves, pariahs, minus religion, minus family, minus property, minus nationality. Come to your senses, that we lose not the great name of Hellenes which we bear, that we lose not our life, our honor, our ground, and our precious liberty. Let us extend our hands, let our slaughter of .one another stop, and let
* See C hapter 37.


786 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
us join together lik^e g°°d brothers, helping Greater Germany to crush with every means, with every*' method, those two great enemies of the world, the AngloAmerican-Jewish c r0^ * 011 ant* the Bolsheviks, the two evil demons of humanity, who tyrannize the \ world.
In the loi,n8 run this propaganda proved ineffective. A m ajor reason was the utter d estitu tio n the Greek people, who were literally driven to resistance as a m!leans ° f personal and national self-preservation. The basic difficulty was that11 G reece was of little econom ic value to the G erm an w ar m achine. G reece 1had nothing com parable to the Czech industries, the D anish dairy farm s, or ttfhe R um anian w heat fields and oil wells. C onsequently, the G erm ans were litfttle interested in the state of the G reek econom y. In fact, they allowed the?'r soldiers to strip the country clean by requisitioning or “buying” with fre sh ly printed marks whatever caught their fancy. By October 10, 1942, Ciano was noting in his diary:
If we cornt' nLle on ‘hc present basis the most complete bankruptcy will result within two rmonths. Today the middle class is already obliged to give up its jewels its beds a t1 times its daughters, in order to live. Hence, we are facing up risings and disord^ers> the proportions of which it is impossible to estimate ac curately at this tirr'ne· But nothing can make the Germans change their absurd and idiotic attitude an11^ the worst of it is that we Italians must stand for 80 per cent of the consequencies·16
T he effecct ° f this looting was accentuated by two other factors: the sharp decline in 1 the productivity of the country and the almost complete cessation of imp<l0rts· A gricultural production declined drastically because of the lack of fertili/zer>draft animals, and equipm ent, and because of the general condition of in s e r C U fi t y i n rural areas. Thus the average production of cereals during the years 1941-1944 was 60 per cent of the 1938 level. The two other m ost im portant (crops, tobacco and currants, likewise fell to 89 and 66 per cent, respectively- Conditions were even worse in industry. The confiscation of machinery a n ^ the lack of raw materials cut down production to between 10 and 15 p er c i n t ° f prew ar levels and produced w idespread unem ploym ent. Equally serious was the drop in imports with the enforcem ent of the Allied blockade against occupied Greece. Im ports fell during the first year to 6 per cent of t h i prewar level. W hat this m eant may be judged from the fact that before the \war Greece imported 45 per cent of her wheat requirements, 57 per cent of tl·^ ^h » 90 per cent of the rice, and 100 per cent of the sugar. The inevitable r:esult was that actual famine conditions prevailed in Athens, Piraeus and soi^16 the islands in the w inter of 1941—1942. T he situation improved som ew hat during the following years with the partial lifting of the Allied blockade anc* the rushing in of R ed Cross relief supplies. Y et the diet of most Greeks’ continued to be totally inadequate in caloric intake and largely lacking jin anim al proteins and fats. T he effect on the health of the population was (described as follows in a confidential report prepared in April, 1943, by the G eneral Director of Public Welfare and Hygiene:


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 787
The consequences of malnutrition have now taken a tragic form. Large numbers of persons are stricken with tuberculosis even in the higher classes, among lawyers, doctors, men of letters and science and public functionaries. . . . In certain localities every third child presents a case of tubercular glands. . . . Physical exhaustion and malnutrition have also increased other diseases. As shown by reports submitted by the Supreme Hygienic Council of the State and in special meetings of the Medical Society of Athens we are confronted with a terrific spread of malaria which has assumed a very virulent form. There are villages where no day goes by without at least one or two persons in every home being sick in bed with malaria. It is a tragic sight to see children yellow from anemia and with swollen abdomens. . . . Unless fundamental measures are taken to im prove urgently and radically the health of the people, we will see the annihilation of a large portion of our nation.17
Such was the nightm are of occupation in Greece. D uring those three and a half years, 30 per cent of the n ation’s wealth was destroyed, 7 per cent of the population (5 0 0 ,0 0 0 out of 7 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 ) perished in battle or of starva tion and diseases, while collaborationists and black m arketeers added moral degradation to the material hurts of the nation. Such conditions were more eloquent than any amount of propaganda about the Slavic-Communist peril. Out of this misery emerged a resistance movement that attracted the support of a substantial portion of the population and attained a significance com parable to that of T ito ’s Partisans in Yugoslavia.
National Liberation Front (EAM). The Com m unist-controlled N a tional Liberation Front was the leading resistance organization in Greece, corresponding to the Com m unist-controlled Partisans in Yugoslavia. The National Liberation Front, or EAM , as it was commonly called after the ini tials of the Greek words Ethnikon Apeleftheretikon M etopon, was organized in Athens on September 27, 1941. It rose to prominence for largely the same reasons th at T ito ’s followers did to the north. The C om m unist party provided disciplined leadership and a nation-wide underground organization that had been tested during the years of the prewar M etaxas dictatorship. Also, the Greek Communists, like their Yugoslav counterparts, made their EA M a national rather than a party resistance organization. They invited into the EA M all Greeks regardless of political beliefs so long as they were opposed to the foreign occupationists. By 1944 the EAM had become a truly national organization in its com position. Several political groups had established affili ation, including the Communist party and four other minor Socialist and A grarian parties. As for individuals, the E A M num bered in its ranks six bishops, several hundred priests, virtually all the labor leaders regardless of their political affiliations, and thirty university professors, including the presi dent of the Polytechnic School and two members of the National Academy. In addition to these personalities the EAM attracted large numbers of ordinary citizens into its various functional bodies. These included the National Popular Liberation Army (E L A S), United All-Greece Youth O r ganization (E P O N ), N ational M utual Aid, or "Red C ross of the Resistance”


788 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
(E A ), and W orkers’ National Liberation Front (E E A M ). W ith this network of organizations the EA M was able to secure the active support of a large proportion of the population. The most m ilitant and physically fit could join ELA S and fight in the m ountains. The workers in the cities could organize and work through EEA M . The youth found social recreation and useful duties in E PO N . All elem ents of the population could participate in the work of the “Red Cross of the Resistance.” This was perhaps the most im portant achievement of EAM . It provided a program that was acceptable to all patri otic Greeks and established organizations suitable for citizens of all ages and backgrounds. T here is no agreem ent as to the size of the E A M and its subsidiary organizations. Estimates range from 500,000 to 2,000,000 members. Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden estimated that the armed forces, or ELAS, num bered 50,000 men and that the rest of the EAM apparatus included another 500,000 to 750,000 people. W hether these figures, or others that are con siderably higher, are accepted, it is ap p aren t th at the E A M was a m ajor force in a country of 7,000,000. Nationalist Bands. The EA M was not the only resistance organiza tion in Greece. Several other groups existed, the most im portant being the Greek National Democratic League, or EDES. It was led by Colonel (later G en eral) N apoleon Zervas, who m ight be com pared to M ihailovich in the role that he played during the occupation. Neither the EDES nor the other so-called “nationalist” bands ever approached the EA M in popular follow ing or effectiveness in resisting the Germans. They lacked the nation-wide organizational apparatus furnished the EAM by the Communists. Their leaders never showed any real grasp of the situation in Greece. They did not adopt or consistently follow a definite program based on the needs of the country. They wavered back and forth until their obvious weakness in relation to the EAM drove them to complete dependence on the British and to surreptitious collaboration with the Germ ans and the Italians. This is well illustrated by the career of G eneral Zervas. T he E D E S leader undoubtedly wished to rid the country of the invader. But he com pletely lacked the personal qualities and the organizational backing necessary to develop a strong resistance movement. He regarded EDES as his personal instrument that he was free to use as he wished to com bat the Axis and also to advance his own fortunes. One of his chief lieutenants, who worked closely with him during the occupation, has described clearly his incapacity as a re sistance leader:
General Zervas’ lack of a more general education, in the broad meaning of the word, and of ideological orientation, always was a basic obstacle to the development of psychological and spiritual ties among the guerrillas and mem bers of EDES. . . . during the whole course of our endeavors we wavered between a superficial democratism and a superficial nationalism, without ever evolving a stable national political policy which could be used to arouse enthusiasm and militancy. We always met the stubborn opposition of General Zervas and of those


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 789
about him. . . . The centralization [of power] which General Zervas insisted on maintaining because of the circumstances of the struggle proved to be unwar ranted and injurious. Nothing was heard but the slogan, “Faith in the Leader. All for the Leader. All from the Leader.” 18
It is not surprising th a t E D E S was soon hopelessly outstripped by the E A M . W hen the B ritish, for reasons which will be noted later, decided to back EDES as a counterweight to the EAM , Zervas eagerly accepted this aid and became completely dependent upon his supporters. Colonel C. M. W oodhouse, Chief of the British M ilitary Mission to occupied Greece, ob served that “without British support Zervas’ army would never have existed . . . .” 18 T here is also considerable docum entary evidence indicating th at Zervas had certain understandings with the Axis com m anders. On August 10, 1943, the Germ an chief of staff at Y anina in Epirus reported to Berlin: “At the conclusion of his operations Zervas has returned to a loyal position to w ard us and is being favorably received in N ationalist circles. British sup plies helped Zervas carry out general mobilization and create new regiments. Zervas has now started fresh offensives against C om m unist bands.” 20 Despite British aid and Germ an cooperation, EDES was never able to match the EAM and its ELA S forces in popular backing or military strength. At the time of liberation Zervas was found to have not more than 12,000 men and to control only a small area in Epirus, 35 miles long and 25 miles wide. Three m onths later when fighting broke out between ELAS and the British, Zervas’ army was dispersed by ELAS in a brief four-day cam paign. If it is rem em bered th at Z ervas’ E D E S was the only serious rival of ELAS, it becomes apparent why the EAM and ELAS could scarcely help becoming the mainstay of Greek resistance. Resistance Struggle. T he E A M ’s m ilitary arm , E LA S, was for mally established in December, 1942. It was organized around a number of guerrilla chieftains who had taken to the mountains early in the year and waged individualistic, uncoordinated warfare against the invader. From the outset ELAS differed basically from the other resistance groups in that it was definitely subordinate to a parent political organization. Zervas’ EDES and the other nationalist groups were commanded by military leaders who were free to pursue whatever policy they wished in either the political or the m ilitary field. By contrast, E L A S was created by the E A M and rem ained its subordinate military branch to the end. All political matters were automatically referred to the EAM Central Committee. M ilitary problems were entrusted to the ELAS High Command, hut the Central Committee selected the personnel of this body. The Central Com m ittee further ensured its control over ELA S by -a m ultiple system of com m and. Each ELA S unit was led by a military com m ander, usually a reg ular army officer in the c a se .o f the higher ranks, and by a K apetanios, the popular leader who frequently came from (he ranks. The form er made the linal decision in m ilitary affairs while the latter look care of propaganda and


790 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
morale within the unit and directed relations between the unit and the civilian population and organizations. In the top ELAS posts, such as general head quarters and division headquarters, the military commander and the Kapetanios were joined by a third person, a political representative of the EAM . The K apetanios was a Communist as a rule and the political representative almost invariably. Thus, although the military men in ELAS were supreme so far as actual operations were concerned, nevertheless the army as a whole was firmly in the control of the EA M and ultimately of the Comm unist party. In April, 1943, the prestige of ELAS rose considerably with the entry into its ranks of a well-known and distinguished regular army officer, Colonel (later General) Stephanos Saraphis. A month later, on May 19, 1943, a regular ELA S High Com m and was formed, consisting of Saraphis as military chief, Ares Velouchiotes, the redoubtable Communist guerrilla leader and the first organizer of ELAS bands, as the Kapetanios, and Vasiles Samariniotes, also a Communist, as the EAM representative. A t this time ELAS was strongest in central and northern Greece, th a t is R oum ele, Thessaly, and M acedonia. Some 12,000 men belonged to the ELAS formations in these areas, and an undeterm ined additional number in the Peloponnesian and Thracian bands. In July, 1943, all these groups were reorganized by the new High Com m and along regular military lines. The prew ar G reek army was used as the model in the internal organization of ELAS, the naming of the various units, and the adoption of military reg ulations and penal code. In the summer of 1943 the new ELAS army carried out its first largescale, coordinated operations. Up to this time it had gained control of the mountainous Pindus and Olympus areas and conducted hit-and-run opera tions in the plains. Now it received an order from General H eadquarters, Middle East, to launch with EDES a coordinated series of sabotage opera tions. The reason for this order was the Allied invasion of Sicily scheduled for July 10. It was hoped that the diversionary operations would lead the G erm ans to anticipate landings in Greece rather than in Sicily. The plan was successful. During these weeks ELAS and ED ES blew up trains and bridges, destroyed highways, cut telephone communications, and attacked Axis out posts. The Germans hurried two divisions to Greece, and on July 10 these forces were not available for the defense of Sicily. Two months later Italy capitulated to the Allies and a large propor tion of the Italian war matériel in Greece fell into the hands of ELAS. This provided ELA S with precisely what it hitherto had lacked. From the outset it had a surplus of manpower and a shortage of equipment. The Italian booty enabled ELAS to organize new artillery and cavalry units and to increase the num ber of armed regulars. By the autum n of 1943 ELA S had become a rather formidable mili tary machine. Its reserves in the cities and in the countryside were increasing rapidly and were gradually being armed. These reserves aided in the supply of the regular ELAS, gathered intelligence, attacked the enemy communica


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 791
tion and transportation systems, and occasionally participated in pitched bat tles. The operations of ELAS were coordinated by a telephone network which was completed at this time and which connected virtually all the villages in the ELAS-controlled areas. Even barbed wire was used for this purpose. Equally impressive was the ELAS School of Reserve Officers, which grad uated its first class of 136 cadets in September, 1943. British officers par ticipated in the graduation ceremonies and delivered speeches praising the work of the school. The graduates were given commissions in ELA S with the rank of sublieutenant. The second class, consisting of 300 cadets, began its training the following month. At this time ELA S dem onstrated its strength by meeting successfully the severest test to which it was subjected. F or various reasons which will be considered later, relations between ELAS and EDES had deteriorated to the point of arm ed conflict in O ctober, 1943. A t the m om ent when the E LA S attack was getting under way, Germ an columns attacked the ELAS positions in the Pindus from five directions. T his was a m ajor offensive, the G erm ans using large forces equipped with planes, m ountain artillery, and arm ored cars. They succeeded in reopening the strategic Kalam baka-M etsovo-Yanina highway connecting Thessaly with Epirus. Although ELAS was forced to re treat on a wide front and to surrender many villages, it retreated in good order and inflicted heavy losses on the enemy. By the end of December the Germ an attacks petered out and ELAS began a counteroffensive. From Jan uary to April, 1944, it launched coordinated attacks at scattered points until finally the G erm ans abandoned the captured positions and returned to their original ones. Having survived this test, ELAS was now the dominant resistance organization in all parts of Greece except for the small EDES force in Epirus and still smaller nationalist bands in isolated sections of M acedonia. D uring 1944 the Germans attem pted only to retain control of the large towns and cities and the im portant transportation routes. In the Peloponnesus they held coastal cities such as Patras, Kalamata,. Nauplion, and Corinth. In M acedonia and Thrace they rem ained in the largest cities, such as Saloniki, Kavalla, Serres, and D ram a. In the rest of Greece they were concerned primarily in controlling and operating the vital railway running from Athens to Saloniki. They succeeded in keeping ELA S out of the towns along the route— Thebes, Levadeia, Lamia, and Larissa— but they were not able to prevent ELAS units from continually blowing up bridges and sections of track. In 1944 the Germ ans were able to transport along this line only a small percentage of the norm al .load. By the sum m er of th at year, when the G erm ans began to evac uate Greece because of Russian pressure in the north, only about a third of the country was under Germ an control. The remaining two thirds constituted “Free Greece,” defended by the ELAS forces and administered by the EAM . Much controversy persists concerning the role of ELAS in occupied Greece. Certain quarters tend to minimize the contribution of ELAS to the resistance struggle. The G erm ans arc perhaps the best authorities as to who


792 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
was responsible for the resistance they encountered in Greece. In their prop aganda efforts they invariably denounced the EAM -ELAS and warned the Greek people that it was the enemy within the gates— the agency of inter national Slavic Communism. But in regard to ED ES and the other resistance bodies, both the Germans and their puppet Greek propagandists were elo quently silent. Similarly, the captured Germ an documents invariably refer to attacks by “communist” ELAS bands and to mopping-up operations against these bands, but EDES and the other groups are very infrequently mentioned. Typical is a G erm an report bearing the date July 6, 1943, and entitled “Political Situation in Greece, 4 June to 3 July 1943” :
“90 percent of the Greeks today are unanimously hostile toward the Axis Powers and are ready for open revolt. . . . the EAM with its combat organizations [is] the main bearer of the entire resistance movement against the Axis Powers. The greater part of the bands is subordinated to it. It is in a leading position, po litically speaking, and, because it is very active and enjoys a coordinated leader ship, it represents the greatest danger to the occupying powers.” 21
E A M Administration. The village was the base of the nation-wide EA M structure. In each village there were four EAM groups: the EA for relief work, the EPO N youth body, the ETA (Epimeletes tou A ndarte) or guerrilla commissariat, and the general EAM committee. The duty of ETA was to collect taxes throughout liberated Greece, and, when possible, in the occupied territories. The levy was based on the principle of no taxation on a specified minimum quantity necessary for sustenance, and progressive taxation on the rem ainder. For example, the peasant paid nothing on his first 300 okas (an oka equals 2% pounds) of grain, then 5 per cent on the next 1,500, 11 p er cent on the next 2,000, and 13 p er cent on the rem ainder. T he same principle applied for livestock, fish, olives, raisins, tobacco, and all other produce. A bout 20 per cent of the proceeds went to the various civilian bodies to meet the expenses of village adm inistration. The rest, usually foodstuffs, went to the district ELAS headquarters and from there to the ELAS depots. Thus ELAS units had food supplies available for them throughout the coun try and did not have to resort to unorganized and indiscriminate requisition ing, which would have antagonized the peasants. The secretary of the general EAM committee was known as the Ipefthinos, or responsible one. His duties were to check the identification papers of travelers or newcomers to the village, furnish mules and guides when needed by ELAS, and provide recommendations for local villagers who wished to join ELAS. It was through the Ipefthinos that the Communists controlled the EAM mechanism. W hen the occupation began, most of the EAM organizers were members of the Communist party, which had kept a nation-wide underground organization during the M etaxas dictatorship. Thus it was almost always a Com m unist who arrived at a village, recruited as


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 793
many peasants as he could into the EA M , and stayed on as the leading EA M functionary. The hierarchical form of the EAM further increased Communist in fluence. The Ipefthinoi of a group of villages elected the eparchia, or district EA M committee. The members of this committee in turn elected an Ipefthinos, and the Ipefthinoi of several district committees elected the nomos, or prefecture EAM committee. The process was repeated and the Ipefthinoi of several prefectures elected the regional committee, which represented a large area such as Thessaly or M acedonia. There were approximately a dozen such regions in Greece, and each had one representative in the national cen tral committee. Large cities, such as Athens, Piraeus, Saloniki, Patras, and Volos, had one delegate in the national central com m ittee, each being the Ipefthinos of its city’s central com m ittee. T he latter was elected by the Ipefthinoi of the neighborhood committees and of the functional groups— for lawyers, scien tists, doctors, teachers, artists, civil servants, clerks, workers, and so forth. In this way some twenty-five delegates were elected to the national Central Committee, the supreme policy-making body. These delegates repre sented the constituent political parties (Communist, Socialist, Agrarian, and so o n ), the functional groups (ELAS, EPON, EA, and so o n ), the central committees of the various regions, and the central committees of the large cities. It is apparent that the C om m unist control of the Ipefthinoi ensured a Communist majority on the national central committee, although only about a tenth of the total EAM membership were also members of the Communist party. It is also ap p aren t th at this organizational m echanism enabled the Communists to camouflage their control, at least so far as the majority of Greeks were concerned. The final step in the evolution of the adm inistration of the liberated territorities was the creation by the EAM on M arch 10, 1944, of a five-man Political Committee of National Liberation, or PEEA . This body was en trusted with two tasks. One was to bring pressure to bear on the governmentin-exile to agree to the form ation of a representative national government. In this respect the Greek Communists differed basically from their Yugoslav comrades, who had specifically repudiated their exile government at their Jajce assembly in April, 1943. The G reek Communists, by contrast, were now endeavoring to force their way into their government-in-exile in Cairo. The significance of this difference will be analyzed in the following chapter. Suffice it to note here th at it explains in part the entirely different course of events in the two countries following liberation. The other task of PE E A was to supervise the administration of the liberated territories. Since these included by this date caver one half the area of the country and about two and a half million people, PEEA decided that the time had come for the election of a National Council. The election was held on April 9, 1944. Elaborate measures were taken to secure a representa tive assembly, but the delegates inevitably reflected the HAM predom inance


794 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
in the liberated areas and in the underground resistance in the occupied te r ritories. On M ay 7 a total of 250 delegates met from all parts of Greece. Athens was represented by 20 delegates, Saloniki by 10, Piraeus by 7, and so on to the provincial towns and rural districts. The delegates were a repre sentative cross section of Greek society, including 2 bishops, 2 priests, 5 university professors, 8 generals, 20 civil servants, 5 industrialists, 15 doc tors, 25 lawyers, 22 laborers, 23 farm ers, 10 newspaperm en, 10 scientists, 9 high school teachers, and others. The N ational Council issued a proclam ation on May 27 defining its objectives. It declared its “undaunted will to fight to the end for the liberation of the country, for the complete smashing of fascism and for the restoration of national unity and popular sovereignty.” In the light of later events the significant feature of this proclam ation is that it looked forw ard to an arrange ment with the government-in-exile. The final article stated: “The work of the N ational C ouncil will continue until the whole country is liberated. It may be dissolved before liberation if it decides itself on a m otion by one third of its ow n m em bers, or on a proposal by P E E A .” 22 This m eant th at both P E E A and the National Council were ready to leave the stage if the EAM could secure representation in the royal cabinet in Cairo. W e shall see later that in Septem ber, 1944, the EA M was allowed to participate in the cabinet, with far-reaching repercussions for the resistance movement and the entire post war history of Greece. In conclusion it is apparent th a t by the sum m er of 1944 the E A M had developed a complete state apparatus. It possessed a powerful army, an effective administrative organization, and a N ational Council with delegates from all parts of Greece. Needless to say, the EAM had many serious short comings. Criminal elements seized the opportunity provided by the years of turbulence to commit crimes in the nam e of resistance. C ertain ELA S officers were also responsible for unnecessary excesses. Some of them were fierce guerrilla fighters who rose from the ranks of ELAS but who rem ained guer rilla chieftains at heart and gave no quarter and expected none. Others were fanatical Communists, imbued with the ideology of the class struggle and assuming that those who were not with them were against them and should be treated as enemies. In addition, certain ELA S units were guilty of ex ecuting suspects on inconclusive evidence or because facilities were lacking for their imprisonment. Despite these shortcomings, the fact remains that the EA M repre sented Greece as much as any organization could during a period of foreign occupation. Colonel W oodhouse, the chief of the British Military Mission, who regarded the EAM as a tyrannical organization and who fought it as a menace to British imperial interests, nevertheless paid it the following tribute:
The initiative of EAM /ELAS justified their predominance, though not their tyranny. Having acquired control of almost the whole country, except the principal communications used by the Germans, they had given it things that


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 795
it had never known before. Communications in the mountains, by wireless, courier, and telephone, have never been so good before or since; even motor roads were mended and used by EAM /ELAS. Their communications, including wireless, ex tended as far as Crete and Samos, where guerillas were already in the field. The benefits of civilisation and culture trickled into the mountains for the first time. Schools, local government, law-courts and public utilities, which the war had ended, worked again. Theatres, factories, parliamentary assemblies began for the first time. Communal life was organised in place of the traditional individualism of the Greek peasant. His child was dragooned into EPON, his nest-egg levied into EA, his caique commandeered to equip ELAN [EAM’s naval arm]. . . . Followed at a distance by the minor organisations, EAM /ELAS set the pace in the creation of something that Governments of Greece had neglected: an or ganised state in the Greek mountains. All the virtues and vices of such an experi ment could be seen; for when people whom no one has ever helped started helping themselves, their methods are vigorous and not always nice. The words “liberation” and “popular democracy” filled the air with their peculiar connotations. Uneasy stirrings were breaking the surface everywhere, but only the KKE [Communist party of Greece] knew how to give them direction.23
OCCUPIED ALBANIA
In Albania the Communist-dominated National Liberation Front, or LN C (Levisiya Nacional C lirim tare), was the counterpart of the Greek EAM and the Yugoslav Partisan movement. The situation in Albania was such that the LN C , as the N ational L iberation F ro n t will be term ed henceforth, Was able to seize power with com paratively little opposition. There was no exile government to challenge the pretensions of the Communist resistance leaders. A lso, the years of King Zog’s dictatorship and of the Italian occupation left Albania with no political parties or leaders, thus presenting the Communists with an open field for their operations. A nd the LN C had the additional ad vantage of being supported by the powerful Partisan and EAM resistance organizations. Finally, the LN C did not have to contend with Allied forces as did the EAM in Greece after the Germans departed. Neither the Russians nor the W estern powers bothered to send troops to Albania once the country had been evacuated by the Axis. A fter the Italians had occupied A lbania in A pril, 1939, they issued a constitution for the country on June 3, 1939. They defined Albania as an autonom ous constitutional m onarchy, hereditary in the house of Savoy. The constitution actually was designed to institutionalize Italian domination. King Victor Em m anuel was entrusted with executive, legislative, and judicial au thority, and the Albanian armed forces and diplomatic corps were incor porated into those of Italy. Two years later, when the Germans overran Yugoslavia and Greece, A lbania was given the Yugoslav province of Kosovo, which had a predom inantly A lbanian population, and the northern part of the Greek province of Epirus, which had a small Albanian minority. Axis propaganda now boasted that Albania at last had secured her just ethnic frontiers.


796 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
Despite these territorial gains, the Albanians did not resign them selves to foreign rule. They had always resented central authority, and now that it was foreign their resentment was greater. Also, their experiences of the past decade had shown that the main danger to their national independ ence came from Italy. The Italians sensed the general disaffection and made various concessions in June, 1941, allowing the Albanians greater autonomy. Despite these concessions, an organized resistance movement began to de velop in the country in 1942. The Albanian Communists during the prewar years had functioned in scattered and uncoordinated groups. The three most im portant had been in Scutari in the north, in T iran a in the center, and in K oritsa in the south. To the latter group belonged an obscure young lycée teacher, Enver Hoja (Hoxha), who was to become the president of the country after the war. The social basis of Com m unism in A lbania was to be found in the landless peasants of the south and the disaffected, E uropean-trained intellectuals in the cities. The peasants had long been ready for revolt: they lacked land and, in addi tion, the owners of the estates they tilled were Moslems, whereas they were O rthodox Christians. As for the intellectuals, they never numbered more than two or three thousand, but they constituted the mainstay of the Communist apparatus and provided the leadership necessary for the organization of the peasants. These young men were peculiarly susceptible to revolutionary ideas because they had no roots in landed property o r am ong the tribes, and could find no satisfaction for their aspirations within the narrow limits of independ ent Albania. At one time ambitious young Albanians had gone to Constan tinople and found a career in the O ttom an imperial bureaucracy. Now this outlet was closed and none other had taken its place. U nder such circum stances, educated young men in oth er countries had turned to fascism. But in A lbania this was the creed of the foreign overlord, so the young men turned instead to communism. The Albanian Communists owed much to Tito, who, even before the w ar began, had sent agents to help build a party structure. O n Novem ber 8, 1941, these Yugoslav organizers sum m oned a meeting in T irana of the most promising Albanian Communists and thereby established the Albanian Com munist party. A central committee of eleven was selected, with Enver H oja as provisional secretary. In September, 1942, the party leaders organized the LNC when they persuaded a number of the northern chieftains to join forces with them. Soon after the LNC came into existence, a more conservative group of Albanian patriots formed the National Front, or Balli Kombetar. They were anti-Zogists of mildly liberal, republican, and strongly nationalist convictions. When some British and a few American agents arrived in Al bania they strove to unite the Ballists and the LNC into one strong resistance organization. They arranged a meeting of representatives of the two bodies on August 2, 1943, and induced them to accept a plan for united action against the Italians. B ut the Suprem e Com m ittee of the L N C reversed its


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 797
position and refused to ratify the agreement. The reaction of the British offi cers to the two A lbanian groups is revealing:
The forces of the Balli Kombetar seemed to Maclean and Smiley weaker in numbers, organisation, and morale than those of the LNC. Some indeed of their leaders paid more heed to British advice than did the Communists, but their zeal for war was severely restrained by the enjoyment of their present riches. While, therefore, the British officers gave them some supplies of arms and money, and occasionally took part in their operations against the enemy, the greater part of their efforts were devoted to the training and supplying of the Partisans [of LNC].-4
W hen Italy collapsed in Septem ber, 1943, the LN C disarm ed two Italian divisions and obtained large quantities of supplies. With these it was able to increase its forces and occupy several large cities, including Koritsa, A rgyrokastron, Berat, and Elbasan. The Germ ans then rushed in troops, cap tured the cities, and set up a four-m an regency to help its forces rule the country. The Germans could spare only two and a half divisions for Albania, so they contented themselves with controlling the cities and main routes, leaving the rest of the country to the resistance bands. By O ctober, 1943, the two A lbanian resistance groups were openly at war with each other after the m anner of their counterparts in Yugoslavia and Greece. The reasons were basically the same as in the two neighboring countries. On the one hand, the Ballists were alarm ed by the mounting strength of the LNC and some of their leaders resorted to collaboration with the Germans as the lesser of two evils. On the other hand, the LN C had regarded the Ballists as dangerous rivals and treated them accordingly. A British officer concluded that he “could not escape coming to the conclusion th at the C om m unist leaders were m ore interested in elim inating their rivals and seizing political power after the war than in the immediate task of killing Italians.” 20 The Germ ans took advantage of the civil w ar to launch their first offensive against the L N C on Decem ber 19, 1943. T he guerrillas successfully evaded the advancing Germans and were able to increase their numbers as a result of G erm an terrorism . By the fall of 1944, when the G erm ans evacuated the country, the LNC leaders claimed to have nearly 70,000 men under their command. In the political field the LN C followed the example of Tito. On May 24, 1944, it assembled a National Congress of two hundred delegates from all parts of the country. The Congress selected a supreme legislative body, the Antifascist Council of National Liberation, consisting of thirty members. The Congress also forbade Zog to return to A lbania and resolved not to rec ognize any Albanian government that might be formed abroad. A t the second meeting of the Antifascist Council on October 20, 1944, a provisional gov ernm ent was formed with Enver Hoja at the head. The following month the LNC forces drove the Germans out of Tirana and on December 4 Hoja for mally proclaimed the complete liberation of Albania.


THE NEW SPIRIT
One of the most im portant developments in the B alkans during the war years was the undermining of the old order in most of the peninsula. H itler was not able to establish his much advertised “new order,” but he did succeed in destroying the old one. For all his avowed anticommunism, H it ler’s historical role proved to be revolutionary because he dem olished existing institutions— social, economic, and political. In Eastern Europe especially, Hitler proved to be the great leveler. Even in the satellite countries he underm ined the old order because the existing regimes were discredited by their association with him. Then in late 1944, the R ed Army, whose entrance into Europe he made possible, marched in and forcibly swept away the rem nants of the old regimes and imposed new ones. This revolutionary change was much m ore pronounced in the occupied countries, where powerful resistance movements attracted a wide following. The resistance organizations, by their very nature, not only shattered the existing institutions but also created a new atmosphere— a new spirit. One manifestation of this new spirit was the awakening of the hith erto inert peasantry. The guerrillas who fought against the Axis armies were in the great m ajority of cases peasants turned fighters. These peasants learned that they could exist without the towns but that the towns could not survive without supplies from the countryside. They also discovered that they were physically and psychologically better equipped than the townsmen to meet the harsh conditions of guerrilla warfare. In fact, it was largely peasant armies that liberated the cities from the foreign invaders. Such experiences and tri umphs inevitably affected the outlook of the peasantry profoundly. A nother manifestation of the new spirit was the m arked change in the relationship of the sexes. Before the war the interests and activities of women had been strictly limited by traditional social conventions. During the occupa tion these conventions were to a considerable degree abandoned. W ith the absence of so many men, the women assumed responsibility for the family farms and the care of the children. The younger women also entered every branch of the resistance movements, including the fighting brigades. In Greece, for example, about 40 per cent of the members of the EPO N youth organization were young women, and one of the crack ELAS battalions con sisted exclusively of women. A Yugoslav woman leader described the changes in sex relationships in her country as follows:
Before any written law, women became equal with men during the course of the war. This came about through an accepted, almost unspoken agreement. . . . The right of women to take part with the men in the whole life of their people became the right of shepherdesses in the mountains, village women in Krajina and Lika, in the Slavonian villages and in the dugouts of Srem. . . . Before they knew what it meant, the right was theirs. . . . They attained it in a unique way, one only possible during a great liberation struggle. Before any law was written,
798 Age of War and Crisis: 1914


Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation: 1941-1945 799
women were already taking part in making laws. . . . No one any longer drove women out of doors while the men were consulting.26
The new spirit also found expression in the new position of youth. In all revolutionary periods it is natural that youth should com e to the fore because it is less com m itted to the status quo, m ore receptive to new ideas, and more ready to take up arms. In the Balkan countries young men and women flocked into the youth organizations and played a prom inent role in the resistance struggle. Teen-age guerrilla fighters were common, as were also com m anders in their early twenties. This naturally shook the dom ination of the middle-aged and elderly men, which had been unconsciously accepted for generations as a norm al condition of peasant life. A final manifestation of the new spirit was the discrediting of the tradi tional political leaders. They had no aptitude or relish for underground work. They were apprehensive of the competition of the new leaders who were arising from the rank and file of the resistance m ovem ent and felt at hom e in it. Thus the great m ajority of the prew ar political personages rem ained aloof from the struggle against the foreign invaders. They also proved in capable of comprehending the new forces and ideas at work in their coun tries. In Yugoslavia, for example, they continued to think along the traditional national-religious lines, with the Serb politicians determ ined to reimpose their hegemony at the end of the war, and the Croatians to maintain their inde pendent Croatia. The same was true in Greece, where Colonel W oodhouse described the role of the old political leaders as follows:
They lived in the past both socially and politically. . . . Most of them remained throughout the dictatorship of Metaxas, throughout the German occu pation, and remain to this day oblivious of the social revolutions that have taken place in Western Europe. The retrogression of their political thought is still more marked: for the only lively political problem that divides them is still the con stitutional question of Monarchy or Republic, which has been fruitlessly debated without intermission since it came into being in 1917.27
In this m anner the old party chiefs forfeited their traditional leader ship. In doing so they left a political vacuum which the Communists quickly exploited. They succeeded not only because they were well organized and disciplined but also because they astutely used nationalism for their own pur poses. They took the lead in organizing revolutionary nationalist movements against the foreign invaders and thereby gained the positions and power necessary to realize the revolutionary social changes that were their ultimate aim. The following statem ent by Stalin offers a key to much that happened in the Balkan Peninsula during the occupation: “Leninism . . . recognizes the latent revolutionary capabilities of the national liberation movement . . . and it is possible to use these for the purpose of overthrow ing the com m on enem y, for the purpose of overthrow ing im perialism .” 28


3 9 . H id d e n W a r, C o ld W a r a n d P ea ce S ettlem en t
in 1 9 4 7
T
J L h e B a l k a n c o u n t r i e s underw ent entirely different experiences during the war years. Bulgaria and Rumania, not having offered resistance to the Axis Powers, were spared the ordeals of invasion and occu pation. Consequently, they did not generate significant national resistance movements. By contrast, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Albania waged grueling struggles against the occupation forces and at the same time endured savage internecine fighting between the Communist-led groups and their rivals. In the end, the radical resistance organizations gained the upper hand and were the dom inant power in their respective countries by the time the Axis forces withdrew.
T hese developm ents seem ed to foretell th at if the postw ar B alkan regimes were to differ significantly from each other the dividing line would run north and south, with Bulgaria and Rum ania on the one side and Yugo slavia, Greece, and Albania on the other. A dividing line did appear as soon as the G erm ans withdrew, but it ran from east to west. On the one side was Greece, who experienced the least institutional change despite her turbulent war record, and on the other were the remaining Balkan countries, which were subjected to Communist domination and social upheaval. This unexpected outcome indicates that the course of postwar Balkan history was determ ined, in part at least, by external forces. The m ost im por tant of these was, as usual, the interplay of conflicting great-power policies. Even during the war years the Allies were engaged in a covert struggle with each other at the same time that they fought against Hitler. They fought two wars during these years, a war against the Axis and a war, now hidden, now open, among themselves. They had a common cause against the enemy, but they kept in mind the postwar balance of power and jockeyed for position. The closer they came to victory the m ore they sacrificed unity for what they considered to be their national interests. A nd as soon as they defeated the 800


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 801
enemy their hidden war burst into the open and became the Cold W ar. In this chapter we shall trace the veiled course of the hidden war during the oc cupation period, and the flamboyant unfolding of the cold war between lib eration and the signing of the peace treaties in 1947.
BRITISH AGENTS AND BALKAN GUERRILLAS
During most of the war period, Britain alone, of the Allied Powers, maintained contact with the resistance organizations in the Balkans. On O cto ber 23, 1943, for example, Prime Minister Churchill informed President Roosevelt: “We British have about eighty separate missions working with partisans and patriot bands scattered over these immense mountainous re gions. . . . ” 1 U ntil late in the w ar neither the U nited States nor the Soviet Union had sent missions of their own. The Soviet government apparently was too preoccupied to establish contact at a time when it was fighting for sur vival on the banks of the Volga. The United States government, on the other hand, regarded the entire Middle East, including the Balkans, as an area of British concern and deliberately avoided any involvement. Thus Britain was left with virtually a free hand, and her primacy was further strengthened by the fact that the Greek and Yugoslav governments-in-exile were located in London and were dependent on British financial subsidies. In fact, the British government had much more contact with, and influence over, the resistance groups than did the exile governments. The latter not only lacked the tech nical facilities for communication but also were estranged from the resistance bodies because of ideological and political differences. Considering first British relations with the Yugoslav resistance move m ent, we find that the earliest British missions were assigned to Mihailovich as the representative of the government-in-exile. In M ay, 1943, Churchill sent a sm all group to T ito ’s headquarters to check reports of a powerful and growing Partisan movement. Captain F. W. Deakin, an Oxford don who com m anded the group, sent back dispatches emphasizing the extent and signifi cance of T ito ’s operations against the enemy. Churchill then decided to send a senior officer, Brigadier Fitzroy M aclean, to head the mission with the Par tisans. M aclean arrived in September, 1943, to find the situation revolution ized. Tito had taken advantage of the Italian surrender to disarm six Italian divisions while two others had joined him voluntarily. The Partisans now numbered 200,000 men and M aclean reported that they were destined to be the future rulers of Yugoslavia. Churchill acted in accordance with this in form ation and took the initiative at the Teheran Conference in November, 1943, to propose that Allied support be transferred from Mihailovich to Tito. The following m onth he w ithdrew all B ritish personnel from M ihailovich’s headquarters. C hurchill’s general .attitude tow ard developm ents in Y ugoslavia at this time is m ade clear in the following account by M aclean of a conversation that he had with the prime m inister shortly alter the Teheran Conference:


8 0 2 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
I now emphasized to Mr. Churchill the other points which I had already made in my report, namely, that in my view the Partisans, whether we helped them or not, would be the decisive political factor in Jugoslavia after the war and, secondly, that Tito and the other leaders of the Movement were openly and avowedly Communist and that the system which they would establish would in evitably be on Soviet lines and, in all probability, strongly oriented towards the Soviet Union. The Prime Minister’s reply resolved my doubts. “Do you intend,” he asked, “to make Jugoslavia your home after the war?” “No, Sir,” I replied. “Neither do I,” he said. “And, that being so, the less you and I worry about the form of Government they set up, the better. That is for them to decide. W hat interests us is, which of them is doing most harm to the Germans?” 2
Turning to British relations with the Greek resistance movement, we find th a t C hurchill’s attitude tow ard the C om m unist-dom inated E A M was m uch less accom m odating than it was tow ard T ito’s Partisans. T he explana tion certainly does not lie in any substantive difference in the two organiza tions. Both were led and directed by Communists and both had the same ultimate objectives that Maclean had described to Churchill. Yet the British prime minister from the beginning was resolved to control the Greek resist ance organizations in contrast to his acceptance of T ito ’s hegem ony in Y ugo slavia. It may be assumed that one reason for the difference in his policy was that Greece loomed more im portant in British imperial considerations than did Yugoslavia. Greece, with her numerous harbors and islands, was an essential factor in the balance of power in the eastern M editerranean. If Britain was to retain her traditional primacy in that area it doubtless seemed essential to Churchill that postwar Greece should be ruled by a friendly, nonCommunist government. A no th er explanation for C hurchill’s G reek policy may lie in the fact that the EA M was not as powerful and militant an organization as its Yugo slav counterpart. Churchill was informed unequivocally that the Partisans would play a decisive role in postw ar Yugoslavia. The reports from Greece, although stressing the pre-em inence of the EA M , did not accept its ultimate trium ph as inevitable. Accordingly, Churchill, in giving arms to the EA M to fight the Axis, im posed throughout certain conditions and restrictions de signed to make possible British supervision and control, and to prevent the EA M from consolidating and extending its predominance. The first British mission to occupied Greece dropped by parachute on O ctober 1, 1942. Twenty-five miles n o rth of the landing spot were T h er mopylae and the Gorgopotamos Bridge on the main Saloniki-Larissa-Athens railroad, w hich was then carrying supplies for R om m el’s arm y in N orth Africa. The objective of this mission, headed by Brigadier Edward Myers, was to blow up the G orgopotam os Bridge. A fter weeks of hiding in dam p caves and struggling up and down snow-covered mountains, the mission


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 803
made contact with two guerrilla groups and with their help demolished the bridge. W hen escape from Greece proved impossible, the mission was or dered to stay on as an official British M ilitary Mission for liaison between the Greek guerrillas and General H eadquarters, Middle East. Myers now discovered that the Communist-led EAM , with its mili tary branch, ELAS, was by far the strongest resistance organization in the country. It dom inated central and northern Greece, while EDES, its only significant rival, controlled only a part of the province of Epirus.* The coop eration of EA M -E L A S was obviously essential if there was to be any sub stantial resistance in Greece. U nder these circumstances Myers furnished ELA S with the minimum of arms necessary for specific operations and at the same time encouraged and bolstered EDES as a counterweight to ELAS. M yers also prepared in M arch, 1943, a docum ent specifying how Greek resistance bodies should be organized and how they should operate in order to be eligible for British aid. The most im portant provisions were the fol lowing:
1. All andarte [guerrilla] bands are to be known for military purposes as “National Bands,” which title will be the only one used by the Allies. 2. Greece is to be divided into areas. A competent leader, recognised by mutiial agreement of Brigadier Eddie [Edward Myers] t as representative of GHQ, Middle East, and of the Greeks, will be appointed military commander of each area. Each commander will be solely responsible for all military decisions in his area. AH “National Bands” in the same area will co-operate fully under the military commander’s orders. 5. No member of any “National Band” is ever to mention politics in public. Every member is to be free to have his own political views. 9. If, in the opinion of the British Liaison Staff, there is any failure to carry out the above Agreement, GHQ, Middle East will immediately order the cessation of supply of war material until the failure is rectified.3
The effect of these provisions would have been to remove the re sistance struggle from the political arena and place it under effective British control. The EA M leaders refused to accept these terms, and it was not until July, 1943, that an agreem ent was reached that was acceptable to all parties. This provided for the establishment of a Joint General H eadquarters “for the better direction of the struggle and for the co-ordination of all military ac tions.” This body was to be composed of “representatives of all guerrilla bands recognized throughout Greece or occupying large areas, as well as a representative of the M iddle East.” The ELAS High Command was to con tinue and it was clear from the negotiations and the term s of the agreement that it would operate as an autonom ous unit in carrying out the orders of G H Q , Middle East. The provision for no politics was withdrawn, though it
* Various Greek resistance groups were described in Chapter 38. 1 Members of the military missions used Iheir Christian names, even for formal purposes, when operating in the occupied Balkan countries.


804 Age oj War and Crisis: 1914
was still stipulated th a t supplies w ere to be cut off if the p act’s provisions were violated.4 This agreem ent m ade possible the effective cooperation of all G reek forces in carrying out a far-flung series of diversionary operations in the summer of 1943. The Germans rushed two divisions to Greece to meet an expected Allied invasion which m aterialized, instead, in Sicily. Myers then received orders to “lie low . . . with a view, when the time cam e for the in vasion of Greece itself, to carrying out another series of widespread sabotage operations. . . .” 5 Considerations of higher strategy prevented an invasion from being m ade before the G erm ans evacuated the country in the fall of 1944. During the interval Myers became increasingly involved in political en tanglements. The basic reason was that all parties concerned— the British as well as the rival G reek resistance groups— were jockeying with an eye to the postwar balance of power. The EA M , like the Yugoslav Partisans, had plans for social revolu tion following the war. They believed that the British would make every effort to stop them and would use King George as their tool. Accordingly, they con ducted a propaganda campaign against the Glueksburg, as they invariably called the king. They accused him of responsibility for the prewar M etaxas dictatorship and denounced him for fleeing the country and living abroad in luxury while his people endured the hardships of occupation and resistance. Above all they warned that he would be foisted willy-nilly upon the people of Greece at the end of the war as a puppet of imperial Britain. This propaganda proved so effective that Myers now proposed that the British government should persuade King George to announce publicly that he would not set foot on G reek soil until the people expressed in a free plebiscite their desire for his return. In this manner, Myers argued, “the bottom could be knocked out of E A M ’s basket of propaganda.” (i In order to settle this ticklish m onarchy question Myers arranged for a meeting in Cairo between Greek officials and representatives of the resistance groups. In Aug ust, 1943, six resistance representatives, together with M yers, flew to C airo from hidden airfields in occupied Greece. By coincidence there appeared in Cairo at the same time an official spokesm an of the several political parties represented in the preM etaxas parliam ent. Thus there now gathered in C airo representatives of all the Greek political parties and resistance organizations. These representatives on August 17 subm itted a m em orandum to Premier Emmanuel Tsouderos, head of the Greek exile government which recently had moved from London to Cairo. The memorandum requested that “for the sake of national unity which alone can guarantee the success of our national struggle. . . . an authoritative statem ent be issued that the King will not return to Greece before the people have expressed themselves on the form of their governm ent.” 7 O n A ugust 19 the Tsouderos cabinet discussed the m em orandum , approved its contents unanimously, and passed a resolution authorizing Tsouderos to “communicate this decision of the Council of M in isters to His M ajesty the King.” 8


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 805
This placed the king in a difficult position. All the resistance groups, all the political parties, even the royal ministers, were agreed that the king should not return until after a plebiscite. King George already had declared publicly on July 4, 1943, that the Greek people would be free to elect a constituent assembly after liberation. But he refused to go further and state publicly that he would remain out of the country until after the people had expressed their wish. The open conflict between the king and the Greek delegates and ministers served to bring to the fore a basic dichotomy in British policy. This dichotomy has been defined succinctly as follows by Colonel C. M. W oodhouse, who shortly was to succeed Myers as commander of the British M is sion in G reece: “Those who put the war effort first tended to have an adverse opinion of the King, because practically all resistance to the G erm ans in Greece was carried on by republicans; those who put long-term considera tions first looked with favour upon the King as the most likely guarantee that Greece would not pursue an anti-British policy after the w ar.” 9 M ore specifically, the proposal that the king should remain abroad was supported by SOE, or Special O perations Executive,, the British counterpart of the A m erican Office of Strategic Services. Because the SOE was directly in charge pf the British missions in G reece it was concerned prim arily with o r ganizing effective resistance operations. On the other hand, the Foreign Office, which was more interested in postw ar power relationships, strongly supported the king as the most reliable guarantee of a friendly Greece. Churchill sup ported the Foreign Office and the final decision therefore was to stand by the king. The top B ritish officials in the M iddle E ast now met with the G reek ministers and resistance delegates and informed them that the British gov ernm ent favored the return of the king upon liberation and opposed the de mands being made upon him. The British officials also ordered the G reek delegates to leave Cairo at once and return to their homeland. Furtherm ore, Brigadier M yers, who had become identified with the plan to keep King George abroad, was not allowed to return to Greece, being replaced by Col onel W oodhouse. The reaction of the resistance delegates was expressed by the EDES representative.
After some days we received our answer: we were ordered to leave Cairo at once. This order was announced to us officially by Marshal Wilson. We pro tested against the unheard-of-manner in which we were being forcibly expelled. We were transported like prisoners to the airdrome. Mr. G. Kartales [representa tive of the political parties]; suffering from acute malaria and fever, was forced to follow. . . . On the mountains of Greece, we, and the guerrillas we represented, were the “heroic Greeks.” In Cairo, because we disturbed British policy and the plans of the King, we were “undesirables.” 10
These developments in Cairo m arked a turning point in Greek affairs. I'ield M arshal Lord Wilson, the British com m ander in chief in the M iddle Hast, has emphasized the significance of the decision to back King George.


806 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
The acute differences between our diplomats and S.O.E. arose over Myers, whom the former accused of getting too deeply committed to E.A.M. and ranging outside his province in the political sphere by encouraging the left wing leaders, whereas H. M. Government were backing the King and the refugee Government; Myers, on the other hand, claimed that E.A.M. held the greatest control of the resistance movement though some of our liaison officers differed about this; the Greeks recognized Myers as a leader and he had their confidence, thus enabling him to get the different parties to sit round a table and agree to work under one direction. The suggestion to defer the return of the King brought matters to a head; our diplomats were strongly averse to any encouragement being given to parties which might prejudice the return of the King and the existing Greek Government, while S.O.E. wanted to build up resistance regardless of the politics of any of the bands they had contacted. From the war effort point of view the latter course was preferable and I personally did not like the idea of tying our liaison officers exclusively to one political party. . . . I felt that the wisest course was to work with the left wing parties and endeavour to guide them rather than to resist them. Myers, nevertheless, was ordered to report to London and was not allowed to return to Greece. The warm welcome of the six delegates by our Ambassador followed by a rapid cooling off as soon as their political demands were made known marked in my opinion the turning point in our relations with E.A.M. . . . since the six delegates who came to Cairo had returned with their demands not acceded to, a strong anti-British bias was noticeable; I therefore recommended the return of Myers, who was most likely to get them round to the right way of thinking; the diplomats, however, were too strong for me and I was overruled.11
A marked intransigence and hardening of policy was noticeable henceforth on the part of all participants in Greek affairs. The king naturally was more resolved than ever to return to his throne, secure in the knowledge of B ritish support. T h e B ritish were disturbed by the E A M ’s growing strength and were determ ined to forestall any developments in Greece that might jeopardize their postwar position in that country. Finally, the EA M -ELA S now considered its suspicions of the British and the king to have been con firmed, and henceforth acted with corresponding m istrust and harshness. It is scarcely surprising that developments in Greece from now on were marked by increasing violence. W hen the Italians surrendered in September, 1943, ELA S seized most of their arms and supplies. The following m onth ELA S attacked EDES, partly bccause of provocation by the latter body and partly because the EAM ELAS leaders wished to eliminate a rival organization which the British were fostering as a counterweight. The Germans seized this propitious m o ment to launch an offensive against the G reek guerrillas. A t the same time the British rushed arms to EDES and denied them to ELAS. Under these cir cumstances ELA S failed to attain its objective and a peace settlement was negotiated by the two organizations on February 15, 1944. The following m onth the EA M leaders established a five-man Political Committee of N a tional Liberation, or PEEA . The main objective of PEEA was to force the


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 8 0 7
exile cabinet to offer seats to EAM representatives. It was not a provisional government like that already established by Tito when he repudiated the Yugoslav exile government. Nevertheless, the establishment of PE E A carried the threat that if Prem ier Tsouderos in Cairo did not accept resistance rep resentation in his cabinet the EAM could follow the example of Tito. The most spectacular example of EAM strength and influence came in April, 1944, when G reek army and naval units in Egypt revolted against the Tsouderos government. The revolt was a complex affair, being supported by irresponsible republican Greek politicians in the M iddle East who were motivated by antiroyalist considerations. The leaders of the EAM in Greece did not instigate the mutiny, which, indeed, caught them by surprise. Never theless, m em bers of the rank and file, whose disaffection m ade the revolt possible, were moved by EA M propaganda and slogans. In the end, the up rising was suppressed following decisive intervention by British military forces. Nevertheless, it had illuminated like a flash of lightning the deep fissures and violent passions that rent the Greek political world. In retrospect it appears that the turbulence of Greek politics at this tim e arose from the fact th at the policy Churchill followed in Greece was different from his policy in Yugoslavia. In the latter country he accepted Partisan predom inance and cooperated with Tito as the future ruler of his country: In Greece, by contrast, Churchill refused to accept EAM predom i nance. Had he done so the EAM would have forged ahead to supreme power as easily as did the Partisans. The only rival organization was EDES, a British creation that remained dependent on British aid from beginning to end. Col onel C. M. W oodhouse, M yers’s successor in G reece, has stated flatly that “it is perfectly correct to say . . . that w ithout British support Zervas’ army [EDES] would never have existed. . . . If Zervas had not been supported the whole of Greece would have been controlled by EA M -ELA S when the G er m ans left it.” 12 Such EAM control was precisely what Churchill was resolved to fore stall. This explains his backing of King George in the face of unanimous Greek opposition. It also explains the following minute which he wrote on September 29, 1943, a month after the Cairo negotiations:
Should the Germans evacuate Greece, we must certainly be able to send five thousand British troops with armoured cars and Bren carriers into Athens. . . . The Greek troops in Egypt would accompany them. Their duty would be to give support at the centre to the restored lawful Greek Government. . . . There may be some bickering between the Greek guerrilla bands, but great respect will be paid to the British, more especially as the saving of the country from famine depends entirely on our exertions in the early months of liberation.13
The contrast is apparent betw een this plan for arm ed intervention in G reece and the advice th at Churchill gave to M aclean th at “ the less you and I worry about the form of Government they [the Yugoslavs] set up, the
better.”


8 0 8 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
“ THE BRUTE ISSUES”
The turbulence of Greek politics and the manifestations of EAM strength would have been disturbing to British policy makers under any cir cumstances. They were particularly so at the time because the Teheran Con ference of N ovem ber, 1943, had rejected C hurchill’s proposals for Allied thrusts into the Balkan Peninsula. Churchill had been advocating such action for several months but had been steadfastly opposed by the Am erican chiefs of staff. These military men from the beginning had placed first priority on Overlord, the cross-Channel invasion of Europe projected for the summer of 1944. It should be added that Churchill did not wish to abandon Overlord, as some of his critics assert. R ather, he refused to accept the Am erican view that Overlord and a Balkan campaign were mutually exclusive. He main tained that a series of diversionary attacks in the eastern M editerranean might delay Overlord for a few months but would greatly enhance that op eratio n ’s prospects for success. A t the T eheran Conference Churchill pre sented this thesis to Roosevelt and Stalin on November 28, 1943. He pointed out that at the moment there were two surplus British and American divisions in the M editerranean, as well as a powerful arm y m aintained by the Turks, who probably could be persuaded to join the Allies. Under these circum stances, he asked, are there not possible operations in the eastern M editer ranean that should be considered even if they might involve a slight delay for Overlord? Roosevelt intervened at this point to suggest an expedition across the A driatic to help Tito in Yugoslavia. Churchill quickly acccptcd and sup ported the proposal. But Stalin now objected that it would be unwise to scatter Anglo-American strength by launching new operations. He also added th at the T urks would never budge from their neutral stand. Stalin’s negative reaction proved to be decisive because Roosevelt was unwilling to stand up against the Russian dictator. The president wanted above all else to ensure a com prehensive postw ar settlem ent with the Russians, and if the way to get that was to accept their strategic plans (which agreed with those of his own chiefs of staff), then Roosevelt was willing to go along. Churchill argued his case stubbornly and persuasively for two days but to no avail. In the end he was forced to agree to a cross-C hannel invasion scheduled for M ay 1, 1944, and to a supporting attack on the coast of southern France. This decision obviously was of basic significance for the future of the Balkans. It ruled out the possibility of an Anglo-American invasion of the peninsula. The Red Army now was assured of a free hand in Southeastern Europe. Furtherm ore, obviously Yugoslavia would come under the rule of the Com m unist Partisans, while Greece also was likely to fall to the C om munist EAM unless energetic measures were taken. Such was the grim out look that Churchill faced at the beginning of 1944. These were the circum


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 809
stances in which he wrote a m emorandum to Foreign M inister Anthony Eden on May 4, 1944, requesting a reappraisal of the situation.
A paper should be drafted for the Cabinet, and possibly for the Imperial Conference, setting forth shortly—-for that is essential— the brute issues between us and the Soviet Government which are developing in Italy, in Rumania, in Bul garia, in Yugoslavia, and above all in Greece. . . . broadly speaking the issue is: are we going to acquiesce in the Communisation of the Balkans and perhaps of Italy? 14
ANGLO-RUSSIAN DIVISION OF THE BALKANS:
S U M M E R 1944
The basic problem confronting the British was how to safeguard their interests in the Balkans with the Red Army advancing from the north and with an Anglo-American expedition ruled out at Teheran. The only course open was to attem pt to reach an understanding directly with the Russians. O n May 5, 1944, Anthony Eden proposed to the Soviet am bassador in Lon don, F. Gusev, that they discuss a tem porary arrangem ent whereby Rumanian affairs should be regarded mainly as Russia’s concern, and G reek affairs should be B ritain’s concern. This suggestion set off a chain reaction of nego tiations which also involved the United States and which ultimately led to the division of the peninsula into spheres of interest. The Soviet am bassador informed the Foreign Office on May 18 that his government was willing to accept the British proposal but wished to know whether the United States had been consulted. Accordingly, on May 30, L ord Halifax, the British am bassador in W ashington, asked Secretary of State Cordell Hull whether the United States would object to the proposed AngloSoviet agreement as a tem porary wartime arrangement. Hull replied that he would give this proposal serious consideration, but added that he was op posed to spheres of influence in the Balkans because he feared they would sow the seeds of future conflict and weaken the postwar international security organization.
On the following day, May 31, Churchill sent a telegram to Roose velt strongly urging the acceptance of the proposed agreement and explaining once more that it would apply only for the war period and did not involve spheres of influence. Churchill sent another message on June 8 repudiating again the idea of spheres of influence and adding that it seemed reasonable to him that Russia should deal with Rum ania and Bulgaria, and Britain with Yugoslavia and Greece. This casual inclusion of Bulgaria and Yugoslavia in the proposed agreement meant that it would cover virtually the entire penin sula. Secretary Hull was convinced more than ever that the plan should be opposed. Accordingly Roosevelt on June 10 sent a negative reply to Churchill, expressing the opinion that even if the agreement were limited to military affairs it would lead to spheres of influence and engender future trouble. The president concluded that he favored consultative machinery for the Balkans


810 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
to resolve misunderstandings and to prevent the development of exclusive zones of influence. Churchill replied the following day in “a long and forceful telegram ” to the president, stating that a tripartite arrangement would be too cumber some. He urged instead that the proposed Anglo-Russian agreement, limited to R um ania and Greece, be given a three m onths’ trial, after which it could be renewed or ended as seemed desirable. Roosevelt now decided to accede to C hurchill’s request. O n the next day, June 12, he replied accepting the three m onths’ proposal and adding that care should be taken to avoid the development of postwar spheres of influence. Roosevelt did not inform Hull of his decision, the reason seemingly being that he disliked to communicate unwelcome news to personal friends. A s a result, H ull did not learn of the president’s action until eighteen days later, during which time there was considerable confusion. This became ap p aren t when Churchill w ired Stalin on July 11 requesting th at the B alkan plan be tried for three m onths. Stalin replied on July 15 “th a t the A m erican Governm ent have some doubts regarding this question, and that it would be better to revert to this m atter when we receive the American reply to our inquiry.” 18 T h a t sam e day the R ussians asked W ashington w hat had been decided and were informed that the Balkan arrangement had been endorsed with the three m onths’ time limit. Stalin now failed to take up the m atter again with Churchill. As a result, the proposed agreement never came into effect. “We were thus unable,” relates Churchill, “to reach a final agreement about dividing responsibilities in the B alkan peninsula.” 10 It is im portant to note, however, that on certain critical occasions both governments acted in accordance with the terms of the proposed agree ment. The British, for example, declined to intervene actively in Rumanian and Bulgarian affairs when, in the summer of 1944, envoys from those two countries attem pted to bring A nglo-Am erican forces on the scene as a coun terweight to the Red Army. The Russians in the same spirit advised the Greek Communists in August, 1944, to join a British-sponsored government for Greece. Despite the lack of legal sanction, both Britain and Russia now acted as though they had divided the Balkans between them.
RED ARMY IN RUM ANIA AND BULGARIA!
FALL 1944
Rum ania was the first Balkan country to fall to the advancing Red Army. As described in Chapter 37, R um ania had contributed heavily to the Axis war effort and had suffered severe losses on the Russian front. Follow ing the disaster at Stalingrad in the w inter of 1942-1943 the R um anians be gan sporadic negotiations with the W estern Powers in the hope of securing Anglo-American intervention to block the approaching Russians. These ef forts were doomed to failure because of the Teheran decision against a


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 811
W estern invasion and also because of the Anglo-Russian negotiations which had assigned Rum ania to Russia. The R ed A rm y crossed the Pruth River and reached R um anian soil in April, 1944. After pausing for consolidation and preparation it resumed its advance in the summer. The R um anians sought frantically to obtain a cessation of hostilities. Negotiations were carried on by representatives of the N ational Dem ocratic Bloc, a loose grouping that had been form ed in June, 1944. It included the four leading opposition parties: the Liberals, Socialists, Communists, and National Peasants. The leader of the latter party, Iuliu M aniu, directed the negotiations. He proved to be so slow and indecisive that in the end it was not the Bloc but young King Michael who extricated R um ania from the Axis camp. M ichael had succeeded to the throne when his father abdicated in September, 1940. At first he had been completely dom inated by the imperious A ntonescu. B ut by 1944 he had begun to show a will of his own and to ex press distaste for the Germans and sympathy for the Allies. He was encour aged in these views by his m other, Q ueen Helen, and by certain Foreign Office officials. On August 23 Michael invited A ntonescu to the palace and demanded his resignation. Antonescu refused and began to bluster. The king then summoned his guard and had him arrested. T hat evening Michael an nounced'over the radio that Rumania had accepted the Allied surrender terms and that she no longer was at war with Russia. The Germans retaliated the next day by bombing Bucharest, aiming especially at the pakice. Michael then formally declared war on Germany on August 25. During the following months the Rumanian army fought along side the Soviet, first forcing the G erm ans out of Transylvania and then driv ing into Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Germany. A fter the grievous losses they had suffered on the Russian plains the hapless Rum anian soldiers now sustained 169,822 casualties fighting against their form er allies. M ichael’s coup was one of the decisive events of W orld W ar II. T he “great historic act of 23 August 1944,” as it was called by the Rumanians at the time, opened the way into the Balkans for the Red Army. The immediate effect was the collapse of the Axis-dominated regime in Bulgaria. As described in Chapter 38, a change of government had occurred in Bulgaria in M ay, 1944, as a result of the Anglo-American air raids and the threat of the approaching Red Army. The new premier, Ivan Bagrianov, was an Agrarian, and his cabinet was composed mostly of “technicians.” These men were neither pro-G erm an enough to satisfy H itler nor anti-German enough to. suit Stalin. T hey tried to m aintain a balance betw een the two dic tators, b u t when Stalin’s R ed A rm y pushed into M oldavia their position b e came impossible. On September 2 Bagrianov was replaced as premier by an other Agrarian, Kosta Muraviev. The latter form ed a cabinet comprising political personages who belonged to the prewar democratic parties. These men had opposed the pro-G erm an course of the war governments but they also distrusted the Communists and refused to join the Fatherland Front.


812 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
T heir sympathies were with the W est and they deplored the action of King B oris’s governm ent, which had declared w ar on the W estern powers in M arch, 1941, while remaining neutral in the Russo-German struggle. Ac cordingly, the Muraviev government now declared itself no longer at war with Britain and the United States. Moscow was highly suspicious of this move because it m eant that future peace negotiations would be conducted directly between Bulgaria and the West. This distrust was unw arranted in view of the fact that the Bul garian envoys in Cairo had been cold-shouldered by Britain and the United States, who were obviously waiting for Russian initiative in Bulgaria. M os cow, however, held that B ulgaria should have sought Soviet m ediation in dropping out of the war. In order to make it quite clear that it was resolved to control B ulgarian affairs, the Soviet governm ent, w ithout inform ing its allies, suddenly declared war on Bulgaria on September 5, 1944. W ithin five hours Prem ier M uraviev requested an arm istice from Russia. The next day he declared war on Germany, neutrality no longer being feasible. Two days later, on September 8, the Red Army entered Bulgaria without encountering resistance. T hat same night the Fatherland Front grasped the opportunity it had long awaited. It seized power smoothly and quickly with the assistance of collaborators in the w ar m inistry and in certain arm y units stationed near Sofia. The new government included representatives of the four parties comprising the Fatherland Front. The prime minister, Colonel Kimon Georgiev, and four other members of the cabinet, belonged to the Zveno group. The Communists held four cabinet posts, including the im portant ministries of interior and justice, while the Agrarians and Socialists held four and three seats, respectively. U nder this new government Bulgaria participated actively in the war against Germany. Bulgarian troops fought beside the Yugoslavs and the Russians, taking Skoplje, Nish, Belgrade, and then fighting on through Croatia and Hungary to Vienna. In these operations some 30,000 Bulgarian soldiers were killed. T hese developm ents in R um ania and Bulgaria left the Soviet U nion in a dom inant position in the northern Balkans. The Soviet success was due basically to the strength of the Red Army and to the Teheran decision against an Anglo-American invasion. This left the W estern powers no alternative but to accept Russian responsibility in the northern Balkans as had been proposed in the summer negotiations. The predominance of the Soviet Union was formalized by the armistice agreements that it signed with Rum ania and Bulgaria on Septem ber 12 and O ctober 28, 1944, respectively. R epresenta tives of the United States and G reat Britain participated in the armistice ne gotiations. But since the two satellite countries were in the Russian sphere of military operations, the Soviet government took the initiative in preparing the armistice documents, both of which were signed in Moscow. In regard to frontiers, Bulgaria was required to evacuate Greek and Yugoslav territory, while R um ania was forced to accept the loss of Bessarabia


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 81 3
and northern Bukovina, which she had ceded to the Soviet Union in 1940. On the other hand, Rum ania was to regain Transylvania from Hungary. Finally, Rumania was required to pay 300 million dollars in reparations to the Soviet Union as well as to meet the cost of Soviet operations on her territory. The most im portant provisions, so far as the future of Rumania and Bulgaria was concerned, called for the establishment of Allied Control Com missions in Bucharest and Sofia. These commissions were to include repre sentatives of all three allies, but their authority and functioning were defined as follows: “During the period between the coming into force of the armis tice and the conclusion of hostilities against Germany the Allied Control Com m ission will be under the general direction of the A llied (Soviet) High C om m and.” 17 This phrasing showed clearly where the preponderance of authority was to lie. F urtherm ore, it is significant that no corresponding p ro vision was made for the period between the surrender of Germany and the coming into force of the peace treaties. Thus the Soviet Union acquired a legal basis for its predom inance in B ulgaria and R um ania until the signing of the peace treaties, whose terms would require its approval.
BRITISH DIPLOM ACY IN YUGOSLAVIA AND GREECE:
FALL 1940
While the Soviet Union was establishing its dom inance in the north ern Balkans, G reat Britain sought to strengthen her position in Yugoslavia and Greece. Britain was unable to act as decisively as the Soviet Union be cause her armies at this time were fighting in France rather than in the Bal kans. Consequently, she was able only to exert her influence upon the Greek and Yugoslav exile governments and to utilize the various missions that she was maintaining throughout the peninsula. C onsidering first B ritain’s policy in Y ugoslavia, we saw earlier in this chapter that in December, 1943, Churchill had recognized the predominance of the Partisans and shifted his support from Mihailovich to Tito. Having made this basic decision, Churchill thereafter sought to promote a working arrangem ent between Tito and King Peter in Cairo. As a move in this direc tion Churchill persuaded Peter to dismiss the coterie of politicians who hitherto had surrounded him. These men had proven singularly unconstructive, being divided into quarreling factions because of conflicting personal ambitions and the traditional Serb-Croat feud. O n June 1, 1944, P eter accepted as prem ier the C roat D r. Ivan Shubashich. Prior to 1941 Shubashich had served as governor of Croatia. During the years of exile he had kept aloof from the intrigues of the other politicians and had openly expressed his sympathy for the Partisans. Follow ing his appointm ent to the prem iership Shubashich held meetings with Tito on June 14-17, 1944. Shubashich promised that his government would co operate as closely as possible with the Partisans, and both men agreed that


814 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
“the final solution of the organization of the State shall be decided by the people after the liberation of the whole country.” 18 The next im portant developm ent was a meeting held in Naples be tween Churchill and Tito on August 12, 1944. The British statesm an was cordial to his guest, stating that he regarded “M arshal Tito and his brave m en w ith the utm ost adm iration.” 10 A fter discussing the future of Istria, a problem that was to cause much trouble later, Churchill expressed the hope that Tito would not introduce communism after the war. Tito replied that he had no intention of doing so. But when Churchill asked him to reaffirm this statem ent in public he refused on the ground that it would appear that it had been forced upon him. Tito was similarly evasive when Churchill declared that he wanted a strong and united Yugoslavia, and hoped for a reconciliation between the Partisans and the exile government. Tito gave' his usual response that the status of the monarchy could not be settled until the Yugoslav people ex pressed their wishes after the war. W hen Churchill proposed a meeting be tw een King P eter and T ito, the latter replied th at he had no objection in principle to the meeting but that the time was premature. The outstanding feature of the Churchill-Tito meeting was the reso lute independence of the Yugoslav leader. Churchill wished to promote the interests of the king in the hope of thereby furthering B ritain’s postw ar posi tion in Y ugoslavia. Despite T ito ’s rebuffs, Churchill continued to provide aid to the Partisans. Even King Peter himself broadcast an appeal from London on Septem ber 12 urging his people to unite under Tito. During this time Tito was pursuing an equally independent policy toward the Russians. On September 21, 1944, he suddenly departed by plane for Moscow, much to the annoyance of the British, whom he had not fore warned. The purpose of the Moscow trip was to coordinate the operations of the Red Army and the Partisans. In the ensuing negotiations with Stalin, Tito consented to the entry of Russian troops into Yugoslav territory. But in re turn he required Stalin to agree that the Russian troops should be withdrawn upon com pletion of their operations, and that Yugoslav civil adm inistration should operate in Yugoslav territory where Red Army units were located. Following this arrangem ent the two men discussed a variety of other topics. T ito ’s account of the conversations is revealing, both for w hat was to happen in Yugoslavia at the time and also several years later:
. . . tension arose at this first meeting with Stalin. We were more or less at cross purposes on all the matters we discussed. I noticed then that Stalin could not bear being contradicted. In conversation with the men around him he is coarse and touchy. Of all the members of the Politburo of the Soviet Central Committee it is only Molotov to whom he turns occasionally to ask for his opinion, but he never listens to him to the end, but goes on with his own line of thought. I was not used to such conversation, which led to uncomfortable scenes. For instance Stalin said to me:


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 815
“Walter, [Tito’s prewar party name in Moscow] be careful, the bour geoisie in Serbia is very strong!” I answered calmly: “Comrade Stalin, I do not agree with your view. The bourgeoisie in Serbia is very weak.” He was silent and frowned and the others at the table, Molotov, Zhdanov, Malenkov, Beria, gaped. Stalin then began to inquire after different bourgeois politicians in Yugo slavia, where they were, what they were doing, and I replied, “He is a scoundrel, a traitor, he worked with the Germans.” Stalin asked about another one. I gave the same answer. Stalin flared up: “W alter,” he said, “to you they are all scoundrels!” I replied, “Exactly, Comrade Stalin: anyone who betrays his country is a scoundrcl.” Stalin frowned again, while Malenkov, Zhdanov, and the others looked at me askance. The talk proceeded in a very painful atmosphere. Stalin began to assure me of the need to reinstate King Peter. The blood rushed to my head that he could advise us to do such a thing. I composed myself and told him it was im possible, that the people would rebel, that in'Yugoslavia the king personified treason, that he had fled and left his people in the midst of their struggle, that the Karagetfrgevic dynasty was hated among the people for corruption and terror. Stalin was silent, and then said briefly: “You need not restore him forever. Take him back temporarily, and then you can slip a knife into his back at a suitable moment.” At this moment Molotov returned to the room, which he had left a mo ment back. He carried a telegram from a Western' news agency reporting that the British had landed in Yugoslavia. I leaped to my feet: “That’s impossible!” Stalin, angrily: “Why impossible! It is a fact!” I repeated that it was impossible and probably the agency was mistaken; that we had asked General Alexander to send us three batteries of heavy artillery to help our Fourth Army in its operations towards Mostar and Sarajevo, and the arrival of this artillery had probably been mistaken for an invasion of Yugoslavia by the British. Stalin was silent, and then he asked the direct question: “Tell me, Walter, what would you do if the British really forced a landing in Yugoslavia?” “We should offer determined resistance.” 20
O ne explanation for this rem arkable scene is th at Stalin m ay have been thinking along the lines of the June, 1944, Anglo-Russian negotiations which had assigned Yugoslavia and Greece to Britain, and Rumania and Bul garia to R ussia. If this be so, then Stalin presum ably was testing T ito ’s reac tion to such a division of the Balkans. In any case, whatever the explanation might be, Tito had made his position as clear to Stalin as he had to C hurch ill. It should be noted that we are depending here on T ito ’s version of his meeting with Stalin, and that we have no way of checking that version. On Ihc other hand, T ito ’s observations do jibe with the following charactcriza


816 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
tions of Stalin by N ikita S. K hruschev, first secretary of the Soviet C om m unist party, at a secret session of the p arty ’s tw entieth congress in M oscow on F eb ruary 2 4-25, 1956: “Stalin absolutely did not tolerate collegiality in leader ship and in w ork. . . . Stalin acted not through persuasion, explanation, and patient cooperation with people, but by imposing his concepts and dem and ing absolute subm ission to his opinion.” 21 Turning to Greece, we find that both the British and the Russians had much less trouble in that country, thanks to the com parative docility of the Greek Communist leaders of the EAM . We noted earlier in this chapter and in C hapter 38 the considerable turm oil among the Greeks, including the fighting between ELAS and EDES, and the mutiny of the Greek armed forces in the M iddle East. Y et the EAM never made as far-reaching dem ands as the Yugoslav Partisans. W hen it established PE E A on M arch 10, 1944, its pri mary aim was to secure representation in the Greek exile government in Cairo. By contrast, Tito, some months earlier, at the Jajce Assembly of November, 1943, had specifically repudiated King Peter and his government. A sim ilar difference is noticeable in the relations betw een T ito and Moscow on the one hand and the Greek Communists and Moscow on the other. The subservience of the Greek Communists to Moscow became evi dent following the Anglo-Russian negotiations for the division of the Bal kans into spheres of responsibility. On June 25, 1944, only ten days after the State D epartm ent had inform ed the Soviet governm ent that it had ac cepted the British Balkan plan, a Russian military mission arrived at EA M ELAS headquarters in occupied Greece. Immediately thereafter the EAM began to modify its conditions for entering the exile cabinet. Negotiations had been going on for some time for the establishment of a national unity government. These negotiations began after the April, 1944, m utiny in the G reek arm ed forces in the M iddle East. Following the suppression of the mutiny the British intervened energetically in Greek po litical affairs and selected George Papandreou, a well-known opponent of the EA M , to serve as prem ier of the exile government. Papandreou called a conference in Lebanon which was attended by representatives of all G reek political parties and resistance organizations. The conference adopted on M ay 20 a National C harter which was to serve as the basis for the establish ment of a national unity government. Although the EAM delegates to the conference accepted the charter they were repudiated by their superiors when they returned to Greece. In stead, the EAM leaders demanded more ministries and more im portant min istries as their price for joining the cabinet. This was the situation when the Soviet mission arrived at EAM headquarters. Soon afterward the EA M m odi fied its conditions, and on September 2 it agreed to participate in the unity government. One may presume a connection between the EAM about-face and the appearance of the Soviet representatives. This incident highlights the contrast between Tito and the Greek Communists. Tito had not only repudiated the exile government but also re


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 817
fused C hurchill’s request th a t he m eet with King Peter. T he G reek C om m u nists, on the other hand, entered a cabinet headed by a prem ier who had been hand-picked by the British and who was an avowed and violent enemy of the EAM . A nd in return the Com m unists and the EAM received six m in istries— labor, agriculture, public works, national economy, finance, and un derministry of finance— all of which were useless as instrum ents of power manipulation. And this at a time when the Germans were beginning to evacuate Greece and when the EA M -ELA S, as the only national resistance organization worthy of the name, was assuming de facto control of the coun try without any opposition. The submissiveness of the Greek Communists to the current Moscow “line” was even more strikingly m anifested at a m eeting held in C aserta, Italy, late in Septem ber, 1944. T he m eeting was called by the British and included representatives of EAM and E D E S. T he purpose of the meeting is to be found in a note that Churchill had addressed to his chiefs of staff the previous m onth, on August 6, 1944: “ It may be that within a m onth or so we shall have to put 10,000 or 12,000 men into A thens, with a few tanks, guns, and arm oured cars. You have a division in England which has above 13,000 troops. Such a force could be em barked now, and would probably be in time for the political crisis, which is of m ajor consequence to the policy of His M ajesty’s G overnm ent.” 22 The crisis that Churchill foresaw was the power vacuum that would be created in G reece when the G erm ans evacuated the country, a develop ment that was expected very shortly because of the advance of the Red Army in the north. This was a most serious m atter for Churchill in view of the course of events elsewhere in the Balkans. The Russians were firmly en sconced in R um ania and Bulgaria, while T ito had m ade it clear that he would not tolerate any foreign intervention in his country. Thus the question now was whether the British would be able to take advantage of the impending G erm an departure to secure their position in at least one Balkan country. The issue, in other words, was the new power situation that would develop in the Balkans now th at H itler’s “New O rd er” was crum bling. Churchill made this clear in a dispatch to Anthony Eden on August 16: “ Regarding our ex pedition to Greece, G eneral W ilson and his staff are already taking action. . . . I have strongly emphasized that the operation must be regarded as one of re inforced diplom acy and policy rath er than an actual cam paign. . . .” 23 Under these circumstances the Caserta meeting was held in order to persuade the EA M to agree to the landing of British troops in Greece when the G erm ans w ithdrew , ft is significant that the only m em ber of the E A M delegation who opposed the proposal was a professional military man, G en eral Saraphis. He maintained that there was no need for British troops to enter Greece in view of the fact th at the G erm ans were already retreating northward. The Communist members of the EAM delegation overruled Saraphis and signed the so-called C aserta Agreement by which they under


818 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
took to carry out the orders of the British G eneral Scobie. The crucial clause provided:
All guerrilla forces operating in Greece place themselves under orders to the Greek Government of National Unity. The Greek Government places these forces under the orders of General Scobie, who has been nominated by the Su preme Allied Commander as General-in-Command of the forces in Greece.24
In the light of later developments it is significant that the original version of the agreement included a paragraph defining the aim of the com m anding general (G eneral Scobie) as being “to restore law and order in Greece.” W hen Saraphis refused to accept this clause it was omitted. Saraphis and the EA M -E L A S made it clear that they undertook to carry out G eneral Scobie’s orders only as they involved m ilitary operations against the G erm ans. Despite the elimination of the “law and order” clause, the British were now in a strong position to safeguard their interests in Greece. The head of the Greek government was their man and the EAM not only had accepted a subordinate position in the cabinet but also had agreed to the landing of British troops in Greece.
DIVISION OF THE BALKANS CO N FIRM ED :
OCTOBER, 1944
In O ctober, 1944, Churchill and Stalin held a conference in Moscow that was to have momentous consequences for the Balkan Peninsula. The reason for the conference was the rapid advance of the Red Army up the Danube Valley and across the Polish plains. The new military situation called urgently for new political arrangem ents. Churchill, with his keen sense of political reality, saw the shifts that were taking place and the need for re appraisal at the highest level.
The arrangements which I had made with the President in the summer to divide our responsibilities for looking after particular countries affected by the movements of the armies had tided us over the three months for which our agree ment ran. But as the autumn drew on everything in Eastern Europe became more intense. I felt the need of another personal meeting with Stalin, whom I had not seen since Teheran. . . . The Russian armies were now pressing heavily upon the Balkan scene, and Rumania and Bulgaria were in their power. As the victory of the Grand Alliance became only a matter of time it was natural that Russian ambitions should grow. Communism raised its head behind the thundering Rus sian battle-front. Russia was the Deliverer, and Communism the gospel she brought.25
President Roosevelt was unable to participate in the Moscow Con ference because he was involved in the presidential and congressional elec tions. He agreed, therefore, that Churchill and Stalin should meet alone, with the Am erican am bassador in Moscow, Averell Harrim an, attending as an observer. The first meeting was held in the evening of October 9. Churchill


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 819
has left a vivid picture of the manner in which he settled Balkan affairs with Stalin.
The moment was apt for business, so I said, “Let us settle about our affairs in the Balkans. Your armies are in Rumania and Bulgaria. We have in terests, missions and agents there. Don’t let us get at cross-purposes in small ways. So far as Britain and Russia are concerned, how would it do for you to have ninety per cent predominance in Rumania, for us to have ninety per cent of the say in Greece, and go fifty-fifty about Yugoslavia?” While this was being trans lated I wrote out on a half-sheet of paper:
Rumania Russia 90% The others 10%
Greece Great Britain 90% (in accord with U.S.A.) Russia 10%
Yugoslavia 50-50%
Hungary 50-50%
Bulgaria Russia 75% The others 25%
I pushed this across to Stalin who had by then heard the translation. There was a slight pause. Then he took his blue pencil and made a large tick upon it, and passed it back to us. It was all settled in no more time than it takes to set it down. . . . After this there was a long silence. The pencilled paper lay in the centre of the table. At length I said, “Might it not be thought rather cynical if it seemed we had disposed of these issues, so fateful to millions of people, in such an off hand manner? Let us burn the paper.” “No, you keep it,” said Stalin.26
This extraordinary episode reflects the rapidly shifting balance of pow er in the Balkans. W hen the British first proposed the division of the Balkans in June, 1944, they retained both Yugoslavia and Greece for them selves. Now they accepted equal Soviet representation in Yugoslavia while acknowledging continued Soviet predom inance in Bulgaria and Rum ania. The explanation for this change is that the R ed A rm y now had overrun R um ania and Bulgaria, and had entered Yugoslavia and Hungary as well, while the British still had only their military missions in Greece and Yugoslavia. F u r thermore, it had been agreed at the second Quebec Conference between Churchill and Roosevelt (September 11-19, 1944) that
as long as the battle in Italy continues there will be no forces available in the Mediterranean to employ in the Balkans except:


8 2 0 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
(a) The small force of two British brigades from Egypt which is being held ready to occupy the Athens area and so pave the way for commencement of relief and establishment of law and order and the Greek Government. (b) The small land forces in the Adriatic which are being actively used primarily for Commando type operations.27
Thus the percentage figures that Churchill himself proposed at M os cow reflected the fact that he had negligible forces with which to counter the advancing Russians. In fact, we shall see now that the British were in such a weak position that they came within an ace of losing even Greece despite the loyal cooperation of M oscow and the submissiveness of the E A M in allow ing them to land their two brigades.
CRISIS IN G REECE: N O V EM B ER -D EC EM B ER , 1 9 4 4
The Germans began to evacuate Greece in September, 1944, because the Russians were about to cut their only escape route, the Saloniki-Belgrade railway. “The testing time for our arrangem ents had now com e,” relates Churchill. “At the Moscow Conference 1 had obtained Russian abstention at a heavy price.” 28 T he price, of course, had been Russian dom ination of the northern Balkans. Churchill now took measures to ensure control of the part of the Balkans allotted to him at the Moscow Conference. In doing so he faced two m ajor obstacles that the Russians in the north had been spared. One was the pitiful lack of arm ed forces, contrasting markedly with the mas sive power of the Red Arm y sweeping through the Danube Valley. The other was the pro-Russian orientation of the Communist-dominated EAM -ELAS, which would be by far the strongest organization in Greece upon the de parture of the Germans. The first British troops to arrive in Greece were small commando units which occupied Patras on October 4. They reached Corinth by October 10 and four days later were in Athens, which they found under ELAS con trol. During the rem ainder of the month they pursued the retreating Germans northw ard, fighting only a few skirmishes. They found that the ELAS had preceded them in all the towns and cities, but it m ade no attem pt to seize control of the country or to block the British. In fact, on the eve of the arrival of the British, the Central Committee of the Greek Communist party issued a proclamation entitled “Forward for the Final Battle”— a proclam a tion that stands in striking contrast to T ito ’s response when Stalin suggested British landings in Yugoslavia.
Let us march united in one soul and one movement. It is everybody's primary national duty to ensure order and a smooth political life for the country. Avoid taking the law into your own hands, as the punishment of the collaborationists and other criminals rests in the hands of the United National Government. . . . Communists, you stood as the champions of the national and popular up


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 821
rising. Stand now as the vanguard for securing order and democratic freedom. Patriots all, unite in the struggle for the completion of the liberation of Greece along with the ELAS and OUR ALLIES under our United Government.29
On O ctober 17 Prem ier Papandreou and his governm ent returned to A thens on board a G reek warship. The capital and its port of Piraeus were a blaze of lights, thanks to an ELAS band that had fought off a G erm an demolition squad ordered to dynamite the power plant. Three particularly large electric signs stood out above the rest. They spelled out the initials EA M , ELAS, and KKE (Com m unist party of G reece). These signs symbol ized the dilemma facing the returning government, a dilemma described at the time by the London Times correspondent as follows: “W ithout a work ing administrative machine, with no revenue, with a civil service and a police force that had to be purged of collaborationist elements and completely re organized before they could be either effective or trusted . . . the G overn m ent’s authority does not extend beyond the principal cities, hardly beyond A thens.” ·''0 The basic problem henceforth was how to secure the transfer of pow er from the EA M -ELA S to the legal but im potent Papandreou govern ment. This transfer obviously was essential not only for regular and orderly government but also for British interests. Churchill wrote to Anthony Eden on November 7: “ In my opinion, having paid the price we have to Russia for freedom of action in G rcece, we should not hesitate to use British troops to support the Royal Hellenic G overnm ent under M. P apandreou.” 31 The problem, specifically, was to secure the disarming of the resist ance forces so as to transfer state power to the legal government. Failure to find a disarm am ent form ula acceptable to all parties precipitated the battle of A thens in D ecem ber. T he forces involved in the disarm am ent dispute were 40,000 to 50,000 in ELAS, 10,000 to 15,000 in EDES, and a few thousand in the governm ent’s M ountain Brigade and Sacred Com pany. The last two consisted of hand-picked royalists, so the Papandreou government now maintained that these bodies should be preserved because they were official military organizations, while both ELA S and ED ES should be dis banded because they were guerrilla organizations. The EAM leaders were suspicious of a plan th a t w ould leave ■royalist bodies as the only m ilitary forces in the country until a new national army could be organized. The disarm am ent negotiations began in earnest on November 22 when Papandreou initialed a plan for the disbandment of the M ountain Brigade and the Sacred Com pany as well as ELAS and EDES. The EAM accepted this plan but Papandreou suddenly reversed his position and insisted that the government units remain intact. According to one source, “He | Papandreou] gave an EAM minister a letter from Scobie which said Prime Minister Churchill would not permit the royalist Mountain Brigade to be dis banded. This is why the attem pt to disarm the political factions in G reece first failed, as confirm ed by the A m erican am bassador in G reece.”


8 2 2 Age of War and Crisis: 1914■
G eneral Scobie now intervened and presented an O rder of the Day to Generals Saraphis and Zervas, commanders of ELAS and EDES, respec tively, requiring the disbandm ent of their forces by Decem ber 10. Saraphis rejected the order, pointing out th at Scobie’s authority under the C aserta Agreement pertained only to operations against the Germans. The disband ment of an army and the formation of another, Saraphis maintained, were domestic matters that must be settled without foreign interference. O n N ovem ber 27 the E A M m inisters in the cabinet proposed a com promise to break the deadlock. They suggested the form ation of a mixed divi sion consisting of the M ountain Brigade, the Sacred Company, an EDES unit, and an ELAS brigade equal in men and arms to the combined strength of the other three units. They suggested also that there should be joint com m and of this division and that the men should be mixed in the squads. Papandreou approved the plan except for the mixed squads. A t this point, when the question seemed to have been settled peacefully, Papandreou made public a different plan which he claimed had come from the EAM min isters. This Papandreou plan kept the M ountain Brigade, the Sacred Com pany, an EDES brigade, and an ELAS brigade, but the latter was to equal only the ED ES brigade in strength. Obviously this was quite different from the original EAM compromise. This left the ELAS brigade outnum bered two to one, while the EA M plan provided for an ELA S brigade equal in strength to all the other units com bined. The Communist ministers denounced as “a breach of faith” this at tem pt of Papandreou to present his plan as their own and now insisted on withdrawing the November 27 compromise plan and going back to their orig inal position. O n November 29 they informed Papandreou that the M ountain Brigade and the Sacred Com pany must be dissolved as well as ED ES and ELAS. General Scobie now brought the crisis to a head. On December 1 he issued an order for the disbandm ent of all guerrilla forces on D ecem ber 10. The six EA M ministers denounced this as an interference in internal Greek affairs and resigned the same day. At the same time the EAM Central Com mittee revived the ELAS Central Committee, which had been disbanded upon liberation, and ordered a mass meeting in A thens’ Constitution Square on December 3. Saturday afternoon, December 2, the EA M Central Committee asked for and received permission to hold the demonstration. Papandreou discussed the situation later in the day with A m bassador Leeper and General Scobie. Both impressed on him that this was the time to be firm with the EAM . They urged him to stop the demonstration. Papandreou agreed. His minister of the interior ordered the Athens police chief to tell the EA M leaders that they could not hold the dem onstration. By the time this notifica tion reached them it was alm ost eleven o ’clock Saturday night. Telephones and radios are rare in Athens, especially among the poorer people. It was physically impossible to call off the dem onstration at that late hour. The next morning the EA M supporters poured out into the streets.


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 8 2 3
As usual in EA M demonstrations, the crowd was young, although there were thousands of old men and women and young children. They carried placards with typical EA M slogans: “Am erica, send us soldiers to make a balance and avoid civil w ar” ; “We w ant a real national unity governm ent” ; “We can solve o ur own problem s” ; “T he people’s will” ; “Independence.” The dem onstration began peacefully. The m archers were unarm ed. There was no fighting with the police. Then suddenly firing began and the bright Decem ber morning was transformed into Bloody Sunday. One of the eyewitnesses of the shooting was the British officer, W. Byford-Jones. He described the scene as follows:
During the next quarter of an hour I watched the demonstrators arrive in the square, carrying their banners and flags, British, American, Russian and Greek. As a large procession was lining up, megaphonists continued to shout their slogans. “Down with Papandreou,” they cried in chorus. “Down with Interven tion,” “Try the collaborators,” . . . . I took up my position outside Jannaki’s bar, which is on the ground floor of the building which also houses the police headquarters, on one corner of the square and watched the procession move off. The head of it had reached the road in front of the old royal palace when my attention was attracted by the sound of voices to jx group of police officers leaning on the balcony of the second floor of the building above the bar. To my surprise these officers had rifles at the ready. Some were standing, others kneeling, so that only their heads could be seen. One or two were taking aim at the head of the procession. I took it that this was merely a precaution, should the demonstrators attack the police station. The Greek police are an armed force. The procession approached: men, women and children marching eight to ten abreast. . . . There; was nothing sullen or menacing about the procession. Some of the men shouted fanatically towards the police station and the hotel, but there was a good deal of humorous banter, and many.jokes were exchanged be tween demonstrators and those who watched from the kerbs. My attention was again attracted to the balcony above by what sounded like an order, given in Greek. The head of the procession was at this time thirty yards away. Mr. S. Barber of the United Press, told me later that it was an order to fire. Next moment the police officers began to pull back the bolts of their rifles, not in unison like a disciplined body, but hesitantly, one after the other, as though some of the men were reluctant to obey. I still thought that this was a precautionary measure, and looked again at the approaching multitude. What happened next was so fantastically unreal I might have been watch ing a film. The squad of police above emptied their rifles into the procession. . . . I thought at first that the police were firing blanks, or that they were aiming far above the crowd. Many other people thought that. But the worst had happened. Men, women and children, who, a few moments before had been shouting, march ing, laughing, full of spirit and defiance, waving their flags and our flag, fell to the ground blood trickling out of their heads and bodies either on to the road or on to the flags they had been carrying. . . . The shots continued to ring out, echo ing and re-echoing among the high buildings, and between the volleys, there were screams of fear and cries of pain, a wild stampede of people who fell over bleed


824 A ge of War and Crisis: 1914
ing bodies. The police now seemed afraid to stop and the sight outraged the sense of decency of every British man who looked on. . . . Every moment those of us who stood within the line of fire expected E.A.M. to use arms. On the roof of the K.K.E. [Communist party] headquarters in the square there was a machine-gun nest, and it could have raked the neigh borhood with devastating fire. But E.A.M. contented themselves with cursing and threatening. I do not think anyone in the procession was armed. Such was the fury of the crowd that, if they had been, civil war would have broken out that mo ment.33 *
A bout twenty dem onstrators were killed and one hundred and forty wounded. The die was cast. Hostilities began which developed into the bloody and bitter battle of Athens. On the day of the dem onstration Prem ier Papandreou broadcasted: “T oday our conscience is clear. All responsibility before history and before the nation is upon the leaders of the extrem e left.” In reply the EA M retorted: “ H enceforth P apandreou is an outlaw . T he people will fight for liberty without counting the sacrifices.” Two days later, on December 5, Churchill sent the following instructions to General Scobie:
You are responsible for maintaining order in Athens and for neutralising or destroying all E.A.M.-E.L.A.S. bands approaching the city. You may make any regulations you like for the strict control of the streets or for the rounding up of any number of truculent persons. Naturally E.L.A.S. will try to put women and children in the van where shooting may occur. You must be clever about this and avoid mistakes. But do not hesitate to fire at any armed male in Athens who assails the British authority or Greek authority with which we are working. It would be well of course if your commands were reinforced by the authority of some Greek Government, and Papandreou is being told by [Ambassador] Leeper to stop and help. D o not however hesitate to act a s if you were in a conquered city where a local rebellion is in p rogress.3'
W hen the fighting began in the streets of A thens Prime M inister Churchill encountered a storm of protest, both at home and abroad. Even the London Times, the M anchester Guardian, and the Economist contributed to the avalanche of criticism. Churchill himself was moved to declare that “there is no case in my experience . . . where a B ritish G overnm ent had been so maligned and its motives so traduced in our own country by im portant organs of the Press or am ong o u r own people.” 35 In answ ering his critics Churchill assailed the EAM -ELAS as “gangsters,” “brigands,” and “ a gang of bandits from the m ountains.” He stressed above all else the alleged exist ence of a “fairly well organized plot or plan by which ELA S should m arch down upon A thens and seize it by arm ed force and establish a reign of terror. . . 30 This contention fails to answer a num ber of crucial questions. If EA M -ELA S planned to seize power, why did it not do so during the weeks prior to the British arrival when the G erm ans were fleeing the country? W hy
* From The Greek Trilogy by W. Byford Jones, by permission of Hutchin & Co. (Publishers) Limited, London.


H idden War, Cold War and Peace Settlem ent in 1947 825
did it perm it the landing of a handful of British troops in early O ctober? W hy did it not assume power in A thens during the three days between the departure of the G erm ans and the arrival of the British, when, in fact, it con trolled the city? Finally, why was ELAS caught unprepared for battle, as we shall note shortly? O r to go further back, why did the EA M commit itself to the return of the exile government and to the landing of British troops by participating in the Papandreou government and signing the Caserta A gree m ent? The diplomacy and the events preceding the battle of Athens suggest strongly th at a decisive factor was C hurchill’s determ ination to disarm ELA S in order to establish B ritain’s position in G reece as provided for at the M os cow Conference. This is borne out by C hurchill’s dispatch to Scobie soon after the hostilities began: “T he clear objective is the defeat of E .A .M . T he ending of the fighting is subsidiary to this.” 37 Because of their subservience to M oscow ’s directives, the G reek Com m unist leaders, far from plotting to seize power, had in fact relinquished the power that they actually held. In return they demanded only certain safeguards and assurances concerning the future, a dem and that was absurdly modest in the light of what they had con ceded in the past and in view of E L A S ’s strength com pared to that of the handful of British troops. It has been pointed out that “ if ELAS had elected to resist the British landing parties and refused to adm it the Greek exiled Governm ent, there would have been little Churchill could do. As it was, the British found it hard to scrape together the handful of troops actually assigned to the landing in G reece.” 38 The puzzling feature of the events leading to the outbreak of the battle of A thens is C hurchill’s rejection of the specific E A M proposal th a t an equal number of ELAS and non-ELAS troops be retained during the in terval while a regular national conscript army was being trained. Acceptance of this plan would have led to the disbandm ent of most of the ELAS units and would have reduced the strength of that form idable force to the level of its rivals. This probably would have enabled Churchill to attain his objectives in Greece peacefully rather than by a costly and em barrassing armed struggle. Yet Churchill turned down the EAM terms and thereby precipitated the battle of Athens. The explanation for this parodox perhaps lies in faulty intelligence reports from Greece which led Churchill grossly to underestim ate and mis judge the EA M -ELA S. Captain Deakin and Brigadier M aclean sent realistic reports from Y ugoslavia concerning the strength of T ito ’s Partisans. But the available evidence suggests that the reports from Greece were misleading. This would explain why, even before the Germans had evacuated Greece and before the crisis had developed, Churchill in private correspondence referred contem ptuously to the E A M as “ m iserable G reek b anditti.” 89 B ut as soon as the fighting began, C hurchill'realized that the enemy had been underesti mated, and he wrote complainingly to G cneraf Wilson, “ You guaranteed most strongly that you hud already sent enough soldiers. . . . I warned you


826 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
of the param ount political im portance of this conflict. A t least two more bri gades should hurry to the scene.” 40 It is notew orthy, in this connection, that M. W. F odor, a correspond ent with years of experience in the Balkans, comm ented that the events in Greece “leave this writer, who followed the afterm ath of the last war [World W ar I], am azed by the deterioration of the British intelligence service, its one sidedness and its complete failure to understand the Balkan mentality. This criticism applies to high and low officials alike, both here [in Athens] and in E ngland.” 41 Similar observations were made by a well-known British journalist and Member of Parliament, Vernon Bartlett:
I have a feeling that the Foreign Secretary is not as well informed by his representatives abroad as he should be, because they are not the sort of people who by training have much sympathy with these resistance movements. . . . I think that the Diplomatic Service at the present time is terribly out of touch with these developments inside Europe. If it were not so we should not have so mis judged the Greek situation. . . ,42
B A TTLE O F A T H E N S : D E C E M B E R , 1944--
JANUARY, 1945
The battle of Athens was unique; neither side was prepared to fight. T here were no ELAS regulars in the capital when hostilities began. The head quarters and staff officers of the First ELA S Corps were in A thens but the men from the beginning had been kept outside in accordance with Scobie’s orders. Only ELAS reserves were within the city— between ten and fifteen thousand men, arm ed mostly with rifles and untrained and unorganized. The nearest regular ELAS units were the Thirty-fourth Regiment at Eleusis and the Second Regiment at Thebes, totaling less than two thousand men. The main concentration of ELAS veterans was far to the north in Thessaly, where the men had come down from the mountains after liberation. Between the departure of the Germans and the development of the crisis the ELAS forces had begun to demobilize. Its top policy body, the Central Committee, had been dissolved, leaving only the executive High Com mand. Orders had been issued to demobilize the reserves, to return requisi tioned horses, mules, and vehicles to their owners, and to grant leaves to officers and men wishing to visit relatives. Thus, when the crisis came, the ELAS leaders were unprepared and confused. On December 2 the ELAS Central Committee was re-established, but when, on the following day, the High Command asked the Central Committee for a general plan of action, no answer was forthcoming. Such was the bewilderment and unpreparedness of the arm y that allegedly had been plotting to seize Athens. General Scobie was equally unprepared for battle. He had available about ten thousand men: the paratroop brigade which had made the original landing in Greece, an arm ored brigade, and the Greek M ountain Brigade.


H idden War, Cold War and Peace Settlem ent in 1947 8 2 7
He also had about twenty-four tanks, two squadrons of armed cars, and a Spitfire squadron stationed at the nearby Hassani airfield. Scobie, who did not expect the EA M to fight back and thought ELAS incapable of serious resistance, had scattered his troops throughout Athens, unprepared for either attack or defense. T he first w eek’s fighting was planless and desultory. N either side had readied itself for large-scale action, for both were still hoping for a diplom atic settlement. It took ELA S leaders in A thens six days to get in touch with all their units and get their activities co-ordinated. But after the first week they began to press the British. In various parts of the city, reserve units were gradually consolidating under central control, and some ELAS regulars were seeping in from the outside. Still, ELA S was using only a fraction of its total strength, with the Royal Air Force patrolling the roads into Athens and fore stalling large troop movements. As the ELAS operations gained, the scattered British detachments fell back to the center of the city, leaving behind supply dumps which pro vided ELAS with much-needed food. By Decem ber 12, when the lines be came fairly fixed, the British controlled only three small and isolated areas. One group held out on the tip of the peninsula in Piraeus. A nother controlled the airfield at Hassani and the shore toward Phaleron Bay. The main body of British troops held a thin strip of central Athens, about two miles long and five or six blocks wide. E xcept for these three isolated areas, E L A S controlled not only Athens but all of Greece. Meanwhile the British in Athens were growing stronger. On Decem ber 11, Field M arshal Alexander personally investigated the situation and ordered immediate reinforcements from Italy. During the next fortnight one hundred A m erican troop carrier planes flown by A m erican pilots rushed in two British divisions, a brigade of the Fifth Indian Division, and several mis cellaneous battalions. When these reinforcements began to arrive, the ELAS High Com m and realized that it must strike at once or give up any hope of success. On the night of December 15-16 it launched an all-out attack on the British positions. But though it won some minor gains it could not drive the British out of Athens, partly because adequate reinforcements had not arrived from Thessaly and partly because the attack had not been properly synchronized. This failure was the turning point. British air-borne troops were ar riving in increasing num bers from Italy. The balance was turning against ELAS. O n D ecem ber 27, General Scobie launched his offensive. The British advanced steadily. In three days of raw and bloody fighting they cleared the southern half of Athens and much of Piraeus. After a few days’ rest they re sumed the attack on January 3. Still ELA S fought back bitterly. Its losses averaged thirty dead and twenty-four wounded for each street given up. British casualties were “above norm al.” Then suddenly it was all over. On the night of January 4 - 5 , ELA S slipped out of the city in the darkness. T he victory in Alliens did not end the Greek crisis for Churchill. He


828 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
was warned by General Wilson that resources were lacking to challenge E L A S ’s dom ination of the rest of G reece:
I earnestly hope that you will be able to find a political solution to the Greek problem, as I am convinced that further military action after we have cleared the Athens-Piraeus area is beyond our present strength. . . . During the German occupation they [the Germans] maintained between six and seven divi sions on the mainland, in addition to the equivalent of four in the Greek islands. Even so they were unable to keep their communications open all the time, and I doubt if we will meet less strength and determination than they encountered.43
O n C hristm as Eve Churchill flew from London to A thens in search of the “political solution” that Wilson had urged. He was not able to restore peace but on his return to England he eased the controversial monarchy ques tion by persuading King George to withdraw (Decem ber 30) and to appoint Archbishop Damaskinos as regent. A t the same time Premier Papandreou resigned and Damaskinos appointed in his place the veteran republican Gen eral Nicholas Plastiras. These changes paved the way for armistice negotia tions when ELAS withdrew from Athens. An armistice was signed on January 11, 1945, and a m onth later, on February 12, the Varkiza Peace Agreement was signed. The principal provisions were that ELAS should surrender its arms within two weeks; the Com m unist party and the EAM be recognized as legal political organizations; elections and a plebiscite on the monarchy question be held within the year; the prosecution of those implicated in the uprising be confined to those who violated criminal law and not extend to political offenses; and the immediate purging of those in the civil and arm ed services who had collaborated with the Germans. T hus ended the thirty-three days of fighting in A thens. The cost is estim ated to have been 250 million dollars worth of property destroyed and 11,000 persons killed, 6,500 of them noncom batants. Churchill had finally secured B ritain’s position in G reece as the Soviet Union had -done in the northern Balkans. Greece now was to be on the side of the W est during the forthcoming Cold W ar of the postwar years.
YALTA
T he fighting in A thens had barely ceased when, in February, 1945, the Big Three powers met at Yalta for the last of their wartime conferences. By this time Russia was in a particularly strong position in E astern Europe. The principle had been established that until the end of the war each great power would supervise political developments in those areas through which its armies passed in pursuit of the foe, and for Russia this m eant all the territory north of Greece. Moreover, as we saw earlier in this chapter, the armistice agreements concluded with R um ania and Bulgaria in the fall of 1944 gave the Soviet authorities almost unrestricted political power until the peace trea ties were concluded. As for Yugoslavia, the Communist Tito was consolidat


H idden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 829
ing his position without any significant opposition. Thus when Stalin appeared at Yalta he was already the de facto master of Eastern Europe. During the negotiations Stalin carefully respected the division of the Balkans arranged at the October, 1944 Moscow Conference. He raised no objections concerning the armed British intervention in Greece. Instead, he assured Churchill that he had “complete confidence” in his Greek policy, and added cynically that “since the Greeks had not yet become accus tom ed to discussion, they were following the practice of cutting each o th e r’s thro ats.” 44 In regard to Y ugoslavia, the Big T hree placed themselves squarely behind Tito by endorsing an agreement he had concluded with Shubashich on N ovem ber 1, 1944, for the establishm ent of a regency until a plebiscite could be held. King Peter naturally had been alarmed by this arrangem ent, but British pressure had compelled him to restrain his objections. Now the decision at Y alta underm ined his position and reduced still further what little hope remained that he might return to his throne. The three powers also agreed to assist the liberated peoples of Europe “to form interim governmental authorities broadly representative of all dem o cratic elements in the population and pledged to the earliest possible estab lishment through free elections of governm ents responsive to the will of the people. . . .” 4r’ On paper, this D eclaration on L iberated E urope represented a substantial concession on the part of the Soviets. Despite their domination of Eastern Europe they had consented to free elections which might well bring to office anti-Soviet governm ents. The substance of this concession, however, was negligible. The Declaration proved to be meaningless and bar ren because it was interpreted very differently by the various signatories. The United States interpreted the D eclaration literally, that is, free elections and no spheres of inlluence in Eastern E urope. The United States was free to take this position because it was not bound by the percentages arrangem ent made at Moscow. Britain, on the other hand, was ambivalent about the Declaration because the percentages agreement had enabled her to secure her position in Greece. O n the other hand, the D eclaration was alluring because, if literally enforced, it would enable B ritain to regain posi tions in Rum ania and Bulgaria that she had abandoned. The Russians, by contrast, clung to the percentages agreement and regarded the Declaration as mere window dressing. They had scrupulously kept their hands off Greece while Churchill had battered the ELAS. Now they expected the W estern powers in turn to respect their “90 per cent say” in R um ania and “75 per cent say” in Bulgaria. Consequently they were sur prised and outraged when the British gradually and somewhat embarrassedly joined the United States in forgetting the percentages and insisting on fulfill m ent of the Declaration. The Russians refused to budge on this point because they regarded “friendly” governments in Eastern Europe as absolutely essen tial for their security. A few m onths later at the Potsdam Conference Stalin declared flatly: “ A freely elected governm ent in any of these countries [in E astern E urope] would he anti-Soviet, and that we cannot allow .” 40 This


8 3 0 A ge of War and Crisis: 1914
contradiction between “friendly” and “freely elected” governments was the rock on which the Big Three G rand Alliance foundered as soon as this rock was laid bare by the ebb of the tide of Germ an conquest.
YALTA VIOLATED
The first conflict over “friendly” or “freely elected” governments took place in Rum ania. King M ichael had withdrawn his country from the Axis camp when he rid himself of Antonescu on August 23, 1944. The next day a coalition government was formed, representing the four main “dem ocratic” parties: the National Peasants, the Liberals, the Social Democrats, and the Communists. The premier was General Constantin Sanatescu, M arshal of the Royal Court, who had been the connecting link between the king and the army in the coup against Antonescu. The disparate elements in this coalition soon were at loggerheads. The Communists and Social Dem ocrats combined with two smaller left-wing parties, the Plow m en’s F ro n t and the U nion of Patriots, to form a N ational Democratic Front (FN D ) and to dem and a greater voice in government. They accused Maniu and Bratianu of opposing reform measures and of fail ing to fulfill the armistice terms. These charges were to a certain degree jus tified because the conservative R um anian leaders were strongly anti-Russian and assumed wishfully that the W estern powers would somehow protect them against Soviet pressure. Having thus misjudged the power situation, they failed to purge the pro-Germ ans and war criminals, and they evaded the R ussian dem ands for m aterial assistance in the war against the G erm ans. On November 5, 1944, the Sanatescu government resigned following a protest from the Russian General Vinogradov, vice-president of the Allied Control Commission, that the armistice terms were being violated. On the same day Sanatescu formed a second cabinet in which the FN D had increased representation. But the FND rem ained hostile to the prem ier, and within less than a m onth he was forced to resign a second time. On December 2 a new government was formed by General Nicholas Radescu, chief of the Rumanian general staff. In accepting the premiership Radescu stipulated that the Communist militia be disbanded and that agrarian reform be postponed until the Ru manian troops were home from the war. The Communists accepted these term s and entered R adescu’s cabinet. B ut it soon becam e apparent th at they had no intention of honoring their commitment and that their goal was a Com m unist-dom inated government. On January 16, 1945, Gheorghiu-Dej, secretary-general of the Communist party and minister of communications, returning from a visit to Moscow, instructed the FN D to overthrow the Radescu government and begin agitation for immediate land reform. Radescu had little chance against the coordinated sabotage of the Russians and the Com m unist-controlled FN D . The Com m unist undersecretaries in various min istries sabotaged the work of their departm ents and refused to resign when


H idden War, Cold War and Peace Settlem ent in 1947 831
R adescu requested them to do so. R adescu was unable to reach the public because the Soviet Mission suppressed all opposition papers. The crisis came on February 24, when mass dem onstrations were or ganized against the governm ent in B ucharest and in some provincial towns. T hat evening eight dem onstrators were killed by a burst of firing in the streets of Bucharest. The Communists charged Radescu with responsibility, while the premier maintained that Communist provocateurs had done the shooting. The next day the Communist-controlled press denounced Radescu as a m ur derer and demanded his execution. T he turning point in R um ania’s postw ar history cam e on F ebruary 27, 1945. On that day A ndrei Vyshinsky, the Soviet foreign minister, arrived in Bucharest and delivered an ultim atum to King Michael dem anding Radescu’s resignation. T he following day Radescu com plied with this dem and. The king then proposed that Prince Barbu Stirbei, a high court functionary, assume the premiership. Vyshinsky reacted violently to this suggestion, slam ming the' door so forcibly as he left that he cracked the wall plaster. The Russian demanded and secured the appointm ent of Peter Groza, leader of the leftist Plow m en’s F ront. T he cabinet, as announced on M arch 6, consisted entirely of members of the FND and of dissident Liberals and National Peasants who represented nobody but themselves. The Russians promptly strengthened the position of this government by transferring northern T ran sylvania to Rumania. Obviously, these events in R um ania were gross violations of the Y alta Declaration on Liberated Europe, which had been enunciated only a month earlier. Churchill was nevertheless reluctant to intervene because of the per centages agreement:
The Russians had established the rule of a Communist minority by force and misrepresentation. We were hampered in our protests because Eden and I during our October visit to Moscow had recognized that Russia should have a largely predominant voice in Rumania and Bulgaria while we took the lead in Greece. Stalin had kept very strictly to this understanding during the six weeks fighting against the Communists and E.L.A.S. in the city of Athens, in spite of the fact that all this was most disagreeable to him and those around him. . . . He had subscribed on paper to the principles of Yalta, and now they were being trampled down in Rumania. But if I pressed him too much he might say, “I did not interfere with your action in Greece; why do you not give me the same lati tude in Rumania?” 47 .
Roosevelt was no.t h am pered by the percentages agreem ent but he was loath to press the issue. According to James F. Byrnes, who shortly was to become secretary of state,
The President felt that the Rumanian situation did not offer the best test case of our relations with the Soviets. Great Britain and the United States had no armed forces in Rumania. It was under the exclusive control of the Red Army. I he President knew that Ihc Soviets had to maintain a line of communication


832 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
from the homeland through Rumania to their armies in Germany. He knew the Soviets would claim the action taken was necessary to protect their armies. . . ,48
Soviet highhandedness in Rum ania had its parallel in Bulgaria. On September 9, 1944, as noted earlier in this chapter, the Fatherland Front had executed its coup and established a government under Colonel Kimon Georgiev. The four parties comprising the Fatherland Front were all represented in the government. The Zveno group had the premiership and four ministries. The Agrarians, who enjoyed widespread peasant support, held four cabinet seats. The Social Democrats had three and the Communists four, including the key ministries of interior and justice. One of the first tasks undertaken by the new governm ent was to purge and punish all politicians associated with Bulgaria’s pro-G erm an policy since 1941. “P eo p le’s C o u rts” with powers of sum m ary trial and execution w ithout appeal were established throughout the country. The Communist ministers of interior and justice did not exert a restraining influence. According to official figures, 10,897 had been found guilty by M arch, 1945, of which 2,138 had been sentenced to death and executed (including the three wartime regents), 1,940 h ad been sentenced to 20 years’ im prisonm ent, 962 to 15 years, 727 to 10 years, and the rem ainder to shorter terms. Rumors spread that many m ore had been punished, but even if the official figures are accepted they indicate that the purge in Bulgaria was of a severity unparalleled in any other European country. The next task after the purge was to prepare for the forthcoming elections. The Fatherland Front governm ent was provisional, and it was agreed, in conformity with the Yalta Declaration, that a free election should be held as soon as conditions allowed. Friction developed during the cam paign between the Communists on the one hand and the Agrarians and So cial Democrats on the other. The Agrarians accused the Communists of interfering in the internal affairs of their party and of trying to unseat A grar ian leaders, such as Nikola Petkov, who were anti-Communist. In fact, the A grarian party did split in M ay, 1945, during a party congress at which Petkov was ousted in favor of A lexander O bbov, who favored cooperation with the Communists. Petkov and certain Social Democratic leaders then resigned from the Fatherland Front and organized an opposition group whose main aim was to prevent the Communists from dominating Bulgaria. The contest was unequal because the Communists controlled the Fatherland Front, the press, the militia, and local government. And, more im portant, the R us sians supported the Communists, whereas the W estern representatives on the Control Commission could do little to aid Petkov. Thus it appeared that the Russians were assured of a Bulgarian regime as “friendly” as that in Rum ania. In Yugoslavia the Communists became the masters of the country before elections were held. As the Germans withdrew, the Partisans’ National Liberation Committees took over control. Furtherm ore, the Big Three at Y alta endorsed the T ito-Shubashich agreem ent of N ovem ber 1, 1944, p ro


H idden War, Cold War and Peace Settlem ent in 1947 8 3 3
viding for a regency to act for the king until a plebiscite could be held. The regency was established on M arch 5, 1945, and two days later a new gov ernm ent was formed with Tito as prim e m inister and m inister of war, and Shubashich as foreign m inister. O nly five of the tw enty-eight cabinet posts were held by non-Tito representatives. Loyal Partisans held all the strategic posts so that there never was any doubt about the outcome of the election of the constituent assembly scheduled for November 11, 1945. In the field of foreign affairs Tito at this time was pressing his claim to the Italian province of Venezia Giulia with the city of Trieste. The P arti sans had demanded the province as early as November, 1943, at their Jajce Assem bly. By M ay 1, 1945, Partisan forces had occupied m ost of the prov ince and were fighting inside Trieste itself. This led to acute friction with the W estern powers, which insisted that the fate of the province be reserved for the peace conference. New Zealand troops were rushed to Trieste, and on June 9, 1945, the Yugoslavs yielded to a virtual ultimatum and withdrew their forces behind the so-called M organ Line, leaving Trieste to the Allies. W hen Stalin complained to Churchill about the pressure on Tito, the British prem ier replied heatedly: “O ur joint idea at the Kremlin in O ctober was that the Yugoslav business should work out around 50-50 Russian and British influence. In fact it is at present m ore like 90-10, and even in that poor 10 we have been subjected to violent pressure by M arshal T ito .” 48 This ex change is significant in reflecting the growing friction betw een the W estern powers and the Com m unist states, and also in revealing th at Churchill was still thinking in terms of the percentages agreement reached at Moscow. These conflicts in the B alkans were considered at the Potsdam C on ference held from July 17 to A ugust 2, 1945. This was the longest and the least satisfactory of the Big Three conferences because the need for military cooperation was no longer an overriding bond and political differences were coming increasingly to the fore. The differences in the Balkans were dis cussed by Churchill and Stalin when they dined together at a preliminary meeting on July 18. Churchill again com plained about the situation in Y ugo slavia, protesting that Britain was being steadily eliminated in that country.
I then spoke of the difficulties in Yugoslavia, where we had no material ambitions, but there had been the fifty-fifty arrangement. It was now ninety-nine to one against Britain. Stalin protested that the proportions were 90 per cent British, 10 per cent Yugoslav and 0 per cent Russian interests. The Soviet Govern ment often did not know what Tito was about to do. Stalin also said that he had been hurt by the American demand for a change of Government in Rumania and Bulgaria. He was not meddling in Greek affairs, and it was unjust of them.50
T he im plication of Stalin’s rem arks was clear: the percentages agree ment should be followed and the Y alta Declaration ignored. W hen full negoliations began it was soon discovered that the problem could not be disposed of so simply. Stalin m ade it clear he expected the W estern pow ers to recog nize the “People’s D em ocracies" of R um ania, Bulgaria, Y ugoslavia, A lbania,


and other Eastern European countries. But the American delegates, Presi d ent H arry S. T ru m an and Secretary of State Jam es F. B yrnes, took their stand by the Yalta Declaration. They wanted free elections in the liberated countries and, if necessary, they were prepared in conjunction with Britain and Russia to send missions to observe and assist with the conduct of the elections. Furtherm ore, they produced a m emorandum maintaining that the Yalta Declaration had not been observed in Rum ania and Bulgaria. Stalin cam e back with the obvious rejoinder, attacking British behavior in Greece. The British heatedly rejected the Russian charges, and thus the Cold W ar lines were draw n with the Soviet U nion on the one side and the W estern powers on the other. The Potsdam deliberations concerning Eastern Europe were doomed to failure because they were based upon two incompatible starting points, the percentages agreement and the Yalta Declaration. A t one point Byrnes told M olotov: “The United States sincerely desires Russia to have friendly coun tries on her borders, but we believe they should seek the friendship of the people rather than of any particular government. We, therefore, want the governm ents to be representative of the people.” 81 If B yrnes was unaw are that his proposal was inherently contradictory, Stalin was ready to enlighten him with brutal frankness: “A freely elected government in any of these countries would be anti-Soviet, and th at we cannot allow .” 82
PEACE SETTLEM ENT
The Potsdam Conference was not altogether profitless so far as the Balkans were concerned. The negotiators did agree that the Council of For eign Ministers should prepare peace treaties for Rum ania and Bulgaria, and that these treaties were to be concluded with “recognized democratic govern m ents.” It was also agreed to “examine . . . the establishment of diplomatic relations . . . to the extent possible prior to the conclusion of peace treaties. . . This did not settle anything, but at least it arranged for continuation of negotiations at a lower level. Furtherm ore, the requirem ent for “recognized dem ocratic governments” slowed down tem porarily the Communist drive to power in the northern Balkans. In Rum ania King Michael declared that the Groza government did not meet the requirements stipulated at Potsdam and asked for British, Am er ican, and Russian assistance in forming a new cabinet. The Russians assured G roza he still had their backing, so he refused to tender his resignation. King M ichael thereupon staged a royal sitdown strike, leaving Bucharest for his summer palace and refusing to sign any decrees. Meanwhile in Bulgaria Petkov had protested officially to the A m erican and British representatives in Sofia that the Y alta free-election provision would not be observed if the election were held as scheduled on August 26. The United States and Britain in turn protested to both Sofia and M oscow, with the result that the Russian governm ent agreed to inform the Bulgarian government that it would not
834 Age of War and Crisis: 1914


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlem ent in 1947 835
object if the election were postponed. O n the election day itself the Father land Front government announced the postponem ent of the election to Novem ber 18. This upsurge of opposition to Communist domination proved ephem eral because the Soviet Union had the preponderance of power in that area and the W estern powers were not ready to offer challenge. They did hold the line at the first meeting of the Council of Foreign M inisters in London in September, 1945. At this meeting the arguments heard at Potsdam were re peated. M olotov insisted that the “ people’s dem ocracies” be recognized, while Byrnes reiterated that he wanted to see governments in Eastern Europe that were both friendly to the Soviet Union and democratic. The conference broke up on October 2 w ithout any achievement to its credit. The next meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers was held in December, 1945, in Moscow. This time the W estern powers gave way on E astern Europe in return for concessions elsewhere. The Soviet Union agreed to accept an arrangement for Allied administration of Japan which did not significantly impair American control. The W estern powers in turn agreed that “two truly representative members” of the opposition parties should be added to the Rum anian and Bulgarian cabinets. In the case of Rum ania, free and unfettered elections were to be held as soon as possible, after which the W estern powers promised to extend recognition to the remodeled Rum a nian government. The election requirem ent did not pertain to Bulgaria be cause an election had already been held there on November 18, with the op position abstaining and the government thus receiving an 86 per cent majority. G roza in Bucharest did accept two minor opposition figures in his cabinet. But no one paid any attention to them and the formal promises of civil liberties and early elections proved entirely empty in the years to come. Before the unregenerate behavior of the Rum anian government had become fully apparent, Britain and the United States extended recognition on Feb ruary 5, 1946. In Bulgaria, however, recognition was withheld because op position representatives were not included in the government. The Soviet government forbade Sofia from making this concession, presumably because such opposition leaders as Petkov had too strong a following. During the year 1946 protracted negotiations were conducted for the conclusion of a peace settlement. It had been agreed at the Moscow meeting of the Council of Foreign Ministers that the peace should be prepared in three stages. First the drafts were to be drawn up by those members of the Council of Foreign Ministers who were signatories of the armistice pacts. Next a con ference of twenty-one Allied nations was to “consider” the drafts, and finally the Council of Foreign M inisters was to draw up the final texts of the settle ments. This complicated procedure represented a compromise between the Russians, who wanted to restrict the num ber of powers participating in the peacemaking, and the W estern powers, which wished to include all Allied nations.
T he C ouncil o f F oreign M inisters met in Paris from April 25 to May


836 Age of War and Crisis: 1914
16 and from June 15 to July 12. It reached an accord on m any questions, though a considerable num ber still rem ained unresolved. T he problem now arose concerning the powers that were to be accorded the conference of Allied nations. The Soviet Union, which had accepted the plan for a con ference with reluctance, now was determ ined to restrict its authority as much as possible. In the end, the Soviet viewpoint prevailed to a large extent. The conference could not change or even pass judgment on the large num ber of clauses that the Council had already formulated. On the twenty-six points which the Council had left open, the conference was merely to make “rec om m endations.” W hether these recommendations were to be considered, let alone adopted, was left entirely to the discretion of the Council. Despite these restrictions, the conference did give the smaller states an opportunity to discuss fully many controversial issues and to adopt fiftynine recommendations by a two-thirds majority and forty-eight recommenda tions by a simple majority. These recommendations appreciably affected the final peace terms prepared by the Council of Foreign M inisters in New York from November 4 to December 16, 1946. The peace treaties, which for mally ended the war between the Allies on the one hand, and Italy, Rumania, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Finland on the other, were signed in Paris on Feb ruary 10, 1947. The most im portant provisions, so far as the Balkans were concerned, had to do with reparations and frontier changes. Italy was required to pay 125 million dollars to Y ugoslavia, 105 million dollars to G reece, 5 million dollars to Albania, in addition to other sums to Russia and Ethiopia. Like wise, Hungary was to pay 70 million dollars to Yugoslavia, as well as other sums to Russia and Czechoslovakia. Italy was required to surrender the Dodecanese Islands to Greece, Saseno Island to Albania, and a part of the province of Venezia Giulia to Yugoslavia. The latter cession represented a compromise between Russia and Yugoslavia, on the one hand, who had de manded the entire province, and Italy and the W estern powers, on the other, who had insisted on an ethnic boundary. The final compromise gave to Yugoslavia the port of Pola, Izonzo Valley, and Istria, with a population of 225,000 Slavs and 128,000 Italians. Trieste, with its immediate hinterland, estim ated at 300 square miles, was placed under international control. H un gary was reduced to the Trianon frontiers, yielding northern Transylvania to Rum ania, southern Slovakia to Czechoslovakia, and Carpatho-U kraine to Russia. Bulgaria restored the Greek and Yugoslav territories that she had occupied but she acquired southern Dobruja, which she had lost to Rum ania in 1919. Finally, Rum ania confirmed the cession of Bessarabia and northern Bukovina to Russia. Superficially this peace settlement appears inconsequential. Both the financial provisions and the territorial changes were on a relatively minor scale. Y et the peace treaty represented a mom entous turning point in Balkan history because it sanctioned the new Com m unist regimes in the northern Balkans. This meant revolutionary and far-reaching changes within the pcnin


Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement in 1947 83 7
sula as well as a basic shift in the orientation of the northern Balkan coun tries from the W estern capitals to Moscow. Churchill had frequently de clared during the war that he did not propose to allow the Soviet zone to extend westward to a line from Stettin in the north to Trieste in the south. Y et this is precisely w hat the W estern pow ers accepted when they signed the peace treaty at Paris. The explanation for the Soviet advance has provoked much specula tion and controversy since the war. It has often been asserted that the Rus sians could have been stopped if C hurchill’s proposal for a B alkan invasion had been followed. On the other hand, a well-informed authority, Dr. Philip E. Mosely, has pointed out that a Balkan invasion might have served to ex tend the Soviet zone still further instead of restricting it.
In recent years it has often been argued that, if the American leadership had accepted the Churchill-sponsored project for an invasion of the Balkans in 1943, the later fate of East Central Europe might have been a very different one, for the need and opportunity for Soviet-style “liberation” would have been averted. The plans for a Balkan approach have remained obscure, as to forces proposed and limits of advance and schedule,, but there has been no indication that they called for more than an advance northward to the Danube-Sava line. If carried out, this plan would presumably have brought Bulgaria within the British safety-zone for Ihe Mediterranean, but it is probable that Yugoslavia would have remained under the control of Tito’s forces. In any case, Poland and Czecho slovakia, Hungary and Rumania would have remained within the Soviet military theater, with all the consequences derived therefrom. In addition, the SHAEF invasion of Western Europe could not have been carried out during 1944. It is possible that not only all of Germany, but also Denmark, the Netherlands, Bel gium and perhaps France would have experienced Soviet-style “liberation.” 53
This analysis indicates that the fate of the northern Balkans was de termined by the course of events outside the peninsula. Soviet dom ination was probably inevitable once the W ehrm acht was defeated in Russia and the Red A rm y began its relentless advance westward. An A nglo-A m erican coun termove into the Balkans, as Dr. Mosely suggests, might have simply de flected the Red flood into W estern Europe and thus given Moscow control of the heart of the Continent. Theoretically, the W estern powers might have attem pted to roll back the Soviet zone immediately after the war when Russia was exhausted and devastated and the United States alone had possession of the atom bomb. This may have been militarily feasible but the fact remains that it was not so politically. Allied public opinion was not prepared to ac cept an anti-Soviet war at that moment. In Britain there was much warm feeling toward the Russians for having borne so long and so gallantly the brunt of the Nazi onslaught. And in the United States the public clamor was not to launch a crusade into Eastern Europe but rather to “bring the boys back home.”


*«.·»!' * ' ·


E p ilo g u e
w
I I o r l d W ar II represents one of the great points in the long and variegated history of the B alkan Peninsula. R egardless of w hether or not one is convinced th at w hat has happened is desirable, the fact remains that there has been far-reaching and incalculably im portant change. Kings have been expelled from their thrones; traditional parties have been splintered into impotence or completely suppressed; and venerated po litical leaders have disappeared into retirem ent, exile, or grave. New men and new parties have appeared on the stage, with radical and all-embracing plans for social change, and with the organization and foreign backing neces sary to effect such change. The institutions and traditions of a millenium have been revolutionized before our eyes during the brief period since the Balkan Peninsula was engulfed in W orld W ar II. To find another such turning point in B alkan history it is necessary to go back to the O ttom an invasion in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Indeed, the invasion and the half millenium of O ttom an rule that followed offer suggestions as to what might be expected in the present era of transi tion. T he first parallel th at comes to m ind is the social cleavage and class conflict within the peninsula which paved the way for both Islam and Com munism. To be sure, the decisive factor in each case was arm ed force, whether wielded by the Janissary Corps or the Red Army. But foreign in vasion was facilitated by domestic dissension, especially because the invaders in b o th periods were able to proclaim them selves to be the deliverers of the common people against their exploitive rulers. Thus the Red Army found powerful allies in the Com m unist-dom inated resistance movements in the Ikilkan M ountains, while the Turks likewise received assistance throughout (heir campaigning, beginning with the discontented Christian peasantry of Asia Minor in the early fourteenth century and ending with the Bogomils of Bosnia a century and a half later. Following their conqucst of the peninsula, the Turks remained mas
839


840 Epilogue
ters until the twentieth century. Yet the several ethnic Balkan groups were able to retain their identity and to emerge finally as independent peoples with essentially unimpaired national cultures. A basic reason for this phenomenon was the loose structure of the O ttom an Em pire, which remained a flabby congeries of peoples, religions, and conflicting loyalties. The subject groups were allowed to retain their institutions and cultures so long as they accepted the suzerainty of the sultan and continued to pay tribute. In this respect the Com m unist regimes in the northern Balkans are the complete antithesis of the old O ttom an imperial structure. They have subordinated every form of hum an activity to the interests of the official ideologies and programs. Furtermore, they possess the technological devices for realizing the regimenta tion they seek. The press, the radio, the stage, and the schools have been reduced to a degree of uniformity that suggests that the new Balkan regimes will leave a far deeper im print than the O ttom an Em pire. This certainly will be the case if the C om m unist governm ents rem ain in power for any length of time. In this connection the reasons for Ottom an decline and disintegration are relevant. A t a relatively early stage the O tto man Empire was doomed to eventual extinction, even though European rivalries preserved it as a passive and impotent power until the twentieth century. T he em pire’s ultim ate fate was decided by its inability to keep pace with the dynamic West, which was being transform ed by the Renaissance, the discoveries, the Commercial Revolution, the scientific advances, and the rise of the absolutist monarchies. The O ttom an Empire, by contrast, remained unaffected and unchanging. As a result it was incapable of either defending itself o r providing its subjects with the prerequisites of m odern life. The failure of the O ttom an Em pire was, in the broadest term s, a failure in ad justment, a failure to respond to the challenge of the dynamic West. This fact has a direct bearing upon the present situation because the underlying problem in the B alkans today is still one of the adjustm ent to the West. We have seen that the manifold difficulties that have beset the Balkan peoples in recent decades have arisen from the impact of the dynamic W est ern civilization upon an agrarian, self-contained, and relatively static culture. The result has been a crisis that has manifested itself in every aspect of Balkan life— economic, political, and cultural. The prew ar regimes tried in vain to cope with this crisis. They failed to alleviate the plight of the peasants with their tiny plots, low productivity, and lack of capital. They also failed to attain political stability, so that the representative institutions established at the end of W orld W ar I gave way to authoritarian structures that prevailed in every Balkan country when W orld W ar II began. They failed, finally, to retain the allegiance of their own intellegentsia which, frustrated by social injustice and lack of opportunity, became the spearhead of a revolutionary movement. In this respect the Balkan intellectuals reacted in essentially the same m anner as their counterparts in China or India or tsarist Russia. And the reason was that they were responding to a basically similar situation


Epilogue 841
to the same com plex of problem s th a t is today facing all the underdeveloped regions of the world. We are now witnessing in the Balkan Peninsula two different and rival approaches toward the solution of the traditional problems. One set of procedures is being followed in the C om m unist-dom inated northern B alkans and a very different set in W estern-oriented Greece. W e have seen that the latter country was set firmly in the W estern cam p as a result of the ChurchillStalin division of the Balkans in O ctober, 1944, and the arm ed British action in A thens two months later. Greece was retained in the W estern orbit by the enunciation of the Trum an Doctrine in M arch, 1947, when a Communistdirected rebellion threatened to overthrow the Athens government. Today, in 1957, Greece remains a W estern outpost in the Balkan Peninsula. Conse quently, her efforts to cope with the basic problems noted above are typically “W estern” in character. G reece is attem pting not to create a new social order but rather gradually to reform existing institutions with W estern finan cial and technical assistance. This assistance has reached very considerable proportions. Between liberation and the sum m er of 1956 it am ounted to 1.8 billion dollars from the United States alone. This sum, which does not include the large military grants, represents 214 dollars for every Greek man, woman, and child— a rate of per capita aid surpassing that given to any other European country. Greece has utilized this lavish assistance to cope with the ravages of occupa tion and of civil war, and also to increase the productivity of her economy. By the beginning of f956 Greece was producing 40 per cent more farm crops than before the war, and her industrial output was 86 per cent higher. The greatest gains were in electric power output, which more than doubled, and in rice production— largely on reclaimed salty coastal lands— which sky rocketed nearly 700 per cent.1 In the field of public adm inistration efforts have been made, with less satisfactory results, to cope with long-standing issues such as an inequitable tax structure, a swollen bureaucracy, and an excessively centralized administration. In striking contrast to this gradualism, the northern Balkan countries have experienced a thoroughgoing political and economic revolution. The po litical revolution has involved the establishm ent of so-called “ people’s dem oc racies,” which have been defined candidly as “the dictatorship of the proletariat though not in the Soviet form .” 2 All pro-W estern elements were ruthlessly eliminated from political life, especially after the signing of the peace treaties in February, 1947. Nikola Petkov was executed in Bulgaria, Iuliu M aniu was imprisoned in Rum ania, and Ivan Shubashich was forced to resign in Yugoslavia. The process was completed with the organization of the Com munist Information Bureau (C om inform ) in September, 1947. Its purpose was to coordinate the activities of all the Eastern European Communist parties in their efforts to com bat “ A nglo-A m erican im perialism .” This m ade it plain that the period of “antifascist” coalitions was finished and that the


842 Epilogue
Communist parties were to act alone and forcefully against those whom they considered to be W estern agents. This political revolution was accompanied by— indeed it made pos sible— a corresponding economic upheaval. One feature of the economic change was the extension of state control over an increasing portion of the national economy— beginning with foreign trade and expanding to banking, in dustry, and wholesale trade. The other main feature was the launching of eco nomic programs, the first ones being short-term reconstruction plans designed to regain prewar production levels, and the later ones being long-term devel opment plans for industrial expansion. The plans called for heavy capital in vestm ent which in turn necessitated rigid curbs upon consum ption. The au thoritarian regimes had the power and the will to enforce the required curbs, with the result that the objectives of the plans have generally been reached. The following figures reveal the unprecedented growth of heavy industry which has been favored at the expense of consum ers’ goods production.
O utput of Basic M aterials in Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, and Rumania
Commodity Unit 1939‘ 1951 1952 1953 Coal Millions of tons 11.5 21.9 23.5 24.1 Pig iron Thousands of tons 231.1 605.3 673.6 720" Cement Millions of tons 1.6 2.9 3.5 3.9 Electric power Billion kilowatt hours 2.5 6.0 7.1 8.0
“ 1939 figures for Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, 1938 figures for Rumania. 6This figure does not include Bulgaria’s production, for which no information is available for that year.
Source: Compiled from Economic Survey of Europe in 1954 (Geneva, 1955), p. 265; and R. L. Wolff, The Balkans in Our Time (Cambridge, Mass., 1956), p. 440. The rate of industrial growth is equally impressive in Albania: see statistics in Economic Survey o f Europe in 1955 (Geneva, 1956), p. B42.
The statistics concerning postw ar industrial growth in Greece as well as the northern Balkans are impressive, but they should not be interpreted overoptimistically. In Greece, for example, unemployment in the industrial sector is estim ated to be betw een one third and one quarter of the labor force actually engaged in industry, and disguised unemployment in the countryside is estim ated to be close to 40 p er cent of the population actively engaged in agriculture.3 The ministry of welfare has reported that at the end of Sep tember, 1955, 29 per cent of the population (2,764,017 out of 7,900,000) were destitute, having an average m onthly income of less than 240 drachm as or 8.40 dollars a m onth.4 A competent observer analyzed the economic state of the country in January, 1956, as follows:
American money, despite all its benefits, has not revolutionized the na tion. The mass standard of living is still probably the lowest in Europe this side of the Iron Curtain. Unemployment is so heavy that mere false rumors of jobs open on Greek ships have sent jobless men scurrying to distant ports in Northern Europe. Men who know Greece say that where 100 wealthy families formerly controlled its economy now the number is about 500.5


Epilogue 843
We may conclude that although the Greek economy has made grati fying progress in certain areas this has not alleviated the traditional and fundam ental problems of low productivity, surplus labor, and inequitable dis tribution of national income. The northern Balkan countries also have ex perienced serious difficulties, the most dangerous being the perennial agrarian problem. The peasants are generally dissatisfied and are opposing their gov ernm ents by lim iting production. O ne of their grievances is the constant pressure for the collectivization of the land along the lines of the Soviet kolhozi. A no th er is the lack of consum ers’ goods because of the concentra tion on heavy industry. This has forced the Communist rulers to resort to compulsory delivery of agricultural produce, which in turn has further alien ated the peasant masses. Furtherm ore, it should be noted that the Balkan countries all lack the great reserves of virgin land which existed in the Soviet Union and which provided leeway for trial-and-error experim entation. These difficulties are reflected in the fact that the increase planned by the northern Balkan, countries in national production and in industrial production for the period 1955 to 1960 are substantially less than the increases actually realized for the period 1950 to 1955.“ In addition to these economic problems, the Communist governments m ust contend with the anti-Soviet proclivities of their nationalist-m inded sub jects. The Balkan peoples are uniformly antipathetic to foreign domination, direct or indirect, even if it em anates from Slavic M other Russia. T he Bul garians dramatically manifested this tendency following the Berlin Congress when they rejected dictation by the Russians, even though the latter had just delivered them from Turkish rule. A more recent and significant expression of rugged Balkan nationalism was the 1948 split between Tito and Moscow. The roots of the schism go back to the war years when Tito, as we noted, followed a much more independent course than the other Balkan Communist leaders. He continued to assert his independence after the end of the war. On a num ber of issues he took the heretical position that the Yugoslav state should be completely free and independent, and that the Yugoslav Communist party should be equal to the parent Soviet party. W hen he stubbornly refused to recant, the Cominform expelled the Yugoslav party in an angry proclam ation in June, 1948. B ut T ito’s governm ent did not collapse as expected. Instead “Titoism ,” a new term in the M arxist lexicon, spread widely throughout Eastern Europe. W ith the death of Stalin in 1953. Soviet imperiousness diminished and the ties binding the Eastern European states to Moscow were allowed to slacken. By the time of the Twentieth Congress of the Soviet Communist party in 1956 the new Soviet leaders were listing Yugoslavia as one of the “ people’s dem ocracies” and were accepting autonom ist form ulas which they earlier had branded as deviationist and anti-Communist. Tito responded by addressing the Congress delegates as “ Dear Com rades” and by referring to the Soviet Union as a socialist state rather than a bureaucractic dictatorship. The rapprochement cooled'ofT with the tumultuous events that con


844 Epilogue
vulsed E astern E urope in the second half of 1956. Beginning with the riots in Poznan, Poland, in late June, they built up in O ctober and N ovem ber to the establishment of the “national com m unist” regime of Wladislaw Gomulka in Poland, and to the arm ed Russian intervention in Hungary. Tito welcomed G o m u lk a’s advent enthusiastically, but he condem ned the Red A rm y’s bloody role in Budapest as “absolutely w rong” and a “fatal error.” The Russians, in turn, used the columns of Pravda (Novem ber 11, 1956) to accuse Tito of “tendencies to interfere in the affairs of o ther C om m unist states.” A t the same time the devastation of Hungary sent trem ors throughout the northern Bal kans, causing the Communist regimes to make conciliatory gestures to their peoples in order to avoid further anti-Com m unist and anti-Soviet explosions. These recent developments exhibit the same pattern as does the en tire history of the Balkan Peninsula in the past two centuries. This pattern suggests that the present rulers of Bulgaria, Rumania, and Albania face a delicate and perilous task in reconciling the sturdy nationalism and individ ualism of their subjects with land collectivization, forced industrialization, and subservient relationships to the Soviet Union. In conclusion, the half millennium of historical experience analyzed in this volume indicates the likelihood of certain general trends. In the first place, the Balkan Peninsula in all probability will retain its identity. It is very unlikely that it will become a carbon copy of the Soviet Union or of any o th er power. O n the oth er hand, if we look ahead in term s of decades, there doubtless will be far-reaching and enduring institutional change throughout the peninsula. The deep-rooted crisis that the Balkan states have experi enced will require m ore than m inor adjustm ents. T he decisive factor th at will determine the precise course of future events, apart from an unpredictable and incalculable W orld W ar III, probably will be the outcom e of the contest now being waged, wittingly or unwittingly, by Greece and the northern Bal kan states. Both sides face the same basic problems-— rural overpopulation, low productivity, few industries, shortage of capital, and the traditional lack of rapport between rulers and ruled. We have seen that these difficulties stem, directly o r indirectly, from the fact th at the Balkan Peninsula is a p art of the vast underdeveloped portion of the globe. It is not, to be sure, as underdevel oped as large areas of Asia and Africa. But it faces, like them, the same task of adaptation to the demands and challenges of a dynamic world economy. A B alkan society th at is incapable of adap tation to its w orld setting is doom ed irrevocably to the same fate that befell the O ttom an Em pire. Consequently, the crucial question at present is w hether the C om m unist-controlled regimes in the north or the W estern type of society in Greece will, in the years to come, prove more adaptable and more capable of coping with the traditional problems that have plagued all underdeveloped areas. A parallel may be drawn at this point between the Communist-Greek com petition in the Balkan Peninsula and the C hina-India com petition in


Epilogue 845
Asia. The latter contest has attracted wide attention because of its m o mentous implications. A British authority has presented the issue as follows:
. . . the decisive struggle in Asia is quite simply the effort of the two most ancient and populous peoples of the Orient— China and India— to modernize their com munities. . . . China, by submitting to the dictatorship of the Communist party, has in the short run provided itself with some formidable instruments of capital accumulation. India, on the other hand, by consciously adopting democratic pro cedures and Western standards of freedom and welfare, has left itself with vir tually only one weapon— persuasion. . . . There can be little doubt that Asia as a whole— and perhaps underdeveloped peoples elsewhere— will watch with increas ing absorption the development of these two fateful experiments. . . . The liberal method of advance, and the totalitarian method, will in the next decade be pursued side by side in starkest contrast, with the world watching and judging the results.7
This analysis applies perfectly to the Balkan Peninsula as well as to Asia. The contest in the Balkans obviously is insignificant com pared to that between China and India. Yet the same vital issues are at stake, and the out com e will have decisive influence on the future course of events in the penin sula and perhaps in adjoining regions.




Sates
3. Coming of the Ottoman Turks
1. Cited by G. G. A rnakis, “Futuw w a T raditions in the O ttom an E m pire: A khis, Bektashi Dervishes and Craftsm en,” Journal of Near Eastern Studies, XII (October, 1953), 237.
2. Cited by M. Spinka, A History o f Christianity in the Balkans (Chicago, 1933), p. 66.
3. F. Braudel, La Méditerranée et le monde méditerranéan à l’époque de Philippe Il (Paris, 1949), p. 510
4. C. Mijatovich, Constantine: The Last Emperor o f the Greeks (London, 1892), pp. 1J-12.
5. See F. Babinger, Beiträge zur Frühgeschichte der Türkenherrschaft in Rumelien ( 14-15 Jahrhundert) (M unich, 1944), pp. 29 ff., and G . Ostrogorsky, History of the Byzantine State (Oxford, 1956), p. 489.
6. Ducas, cited by A. A. Vasiliev, History of the Byzantine Empire (M adison, Wise., 1952), p. 629.
4. Conquest of the Balkans
1. Pero Tafur: Travels and Adventures 1435-1439, tr. and ed. by M alcolm Letts (London, 1926), pp. 144-146; “The Travels of Bertrandon de la Brocquière, A.D. 1432 and 1433,” in T hom as W right, Early Travels in Palestine (London, 1848), pp. 334, 340.
2. Phrantzes, cited by C. M ijatovich, Constantine: The Last Emperor of the Greeks (London, 1892), pp. 201-202. 3. L. Pastor, History of the Popes (London, 1923, 5th e d .), II, 277-278.
4. Cited by T. W. A rnold, The Preaching o f Islam: A History o f the Propagation of the Moslem Faith (London, 1913), p. 198. 5. Cited by M ijatovich, op. cit., p. 8. 6. F. Babinger, M ehmed der Eroberer und seine Zeit (M unich, 1953), p. 25, has decided affirmatively concerning the mystery of whether or not M ohammed had planned to advance from Otranto to Rome.
5. Ottoman Empire at Its Height
1. O. F errara, Le X V I e siècle vu par les ambassadeurs vénitiens (Paris, 1 9 5 4 ), p. 344.
2. J. F. von Hammcr-Purgstall,' De s osmanischen Reichs Staatsverfassung und Staatsverwaltung (Vienna, 1815), 1, 98.


848 Notes
3. F. С. Lane, “V enetian Shipping during the Com m ercial Revolution,” A m erican Historical Review, XXXV1I1 (January, 1933), 228.
4. Cited by D. M. Vaughan, Europe and the Turk: A Pattern o f Alliances 13501700 (Liverpool, 1954), p. 135. 5. Cited by S. A. Fischer-G alati, “O ttom an Im perialism and the L utheran Struggle for Recognition in G erm any, 1520-1529,” Church History, X X III (M arch, 1954), 57-58. 6. Cited by Vaughan, op. cit., p. 136. 7. Ibid., p. 135.
6. Ottoman Institutions
1. The Turkish L etters o f Ogier G hiselin de Busbecq. Im perial Am bassador at Constantinople 1554-1562. Newly translated from the Latin . . . by Edward Seymour Forster (Oxford, 1927), p. 239. 2. H . Blount, “A Voyage into the Levant,” in J. Pinkerton, ed., A General Col lection o f the Best and M ost Interesting Voyages . . . (London, 1808-1814), X, 222. 3. S. G erlach, Tage-Buch . . . (F ran k fu rt, 1674), p. 314. 4. Cited by G. L. Lewis, Turkey (London, 1955), p. 27. For different evidence, see S. Vryonis, Jr., “Isidore G labas and the Turkish D evshirm e,” Speculum , XXXI (July, 1956), 439-442. 5. Busbecq, op. cit., pp. 60-61.
6. The Letters and W orks o f Lady Mary Wortley Montagu . . . (London, 1893), I, 322. 7. E. J. W. G ibb, A H istory o f O ttom an Poetry (L ondon, 1900), I, 28-29.
8. A. Pallis, In the D ays o f the Janissaries: Old Turkish L ife as D epicted in the “Travel-Book” o f Evliya Chelebi (L ondon, 1951), pp. 119 ff.
7. Balkan Peninsula under Ottoman Rule
1. E. S. Forster, ed., T he Turkish Letters o f Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq . . . (O x ford, 1927), p. 14.
2. P. Rycaut, The Present State o f the Ottoman Empire . . . (London, 1668), p. 212.
3. The Letters and W orks o f Lady M ary Wortley M ontagu . . . (London, 1893), I, 283. 4. Ibid., p. 321.
5. Voyages du Sr A . de la M otraye en Europe, A sie et A friq u e . . . (L e H avre, 1727), I, 462. 6. R. Dalven, M odern Greek Poetry (New York, 1949), p. 52. 7. G. R. Noyes and L. Bacon, H eroic Ballads o f Servia (Boston, 1913), pp. 1 7 2 173.
8. M. K onstantinovic, lstorija Hi Ijetopisi turski spisani oko godine 1490 . . . [A H istory or Turkish Chronicles W ritten about the Year 1490 . . .] (Belgrade, 1865), pp. 22, 41, 156. 9. S. G erlach, Tage-Buch . . . (F ran k fu rt, 1674), p. 123.


Notes 849
8. Decline of the Ottoman Empire
1. The Negotiations o f Sir T hom as R oe in H is Em bassy to the O ttom an Porte from the Year 1621 to 1628 Inclusive . . . (London, 1740), pp. 66-67.
2. M atteo Zane, cited by A. H. Lybyer, The G overnm ent of the Ottoman Empire in the Tim e o f Suleiman the M agnificent (Cam bridge, Mass., 1913), p. 43. 3. W. L. Wright, Jr., ed., Ottoman Statecraft: The Book o f Counsel for Vizirs and Governors o f Sari M ehm ed Pasha . . . (Princeton, N. J., 1935), pp. 88-89. 4. Roe, op. cit., p. 206.
5. P. Rycaut, The Present State o f the Ottoman Empire . . . (London, 1668), p. 209. 6. W right, op: cit., p. 126. 7. Roger N orth, cited by W right, op. cit., p. 58.
8. Cited by H. PfefFermann, D ie Zusam m enarbeit der Renaissancepäpste m it den Türken (W interthur, Swtz., 1946), p. 14.
9. E. D. Clarke, Travels in Various Countries o f Europe, Asia and A frica (C am bridge, Eng., 1810), I, 689-691.
10. Cited by A. Pallis, In the Days o f the Janissaries: Old Turkish L ife as D epicted in the “Travel-B ook” o f Evliya Chelebi (L ondon, 1951), p. 90.
11. Cited in m anuscript by Lewis V. Thom as, “O ttom an A w areness of Europe, 1650-1800.” 12. Cited by A. A dnan-A divar, “Interaction of Islamic and W estern T hought in Turkey,” Near Eastern Culture and Society, ed. by T. C. Young (Princeton, N. J., 1951). p. 122. 13. Cited by A. C. W ood, A H istory o f the Levant C om pany (O xford, 1 9 3 5 ), p. 230. 14. Cited by W. Eton, A Survey o f the Turkish Em pire . . . (L ondon, 1809), p. 109. 15. W. Macmichael, Journey from M oscow to Constantinople in the Years 1817, 1 818 (London, 1819), p. 154. 16. W. Harrjilton, “N otes on a Journey in Asia M inor in 1837,” Journal o f the Royal Geographical Society of London, VIII (1838), 156-157. 17. Eton, op. cit., pp. 247, 248, 263. 18. Cited by W right, op. cit., p. .21.
19. P. Rycaut, The H istory o f the T urks Beginning with the Year 1679 . . . (L on don, 1700), preface. The same point was made by Obreskov, the Russian am bassador to Constantinople in the mid-eighteenth century: see A. F. M iller, M ustafa Pasha Bairaktar: Ottomanskaia Imperiia v Nachale X IX Veka [M us tafa Pasha Bairaktar: The Ottoman Empire in the Beginning o f the Nineteenth Century] (Moscow, 1947), p. 36.
9. Balkan Peninsula during Ottom an Decline
1. H . Inalcik, “Land Problem s in T urkish H istory,” M uslim World, X LV (July, 1955), 224. 2. Acting Consul Calvert to Lord John Russell, July 23, 1860. Great Britain. A ccounts and Papers: State Papers, L X V II (1 8 6 1 ), 10—11. 3.. Early Voyages and Travels in the Levant, ed. by J. T. Bent (London, Hakluyt Society, 1893), LXXXV1I, 188.


850 Notes
4. W. Eton, A Survey o f the Turkish Empire . . . (London, 1809, 4th ed.), pp. 263-264.
5. K. M. Koumas, Historia ton anthropinon praxeon apo ton archaiotaton chronon heos ton hem eron mas [H istory o f the A cts o f M an fro m the Earliest Years to Our Days] (Vienna, 1832), X II, 544.
6. Cited by A. F. Miller, M ustafa Pasha Bairaktar: Ottomanskaya lmperiia v N achale X I X V eka [M ustafa Pasha Bairaktar: The O ttom an Em pire in the Beginning o f the Nineteenth Century] (Moscow, 1947), p. 102. 7. Cited by G. K. Kordatos, Regas Pheraios kai he Balkanike homospondia [Rhigas Pheraios and Balkan Federation] (Athens, 1945), p. 28.
8. S. S. Wilson, A Narrative o f the G reek M ission (L ondon, 1839), p. 206. 9. Cited by D. Mishew, The Bulgarians in the Past (Lausanne, 1919), p. 123. 10. Cited by G. P. Noyes, ed., The L ife and A dventures o f D im itrije Obradovic (Berkeley, Calif., 1953), p. 243. 11. Ibid., p. 23. 12. Ibid., p. 135.
13. Cited by A. Dascalakis, Rhigas Velestinlis: La révolution française et les pré ludes de l'indépendance hellénique (Paris, 1937), p. 85. 14. Cited by S. G. Chaconas, A dam antios Kora'is: A Study in G reek N ationalism (New York, 1942), p. 28.
15. Cited by L. H adrovics, L e peuple serbe et son église sous la dom ination turque (Paris, 1947), p. 124. 16. Translated from G reek text in T. H. Papadopoullos, Studies and D ocum ents Relating to the History o f the Greek Church and People under Turkish Domination (Brussels, 1952), pp. 143-145. 17. Cited by Chaconas, op. cit., p. 88.
10. Defeat by Austria
1. The Turkish Letters o f Ogier G hiselin de Busbecq. Im perial Am bassador at Constantinople 1554-1562. Newly translated from the Latin . . . by Edward Seymour Forster (Oxford, 1927), pp. 65-66.
2. Evliya Effendi, Narrative of Travels in Europe, Asia, and Africa in the Seven teenth Century. Translated from the Turkish by the Ritter Joseph von H am mer (L ondon, 1850), Vol. I, Pt. II, p. 11.
3. The Negotiations o f Sir Thomas R oe in His Embassy to the Ottoman Porte from the Year 1621 to 1628 Inclusive . . . (London, 1740), pp. 54, 114. 4. Evliya, op. cit., Vol. I, Pt. I, pp. 138-139. 5. Ibid., p. 141. 6. Ibid., p. 131. 7. Ibid., Pt. II, p. 12.
8. The Turkish H istory . . . by Richard Knolles, with a Continuation to the Present Year M D C L X X X V l l . . . by Sir Paul Rycaut . . . (London, 1687), II, 89.
11. Defeat by Russia
I. A. N. K urat, The D espatches o f Sir R obert Sutton, A m bassador in Constan tinople {1 7 1 0 -1 7 1 4 ) [Royal Historical Society, Cam den T hird Series, Vol. LXXVIII] (London, 1953), pp. 25, 28.


Notes 851
2. Cited by B. H. Sum ner, Peter the G reat and the O ttom an E m pire (O xford, 1949), p. 46. 3. Kurat, op. cit., pp. 48, 60.
4. Cited by A. Sorel, The Eastern Q uestion in the E ighteenth Century: The Partition o f Poland and the Treaty o f Kainardji (L ondon, 1898), p. 10. 5. Ibid., p. 54. 6. Ibid., p. 29. 7. M. S. A nderson, “G reat Britain and the Russian Fleet, 1769-70,” Slavonic and East European Review, XXXI (December, 1952), 149-150.
8. Cited by P. M. Kontogiannes, Hoi Hellenes kata ton proton epi Aikaterines II rossotourkikon polemon (1 7 6 8 -1 7 7 4 ) [The Greeks During the First RussoTurkish War under Catherine II ( 1 7 6 8 -1 7 7 4 1 (Athens, 1903), p. 188. 9. Cited by Sorel, op. cit., p. 25.
10. Text in T. E. H olland, The Treaty Relations of Russia and Turkey from 1774 to 1853 (London, 1877), pp. 36-56. 11. Reports of Baron T hugutt, A ugust 17 and Septem ber 13, 1774, cited by Sorel, op. cit., pp. 250-251. 12. Term s in the introduction to A. von A rneth, Joseph 11 und Katharina von Russland: lhr Briefwechsel (Vienna, 1869). 13. Cited by G. B. H ertz, British Im perialism ' in the Eighteenth C entury (L o n don, 1908), p. 156. 14. Cited ibid., p. 158.
12. The Balkans, the French Revolution and Napoleon
1. Cited by B. Lewis, “T he Im pact of the F rench Revolution on T urkey,” Jour nal o f W orld H istory, I (July, 1953), 119.
2. Spiridon Foresti to Lord G renville, July 5, 1797. Foreign Office 34 8 /2 .
3. G. Pautier, L es Iles Joniennes pendant l’occupation française et le protectorat anglais CParis, 1863), p. 12. 4. Foresti to Lord N elson, O ctober 3, 1799. Foreign Office 34 8 /2 . 5. Cited by V. J. Puryear, Napoleon and the Dardanelles (Berkeley, Calif., 1951), p. 113. 6. Cited by E. D ard, “Les souvenirs napoléoniens en Yougoslavie,” R evue d ’his toire diplom atique, X L V II (Jan u ary -M arch , 1933), 3. 7. Cited by Puryear, op. cit., p. 195. 8. Cited ibid., p. 191. 9. Cited ibid., p. 236. 10. Cited ibid., pp. 267-268. 11. Cited ibid., pp. 287-288.
12. R. Adair, The Negotiations for the Peace o f the Dardanelles (London, 1845), I, 206.
13. Cited by B. Mouravieff, L’alliance russo-turque au milieu des guerres napo léoniennes (Paris, 1954), p. 316. 14. Cited by J. Savant, “Napoléon et la libération de la G rèce,” L’Héllenisme contemporaine, (July-O etobcr, 1950), p. 321.
15. Ch. Photios, Apomnemoneumata péri tes Hellenikes Epanastaseos [Memoirs on the Greek Revolution\ (Athens, 1899), I, I.


852 Notes
16. T. K olokotrones and E. M. Edm onds, K olokotrones: K lep h t and Warrior (London, 1892), pp. 127-128. 17. Cited by F. Zwitter, “ Illyrisme et sentim ente yougoslave,” L e m onde slave, X (April, 1933), 364.
18. A. Boppe, D ocum ents inédits sur les relations de la Serbie avec N apoléon I, 1809-1814 (Belgrade, 1888), pp. 6-7. 19. H. D esprez, “La grande Illyrie et le m ouvem ent Illyrien,” R evu e des deux m ondes, X V II (M arch 15, 1847), 1017. 20. S. Lane-Poole, Sir R ichard Church (L ondon, 1890), p. 27.
13. Dynamics of Balkan Politics
1. A. N eale, Travels through Som e Parts o f G erm any, Poland, M oldavia and Turkey (London, 1818), p. 266. 2. W. H amilton to Lord Hawkesbury, May 6, 1803, cited by J. W. Baggally, A li Pasha and Great Britain (London, 1936), pp. 87-88.
3. A rticle in Eleftheron Verna of A thens, Septem ber 2, 1931, cited by N. Moschopoulos, La presse dans la renaissance balkanique (A thens, 1931), pp. 130-131.
4. A. Boppe, D ocum ents inédits sur les relations de la Serbie avec N apoleon 1, 1 8 0 9-1814 (Belgrade, 1888), p. 63. 5. A. Gorovei, “Les peuples balkaniques dans le folklore roum aine,” R evue in ternationale des études balkaniques, V—VI (1 9 3 7 -1 9 3 8 ), 470. 6. M. A. Ubicini, Letters on Turkey . . . Translated by Lady Stanhope (London, 1856), II, 173.
7. W. Gell, Narrative o f a Journey in the M orea (London, 1823), p. 65. 8. J. C. R. Broughton, A Journey through Albania and other Provinces o f Tur key . . . (London, 1813), p. 597.
9. E. H urm uzaki, éd., D ocum ente Privitôre la Istoria R om ânilor (Bucharest, 1887-1922, 19 vols.), V, 484. 10. A. C. W ood, A H istory o f the Levant C om pany (London, 1935), pp. 191201 ; F. E. Bailey, “T he Econom ics of British Foreign Policy 1825-50,” Journal of Modern History, XII (December, 1940), 449-484.
11. P. M artens, Recueil des traités et conventions conclue par la Russie avec les puissances étrangères: Tom e III, Traités avec l’A utriche, 1 8 0 8 -1 8 1 5 (St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 178.
14. The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs
1. P. E. Mosely, “T he Peasant Fam ily: T he Zadruga or C om m unal JointFamily in the Balkans, and Its Recent Evolution,” in C. F. W are, ed., The Cultural Approach to History (New York, 1940), p. 95. 2. G. R. Noyes, tr. and ed., The Li f e and A dventures o f D im itrije Obradovic . . . (Berkeley, Calif.: University of C alifornia Press; 1953), p. 107. 3. Ibid., pp . 99, 100, 134. 4. Ibid., p. 135.
5. Cited by T. R. Djordjevic, Srbija pre sto godina [Serbia One H undred Years Ago] (Belgrade, 1946), p. 167.


N otes 853
6. Cited by G. Y akschitch, L ’E u rope et la résurrection de la Serbie, 1 8 0 4 -1 8 3 4 (Paris, 1907), p. 27.
7. A. Boppe, D o cu m en ts in édits sur les relations de la Serbie avec N apoléon I, 1 8 0 9 -1 8 1 4 (Belgrade, 1888), p. 6. 8. Cited by M. G avrilovic, “T he Early D iplom atic Relations of G reat Britain and Serbia,” Slavonic R eview , I (June, 1922), 88. 9. Cited by T. W. Riker, “Michael of Serbia and the Turkish Occupation,” Slavonic R eview , X II (July, 1933), 138, 139. 10. Cited by Gavrilovic, loc. cit., p. 100.
11. B.-S. C unibert, Essai historique sur les révolutions et l’indépendance de la Serbie depuis 1804 ju squ ’ à 1850 (Leipzig, 1855), II, 5. 12. Cited by E. H aum ant, L a form ation d e la Y ougoslavie, X V e— X X e siècles (Paris, 1930), pp. 270-271. 13. Cited by G avrilovic, loc. cit., p. 102.
14. Cited by S. Jovanovic, D ruga vlada M ilosa i M ihaila, 1 8 5 8 -1 8 6 8 [The S econ d Reign o f M ilosh and M ichael, 1858—1868 (Belgrade, 1923), p. 216. 15. Cited by D. Stranjakovic, “La collaboration des Croates et des Serbes en 1848-1849,” Le monde slave, XII (June, 1935), 396.
16. Cited by O. Jaszi, The D issolution o f the H apsburg M onarchy (Chicago, 1929), p. 310. 17. Cited by G. Y. Devas, “Les origines de l’unité yougoslave,” L e m on de slave, I (April, 1918), 540.
18. Cited by R. W. Seton-W atson, The Southern Slav Q uestion and the H apsburg M onarchy (London, 1911), pp. 34, 35.
19. Cited by C· E. M aurice, The R evolu tion ary M o vem en t o f 1 8 4 8 -1 8 4 9 (L o n don, 1887), p. 38.
15. Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood
1. N ikola Luccari, cited by N . Iorga, “Raguse et les T urcs,” A ca d ém ie R ou m aine, Bulletin de la Section H istorique, X V III (1 9 3 1 ), 96.
2. A. C. Ypsilantis, cited by T. H. Papadopoullos, Studiesand D ocum ents R e lating to the H istory of the G reek Church and People under Turkish D om ina tion (Brussels, 1952), p. 55. 3. A. J. Toynbee, A S tudy o f H istory (London, 1935), II, 225. 4. O. Shparo, “Rol Rossii v Borbe G retsii za Nezavisim ost” | “T heRole of Russia in the G reek W ar of Independence,”] Voprosy Istorii, No. 8 (August, 1949), p. 54. 5. I. Juilliany, Essai sur le com m erce de M arseille (Paris, 1842), I, 118.
6. W. M. Leake, A n H istorical O utline o f the G reek R evolution (London, 1836), pp. 23-24.
7. M. B. Sakellariou, H e P eloponnesos kata ten deuteran T ourkokratian 17151821 [Peloponnesus D uring the Second Turkish R ule 1715-1821] (Athens, 1939), pp. 214-216.
8. H . Holland, Travels in the Ionian Isles, A lbania, Thessaly, M acedon ia etc. during the Years 1812 and 1813 (London, 1815), pp. 148-149. 9. Ibid., p. 151.
10. Cited by A. Dascalakis, Rhigas Velestinlis: La révolution française et les pré ludes de l'indépendance hellénique (Paris, 1937), p. 18.


854 Notes
11. T ranslation by Rae D alven, in M odern G reek P oetry (N ew Y ork, 1949), p. 65.
12. Cited by Rizo-Neroulo, Cours de littérature grecque m oderne (Geneva, 1828), p. 48. 13. H olland, op. cit., p. 530.
14. Cited by D. M itrany, The L an d an d the Peasant in R oum ania (N ew H aven, Conn., 1930), p. 24.
15. L ettres in édites de C oray à C hardon de la R och ette, 1790—1796 (Paris, 1877), p. 122. 16. London P ost, D ecem ber 20, 1825, cited by J. H. G leason, The G enesis o f R ussoph obia in G reat Britain (Cam bridge, Mass., 1950), p. 72. 17. Cited by R. J. K erner, “Russia’s N ew Policy in the N ear East after the Peace of A drianople . . .,” C am bridge H istorical Journal, Y (1937), 283-284. 18. L. Bower and G. Bolitho, O tho I: K in g o f G reece (London, 1939), p. 106. 19. Cited by C. W ebster, The Foreign P o licy o f P alm erston 1 8 3 0 -1 8 4 1 (London, 1951), I, 509.
20. Cited by E. Prevelakis, British P olicy tow ards the Change o f D yn a sty in G reece (Athens, 1953), pp. 133, 134. 21. “T he Euthanasia of the O ttom an E m pire,” B lackw ood’s Edinburgh M agazine, DXLVII (May, 1861), 581. 22. M. A. U bicini, L etters on T urkey . . . (L ondon, 1856), II, 18. 23. “The Euthanasia of the Ottoman Em pire,” loc. cit., p. 583. 24. Ibid.. p. 586.
25. A. D. Sideres, H e georgike politike tes Hellados 183 3-1933 [The Agrarian Policy of Greece 1833-1933 ] (Athens, 1934), pp. 58-59. 26. E. D. Clarke, Travels in Various C ountries of Europe, A sia and A frica (Lon don, 1816), VII, 366.
16. Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises
1. Cited by J. E. Swain, The Struggle fo r C on trol o f the M editerranean prior to 1848 (Philadelphia, 1933), p. 62; V. J. Puryear, France and the Levant from the Bourbon Restoration to the Peace of Kutiah (Berkeley, Calif., 1941), p. 129.
2. Cited by C. W ebster, The Foreign Policy o f Palm erston 1830-1841 (London, 1951), I, 282. 3. Ibid., I, 284.
4. C ited by F. S. Rodkey, The T urco-E gyptian Q uestion in the R elation s o f England, France, an d Russia, 1 8 3 2 -1 8 4 1 (U rbana, 111., 1924), p. 18. 5. Cited by P. E. Mosely, Russian D iplom acy and the O pening o f the Eastern Q uestion in 1838 and 1 8 3 9 (C am bridge, Mass., 1934), p. 10. 6. Cited ibid., p. 11. 7. Cited ibid., p. 14. 8. Citedby W ebster, op.cit., I, 305.
9. Cited by H. Tem perley,England and the N ea r East: The C rim ea (L ondon, 1936), p. 81.
10. J. H . G leason, The G enesis o f R u ssophobia in G reat Britain: A S tudy o f the Interaction o f Policy and O pinion (Cam bridge, Mass., 1950), p. 204. 11, Cited by Tem perley, op. cit., p. 89.


Notes 855
12. Cited ibid., p. 96.
13. H. L. Bulwer, The L ife o f . . . V iscount Palm erston . . . (London, 1870), II, 145. 14. Cited by W ebster, op. cit., II, 628. 15. Cited by Tem perley, op. cit., p. 105. 16. Cited by Rodkey, op. cit., p. 129. 17. Cited ibid., p. 130. 18. Cited ibid., p. 141. 19. Cited by Bulwer, op. cit., II, 359-360. 20. Cited ibid., pp. 327-328.
21. Cited by F. E. Bailey, British Policy and the Turkish R eform M ovem ent (Cam bridge, Mass., 1942), p. 182. 22. Full text of memorandum ibid., pp. 271-276. 23. Full text of decree ibid., pp. 277-279.
17. Crimean War
1. Cited by V. J. Puryear, England, Russia, an d the S traits Q uestion 1844-1856 (Berkeley, Calif., 1931), p. 91.
2. Cited by V. J. P uryear, International E conom ics and D ip lo m a cy in the N ea r East (Stanford, Calif., 1935), p. 213.
3. Cited by H. Temperley, England and the N ear East: The Crim ea (London, 1936), p. 251. 4. Ibid., p. 257. 5. Cited ibid., p. 267. 6. Cited fey G. B. H enderson, C rim ean W ar D iplom acy (Glasgow , 1 9 4 7 ),. pp. 6, 7. 7. Cited by Temperley, op. cit., p. 314. 8. Ibid., p. 321. 9. Ibid., p. 342. 10. Ibid., p. 345. 11. Ibid., p. 355. 12. S. Lane-Poole, The L ife o f S tra tfo rd Canning (L ondon, 1888), II, 299—300. 13. Cited by B. Kingsley M artin, The T rium ph o f L o rd P alm erston: A S tu dy o f Public Opinion in England before the Crim ean W ar (London, 1924), p. 215. 14. Cited by Tem perley, op. cit., p. 374. 15. Ibid., p. 378. 16. Cited· by M artin, op. cit., p. 226.
17. Cited by Puryear, England, Russia, and the Straits Q uestion, p. 448.
18. Cited by H. Tem perley, “T he T reaty of Paris of 1856 and Its Execution,” Journal of M odern H istory, IV (September, 1932), 401-402. 19. G. H. Bolsover, “N icholas I and the Partition of T urkey,” Slavonic and East European R eview , X XVII (December, 1948), 145.
18. Making of Rumania
1. L. Thouvenel, Trois années de la question d’Orient, 1856-1859 . . . (Paris, 1897), p. 570.
2. W. Wilkinson, An Account of the Principalities' of Wallachia and Moldavia . . . (London, 1820), p. 155,


856 N otes
3. C ited by D. M itrany, The L an d and the Peasant in R um ania (O xford, 1930), p. 24. 4. Cited by S. I. Samoilov, “N arodno-osvoboditelnoe vosstanie 1821 g. v. Valakhii,” [“T he N ational Liberation Uprising of 1821 in W allachia,”] V oprosy Istorii, no. 10, (O ctober, 1955), p. 101. 5. Cited by J. C. Campbell, “French Influence and the Rise of Roumanian Nationalism” (H arvard University unpublished doctoral dissertation, 1940), p. 16. 6. M. A. . . . de Bucharest, “La Valachie et la M oldavie,” R evue des deux m ondes, IX (January 15, 1837), 162.· 7. Cited by Campbell, op. cit., p. 210.
8. Cited by R. W. Seton-W atson, A H istory o f the R oum anians fro m R om an Tim es to the C om pletion o f U nity (Cam bridge, Eng., 1934), p. 226. 9. Cited ibid., p. 225. 10. Cited by M. Roller, “The Rum aniansin 1848,” in TheO pening o f an Era 1848: A n H istorical Sym posium , ed. by F. Fejtö (London, 1948), p.306. 11. Cited by Campbell, op. cit., p. 360.
12. Cited by W. G. East, The U nion o f M oldavia and W allachia, 1859. (C am bridge, Eng., 1929), p. 64. 13. Cited ibid., pp. 104, 111. 14. Cited by T. W. Riker, The M aking o fR oum ania (O xford, 1931), p. 130. 15. Cited by M itrany, op. cit., pp. 50, 55. 16. Ibid., p. 46. 17. Ibid., p. 47. 18. Cited by Riker, op. cit., p. 437. 19. Cited by M itrany, op. cit., p. 78. 20. Ibid., p. 80. 21. J. de W itte, Q uinze ans d ’histoire 1 8 6 6 -1 8 8 1 . . . (Paris, 1 905), p. 7. 22. A u s dem Leben K ön ig K arls von Rum änien (Stuttgart, 1894), I, 43. 23. Ibid., II, 159. 24. Cited by Seton-W atson, op. cit., pp. 177, 179. 25. Ibid., p. 280. 26. Ibid., p. 276. 27. E. Poujade, Chrétiens et Turcs (Paris, 1867), p. 305. 28. Seton-W atson, op. cit., p. 560. 29. Cited ibid., p. 561.
19. Bulgarian Awakening
1. E. D. Clarke, T ravels in V arious C ountries o f E urope, A sia an d A frica (London, 1816), IV, 540, 543. 2. C. Robert, “ Du m ouvem ent unitaire de l’E urope orientale,” R evu e des deux m ondes, V III (N ovem ber 1, 1844), 436. 3. C. R obert, L es Slaves d e Turquie (Paris, 1844), p. 287. 4. Cited by L. Leger, La Bulgarie (Paris, 1885), pp. 55-56. 5. G. T rubetzkoi, “L a politique russe en O rient: le schisme bulgare,” R evu e d ’histoire diplom atiqu e, X X I (1 9 0 7 ), 186-187.
6. Cited by J. F. Clarke, “Protestantism and th e .Bulgarian C hurch Question in


Notes 857
1861,” in Essays in the H istory o f M odern Europe, ed. by D. C. McKay (New York, 1936), p. 97. 7. Cited by Trubetzkoi, loc. cit., p. 177. 8. “Zapiski G ra ta N. P. . . . Ignatieva (1864—1874),” Izvestiia M in isterstva Inostrannykh D el (1 9 1 4 ), Bk. V I, p. 158. 9. Cited by B. H. Sum ner, “Ignatiev at C onstantinople, 1864-1874,” Slavonic Review, XI (April, 1933), 571. 10. Cited by Trubetzkoi, loc. cit., pp. 190, 191.
11. J. A. Blanqui, V oyage en Bulgarie pendant l’année 1844 (Paris, 1845), p. 181. 12. M arco A ntonio [Canini], V ingt ans d ’exil (Paris, 1868), p. 263.
13. Full text in L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan F ederation: A H istory o f the M o vem en t tow ard Balkan U n ity in M odern T im es (N ortham pton, Mass., 1944), pp. 275-276. See also pp. 89-94 for the other two schemes propounded at this time. 14. Cited by S. A. N ikitin, “ Revoliutsionnaia borba v Bolgarii v 1875-1876 godakh i Aprelskoe Vosstanie,” | “T he Revolutionary Struggle in Bulgaria in 1875-1876 and the April Uprising,”] in O svobozhdenie Bolgarii ot Turetskogo Iga [The L iberation o f Bulgaria fro m Turkish R u le] (M oscow , 1953), p. 19. 15. Cited by A. H ajek, Bulgarian unter den T iirkenherrschaft (Stuttgart. 1925), p. 262.
20. Reform and R evolution in the Ottom an Empire
V. Cited in unpublished doctoral dissertation by H. H. Davison, “ Reform in the O ttom an Em pire 1856-1876” (H arvard University, 1942), p. iv. 2. Ibid., p. 56. 3. Ibid., p. 59.
4. G reat Britain. A cco u n ts and Papers. State Papers, LXV1I (1 8 6 1 ), 3. 5. Ibid., p. 12. 6. Ibid., p.· 43. 7. Ibid., LX X V (1 8 6 7 ), 34. This report was made in reply to inquiries made by Lord Lyons several years after Bulwer. 8. Davison, op. cit., pp. 158-161. 9. Ibid., pp. 213-214. 10. Cited by H. Tem perley, “ British Policy towards Parliam entary Rule and C on stitutionalism in Turkey (1 8 3 0 -1 9 1 4 ),” C am bridge H istorical Journal, IV (1933), 175. 11. E. Pears, F orty Y ears in C onstantinople (N ew Y ork, 1916), p. 58.
21. Balkan Crisis and the Treaty, of Berlin
1. Cited by W. L. Langer, European A llian ces and A lign m en ts 1 8 7 1 -1 8 9 0 (N ew York, 1931), p. 15. 2. Cited by G. Trubetzkoi, “La politique russe en Orient, le schisme bulgare,” R evu e d ’histoire diplom atiqu e, X X I (1 9 0 7 ), 191.
3. F rom 1874 m em orandum of N. P. Ignatiev in Izvestiia M in isterstva Inostran nykh D el (St. P etersb u rg ,'1 9 1 4 ), Bk. IV, p. 92. 4. Cited by R. W. Seton-W atson, “ Les relations de T A utriche-H ongrie et de la


858 Notes
Serbie entre 1868 et 1874; la mission de Benjamin Kâllay à Belgrade,” Le m onde slave, III (August, 1926), 283.
5. N. Iorga, Correspondance diplom atique roum aine sous le roi Charles I, 1 8 6 6 1880 (Paris, 1923), p. 324. 6. Cited by A. Onou, “The Memoirs of Count N. Ignatyev,” Slavonic R eview , X (December, 1931), 390, 391. 7. A. Leroy-Beaulieu, “Les · réform es de la T urquie, la politique russe et le panslavism e,” R evu e des deux m ondes, X V III (D ecem ber 1, 1876), 530. 8. Cited by B. H. Sum ner, Russia and the B alkans 1 8 7 0 -1 8 8 0 (O xford, 1937), p. 582. 9. H ansard, Parliam entary D ebates, 3rd Series, CCIV, 81-82.
10. Cited by D. H arris, A D iplom atic H istory o f the Balkan C risis o f 1 8 7 5 -1 8 7 8 : The First Year (Stanford, Calif., 1936), pp. 107-108. 11. Cited ibid., p. 120. 12. Ibid., p. 379. 13. Iorga, op. cit., pp. 128-129.
14. Cited by D. H arris, -Britain and the Bulgarian H orrors o f 1876 (C hicago, 1939), p. 235. 15. W. F. M onypenny and G. E. Buckle, The L ife o f B enjam in D israeli (N ew York, 1920), VI, 70.
16. H . G. Elliot, S om e R evolu tion s an d O th er D ip lo m a tic E xperiences (London, 1922), pp. 285-286.
17. Cited by M. D. Stojanovic, G reat Powers and the Balkans 1 8 7 5 -1 8 7 8 (C am bridge, Eng., 1938), p. 134. 18. M onypenny and Buckle, op. cit., VI, 111. 19. Gwendolen Cecil, L ife of R obert M arquis o f Salisbury (London, 1921), II, 139. 20. Monypenny and Buckle, op. cit., VI, 217-218.
21. Cited by R. W. Seton-Watson, Disraeli, G ladstone and the Eastern Question (London, 1935), p. 450. 22. Ibid., p. 445. 23. Cited by Langer, op. cit., p. 160. '
24. Cited by Seton-Watson, Disraeli, G ladstone and the Eastern Question, p. 490. 25. H. D. Wolff, R am bling R ecollections (London, 1908), II, 265.
22.Dynamics of Balkan Politics
1. W. L. Langer, D ip lo m a cy o f Im perialism 1 8 9 0 -1 9 0 2 (N ew Y ork, 1951, 2nd e d .), p. 67.
2. D. C. Blaisdell, European Financial C ontrol in the O ttom an E m pire (New York, 1929), p. 217. 3. Cited by H. Feis, E urope the W orld’s Banker 1 8 7 0 -1 9 1 4 (N ew H aven, Conn., 1930), p. 276.
4. J. Tom asevich, Peasants, P olitics, an d E con om ic Change in Y ugoslavia (Stan ford, Calif., 1955), p. 176. 5. F rom M aksim ov’s novel Tselinâ [Virgin Soil], cited by V. Pinto, “T he Civic and Aesthetic Ideals of Bulgarian Narodnik W riters,” Slavonic and East European Review, XXXII (June, 1954), 357.


N otes 859
23. Making of Bulgaria
1. C ited by C . E . B la c k , T he E stablish m en t o f C on stitu tion al G o vern m en t in Bulgaria (Prin ceton , N . J., 1943), p. 75. 2. Ibid., p. 78. 3. Ib id ., p. 116. 4. Ibid., p. 119. 5. Ibid., p. 181. 6. A . K o ch , Prince A lexan der o f Battenberg (Lo n d o n , 1887), pp. 70-72. 7. C ited by B lack , op. cit., pp. 199-200. 8. Ibid., p. 210. 9. Ibid., pp. 238, 245.
10. E . C . C o rti, A lex a n d er von B attenberg: Sein K a m p f m it den Z aren und B is marck (V ienn a, 1920), pp. 165-168. 11. C ited by G . C . Lo g io , B ulgaria: P a st an d P resent (M a n ch e ste r, E n g ., 1 9 3 6 ), p. 331. 12. A . H . B eam an , M . S tam bu loff (L o n d o n , 1 8 9 5 ), p. 59. 13. Ibid., p. 75. 14. Ibid., pp. 99, 101. 15. C ited by V . C h iro l, F ifty Y ea rs in a C hanging W orld (L o n d o n , 1 92 7), p. 129. 16. T. G . D ju v a ra , “ Sou ven irs diplom atiques,” R e vu e d e s scien ces dip lo m a tiq u es, L I 11 (Ja n u a r y - M a r c h , 1 9 3 0 ), 33.
17. H . R. M ad o l, F erdin an d d e Bulgarie: la rêve de B yza n ce (P a ris , 1 93 3), pp. ‘ 102-103. 18. Paléofogue to Pich o n , M a y 12, 1907, in D o c u m e n ts d ip lo m a tiq u es français, 2nd series, X , 801-802. 19. L a d y G ro g a n , The L ife o f J. D . B ou rch ier (L o n d o n , 1 92 6), pp. 41, 43. 20. R. W . Seton-W atson, E u rope in the M eltin g -P o t (L o n d o n , 1 91 9), pp. 358, 360. 21. C ited by Logio , op. cit., p. 356. 22. G . B uch an an to Fo re ig n Office, Ja n u a ry 1, 1907, in British D o cu m en ts on the O rigins o f the W ar 1898-1914, V , 100, 102.
23. I. Sakazov, B ulgarische W irtsch aftsgesch ich te (B e rlin , 1 9 2 9 ), p. 271. 24. W . K . W eiss-Bartenstein, “ U b e r Bulgariens volksw irtschaftsliche E n tw ic k lung,” Zeitschrift für V olkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung, X X I I (19 13 ), 414; N . Sakarov, D ie industrielle Entwicklung Bulgariens (Berlin , 1 9 0 4 ), p. 29. 25. L . Pasvolsky, Bulgaria's E conom ic Position (W ashington, D .C ., 1929), pp. 35-42; Logio, op. cit., pp. 62-66; H . Feis, Europe the W orld's Banker, 18701914 (N e w Y o r k , 194 0), pp. 280 ff. 26. Cited by Logio, op. cit., p. 370.
24. Serbia and the South Slavs
1. Cited by W . L . Lan g er, E uropean A llian ces an d A lig n m en ts 1871-1890 (N e w Y o r k , 1 9 3 1 ), p. 329.
2. A. F . Pribram , The Secret Treaties o f Austria-Hungary, 1879-1914 (C a m bridge, M ass., 1 92 0), 1, 61. 3. Ibid., pp. 59-61.
■


860 Notes
4. C . M ija to v ic h , A R o y a l T ragedy (L o n d o n , 1 9 0 6), p. 121. 5. Ibid., p. 123. 6. Ibid., p. 149. 7. Ibid., pp. 138, 141, 142. 8. C . D u m b a, M em o irs o f a D ip lo m a t (Bo sto n , 1932), p. 97. 9. S ir R P lu n k e tt to the M arquess o f Lan sd ow n e, Ju n e 18, 1903, in B ritish D o cu m en ts on the O rigins o f the W ar 18 9 8 -1 9 1 4 , V , 132.
10. S ir C . Sco tt to the M arquess o f Lan sd ow n e, Ju n e 18, 1903, ibid.
11. C ited by W . S. V u c in ic h , Serbia b etw een E ast and W est: T h e E ven ts o f 1 9 0 3 1 9 0 8 (S ta n fo rd , C a lif., 1 95 4), p. 182. 12. Ibid., p. 197. 13. B y Jo sip M a ric h , in O. M . U tiesh en o vich, D ie H au skom m u n ion en d e r S ü d slaven (V ie n n a , 1 8 5 9 ), p. 128. A dap ted from a translation kin d ly m ade a v a il able by D r. Jozo Tom asevich. 14. C ited b y A . J . M a y , The H apsbu rg M on arch y 1 8 6 7 -1 9 1 4 (C am b rid g e, M ass., 1 95 1), p. 442. 15. C ited by L . A lb e rtin i, The O rigins o f the W ar o f 1914, tr. and ed. by I. M . M assey (L o n d o n , 1953), I I , 20. 16. Ibid., p. 23. 17. Ibid., p. 21. 18. C ited by B . E . Sch m itt, The C o m in g o f the W ar ( N e w Y o r k , 1 93 0), I, "150.
25. Greece
1. C ited by B . H . Su m n er, “ Ig n atiev at Constantinople, 1864-1874,” S lavon ic R eview , X I ( A p r il, 1933), p. 571.
2. W . L . L an g er, The D ip lo m a cy o f Im perialism 1 8 9 0 -1 9 0 2 ( N e w Y o rk , 1935), I, 378. 3. S ir G . L o w th c r to S ir E d w a rd G re y , O ctober 13, 1908, in B ritish D o cu m en ts on the O rigins o f the W ar 1898—1 914 (L o n d o n , 1928), V , 439. 4. S. B . Chester, L ife o f V en izelos (L o n d o n , 192 1), p. 5.
5. Cited by T . Saloutos, They R em em ber A m erica: The Story o f the R epatriated G reek -A m erica n s (B e rk e le y , C a lif., 195 6), p. 118. 6. N . Forbes, A . J. Toynbee, D . M itran y, and D . G . Hogarth, The Balkans: A H istory of Bulgaria, Serbia, G reece, Rumania, Turkey (London, 1915), p. 249. 7. Saloutos, op. cit., pp. 130-131.
26. Rumania
1. T . E . H o llan d , T he E uropean C o n cert in the E astern Q uestion (O x fo rd , 188 5), p. 301. 2. R. W . Seton-W atson, A H istory o f th e R ou m an ian s . . . (C am b rid g e, E n g ., 193 4), p. 385. 3. B ism a rck to W illia m I I , Septem ber 20, 1888, in D ie G ro sse P olitik, V I , no. 1351, 344. 4. B illo w to C a p riv i, M a rc h 6, 1891, ibid., V I I , no. 1465, 154. 5. C ited by Seton-W atson, o p. cit., pp. 385, 386. · 6. D . M itra n y , The L a n d an d th e P easant in R u m an ia (L o n d o n , 193 0), p. 90.


N otes 861
7. Cited by Seton-Watson, op. cit., p p . 394, 395, 401. 8. Ibid., p. 414. 9. Ib id ., p. 428. 10. H e n ry to D elcassé, Ju n e 25, 1901, in D o cu m en ts d ip lo m a tiq u es français ( 1 8 7 1 -1 9 1 4 ), 2nd series, I, no. 301, 352.
27. Albanian Awakening
1. The A lbanian Struggle in the O ld W orld an d N ew . C om piled and W ritte n by M em bers o f the Fed eral W rite rs’ Pro ject o f the W o rk s Progress A d m in is tration of Massachusetts (Boston, 1939), pp. 26-27. 2. T he M em o irs o f Ism ail K e m a l B ey, ed. by So m e rville Sto ry (L o n d o n , 1 92 0), pp. 13-14. 3. C ited by J . Sw ire, A lban ia: The R ise o fa K in g d o m (L o n d o n ,192 9), p. 42. 4. Goschen to E a rl G ra n ville, Ju ly 26, 1880, in British Sessional Papers, H ouse o f C o m m o n s, L X X X I (1 8 8 0 ), 185. 5. C ited by S. Skendi, “ A lb a n ia n P o litic a l T ho u g ht and R e v o lu tio n a ry A c tiv ity , 1881-1912,” Südost—Forschungen, X I I I (1 9 5 4 ), 9. 6. Ibid., p. 16.
7. M em oirs o f Ism ail K em al Bey, p. 373. 8. C ited by Sw ire , o p . cit., p. 145. 9. Prin ce Lich n o w s k y, H eadin g fo r the A b y s s (L o n d o n , 192 8), p. 249. 10. C ited by Sw ire , o p. cit., p. 231. 11. Bishop F a n N o li, cited ibid., p. 195.
28. Diplomatic Developments
1. A . F . Prib ram , The Secret T reaties o f A ustria-H ungary, 1 8 7 9 -1 9 1 4 (C a m bridge, Mass., 1920), I, 50-55.
2. E . Dria'ult and M . L h é ritie r, H istoire dip lo m a tiq u e d e la G rèce d e 1821 à nos jours (P a ris, 1926), IV , 200. 3. R . G raves, S torm C en tres o f the N ea r East (L o n d o n , 193 3), p. 100. 4. D ria u lt and Lh éritier, op. cit., IV , 291. 5. P rib ra m , o p. cit., I, 184-195. 6. G . B u ch an a n to Fo re ig n Office, Ja n u a ry 1, 1907, in British D o cu m en ts on the O rigins o f the W ar 1 8 9 8 -1 9 1 4 , V , 101.
7. J . B . W h ite h e a d to Fo reig n Office, A p r il 2, 1908, ibid., p. 118.
8. E . F . K night, Turkey: The A w akening of Turkey. The Turkish R evolution of 1908 (Boston, 1910), pp. 109-113. 9. C ite d b y H . T e m p e rley, “ B ritis h Po licy-to w ard s P a rlia m e n ta ry R u le and C o n stitutionalism in T urkey (1830-1914),” C am bridge H istorical Journal, I V (1 9 3 2 ), 186.
10. Cited by W. D. David, European D iplom acy in the N ea r Eastern Q uestion 1906^1909 (Urbana, 111., 1940), p. 92. 11. Aehrenthal memoir, August 9, 1908, in Ö sterreich-U ngarns A ussenpolitik von d er bosnischen K rise 1908 bis zu m K riegsausbruch 1914, I, 32.
12. J. B. Whitehead to Sir Edward Grey, September -30, 1908, in British Docu ments, V, 370.


862 N otes
13. C ited b y B . E . Sch m itt, The A n n ex a tio n o f Bosnia 1 9 0 8 -1 9 0 9 (C am b ridg e, E n g ., 1 93 7), p. 36, ft. 1. 14. C ited ibid., p. 96. 15. Ibid., p. 194. 16. Ibid., p. 216. 17. F o rg ach report, A p r il 3, 1909, in Ö sterreich-U n garn s A u ssen p olitik , I I , 239. 18. B e rc h to ld m em oir, O ctober 2, 1912, ibid., I V , 528. 19. L a d y G ro g an , The L ife o f J. D . B ou rch ier (L o n d o n , 1926), p. 134. 20. S ir E d w ard G re y to S ir A . N icolson, D ecem ber 28, 1908, in British D o cu m ents, V , 543.
21. Cited by S. B. F a y , The O rigins o f the W orld W ar (N e w Y o rk , 1934, 2nd rev. e d .), I, 433. 22. “ Zapiski G ra fa N . P. Ignatieva (18 64 -18 74 ),” Izvestiia M inisterstva Inostrannykh D e l (1 9 1 4 ), B k . I l l , p. 108.
23. C ited by E . C . H elm reich , The D ip lo m a cy o f the Balkan Wars, 1 9 1 2 —1913 (Cam b ridg e, M ass., 1938), p. 361. 24. V isco u n t G r e y o f Fallo d o n , T w e n ty -F iv e Y ears, 1 8 9 2 -1 9 1 6 (N e w Y o r k , 1925), I, 254. 25. H . H . Lam b to S ir E d w a rd G re y , Fe b ru a ry 28, 1914, in British D ocum ents, X , Pt. I, 104. 26. Cited by F a y , op. cit., I, 488.
29. Sarajevo and. War
1. C ited by R . W . Seton-W atson, Sarajevo (L o n d o n , 1 9 2 6 ), p. 80. 2. C ited by L . A lb e rtin i, T he O rigins o f the W ar o f 1914, tr. and ed. by I. M . M assey (L o n d o n , 1 9 5 3 ), I I , 12. 3. C ited by Seton-Watson, op. cit., p. 84. 4. Cited by A lbertini, op. cit., I I , 49. 5. Ibid., p. 68. 6. Ibid., I, 297. 7. Ibid., p. 298. 8. C ited by S. B . F a y , The O rigins o f the W orld W ar ( N e w Y o r k , 1934, 2nd rev. e d .), I I , 87. 9. C ited by A lb e rtin i, o p . cit., I I , 34. 10. Ibid., p. 87. T h is statem ent agrees w ith the account alleg edly w ritten by D im itrijevich him self shortly before his execution follow ing his trial in S a lo n ik i in 1917 on charges o f conspiring against the dynasty. See S. G avrilovic, “ N e w Evidence on the Sarajevo Assassination,” Journal o f M odern H istory, X X V I I (Decem ber, 1955), 410-414. 11. C ited by B . E . Sch m itt, The C o m in g o f the W ar 19 1 4 ( N e w Y o r k , 1 9 3 0 ), I, 276-279. 12. Ibid., p. 305. 13. C ited by F a y , op. cit., I I , 471. 14. J. C . A d am s, F light in W in ter (P rin ce to n , N . J., 1 94 2), p. 29. 15. C ited by Sch m itt, op. cit., I I , 433. 16. H . M orgen th au, A m b a ssa d o r M o rg en th a u ’s S to ry ( N e w Y o r k , 191 8), p. 225. 17. Ibid., pp. 227-228. 18. A . Savin sk y, R eco llectio n s o f a Russian D ip lo m a t (L o n d o n , 192 7), p . 250.


N otes 863
19. C ited by J . A . R . M a rrio tt, The E astern Q uestion: A n H istorical S tu dy in European D iplom acy (O xford, 1940, 4th ed .), p. 505. 20. Cited by Schm itt, op. cit., II , 454. 21. A . F . Frangulis, La G rèce et la crise m ondiale (Paris, 1926), I, 195-196.
22. Cited by H . W . V . Tem perley, A H istory of the Peace Conference o f Paris (L o n d o n , 1 92 1), I V , 28.
30. Peace Settlement
1. W in sto n C h u rch ill, The S econ d W orld War: The G ath erin g S torm (B o sto n : H oughton M ifflin C o m p an y, 1948), p. 10. 2. O. C zernin, In the W orld W ar (N e w Y o r k , 1920), p. 164.
3. H . W . V . T em perley, ed., A H istory o f the P eace C on feren ce o f P aris (L o n don, 1921), I V , 113. 4. C ited by R . J . K e rn e r, “ Y u g o s la via and the Peace C o n feren ce,” in Y ugoslavia, ed. by R . J . K e rn e r (B e rk e le y , C a lif., 1 94 9), p. 94. 5. T em p erley, op. cit., I V , 422. 6. H e c k to the U n ite d States am bassador in F ra n ce , Ja n u a ry 4, 1919, P apers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the U nited States, 1919: The Paris Peace C onference (W ashington, D .C ., 1942), I I , '280-282. 7. M ustapha K e m a l Pasha, “ C reatin g a N a tio n ,” L ivin g A g e , C C C X X X I I I (D e c e m b e r 1, 1 92 7), 975.
8. C ited b y A . A . Pallis, G reece's A n atolian A d ven tu re— an d A fte r (L o n d o n , 1 93 7), p. 15. 9. Ibid.,‘p. 18. 10. Ibid.
31. Dynamics of Balkan Politics
1. W . E . -Moore., E con om ic D em ograph y o f E astern and Southern E u rope (G e n e va, 1945), pp. 63-64. Different figures are given for R u m an ia in H . L . Roberts, Rumania: Political Problem s of an Agrarian State (N e w Haven, C o n n ., 1 9 5 1 ), p. 44; fo r Y u g o s la via , B u lg aria , and R u m a n ia in J . Tomasevich, Peasants, P o litics an d E con om ic C hange in Y u goslavia (Sta n fo rd , C a lif., 195 5), p. 316; and fo r G re e c e in G . Coutsoum aris, “ Possibilities o f E c o n o m ic Developm ent in G re e k A g ricu ltu re” (U n iv e rs ity o f Chicago, unpublished doc toral dissertation, 1953), p. 57. B u t all sources agree that a substantial pro portion o f the B a lk a n agricultural population was surplus. 2. D a ta on B a lk a n tax structures fro m E co n o m ic D ev elo p m e n t in S. E. E u rope (L o n d o n , 194 5), ch. 6; D . M itra n y , M arx against the P easant: A S tu d y in Social D ogm atism (C h a p el H ill, N . C ., 1951), pp. 102-104, 236. 3. J . T om asevich, “ Fo re ig n E c o n o m ic R elations, 1918-1941,” in Y ugoslavia, ed. by R . J . K e rn e r (B e rk e le y , C a lif., 1 94 9), p. 521. 4. C ited by Roberts, op. cit., p. 73.
5. South-Eastern E urope: A P olitical an d E con om ic S u rvey (Lo n d o n , 193 9), p. 203.
6. Ch. Evelpides, “Le revenu national des pays balkaniques,” M etron, X IV (June 15, 1940), 169; E conom ic D evelo p m en t in S. E. Europe, pp. 14, 19. 7. Statement by Andreya Stampar, citcd by Roberts, op. cit., p. 71.


864 Notes
8. S tatistical Y ear-B ook o f the L eague o f N a tio n s 1 9 4 0 -4 1 (G e n e v a , 1941), p. 40. 9. T o m a sevich, op. cit., pp. 571-573. 10. Roberts, o p. cit., p. 339. 11. G . C . Lo g io , Bulgaria Past & P resen t (M a n ch e ste r, E n g ., 1 93 6), p. 11.
12. H . Seton-W atson, E astern E urope b etw een the W ars 1 9 1 8 -1 9 4 1 (C am b rid g e, En g .: Cam bridge U niversity Press, 1946), p. 146-147. 13. C ited by M itr a n y , o p. cit., p. 138. 14. Ibid., p. 118. 15. B . N . Peselj, “ Peasant M o vem en ts in Southeast E u ro p e ” (G e o rg e to w n U n i versity, unpublished doctoral dissertation, 1951), pp. 437-438.
16. T o m asevich, Peasants, P olitics an d E con om ic C hange in Y u goslavia, p. 260. 17. Seton-W atson, o p. cit., p. 259. 18. C ited by Roberts, o p. cit., pp. 115-116. 19. M itr a n y , op. cit., p. 122. 20. C ited by E . N . M ittlem an, “ T h e N a tio n a lity Problem in Y u g o sla via : A S u r vey of Developm ents 1921-1953” (N e w Y o rk University, unpublished doc toral dissertation, 1 95 4), p. 136.
21. C ited by E . B a rk e r, M acedonia: Its P lace in B alkan P o w er P o litics (L o n d o n , 1 9 5 0 ), p. 65.
32. Yugoslavia
1. C ited b y E . N . M ittle m an , “ T h e N a tio n a lity Pro b le m in Y u g o s la v ia : A S u r vey o f Developm ents 1921-1953” (N e w Y o rk U niversity, unpublished doc to ral dissertation, 1 9 5 4 ), p. 13. 2. Ibid., p. 14. 3. Ibid., p. 131. 4. Statistics obtained from J . T o m asevich, Peasants, P olitics, an d E co n o m ic C hange in Y u goslavia (Sta n fo rd , C a lif., 1 95 5), pp. 241-242. 5. C ited ibid., p. 241. 6. C ited by M ittle m an , op. cit., p. 82. 7. Cited by Tom asevich, op. cit., p. 226. 8. L . A d a m ic, The N a tiv e 's R eturn (N e w Y o r k , 193 4), pp. 290-291. 9. Statistics on health conditions fro m T o m asevich, op. cit., ch. 25.
10. R . T ro u to n , P easant R enaissance in Y u goslavia 1 9 0 0 -1 9 5 0 (L o n d o n , 1952), pp. 185-186.
11. H . Seton-W atson, E astern E u rope b etw een the W ars 1 9 1 8 -1 9 4 1 (C am b rid g e, Eng., 1946), pp. 229-231.
33. Bulgaria
1. N e w Y o r k T im es, A p r il 10, 1921.
2. N . D . Petk o v, A lek sa n d r S tam boliiski: L ich n o st i idei [A lexan der Stam bu liski: Personality and Ideas] (Sofia, 1930), pp. 183-184.
3. L . Pasvo lsk y, B ulgaria’s E co n o m ic P osition (W a sh in g to n , D .C ., 1 93 0), p. 18; South-Eastern Europe: A Political and Econom ic Survey (London, 1939), p. 167.


Notes 865
4. S. D. Zagoroff et al., T h e A g ricu ltu ra l E c o n o m y o f the D an u b ia n C o u n tries 1935-1945 (Stanford, Calif., 1955), pp. 381-382. 5. South -E a stern E urope, p. 170.
6. G. C. Logio, Bulgaria Past & P resent (Manchester, Eng., 1936), pp. 180, 186-187.
7. S o u th -E a stern E u ro p e, p. 169. 8. Zagoroff, op. cit., p. 373. 9. I. T. Sanders, Balkan Village (Lexington, Ky., 1949), p. 32.
10. Cited by W. M. Kotschnig, U n e m p lo y m e n t in the L ea rn ed P rofessions (Lon don, 1937), pp. 110-111. 11. Cited by Logio, op. cit., p. 42. 12. Sanders, op. cit., pp. 179-181. 13. Ib id ., p. 13.
34. Greece
1. Cited by N. Kaltchas, In tro d u c tio n to the C o n stitu tio n a l H isto ry o f M o d ern G reece (New York, 1940), p. 155.
2. Cited by S o u th -E a stern E urope: A P olitical a n d E c o n o m ic S u rv e y (London, 1939), p. 94.
3. L e M essager d ’ A th è n e s, January 10-11, 1939.
4. “Censor’s Instructions,” Spectator, C L X I (August 19, 1938), 293. 5. L e M essager d 'A th è n e s , January 6, 1939.
6. G. Servakis and C. Pertountzi, “The Agricultural Policy of Greece,” in A g ri cultural S ystem s o f M id d le E urope, ed. by O. S. Morgan (New York, 1933), p. 148. 7. Ibid., pp. 148-152.
8. E co n o m ic D evelo p m en t in S. E . E u ro p e (London, 1945), p. 43; R e p o rt o f the F A O M ission fo r G reece (Washington, D.C., March, 1947), pp. 155-156. 9. G. Cootsoumaris, “Possibilities of Economic Development in Greek Agri culture” (University of Chicago, unpublished doctoral dissertation, 1953), p. 43. 10. A. Pepelasis, “Socio-Cultural Barriers to the Economic Development of Greece” (University of California, Berkeley, unpublished doctoral disserta tion, 1955), p. 48.
11. R e p o rt o f the F A O M issio n fo r G reece, p. 136.
12. F . Hilgerdt, In dustrialization an d F oreign Trade (Geneva, 1945), pp. 137, 143. 13. Pepelasis, op. cit., p. 76.
14. S o u th -E a stern E u ro p e, p. 78.
15. Pepelasis, op. cit., pp. 101, 103.
16. H o O ry k to s p lo u to s tes H ellados [T he M in era l W ealth o f G reece] (Athens, 1947), p. 210.
17. R e p o rt o f the F A O M issio n fo r G reece, p. 3. 18. Pepelasis, op. cit., pp. 225-229.
19. L. G. Allbaugh, C rete: A C ase S tu d y o f an U nderd evelo p ed A rea (Princeton, N. J., 1953), pp. 145-158.


866 Notes
35. Rumania
1. Cited by H. L. Roberts, R u m a n ia : P olitical P roblem s o f an A grarian S tate (New Haven, Conn., 1951), p. 24. 2. Cited by D. Mitrany, T h e L a n d & the P easant in R u m a n ia (New Haven, Conn., 1930), p. 101. 3. Cited by Roberts, op. cit., p. 30. 4. Ibid., p. 91.
5. H. Seton-Watson, E astern E u ro p e betw een the W ars, 1 9 1 8 -1 9 4 1 (Cam bridge, Eng., 1945), p. 204. 6. Cited by Roberts, op. cit., p. 136. 7. Seton-Watson, op. cit., pp. 203-204. 8. Roberts, op. cit., pp. 44-45. 9. International Labour Office, “Agricultural Credits in Rumania,” Industrial an d L a b o u r In fo rm a tio n , X L I (January-March, 1932), 22.
10. E co n o m ic D evelo p m en t in S. E . E u ro p e (London, 1945), p. 121. 11. Roberts, op. cit., pp. 68, 198. 12. C. M. Jordan, The R o m a n ia n O il In d u stry (New York, 1955), p. 320.
13. S o u th -E a stern E urope: A P olitical a n d E c o n o m ic S u rvey (London, 1939), p. 126. 14. Cited by Roberts, op. cit., p. 70. 15. Ibid., p. 83. 16. Seton-Watson, op. cit., p. 336. 17. Roberts, op. cit., pp. 81-82. 18. P. E. Mosely, “The Sociological School of Dimitrie Gusti,” Sociological R e view , X X V III (April, 1936), 163-165. 19. Roberts, op. cit., p. 80.
20. E c o n o m ic D e v e lo p m e n t in S. E . E u ro p e, p. 14 21. Mitrany, op. cit., p. 524.
22. E c o n o m ic D e v e lo p m e n t in S. E . E urope, p. 15.
36. Albania
1. H. W. V. Temperley, ed., A H isto ry o f the Peace C o n feren ce o f Paris (Lon don, 1921), IV, 340.
2. E. P. Stickney, S o u th e rn A lb a n ia or N o rth e rn E p iru s in E uro p ea n In te rn a tional A ffairs, 1 9 1 2 -1 9 2 3 (Stanford, Calif., 1926), p. 105. 3. Temperley, op. cit., IV, 344. 4. Cited by J. Swire, A lbania: T h e R ise o f a K in g d o m (London, 1929), p. 323. 5. L eague o f N a tio n s O fficial Journal, III (June, 1922), 574-575. 6. Ibid., p! 576. 7. Ibid.,IV (May, 1923), 510. 8. Ibid., Ill (June, 1922), 579. 9. Ibid., IV (May, 1923), 502. 10. Ibid., p. 501.
11. T h e A lb a n ia n Struggle in the O ld W orld and the N e w . Compiled and Written by Members of the Federal Writers’ Project of the Works Progress Adminis tration of Massachusetts (Boston, 1939), p. 69. 12. S. Skendi, “The Political Evolution of Albania, 1912-1944” (New York,


Notes 867
Mid-European Studies Center of the National Committee for a Free Europe, Mimeographed Series, March 8, 1954), p. 7.
13. L eague o f N a tio n s O fficial Journal, IV (May, 1923), 497. 14. Swire, op. cit., p. 435. 15. Ibid., p. 444.
16. L eague o f N a tio n s, R eco rd s o f the F ifth A ssem b ly, 1924, plenary sessions, p. 101. 17. Cited by E. Staley, “Italy’s Financial Stake inAlbania,” Foreign Policy R e ports, V III (June 8, 1932), 85. 18. Ibid.
19. Full text in “Albania: The Problem of the Adriatic,” F oreign Policy R ep orts, III (June 22, 1927), 121. 20. N ear East and India, X U (September 15,1932), 741-742. 21. Ibid., X L I (November 10, 1932), 900. 22. Ibid., X L V III (February 11, 1937), 202.
23. C iano’s H id d en D iary 1 9 3 7 -1 9 3 8 (New York, 1953), p. 107. 24. Ibid., p. 177.
25. T h e C iano D iaries 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 3 (New York, 1946), p. 43. 26. Ibid., p. 52. 27. Ibid., p. 60. 28. Ibid., pp. 63-64. 29. Ibid., pp. 64-65. 30. R. Almagia, “Modern Albania: A Review,” G eographical R eview , X X II (July, 1932), 470.
37. Diplomatic Developments
1. Cited by C. A. Macartney, H u n g a ry an d H er Successors (London, 1937), • p. 249. 2. Cited by H. N. Howard, “Yugoslavia, the Little Entente, and the Balkan Pact,” Yugoslavia, ed. by R. J. Kerner (Berkeley, Calif., 1949), p. 328. 3. Cited by M. H. H. Macartney and P. Cremona, Ita ly ’s F oreign and C olonial P olicy 1 9 1 4 -1 9 3 7 (London, 1938), p. 93. 4. Cited by Arnold J. Toynbee and F. T. Ashton-Gwatkin, eds., S urvey o f In ternational A ffa irs 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 6 : T h e W orld in M arch 1 9 3 9 (London, 1952), p. 252. 5. A. P. Papanastassiou, V ers I’union balkanique (Paris, 1934), p. 46. 6. Cited by H. N. Howard, “Bulgaria and the Balkan Entente,” Journal o f C en tral E uropean A ffairs, I (January, 1942), 447-448.
7. Arnold J. Toynbee, S u rvey o f Intern a tio n a l A ffairs, 1936 (London, 1937), p. 506.
8. Cited by J. A. Lukacs, T he G reat P ow ers a nd E astern E u ro p e (New York, 1953), p. 70. 9. New York Tim es, May 8, 1936. 10. G. Ciano, L ’E uropa verso la C atastrofe (Milan, 1948), pp. 153-160. 11. Cited by Lukacs, op. cit., p. 120. 12. Ibid., p. 245.
13. Cited by L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A ' History of the Movement toward Balkan Unity in Modern lim es (Northampton, Mass., 1944), p. 255.


868 Notes
14. Cited by G. L. Weinberg, G erm a n y an d the S o viet U nion 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 1 (Leiden, 1954), p. 115. 15. Royal Ministry of Foreign Affairs, G reek W hite B ook: Ita ly ’s A ggression against G reece: D iplo m a tic D o c u m e n ts (Athens, 1940), no. 178. 16. Cited by S. Lavra, T he G reek M iracle (New York, 1942), p. 17. 17. C iano’s D iary 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 3 (London, 1947), p. 297. 18. M. Ascoli, ed., T h e Fall o f M ussolini: H is O w n Story (New York, 1948), pp. 189-191. 19. Cited by Lukacs, op. cit., p. 347. 20. D. Alfieri, D ictators Face to Face (London, 1954), p. 82.
21. T rial o f the M a jo r W ar C rim inals b efo re the In tern a tio n a lM ilita ry T ribunal (Nuremberg, 1947), X, 523. 22. Cited by Weinberg, op. cit., p. 137.
23. Winston S. Churchill, T he S eco n d W orld W ar: T heir F inestH o u r (Boston, 1949), p. 587. 24. R. J. Sontag and J. S. Beddie, N a zi-S o viet R elations 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 1 (New York, 1948), pp. 233, 242. 25. Ibid., pp. 258-259. 26. Churchill, op. cit., p. 589. 27. N a zi C onspiracy a n d A ggression (Washington, D.C., 1946), I, 780. 28. Sontag, op. cit., pp. 260-261.
29. Winston S. Churchill, T h e S eco n d W orld War: T he G rand A llia n ce (Boston, 1950), p. 106.
30. N a zi C onspiracy a n d A ggression, I, 784-785.
31. Major-General Sir Francis de Guingand, O peration V ictory (London, 1947), p. 55. 32. London Tim es, May 8, 1941. 33. Field Marshal Lord Wilson of Libya, E ight Y ears O verseas, 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 7 (London, 1950), p. 75. 34. Ernest von Weizsäcker, cited by Weinberg, op. cit., p. 163.
38. Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation
1. E. I. Tsouderos, H ellen ikes A n o m a lie s ste M ese A n a to le [G reek A n o m a lies in the M id d le East] (Athens, 1945), p. 112. 2. Office of Chief of Counsel for War Crimes, Translation o f D o c u m e n t N o . N O K W - 1 762, p. 18 of original.
3. P. Schmidt, S tatist a u f diplo m a tisch er B ü hne, 1 9 2 3 -4 5 (Bonn, 1949), pp. 537-538. 4. Maniu and Bratianu to Antonescu, January, 1942, in D o cu m en ts on In te r national A ffa irs 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 6 : Vol. II, H itler’s E urope, edited and selected by M. Carlyle (London, 1954), pp. 326-327. 5. B. M. Kolker, “Natsionalno-Osvoboditelnaia Borba v Rumynii v 1941-1944 Godakh,” [“The War of National Liberation in Rumania 1941-1944,”] V oprosy Istorii, no. 8 (August, 1954), p. 85.
6. H. L. Roberts, R u m a n ia : P olitical P ro b lem s o f an A grarian State (New Haven, Conn., 1951), p. 258. 7. C iano’s D iary 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 3 , ed. by M. Muggeridge (London, 1947), p. 399.


Notes 869
8. Cited by J. A. Lukacs, T h e G reat P ow ers and. E astern E u ro p e (New York, 1953), p. 783. 9. F. Maclean, E astern A p p ro a ch es (London, 1949), pp. 324-325. 10. Ibid., pp. 315-316.
11. Winston S. Churchill, T h e S eco n d W orld W ar: C losing the R in g (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1951), p. 463.
12. P arliam entary D ebates (H a n sa rd ). H o u se o f C o m m o n s, 5th Series, X C D V II, 694.
13. H itler’s E urope, p. 333. 14. Ibid.
15. Ibid., p. 334.
16. C iano’s D iary, p. 509. 17. H ealth C enters fo r G reece (New York, 1944), p. 6. 18. K. Pyromaglou, H e E th n ik e A ntistasis [T he N a tio n a l R esistance] (Athens, 1947), pp. 165-167.
19. C. M. Woodhouse, A p p le o f D iscord: A S u rvey o f R e c e n t G reek P olitics in T h e ir In ternational Settin g (London, 1948), p. 82.
20. Leland Stowe in New York Post, February 20, 1945. See also document published in “Letters to the T im es,” New York T im es, March 28, 1947. 21. Translation o f D o c u m e n t N o . N O K W - 1 7 6 2 , p. 10 of the original. 22. A rc h e io E th n ik e s A n tista ses [A rc h iv e s o f N a tio n a l Resistance] (Athens, 1946), I, no. 2, 91-92. 23. Woodhouse, op. cit., pp. 146-147.
24. J. Amery, Sons o f the Eagle: A S tu d y in G uerilla W ar (London, 1948), p. 60. 25. IBid., p. 59.
26. Cited by R. Trouton, P easant R enaissance in Y ugoslavia 1 9 0 0 -1 9 5 0 (Lon don, 1952), p. 225. 27. Woodhouse, op. cit., p. 29. 28. J. Stalin, T h e F o u n d a tio n s o f L e n in ism (Moscow, 1950), p. 101.
39.Hidden War, Cold War and Peace Settlement
1. Winston S. Churchill, T h e S eco n d W orld War: C losing the C ircle (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1951), p. 466. 2. F. Maclean, E astern A p p ro a ch es (London, 1949), pp. 402-403. 3. E. C. W. Myers, G reek E n ta n g lem en t (London, 1955), pp. 130-131.
4. C. M. Woodhouse, A p p le o f D iscord: A S u rvey o f R e c e n t G reek P oliticsin T heir In tern a tio n a l S ettin g (London, 1948), p. 300. 5. Myers, op. cit., p. 224. 6. Ibid., p. 190.
7. E. Tsouderos, H e lle n ik e s A n o m a lie s ste M e se A n a to le [G reek A n o m a lie s in the M id d le East] (Athens, 1945), p. 64. 8. Ibid., p. 65. 9. Woodhouse, op. cit., p. 49.
10. K. Pyromaglou, H e E th n ik e A n tista sis [T he N a tio n a lR esistance] (Athens, 1947), p. 111. 1,1. Field Marshal l.ord Wilslin of Libya, E ight Y ea rs O verseas, 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 7 (Lon don, 1950), pp. 167, 179-180. 12. Woodhouse, op. cit., p. 82.


870 Notes
13. Churchill, C losing the Circle, p. 538.
14. Winston S. Churchill, T h e S ec o n d W o rld W ar: T riu m p h and Tragedy (Bos ton: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1953, pp. 72-73. 15. Ib id ., p. 80. 16. Ibid., p. 81. 17. Cited by P. E. Mosely, “Hopes and Failures: American Policy toward East Central Europe, 1941-1947,” R eview o f P olitics, X V II (October, 1955), 478. 18. M. Carlyle, ed., D o c u m e n ts on In tern a tio n a l A ß a irs 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 6 : Vol. II, H itler’s E u ro p e (London, 1954), p. 335. 19. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 92.
20. V. Dedijer, T ito Speaks (New York: Simon &Schuster, 1953), pp. 233-235. 21. New York T im es, June 5, 1956. 22. Churchill, T riu m p h a nd Tragedy, p. 109. 23. Ibid., p. 110. 24. Woodhouse, op. cit., pp. 306-307. 25. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 208. 26. Ibid., pp. 227-228. 27. Ibid ., p. 159. 28. Churchill, T riu m p h a n d Tragedy, p. 285. 29. E th n ik o s K e ry x [N ational H era ld], October 20, 1944. This is a daily pub lished in New York. 30. Cited in New York Tim es, December 7, 1944. 31. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 286. 32. Leland Stowe, in New York P ost, February 15, 1945. 33. W. Byford-Jones, T h e G reek Trilogy (London, 1946), pp. 138-140. 34. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 289. Italics in original. 35. H o u se o f C o m m o n s D ebates, January 18, 1945, col. 400. 36. Ibid., December 8, 1944, col. 943. 37. Churchill, T riu m p h a n d Tragedy p. 291.
38. W. H. McNeill, S u rv e y o f In tern a tio n a l A ffa irs 1 9 3 9 -1 9 4 6 : A m e ric a , B ritain, & R ussia: T heir C o-O peration a n d C o n flict 1 9 4 1 -1 9 4 6 (London, 1953), p. 495. 39. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 109. 40. Ib id ., p. 291. 41. M. W. Fodor, in P M (New York), December 7, 1944. 42. H o u se o f C o m m o n s D ebates, December 20, 1944, col. 1890. 43. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 310. 44. E. R. Stettinius, Jr., R o o sevelt and th e R ussians (New York, 1949), p. 218; Foreign Relations o f the U nited States: D iplom atic Papers: The C onferences at M alta a n d Y alta 1945 (Washington, D. C., 1955), pp. 780, 849.
45. T h e C o n feren ces at M a lta a nd Y a lta 1945, p. 911. See also pp. 251—254 and 980 for documents concerning decisions on Yugoslavia.
46. P. E. Mosely, F ace to F ace w ith R ussia, in H ead lin e Series, no. 70, JulyAugust, 1948, p. 23. 47. Churchill, T riu m p h an d Tragedy, p. 420. 48. J. F. Byrnes, Sp ea kin g F rankly (New York, 1947), p. 53. 49. Churchill, T riu m p h a n d T ragedy, p. 560. 50. Ib id ., p. 636.
51. Byrnes, op. cit., p. 73.


Notes 871
52. Mosely, Face to F ace w ith Russia, p. 23.
53. Mosely, “Hopes and Failures,” loc. cit., p. 472.
Epilogue
1. W all Street Journal, January 26, 1956.
2. “The Character of a ‘People’s Democracy,’ ” F oreign A ffairs, X X V III (Octo ber, 1949), 151.
3. E co n o m ic S u rvey o f E u ro p e in 1953 (Geneva, 1954), p. 98. 4. New York Tim es, January 30, 1956. 5. W all Street Journal, January 26, 1956. 6. E co n o m ic S u rvey o f E u ro p e in 1956 (Geneva, 1957), ch. 2.
7. Barbara Ward, “The Fateful Race between China and India,” New York T im es M agazine, September 20, 1953, pp. 9, 66.




Bibliography
General
T
I h e m o s t r e c e n t g e n e r a l b i b l i o g r a i * h y of the Balkans
was issued in 1943 by the United States Library of Congress, Division of Bibliog raphy, in five installments, as follows: T h e Balkans: I G eneral; II A lbania; 111 B u l garia; IV_ R um ania; V Yugoslavia; G reece. These bibliographies cover all aspects of the countries concerned, and in some cases provide summaries of the works listed. Only books and articles in Western languages are included. The most useful preWorld War 11 bibliographical guide was L. Savadjian, B ibliographie b alkanique (Paris, 1920-1938, 8 vols.). See also R. J. Kerner, Slavic E urope: A S elected Bibliography in the W estern European Languages, Com prising H istory, Languages an d L iteratures (Cambridge, Mass., 1918); R. J. Kerner, Social Sciences in the Balkans and in T urkey: A Survey o f Resources fo r Study and Research in the F ields o f K n o w led g e (Berkeley, Calif., 1930); N. V. Mikhov, B ibliographie de la T urquie, de la Bulgarie, et de la M a céd o in e (Sofia, 1908-1913, 2 vols.); N. V. Mikhov, Sources bibliographiques sur l'histoire de la T u rq u ie et d e la Bulgarie (Sofia, 1914-1924, 2 vols.); R. J. Odavitch, E ssai de bibliographie française sur les Serbes, Croates et Slovenes depuis le co m m en cem en t de la guerre actuelle (Paris, 1918); G. Bengesco, E ssai d ’ u n e n otice bibliographique sur la qu estion d! O rient, 1 8 2 1 -1 8 9 7 (Paris, 1897); V. M. Yovanovitch, A n E nglish B ibliog raphy on th e N e a r E astern Q uestion, 1481^-1906 (Belgrade, 1909); L ist o f W o rks in the N ew Y ork Public Library R elating to the N ear Eastern Q uestion and the B a lka n States, In c lu d in g E uro p ea n T u rk e y a n d M o d ern G reece (New York, 1910); M aterials in the N a tio n a l A rc h iv e s R ela tin g to the B a lka n States. National Archives, Reference Information Circular no. 4 (Washington, D. C., 1942). In addition to these regional bibliographies, the Foreign A ffa irs B ibliography is in dispensable for current publications. It is compiled by W. L. Langer and H. F. Armstrong for the period 1919-1932, by R.'G. Woolbert for 1932-1942; and by H. L. Roberts for 1942-1952. Finally, there are numerous bibliographies on in dividual countries and special subjects, which are listed in the appropriate sections below. Scholarly periodicals in the field of Balkan history have appeared in various countries but many have ceased publication. The most important of these defunct periodicals are Affaires danubiennes (Bucharest, 1938-1941); BalkanRevue: Monatsschrift fiir die wirtschaftlichen Interessen der sttdost-europäischen Länder ( Berlin, 1914 1918), title changed Io SUdost; Balkan-Revue (Berlin, 873


874 Bibliography
1918-1920); L e s B alkans: R e v u e m ensuelle: A lb a n ie, Bulgarie, G rèce, R o u m a n ie, Y ou g o sla vie (Athens, 1931-1939); B u lletin de l’In stitu t p o u r l’é tu d e de l’E u ro p e sud-orientale (Bucharest, 1914-1924), title changed to R e v u e historique du sudest européen (Bucharest, 1924—1940); L e m o n d e slave (Paris, 1917—1938); R e v u e des B a lka n s (Paris, 1919-1933) ; R e v u e internationale des étu d es b alkaniques (Belgrade, 1934-1940). L eipziger V ierteljahrschrift fü r Südo steu ro p a (Leipzig, 1937-1943). Scholarly periodicals now appearing in the various Balkan countries are listed in H istorical A bstracts, I (June, 1955), 230-231 (Yugoslavia); I (Septem ber, 1955), 332 (Bulgaria); I (September, 1955), 333 (Rumania); II (September, 1956), 181-183 (Greece). Relevant periodicals being published in non-Balkan countries include the A m e ric a n H istorical R e v ie w (New York, 1896-); A m e ric a n Slavic a n d E ast E uropean R eview (New York, 1945-); E astern R e v ie w (Vienna, 1948-); Jo urnal o f C entral E uropean A ffa irs (Boulder, Colo., 1941—); Journal o f M o d ern H isto ry (Chicago, 1929-); R e v u e des études slaves (Paris, 1921—) ; Slavonic R eview (London, 1922-1927), title changed in 1928, 1939, and again in 1943 (since 1943 has been S la vo n ic a n d E ast E u ropean R eview )', Südo stF o rshungen (Munich, 1936-). Current developments may be followed in T h e N ea r East: A W eekly Jou rn a l o f O riental Politics, L itera tu re, F in a n ce a n d C o m m e rc e (London, 1911), title changed in 1925 and 1935 (since 1935 it has been G reat B ritain and the E a st); and the bimonthly O st E uropa (Stuttgart, 1951-). Considerable material on current developments is available in the official “information” publications of the various Balkan governments interested in presenting their viewpoints to the outside world. The most informative of these publications are Free Bulgaria, now Bulgaria Today, issued fortnightly from 12 Narodno Sobranie Square, Sofia; the G reek B ulletin, issued irregularly by the Greek Information Office at 34 Hyde Park Square in London; and the Y ugoslav R eview issued monthly by the Yugoslav Information Center of 816 Fifth Avenue, New York 21. In the same class is the organ of the Communist Information Bureau, F o r a P eople’s D em o cra cy: F or a L asting Peace (Belgrade, 1947-1948; Bucharest, 1948-1956). A critical appraisal of current affairs is available in the publications of the N a tio n a l C o m m itte e fo r a F ree E urope, Inc., 110 West 57th Street, New York 19. This organization has issued useful special studies, mostly by ém igrés, published by its Mid-European Studies Center. It has also published since 1952 the monthly N e w s fr o m B eh in d the Iro n C urtain. The same viewpoint is presented in the M o n th ly B ulletin: In ternational P easant U nion (New York, 1950-), also consisting largely of articles by ém igrés. The best and most recent study of the Balkans is by R. L. Wolff, The B alkans in O ur T im e (Cambridge, Mass., 1956). This is a solid and reliable study, but it does not include Greece, and 500 of its 600 pages are devoted to the postWorld War I period. The Byzantine and Ottoman periods are covered in F. Schevill, H isto ry o f the B alkan P eninsula fr o m the E arliest T im e s to the P resen t D ay (New York, 1922), but this work has long been outdated, even in its 1933 revised edition. The general history by the Rumanian historian N. Iorga, H istoire des états balkaniques ju sq u ’à 1924 (Paris, 1925), is uneven, though containing valuable material on certain phases of Balkan history. A penetrating analysis of the· nature and results of Turkish rule in the Balkans is given by Sir Charles Eliot, T u rkey in E u ro p e (London, 1908). More recent studies are by R. Ristelhuebcr, H istoire


Bibliography 875
des peuples balkaniques (Paris, 1950), which does not add anything new to the subject; and G. Stadtmuller, G eschichte Südosteuropas (M unich, 1950), which includes the Magyars and Czechoslovaks and which concentrates mostly on the Byzantine period to the neglect of the Ottoman and post-Ottoman. Other gen eral Balkan histories are in existence, though they have long ceased to be of value: W. Miller, The Balkans, Rumania, Bulgaria, Servia and M ontenegro [The Story of the N ations] (New Y ork and London, 1896); N. Forbes, A. J. Toynbee, D. M itrany, D. G. H ogarth, The Balkans: A H istory of Bulgaria, Serbia, G reece, Rumania, Turkey (Oxford, 1915); K. Roth, Geschichte der christlichen Balkan staaten: Bulgarien, Serbien, Rumänien, M ontenegro, G riechenland (Leipzig, 1907); W. S. Davis, A Short H istory o f the N ea r E ast fro m the F ounding o f Constantinople, 330-1922 (New York, 1922).
The most im portant general histories of the period since the eighteenth century are by W. Miller, The O ttom an Em pire and Its Successors, 1801-1922 (Cambridge, Eng., 1922, rev. ed.); R. W. Seton-Watson, The Rise of N ationality in the Balkans (London, 1917); L. A ndré, Les états chrétiens des Balkans depuis 1815: Roumanie, Bulgarie, Serbie, M ontenègre, Grèce (Paris, 1918); and the brief survey of W. M. G ew ehr, The R ise o f N ation alism in the Balkans, 1 8 0 0 1930 [Berkshire Studies in European H istory] (New Y ork, 1931).
In addition to these general histories, many surveys are available of N ear E astern diplom acy or the so-called Eastern Question. T he most recent is the ex cellent study of F. Cognasso, Storia della questione d ’orien te (T urin, 1948), which includes a comprehensive bibliography. Other diplomatic histories are by E. D riault, La question d'O rient depu is ses origines ju sq u ’à nos jours (Paris, 1 8 9 8 ) ;‘and J. A. R. M arriott, The Eastern Q uestion: A n H istorical S tudy in European D iplom acy (Oxford, 1940, 4th ed.). For surveys of the Eastern Ques tion since the eighteenth century, see J. A ncel, M anuel historique de la question d'Orient, 1792-1923 (Paris, 1923); and the two-volume study by M. Lascaris, To Anatolikon zetem a, 1800-1923 [The Eastern Question, 1800-1923] (Saloniki, 1948-1954); provides an excellent bibliography. Finally, note should be made of the extremely useful docum entary collection by J. C. H urew itz, D ip lo m a cy in the N ear and M iddle East: Vol. I, A D ocum entary Record: 15 35-1914; Vol. II, A D ocumentary Record: 1914-1956 (Princeton, N. J. 1956).
While this work was in the press there appeared the first volume in the M id-European Studies Center H andbook Series, East Central Europe under the C om m unists. T he first volum e by S. Skendi, A lbania under the C om m u n ists (New York, 1957), provides basic factual data concerning Albania, and will be followed by other similar handbooks on Bulgaria, Rum ania, and Yugoslavia, as well as on various countries in C entral Europe.
1. The Land and the People
By all odds the most comprehensive and useful work on Balkan geog raphy is the G eograph ie universelle, ed. by P. V. de la Blache and L. Gallois. T he second part of Volum e V II, by Y. C hataigneau and Y. Sion, is entitled P ays balkaniques (Paris, 1934), and deals with Albania, Greece, Bulgaria, Turkish Thrace, and Yugoslavia. Volume IV, Part II, Europe centrale (Paris, 1931), by E. do M arlonnc, deals with Kumaniu in pp. 699- 825. T he authors consider in detail


876 Bibliography
the ethnography and economy, as well as the geography, of the Balkan countries, and provide excellent charts, maps, and bibliographies. Other im portant works on this subject are J. Cvijic, La péninsule bal kanique: geographie humaine (Paris, 1918), a standard analysis by a Serbian geographer; D. G. H ogarth, The N earer East (London, 1905); M. I. Newbigin, Southern Europe (London, 1949), includes only Greece and Albania; C. Evelpidi, Les états balkaniques (Paris, 1930), a useful study by a Greek agricultural econ omist; and W. B. T urrill, The P lant L ife o f the Balkan Peninsula: A P h ytogeographical Study (Oxford, 1929). H. Hodgkinson, The A driatic Sea (London, 1955), is an interesting description and history of the sea and its coast lines, based on sound scholarship and extensive traveling. J. L. Myres, Geographical H istory in G reek Lands (New York, 1953), carries the geographic interpretations from antiquity to the present. On Balkan ethnography the most useful works are M. E. Pittard, Les peu ples des Balkans (Paris, 1920); and the m ore general studies by W. Z. Ripley, The R aces o f E urope (N ew Y ork, 1 8 9 9 ); and C. S. C oon, The R aces o f E urope (N ew Y ork, 1939). F o r a political approach to Balkan ethnography, see C. A. Macartney, N ational States and M inorities (London, 1934). The population trans fers following W orld W ar I are described in S. B. Ladas, The E xchange o f M in or ities: Bulgaria, G reece and Turkey (New York, 1932); those following World W ar II are described by J. B. Schechtm an in E uropean Population Transfers 1 9 3 9-1945 (New York, 1946) and in “Compulsory Transfer of the Turkish Minority from Bulgaria,” Journal of Central European Affairs, X II (July, 1952), 155-169. F or the linguistic and general cultural affinities of the Balkan peoples, see K. Sandfeld, Linguistique balkanique, problèm es et résultats (Paris, 1930); A. Seliscev, “Des traits linguistiques com m uns aux langues balkaniques,” R evue des études slaves, V (1925), 38-57; N. Iorga, Le caractère commun des institu tions du sud-est d e l’E urope (Paris, 1929); and J. A ncel, “L’unité balkanique,” R evue internationale des études balkaniques, I (1934), 117-139.
2. Historical Background
T he most up-to-date one-volum e survey of G reek history is H. Bengtson, G riechische G eschichte von den A nfängen bis in die röm ische K aiserzeit (M unich, 1950). A more detailed history of the Greek and Roman periods, with maps, illustrations and bibliographies, is provided by the C am bridge A n cien t H istory (C am bridge, Eng., 1923-1939, 12 v o ls.), ranging from prehistoric m an to a .d . 324. Briefer surveys are available in E. Eyre, ed., E uropean C ivilization : Its Origin and D evelopm ent (New York, 1934-1939, 7 vols.), the first two volumes of which deal with Greece and Rome; and M. I. Rostovtzev, H istory o f the A ncient W orld (Oxford, 1926-1927, 2 vols.). See also M. Cary, The G eographic Back ground o f Greek and Roman H istory (Oxford, 1949). The above works provide bibliographical guides to specific aspects of ancient history. The best one-volume histories of Byzantium are A. A. Vasiliev, H istory of the Byzantine Em pire (M adison, Wise., 1952, rev. ed.), and G. Ostrogorsky, G eschichte des byzantinischen Staates (M unich, 1940), tr. by J. M. Hussey a^ H istory o f the B yzantine State (Oxford, 1955). In the H istoire générale series edited by G. Glotz, the Byzantine period is tre a te d 'b y C. D iehl and G. M arçais,


Bibliography 877
Le m onde oriental de 395 à 1081 (Paris, 1936), and C. Diehl, R. Guilland, L. Oeconom os, and R. G rousset, L ’E u rope orientale de 1081 à 1453 (Paris, 1945). In the series L ’évolu tion de l’hum anité, L. Bréhier is the author of L e m onde byzantin: Vol. I, Vie et m ort de B yzance (Paris, 1947); Vol. II, L es institutions de l’em pire byzantin (Paris, 1949); Vol. I l l in preparation. See also the follow ing cooperative histories: C am bridge M edieval H istory: Vol. IV, East Rom an E m pire (7 1 7 - 1 4 5 3 ) (Cam bridge, Eng., 1923); N . H. Baynes and H. St. L. B. Moss, eds., B yzantium (Oxford, 1948). A series of interpretive articles by C. Diehl, G. Ostrogorsky, N. lorga, and 1. Sakazov, dealing specifically with Byzan tium ’s im pact on the Balkan Peninsula was published in L a revu e internationale des études balkaniques, IV (1936), 377-419. These works provide bibliographical guides to specific aspects of Byzantine history.
3. Coming of the Ottoman Turks
The Oriental sources for Ottoman history are described in F. Babinger, D ie Geschichtsschreiber der Osmanen und ihre W erke (Leipzig, 1924). Brief though revealing surveys of Turkish historiography are available in “Historical Studies in Turkey,” The Tim es Literary Supplem ent, no. 2725, April 23, 1954, p. 270; and B. Lewis, “H istory W riting and N ational Revival in T u rk ey ,” M iddle Eastern Affairs, IV (June-July, 1953), 218-277. A useful handbook and biblio graphical guide to W estern materials is provided by J. K. Birge, A G u ide to Turkish Area Study (W ashington, D. C., 1949). Among W estern sources, the first from the chronological viewpoint, and essential for early Ottoman history, are the Byzantine historians— Phrantzes, Ducas, Chalcondyles, and Kritobulos— the work of the last of these having been translated recently by Charles T. Riggs and published as H istory o f M eh m ed the Conqueror (Princeton, N. J., 1954). For the period after the fifteenth century, basic sources are the reports of the Venetian ambassadors, edited by E. Alberi, R elazion i degli am basciatori veneti al Senato . . . . (F lorence, 1839-1863, 15 vols.), and by N. Barozzi and G. Berchet, Relazioni degli Stati Europei, lette al Senato degli am basciatori V en eti nel secolo X V I T . . . . . (Venice, 1856-1878, 10 vols.). A nother im portant source that has been inadequately exploited is the great mass of travel literature from the days of the Bavarian captive, Johann Schiltberger, in the early fifteenth century, to the ambassadorship of H enry M orgenthau during W orld W ar I, when the em pire was in its death throes. In order to be used effectively the thousands of travel accounts need to be catalogued with data concerning the date of each journey, the route followed, and the chief interest of the traveler. The only significant analytical study of this travel litera ture is by R. W arm er, “La découverte des pays balkaniques par l’E urope occi dentale de 1500 à 1815,” Journal of W orld-H istory, II, no. 4 (1955), 915-948. F or other works about W estern travelers in the Balkans, which have not been con sulted for the present study, see M. Lascaris’ bibliographical notice in R evue his torique du Sud-Est Européen, XXI (1944), 288.
The first great history of the Ottoman Em pire was w ritten by J. von’ H am m er-Purgstall, G esch ich te des osm anischen R eiches (Pesth, 1827-1835, 10 vols.). Based mostly on Turkish sources, this massive study still remains indis pensable. It ends with the Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji of 1774. The French edi tion, translated by J. J. Hellcrt, H istoire d e l’em pire O ttom an depuis son origine


878 Bibliography
jusqu'à nos jours (Paris, 1835-1843, 18 vols.), corrects som e m inor errors in the G erm an edition and is better indexed. A nother study of equal scope is by J. W. Zinkeisen, G eschichte d es osm anischen R eiches in E uropa (G otha, 1840-1863, 7 vols.), a work that uses many W estern sources ignored by H am m er and which carries the story to 1812. From these two fundam ental histories are derived sev eral shorter works, including E. Creasy, H istory of the O ttom an Turks (London, 1854—1856, 2 vols.); Stanley Lane-Poole, S tory o f T urkey (N ew York, 1922, new e d .); and A. de la Jonquière, H istoire d e l’em pire ottom an (Paris, 1914, rev. éd., 2 vols.). A m ore recent general history of the O ttom an Em pire is by N . Iorga, G eschichte des osm anischen R eiches (G otha, 1908-1913, 5 vols.). This study by the well-known Rum anian historian and statesm an is, like all his works, h u r riedly w ritten, inaccurate in spots, poorly footnoted, yet frequently very illu minating, especially on social and economic subjects neglected by his predecessors. Sir Charles Eliot’s T urkey in E urope (London, 1908, new e d .), is a briefer in terpretive work that is still valuable because of the au th o r’s long residence in Turkey, his perceptive analyses and his engaging style. Two recent studies are noteworthy, though they concentrate on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: G. L. Lewis, Turkey [N ations of the M odern W orld] (London, 1955); Sir H arry Luke, The O ld Turkey and the N ew : From Byzantium to Ankara (London, 1955, rev. e d .). A final source of a general nature is the E n cyclopedia o f Islam (Leiden and London, 1913-1938, 4 vols, and supplem ent). This is an invaluable mine of inform ation, though the articles are of uneven quality, the translations frequently poor, and the cross references inadequate. The reader has no way of discovering, for example, that A lbania is considered under A rnauts, M oldavia under Boghdan, and W allachia under Iflak. The article in the E ncyclopedia under “Turks— His tory” by J. H. Kramers, provides an excellent introduction to the Ottoman Em pire. A new edition of the Encyclopedia o f Islam was planned at the 21st Annual Congress of O rientalists at Paris in July, 1948, and the first fascicles of Volum e I appeared in 1954. Students will also find very useful the A tla s o f Islam ic H istory compiled by H. W. Hazard (Princeton, N. J., 1951). The question of the origins of the Ottoman Empire was first investigated in detail in the m onograph by H. A. G ibbons, The Foundation o f the O ttom an E m pire (New York, 1916). Later studies utilizing Oriental sources not used by Gibbons have thrown light on obscure phases of early Turkish history. The most im portant of these in the order of their appearance are W. L. Langer and R. P. Blake, “The Rise of the Ottoman Turks and Its Historical Background,” A m er ican Historical R eview , XXXVII (April, 1932), 468-505; M. F. Kôprülü, Les origines d e l’em pire O ttom an (Paris, 1935); W. B arthold, Turkestan D o w n to the M ongol Invasion (London, 1938); P. Wittek, The Rise of the O ttom an Em pire (London, 1938); V. A. Gordlevsky, Gosudarstvo Seldzhukidov M aloi A zii [The Em pire of the Seljuks of Asia M inor] (Moscow, 1941); G. G. Arnakis, H oi P rotoi O thom anoi: Sym bole eis to problem a tes ptoseos tou H ellenism ou tes M ikras Asias ( 1 2 8 2 -1 3 3 7 ) [The Early Osmanlis: A Contribution to the Problem o f the Fall o f H ellenism in A sia M in or ( 1 2 8 2 -1 3 3 7 )] (A thens, 1947). T he latter work, which stresses the contribution of the Anatolian Greeks to the early T urk ish state-builders, includes a useful introductory essay entitled “The History of the Osmanli Problem: A Critical Review of Sources and Publications.” See also the important articles by G. G. Arnakis, “Futuwwa Traditions


Bibliography 879
in the O ttom an E m pire: Akhis, Bektashi Dervishes, and C raftsm en,” Journal of N ea r Eastern Studies, X II (O ctober, 1953), 232—247; J. A. B. Palm er, “The Origin of the Janissaries,” Bulletin o f the John Rylands Library M anchester, X X XV (M arch, 1953), 4 48-481; and S. Vryonis Jr., “Isidore G labas and the Turkish D evshirm e,” Speculum, XXXI (July, 1956), 433-443. The latter article throws new light on the date of the introduction of the devshirme. F. Babinger, B eiträge zur Frühgeschichte der T ürkenherrschaft in R um elien (B rünn, 1944), clears up many obscure features of the early Turkish invasion of the Balkans. T he following article is notew orthy for placing the O ttom an expansion into E u rope in the general perspective of N ear E astern-W estern relations: A. S. Atiya, “The Crusades: Old Ideas and New Conceptions,” Journal of W orld H istory, II, no. 2 (1954), 469-475. On the Turkish expansion in the Balkans see also the book by St. N ovakovic, Srbi i Turci X IV i X V veka (Belgrade, 1893, not con sulted). Also notew orthy is W. C. Brice, “T he Turkish Colonization of A natolia,” Bulletin of the John Rylands Library, XXXVIII (September, 1955), 18-44, which analyzes the circumstances under which Asia Minor was Turkified following the battle of Manzikert.
4. Conquest of the Balkans
T urkish-B yzantine relations in the first period of T urkish expansion in the Balkans are critically reviewed by P. Charanis, “The Strife among the Palaeologi and the Ottoman Turks, 1370-1402,” Byzantion, XVI (19421943), 286-314, who corrects a number of misconceptions and factual errors. F ranz .Babinger does likewise for the ensuing Turkish penetration of the Balkans in his Beiträge zur F rühgeschichte ' der Türkenherrschaft in R um elien ( 1 4 -1 5 Jahrhundert) (M unich, 1944). Babinger also deals with the reign of M urad II in his biography, M eh m ed der E roberer und seine Z eit (M unich, 1953), pp. 1-66. The European repercussions to Turkish expansion are conveniently and excellently summarized in D. M. Vaughan, Europe and the Turk: A Pattern o f A lliances 1 3 5 0 -1 7 0 0 (Liverpool, 1954), ch. 1. See also J. D. le Roulx, La F rance en O rient au X l V ’siècle: E xpédition s du m aréchal B oucicaut (Paris, 1886, 2 vols.) and M. Silberschmidt, Das orientalische Problem zur Z eit der Entstehung des Türkischen Reiches (Leipzig, 1923), the latter work being especially valuable for its use of Venetian materials and its detailed analysis of the Eastern Question from 1381 to 1400. F o r the efforts of the Byzantine em perors to obtain support from the West, see O. Halecki, Un em pereur de Byzance à R om e (W arsaw, 1930) ; W. Norden, D as Papsttum und Byzanz, die Trennung der beiden M ächte und das Problem ihrer W iedervereinigung bis 1453 (Berlin, 1903); and N. Iorga, Philippe de Mézières. et la Croisade au X V ' siècle (Paris, 1896). Inform ation on the role of V enice in N ear E astern affairs at this tim e is available in C. Diehl, Venise: une république patricienne (Paris, 1915); and in H. K retschm ayr, Geschichte von Venedig (Stuttgart, 1905-1926, 32 vols.). On the Bogomil heresy and its significance for the Ottoman conquests, see I. Lavrin, “The Bogomils and Bogomilism,” Slavonic R eview , VIII (19291930), 269-283; J. A· Hie, D ie B ogom illen in ihrer geschichtlichen E ntw icklung (Srem ski Karlovci, 1923); M.- Spinka, A H istory o f C hristianity in the Balkans: A S tudy in the Spread o f B yzantine C ulture am ong the Slavs (C hicago, 1933); V. N. Sharenkoff, A S tudy o f M anichaeism in Bulgaria, with Special R eferen ce


880 Bibliography
to the B ogom ils (N ew Y ork, 1927); S. R uncim an, The M ed ieva l M anichee: A Study of the Christian D ualist H eresy (Cambridge, Eng., 1947); D. Obolensky, The B ogom ils: A S tudy in Balkan N eo-M an ich aeism (C am bridge, Eng., 1948) and D. Angelov, “Filozofskite vozgledi na Bogomilite,” [“T he Philosophical Views of the Bogomils,”] Izvestiia (Sofia), nos. 3 -4 (1951), 113-147. The individual campaigns are described in the Balkan national histories listed below, and in the following works: J. H. Kramers, “Skanderbeg,” E ncyclo p edia o f Islam ; A. Gegaj, L ’A lban ie e t l’invasion turque au XV" siècle (Louvain, 1937); Bishop F. S. Noli, G eorge C astrioti Scanderbeg (1 4 0 5 -1 4 6 8 ) (N ew Y ork, 1947); and especially the following work, which presents all the original and secondary material on the subject: J. Radonic, D juradj K astriot Skanderbeg i Albanija u X V veku [G eorge K astriotis Skanderbeg and Albania in the Fifteenth C entury] (Belgrade, 1942). See also G. Beckmann, D er K am pf K aiser Sigm unds gegen die w erdende W eltm acht der O sm anen, 1 3 9 2 -1 4 3 7 (G otha, 1902); A. S..N Atiya, The C rusade in the L ater M id d le A g es (London, 1938); and The Crusade of N icopolis (London, 1934). The latter work should be read together with the comments of R. Rosetti, “Notes on the Battle of Nicopolis,” Slavonic and East European R eview , XV (A pril, 1937), 629 -6 3 8 . See also O. Halecki, The Crusade of Varna: A Discussion o f C ontroversial Problem s (New York, 1943), which pre sents one viewpoint concerning the truce of Szeged, but data supporting the other viewpoint are presented convincingly in G. Ostrogorsky, H istory o f the B yzantine State (O xford, 1956), p. 503, which gives a full bibliography. A n interesting analysis of the various contemporary versions of what happened on the Kosovo battlefield is given in D. Subotic, Y u goslav Popular Ballads: Their Origin and D evelo p m en t (Cam bridge, Eng., 1932), ch. 2. The well-known Turkish historian, M. F. KopriilQ, clears up the circum stances of Bayezid’s death in captivity in the article “Yildirim Bayezid’ in Intihari M es’ elesi,” | “Thc Question of Yildirim Bayezid’s Suicide,” ] Belleten, V II (July, 1943), 591-599. The standard and indispensable work for the O ttom an recovery following the battle of A nkara is P. W ittek, “D e la défaite d ’A nkara à la prise de Constantinople (un demi-siècle d ’histoire o tto m an e ),” R evu e des étu des isla m iques, X II (1 9 3 8 ), 1-34. This period is also treated thoroughly by N. Iorga, G esch ich te des osm anischen R eich es (G o th a, 1908), I, 325 ff.
T he most useful general work on the fall of C onstantinople is the col lection of essays by prom inent G reek historians in 1 4 5 3 -1 9 5 3 . L e cinq-centièm e anniversaire de la prise de C onstantinople, published by the periodical L ’hellénism e con tem porain e in A thens in 1953. It includes several essays on the circum stances of the fall of Constantinople, the ideological cleavages among the Greeks before and after the fall, and the historical significance of that event. See also S. R unci man, B. Lewis, R. Betts, N. Rubistein, and P. W ittek, The Fall o f C on stan tin o, le (London, 1955), and vol. XIV (1953) of B yzantinoslavica, which contains a very im portant collection of studies dealing with the fall of Constantinople. Both works have not been consulted for the present study. The diplomacy associated with the siege and the relations of M oham m ed with Europe are traced by D. M. Vaughan, Europe and the Turk: A Pattern of Alliances 13 5 0 -1 7 0 0 (Liverpool, 1954), chs. 1, 2. R. S. A tabinen, “Les T urcs à C onstantinople du V e au XV" siècle,” R evu e d'histoire diplom atiqu e, O ctober-D ecem ber, 1953, pp. 338-364, is_ an interesting article by a Turkish historian presenting the Ottoman penetration of Byzantium as a gradual process, similar to the barbarian conquest of Italy, with


Bibliography 881
the difference that the Turks possessed a much higher civilization than had the G erm an tribes. A. A. Vasiliev, H istory o f the B yzantine Em pire (M adison, Wise., 1952) provides an excellent analysis of the contem porary sources on the siege, including the Greeks Phrantzes, Ducas, Chalcondyles, and Kritobulos; the Catholic eccle siastics Cardinal Isidore and Archbishop Leonard; the Venetian Nicolo Barbaro, and the Russian Nestor Iskinder. For the Turkish sources see F. Babinger, G eschichtsschreiber d er O sm anen und ihre W erke (Leipzig, 1927), pp. 23—45 and passim. The kanuns or decrees of M oham m ed are translated in J. F. von Hammer-Purgstall, D es osmanischen Reichs Staatsverfassung und Staatsverwaltung (Vienna, 1815), I, 87-101. Two W estern travelers have left vivid accounts of the state of Byzantium on the eve of its fall: P ero Tafur: Travels an d A d ven tu res 1 435-1439, translated and edited with an Introduction by Malcolm Letts (Lon don, 1926); “T he Travels of B ertrandon de la Brocquière, a . d . 1432 and 1433,” in T hom as W right, E arly Travels in P alestine (London, 1848). F or an estim ate of their testimony see Izzedin, “Deux voyageurs du XV” siècle en Turquie,” Jour nal asiatique, CCXXXIX (1951), 159-174. On the principals in the siege of C onstantinople there is C. M ijatovich, Constantine: The Last E m peror of the G reeks (London, 1892); and F. Babinger, M ehm ed der Eroberer und seine Z eit (M unich, 1953). The latter work, which filled a long-felt need, has also been published in a F rench edition: M ah om et II le conquérant et son tem ps 1432-1481 (Paris, 1954). On this standard biography see the com m ents by C. M arinesco, “L ’état et la société turque à l'époque de M ahom et II: A propos d’un ouvrage récent,” R evu e historique, CCX IV (Ju ly September, 1955), 35-47. Barnette Miller has written admirable studies of Mo ham m ed’s Seraglio and Palace School in her two w orks: B eyon d the Sublim e Porte: The Grand Seraglio of Stam bul (New Haven, Conn. 1931), and The Palace School o f M oh am m ed the C onqueror (Cam bridge, Mass., 1941). A Turkish viewpoint concerning M oham m ed’s attitude tow ard Byzantine learning is presented in. A. Adnan-Adivar, “The Cultural Situation of Byzantines and Turks at the Time of the Conquest of Constantinople 1453,” M uslim World, XLV (Jan uary, 1955), 6 1 -7 1 . See also L. Thuasne, G en tile Bellini et Sultan M o h a m m ed II (Paris, 1888). M oham m ed’s repeopling of C onstantinople is described by H. Inalcik, “O ttom an M ethods of C onquest,’’ Studia Islamica, II (1 9 5 4 ), 103-130; and by O. L. Barkan, “Les déportations comme méthode de peuplement et de colonisation dans l’em pire ottom an,” R evu e de la facu lté des sciences économ iques de l’université d ’Istanbul, X I (O ctober, 1949-July, 1950), 67 -1 3 1 . T he standard secondary w ork on the capture of C onstantinople is E. Pears, The D estruction of the G reek Em pire and the Capture of Constantinople by the Turks (New York, 1903). G. Schlum berger, L e siège, la prise et le sac de C onstantinople par les Turcs (Paris, 1922, 6th e d .), is of little value'. T he unsuccessful siege of Rhodes is interestingly described in C hapter 18 of S. Toy, A H istory o f F ortification fro m 3000 B.C. to A .D . 1700 (London, 1955).
5. Ottoman Empire at Its Height
For the reign o f Bayezid II, the most useful w ork is by S. N . Fisher, The Foreign R elations o f T urkey 1 4 8 1 -1 5 1 2 (U rbana, 111., 1948), an excellent study which contains considerable inform ation on internal as well as diplom atic


882 Bibliography
developm ents. See also the same author’s article “Civil Strife in the O ttom an Empire 1481-1503,” Journal of M odern History, X III (December, 1941), 448466. O ther aspects of this reign are covered in the following: L. Thuasne, D jem Sultan (Paris, 1892); and H. A. von Burski, K e m a l R e ’is: Ein B eitrag zu r G e schichte der türkischen Flotte (Bonn, 1928).
By all odds the most im portant w ork for the period of Selim is by G. W. F. Stripling, The O ttom an T urks and the A ra b s 1 5 1 1 -1 5 7 4 (U rb an a, 111., 1942). In addition to an exhaustive bibliography, this study presents im portant data concerning the Mameluke Empire, the invasion of Selim, and the efforts of the Turks to reopen the trade routes. On the latter topic the pioneer work was done by A .'H . Lybyer, in “The Ottoman Turks and the Routes of Oriental Trade,” English Historical R eview , X X X (October, 1915), 577-588. Later writers have modified L ybyer’s findings by stressing the cqntinued use of the old routes throughout the sixteenth century. See F. C. Lane, “Venetian Shipping during the Commercial Revolution,” American Historical Review, XXXVIII (January, 1933), 219-239; “The M editerranean Spice T rade,” Am erican H istorical R eview , XLV (April, 1940), 581-591; N. Mirkovich, “Ragusa and the Portuguese Spice Trade,” Slavonic and East European Review, XXI (M arch, 1943), 174-187; F. Braudel, L a M éditerran ée et le m on de m éditerranéen à l’ép oqu e de P hilippe II (Paris, 1949), pp. 421-427. An early Venetian-Egyptian plan for a canal at the Suez as a reply to the Portuguese interlopers is described by F. Charles-Roux, “L’Isthm e de Suez et les rivalités européennes au XVI" siècle,” R evu e de l’histoire des colonies françaises, XVII (1924), 153-192. See also W. H. M oreland, “The Ships of the A rabian Sea about a .d . 1500,” Journal o f the R oyal A siatic Society, January, 1939, pp. 63-74; and H. Wilberforce-Bell, “The Red Sea,” Journal of the R oyal Asiatic Society, April, 1939, pp. 415-426. For the Turkish-Portuguese wars, see M. Longw orth D am es, “T he Portuguese and T urks in the Indian Ocean in the Sixteenth Century,” Journal o f the R oyal A siatic Society, January, 1921, Pt. I, pp. 1-28. This article is corrected on certain points by E. Denison Ross, “T he Portuguese in India and A rabia 15 1 7 -3 8 ,” Journal o f the R o ya l A sia tic Society, January, 1922, Pt. I, pp. 1-18. See also C. D. Ley, ed., Portuguese Voyages 1 4 9 8 -1 6 6 3 (London, Everym an’s Library, 1947). Selim’s relations with the Persians are described in D. M. V aughan, Europe and the Turk: A Pattern o f A lliances 1 3 5 0 -1 7 0 0 (Liverpool, 1954), ch. 5, and in V. M inorsky, “T he Middle East in W estern Politics in the 13th, 14th and 15th Centuries,” Journal of the R oyal Central Asian Society, X XVII (1940), 433-448, an article which actually deals with the 13th, 15th and 17th centuries, the title having a typographical erçor. T he Turkish sources for Suleim an’s reign are given in the article on this subject by J. H. Kram ers in the E ncyclopedia o f Islam. A few of these sources are available in translation, including Suleim an d er G esetzgebers Tagebuch au f seinem Feldzuge nach Wien, tr. by F. A. Berhauer (Vienna, 1858), and D ie osmanische C hronik des R ustem Pasha, tr. by L. Forrer in Türkische Bibliothek (Leipzig, 1923). T he most im portant contem porary source is the R elazion i of the V enetian ambassadors, published by Albéri (Florence, 1839-1863). Three biographies are available in English: F. Downey, The Grande Türke (New York, 1929); H. Lamb, Suleiman the M agnificent (New York, 1 951); and R. B. M errim an, Suleiman the M agnificent (Cam bridge, Mass., 1944), the latter being by all odds the best. Suleim an’s grand vizir is treated inadequately


Bibliography 883
by H. D. Jenkins in Ibrahim Pasha: G rand V izir of Suleiman the M agnificent (New York, 1911). A useful general survey of O ttom an m ilitary history at this tim e is given in C. Oman, A H istory o f the A rt o f W ar in the Sixteenth C entury (New Y ork, 1937). F or individual campaigns and military leaders, see W. Sturminger, Bibliographie und Ikonographie der Turkenbelagerung Wiens, 1529 und 1683 (Cologne, 1955); K em al Pasha Zadeh, H istoire d e la cam pagne d e M oh acz, tr. and ed. by A. J. B. Pavet de Courteille (Paris, 1859); The Sieges o f Vienna by the Turks, fro m theGerman of K arl A ugust Schim m er and other Sources, tr. by the Earl of Ellesmere (London, 1847); Haji Khalfah, The H istory of the M aritim e Wars of the Turks, tr. by Jam es M itchell (London, 1831); S. Lane Poole, The Story o f the B arbary Corsairs (New York, 1890); Jurien de la Gravière, D oria et Barberousse (Paris, 1886), Les corsaires barbaresques (Paris, 1887), Les chevaliers de M alte (Paris, 1887, 2 vols.); F. Braudel, La M éditerran ée et le m onde m éditerranéen à l’époqu e de Philippe H (Paris, 1949), pp. 723-856; and P. Hubac, Les Barbaresques (Paris, 1949), w hich is vivid and well illustrated, if not always accurate. The basic sources for the diplomacy of the period are E. Charrière, ed., N égociation s d e la France dans le L evan t (Paris, 1848-1860, 4 vols.), in C o l lection de docu m en ts inédits sur l’histoire d e France; and A. von G évay, ed., Urkunden und Actenstücke zur Geschichte der Verhältnisse zwischen Österreich, Ungarn, und der Pforte im X V I und X V II Jahrhunderte (Vienna, 1838-1842, 3 vols.). See also the fine m onograph by J. U rsu, La politiqu e orientale de Fran ço is Ur, 1 5 1 5 -1 5 4 7 (Paris, 1908); and the excellent study of Ibrahim ’s diplom atic adviser by H. Kretschm ayr, “Ludovico G ritti,” A rch iv für österreichische G e schichte, LXXX1II (1 8 9 6 ), 1-106, issued the same year in V ienna in book form. For the interaction of Lutheranism and the Ottoman Empire, see G. Simon, “L uther’s A ttitude tow ards Islam ,” M oslem W orld, XXI (July, 1931), 257-262; S. A. Fischer-G alati, “O ttom an Im perialism and the L utheran Struggle for Recog nition in G erm any 1520-1529,” Church H istory, X X III (M arch, 1954), 4 6 -6 7 ; S. A. Fisch.er-Galati, “T he Turkish Im pact on the G erm an R eform ation, 1 5 2 0 1555” (Harvard University, unpublished doctoral dissertation, 1949). The chang ing attitude of Christendom tow ard the O ttom an Em pire is well described in F. L. Baumer, “England, the Turk, and the Common Corps of Christendom,” Am erican H istorical R eview , L (October, 1944), 26-48. Finally, a comprehensive analysis of O ttom an relations with E urope during this period is given in D. M. V aughan, Europe and the Turk: A Pattern o f Alliances 1350-1700 (Liverpool, 1954), pp. 104-156.
6. Ottoman Institutions
T he standard w ork on O ttom an institutions has for long been A. H·. Lybyer, The G o vern m en t o f the O ttom an E m pire in the T im e o f Suleim an the M agnificent (Cambridge, Mass., 1913). This should be supplemented now by the following study, w hich is much m ore com prehensive than the title indicates: H. A. R. Gibb and H. Bowen, Islamic Society and the West: A Study of the Im p act o f W estern C ivilizatio n on M oslem Culture, in the N ea r E ast: Vol. I, Islam ic Society in the E ighteenth C entury (N ew York, 1950). F or the evolution of the child-tribute see the article “ D ewshirm e” by J. H. M ordtm ann in the E n cyclo pedia of Islam. For the janissaries there are the article on this subject by C. L.


884 Bibliography
H uart in the E ncyclopedia of Islam and also the following works: Ahmed Djevad Bey, E ta t m ilitaire ottom an depuis la foundation de l’em pire ju squ’à nos jours: tom e I, livre I: L e corps des Janissaires depu is sa création jusqu’à sa suppression (Constantinople and Paris, 1882); N. Weissmann, Les Janissaires, étude de V organisation m ilitaire des O ttom ans (Paris, 1938); and the definitive study by I. H. Uzunçarsïlï, O sm anti D evleti Teskilatina M edhal [Introduction to the A d ministration of the O ttom an State] (Istanbul, 1941). The following article by an outstanding Turkish historian minimizes Byzantine influence on Ottoman insti tutions: K ôprülü Zade Fouad Bey, “Les institutions byzantines ont-elles joué un role dans la form ation des institutions ottom anes?” Résum és des com m unications présentées au VIIe congrès international des sciences historiques (Warsaw, 1933), pp. 297-302. See also by the same author, A clune osservazioni all influenza delle istituzioni bizantine sulla istituzioni ottom ane (Rome, 1953, not consulted). For the com position and functioning of the O ttom an dynasty, see A. D. A lderson, The Structure of the O ttom an D ynasty (Oxford, 1956), which has invaluable genealogical tables; N. M. Penzer, The H arem (London, 1936); and the two works by Barnette Miller listed in C hapter 4. T he position of non-M oslems is treated in T. W. A rnold, The Preaching o f Islam: A H istory o f the Propagation o f the M uslim Faith (London, 1913, 2nd rev. and enl. ed.) and F. W. Hasluck, Christianity and Islam under the Sultans (Oxford, 1929). For the position of the Jews, consult the biographies of the out standing Ottoman Jewish family by C. Roth: The House of Nasi: Dona Gracia (Philadelphia, 1948), and The House of Nasi: The Duke of N axos (Philadelphia, 1948), which contain references to the numerous other studies of this subject. Works on the position of the Patriarchate and of Balkan Christianity are listed at the end of the following chapter. , By far the most interesting and revealing introduction to O ttom an cul ture is A. Pallis, In the D a ys o f the Janissaries: O ld Turkish L ife as D e p icte d in the “T ravel-Book" o f E vliya C h elebi (L ondon, 1951). T his is based mainly on J. von H am m er-Purgstall, E vliya E fendi: N a rrative o f Travels in E urope, A sia an d A frica (L ondon, 1846-1850, 2 vols.), which in turn is a translation of only two of the original ten volumes. F or Evliya’s biography and a good bibliography, see F. Babinger, D ie Geschichtsschreiber der Osmanen und ihre W erke (Leipzig, 1927), pp. 219 ff. The first serious study of O ttom an literature was by H am m ar-Purgstall, G esch ich te d er osm anischen D ich tku n st (Pesth, 1836-1838, 4 v o ls.), but this is more a dictionary of Ottoman poets than a history of Ottoman poetic art as the title suggests. It has been superseded by the standard work of E. J. W. Gibb, A H istory of O ttom an Poetry (London, 1900-1909, 6 vols.). This should be checked with the article on “T u rk s-L iteratu re” in the E n cyclopedia o f Islam by K ôprülü Zade M ehm ed F u ’ad, who assigns m ore individuality to O ttom an literature than does Gibb. For the poetic craze in O ttom an society, see A. N avarian, L es sultans poètes ( 1 4 5 1 -1 8 0 8 ) (Paris, 1936). F or Ottom an music, see H. G. Farm er, Turkish Instrum ents o f M usic in the S even teenth C entury (Glasgow , 1937); the im portant long article by R. Y ekta Bey, “La m usique tu rq u e,” in A. Lavignac, Encyclopédie de la M usique (Paris, 1923), II, 2485-3064; and the analysis of Islam ic music in general in the article “M usiki” by H. G. F arm er in the E n cyclo pedia of Islam.
Ottoman institutions fascinated contemporary Western Europeans and


Bibliography 885
stimulated numerous works by travelers and envoys. Most revealing are the four confidential letters addressed by the Hapsburg ambassador, Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq, to his friend Nicolas M ichault between the years 1555 and 1562. The two-volume edition, The Life and Letters of Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq, ed. by C. T. Forster and F. H. Blackburne Daniell (London, 1881), contains notes and additional inform ation lacking in the more convenient single volume, Turkish L etters o f O gier G hiselin de B usbecq, ed. by E. S. F orster (O xford, 1927). Some of the numerous other contemporary Western accounts of the Ottoman Em pire are listed in Lybyer, op. cit., pp. 307-330. O ttom an influence on con tem porary W estern literature and thought is described for the Elizabethan period in S. C. Chew, The C rescent and the R ose (N ew Y ork, 1937); for the period to 1840, in B. P. Porter, Islam in English L iteratu re (Beirut, 1939); for eighteenthcentury English dram a, in T. B. Clark, O riental England (Shanghai, 1939); and for France, in C. D. Rouillard, The Turk in French H istory, Thought, an d L it erature (1520-1660) (Paris, 1938).
Finally, see the valuable bibliography on O ttom an-European cultural in teraction in D. M. Vaughan, E urope and the Turk: A P attern o f A lliances 1 3 5 0 1700 (Liverpool, 1954), pp. 280-287.
7. Balkan Peninsula Under Ottoman Rule
N o period of m odern E uropean history rem ains as obscure as the five centuries of O ttom an rule in the Balkans. The difficulty of languages, the scarcity of materials, and the tendency of Balkan historians to turn their backs to a period of subjugation have contributed to this situation. Yugoslav historians since W orld W ar II have made the most serious attempts to analyze the nature of Turkish in stitutions in the Balkans. T heir works are listed and described in the bibliographi cal articles by W. S. V ucinich, “Postw ar Yugoslav H istoriography,” Journal o f M odern H istory, X X III (M arch, 1951), 5 3 -5 4 ; and “T he Yugoslav Lands in the Ottoman Period: Postwar Marxist Interpretations of Indigenous and Ottoman Institutions,” Journal o f M odern H istory, XX VII (Septem ber, 1955)., 287-305. F or studies in the W estern languages see the general histories of H am mer-Purgstall, Zinkeisen, Iorga, and also the following: F. Giese, “Die geschicht lichen G rundlagen für die Stellung der christlichen U ntertanen im osmanischen Reiche,” D er Islam, XIX (1 9 3 1 ), 264 -2 7 7 ; H. A. R. G ibb and H. Bowen, Islamic Society and the West: A Study of the Im pact of Western Civilization on M oslem C ulture in the N ea r East: Vol. I, Islam ic S ociety in the E ighteenth C en tury (New York, 1950); M. Braun, “Türkenherrschaft und Türkenkam pf bei den Balkanslawen,” D ie W elt als G eschichte, VI (1 9 4 0 ), 124-139; and S. N. Fisher, “Ottoman Feudalism and Its Influence upon the Balkans,” Historian, XV (A utum n, 1952), 3-22. The favorable position of the Balkan peoples under. Turkish rule in the early centuries is em phasized by G. V ernadsky, “On Some Parallel Trends in Russian and Turkish H istory,” T ransactions o f the C onnecticut A cadem y of A rts and Sciences, XXXVI (July, 1945), 25-36. Bibliographies of the various Balkan peoples during the Turkish period are given in the relevant chapters below. Special mention should be made of the following article which specifically com pares Turkish and Venetian administration in Crete and em phasizes the preference of the inhabitants for the form er; C. Tukin, “Osmanli


886 Bibliography
Im paratorlugunda G irit Isyanlari: 1821 Yilina K adar G irit,” [“C retan Revolts in the Ottoman Empire: Crete to 1821,”] Belleten, IX (April, 1945), 163-211. For the migrations of peoples during the Turkish period see the works on ethnography listed in C hapter 1, and also the following: T. Kowalski, “Les Trucs balkaniques,” R evu e internationale des études balkaniques, IV (1 9 3 6 ), 4 20-430; E. Pittard, “Les peuples que les T urcs ont amenés dans les Balkans,” R evu e internationale des étu des balkaniques II (1 9 3 5 ), 195-200; S. A. Birnbaum “The Jewries of Eastern Europe,” Slavonie and East European R eview , X XIX (June, 1951), 420-443; and T. Stoianovich, “L ’économie balkanique aux X V II1' et X V IIIe siècles” (University of Paris, unpublished doctoral dissertation, 1952), ch. 1. T he latter is the most im portant single source. General studies of the Orthodox Church are presented from three differ ent viewpoints in A. D. K yriakos, G eschichte der orientalischen K irchen von 1 4 5 3 -1 8 9 8 (Leipzig, 1902); B. J. Kidd, The C hurches o f Eastern C hristendom from A .D . 451 to the Present Tim e (London, 1927); A. K. Fortescue, The O rtho dox Eastern Church (London, 1927). For the position of the Orthodox Church in the Ottom an Empire, see T. H. Papadopoullos, Studies and D ocum ents R elat ing to the H istory of the Greek Church and People under Turkish Domination (Brussels, 1952); H. Scheel, D ie staatsrechtliche Stellung der ökumenischen K ir chenfürsten in der alten Türkei: Ein Beitrag zur G eschichte der Türkischen Ver fassung und Verwaltung (Berlin, 1942); G. G. Arnakis, “The Greek Church of Constantinople and the Ottoman Empire,” Journal of M odern H istory, XXIV (September, 1952), 235-250. The relations of the Constantinople Patriarchate with the non-Greek peoples of the peninsula are presented from conflicting view points in J. Konidaris H e H ellenike E kklesia os politistike dynam is en te historia tes Chersonesou tou A im ou [The G reek Church as a C ivilizing Force in the H is tory of the Balkan Peninsula] (Athens, 1940); L. Hadrovics, Le peuple serbe et son église sous la dom ination turque (Paris, 1947); 1. Snêgarov, Istoriia na O chridskata arkhiepiskopiia patriarshiia ot padaneto i p od turtsitê do neinoto unishtozhenie (1 394-1787g) [History o f the Ohrid Archdiocese Patriarchate from Its Fall to the T urks to Its A bolition ( 1 3 9 4 -1 7 6 7 )] (Sofia, 1931 ) ; and C. Jelavich, “Some Aspects of Serbian Religious Development in the Eighteenth Century,” Church H istory, XXIII (June, 1954), 3-11. Finally, see T. W. Arnold, The Preaching o f Islam: A H istory of the Propagation of the M uslim Faith (London, 1913), ch. 6, for a description of the spread of Islam in the Balkans and the position of the Christians under Moslem rule. Balkan folk literature in general is described in A. Ognjanov, D ie V olks lieder der Balkanslaven (Berlin, 1941); K. Dieterich, “Die Volksdichtung der B alkanländer in ihren gem einsamen Elem enten: Ein Beitrag zur vergleichenden Volkskunde,” Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde, XII (1902), 145-155, 272-291, 403-415; G. A. Megas, “La civilisation dite balkanique: La poésie populaire des pays des Balkans,” L ’hellénism e con tem poraire, IV (Jan u ary -F eb ruary, 1950), 8-30. For individual countries see C. Fauriel, Chants populaires d e la G rèce m oderne, (Paris, 1824-1825, 2 v ols.); S. M ichaelides, The N eoh ellenic Folk-M usic (Limassol, Cyprus, 1948); D. Subotic, Yugoslav Popular Ballads: Their Origin and D evelopm ent (Cambridge, Eng., 1922); G. R. Noyes and L. Bacon, H eroic Ballads of Servia (Boston, 1913); H. Rootham, K ossovo H eroic Songs of the Serbs (Oxford, 1920); D. H. Low, The Ballads of M arko K raljevic (Cambridge, Eng., 1922); W. A. Morisbn, The R evolt o f the Serbs


Bibliography 887
against the Turks (1 8 0 4 —1 8 1 3 ) : Translations fro m the Serbian N a tio n a l B allads of the Period (Cambridge, Eng., 1942); A. Strauss, Bulgarische V olksdichtung (Vienna, 1895); G. Rosen, Bulgarische Volksdichtungen (Leipzig, 1879); R. A. Patterson, Romanian Songs and Ballads (London, 1919). Excellent studies of modern Greek literature are available in C. Th. Demaras, Historia tes neoellenikes logotechnias [History of M odern G reek L it erature] (Athens, 1948-1949, 2 vols.); C. A. Trypanis, M edieval and M odern G reek Poetry: An A nthology (Oxford, 1951); R. Dalven, M odern G reek Poetry (N ew Y ork, 1949). T he first is the standard work on the subject; the second gives a useful introductory survey of G reek literature since a .d . 330 together with selections in the original; and the third also provides a summ ary of modern G reek literary development together with selections in translation. For the written lit erature of the northern Balkans see M. S. Stanoyevich, E arly Y ugoslav L iteratu re (1 1 0 0 -1 8 0 0 ) (New York, 1922); E. Turdeanu, La littérature bulgare du X IV e siècle et sa diffusion dans les pays roumains (Paris, 1947); E. Turdeanu, “Le Livre grec en Russie: L ’apport des presses de Moldavie et de V alachie (16821725),” R evue des études slaves, XXVI (1950), 69-87; and J. Torbarina, Italian Influence on the Poets of the Ragusan Republic (London, 1931). Finally, the problem of bilinguism is well sum m arized in K. Sandfeld and P. Skok, “Langues balkaniques,” Revue internationale des études,balkaniques, IV (1936), 465-481. See also J. M. Rife, “T he Language Situation in G reece T oday,” C lassical Journal, XXXVII (November, 1941), 65-76; W. K. Matthews, “Sources of Old Church Slavonie,” Slavonie and East European Review , XXVII! (April, 1950), 466-485; and the two articles by W. R. Loader, “Spoken G reek,” G reece and R om e, X III (June, 1944), 73-80, and “Purified or Popular? A Note on the Language Promlem of Modern Greece,” Greece and Rom e, XIX (October, 1950), 116-122. F or Turkish cultural influence in the Balkans see P. Skok, “ Restes de la langue turque dans les B alkans,” R evu e internationale des étu des balkaniques, II (1 9 3 5 ), 247-260; S. S. Bobcev, “N otes com parées sur les hadjis balkaniques,” R evu e internationale d es étu des balkaniques, III (1 9 3 6 ), 1-12; W. S. V ucinich, “Yugoslavs o f the M oslem F aith ,” in R. J. K erner, ed., Y ugoslavia (Berkeley, Calif., 1949), pp. 261—275; and R. S. A tabinen, L es app o rts turcs dans le p eu p le m en t et la civilisation de l’E u rope orientale (Paris, 1952), the latter being a dis appointing propagandist tract.
8. Decline of the Ottoman Empire
The decline of the Ottom an Em pire has not received the attention it de serves. A part from the references in the general histories of Ham m ar-Purgstall, Zinkeisen, and Iorga, there is the superficial and unsatisfactory study by A. Zeki, E ssai sur les causes de. la décaden ce d e l’em pire O ttom an, (Paris, 1929). M ore rewarding are the accounts left by the Ottomans themselves in their N asibat lit erature. A n excellent exam ple of this literature is available in English translation by W. L. Wright, Jr., O ttom an Statecraft: The Book o f Counsel for V izirs and G overnors of Sari M ehm ed Pasha . . . (Princeton, N. J., 1935). This work also provides in pp. 17-21 a useful description of this N asibat literature as well as bibliographical references to French and English translations of Qochi Bey, Katib Chelebi, and oilier Turkish authors.
Another important source is the testimony of contemporary Western


888 Bibliography
travelers and envoys. Perhaps the most outstanding of these is Sir Paul Rycaut, who served for eighteen years as English consul at Smyrna and then as secretary of the English Embassy at Constantinople. His observations on Ottoman history and institutions at the beginning of the decline rank with those of Busbecq when the empire was at its height. Of the numerous editions of his works, the following were used for this study: The Present State of the O ttom an Em pire . . . (London, 1668), and The H istory of the Turks Beginning with the Year 1679 . . . (Lon don, 1700). Some of the numerous other Western accounts of the Ottoman Em pire during the early period of decline are listed in the footnote references of W right, op. cit. A serious gap in the historiography of O ttom an decline is in the rela tionship and interaction of the Ottoman Empire and the West. For the intellectual relations see the revealing essay by Lewis V. Thomas, “Ottoman Awareness of Europe 1650-1800” (in m anuscript); T. C. Young, ed., N ear Eastern Culture and Society: A Sym posium on the M eeting of East and West (Princeton, N. J., 1951), which has im portant relevant contributions by G. Sarton, E. E. Calverley, A. Adnan-Adivar, and L. V. Thomas; and, finally, the pioneer study by A. Adnan, La science chez les Turcs ottom ans (Paris, 1939). A second enlarged edition of the latter w ork was published in Turkish in Istanbul in 1943. T he additional m aterial is described in the review by R. N . Frye in Isis, XXXV11I (N ovem ber, 1947), 121-125. For Piri Reis’s map of the world, see P. Kahle, “A Lost Map of C olum bus,” G eographical R eview , X X lli (1 9 3 5 ), 621—638. The economic relations between the Ottoman Empire and the West are studied in several im portant works: M. Epstein, Early H istory o f the L evan t C o m pany (London, 1908); A. C. Wood, H istory of the Levant C om pany (London, 1935); C. H. M atterson, “English T rade in the Levant 1693-1753” (H arvard University, unpublished doctoral dissertation 1936); and the classic studies of P. Masson, H istoire du com m erce français dans le L evan t au XVII'' siècle (Paris, 1896) and H istoire du com m erce français dans le L evant au X V IIIe siècle (Paris, 1911). See also the more recent articles of A. L. H orniker, “William H arborne and the Beginning of Anglo-Turkish Diplomatic and Commercial Relations,” Journal of M odern H istory, X IV (Septem ber, 1942), 28 9 -3 1 6 ; “A nglo-French Rivalry in the Levant from 1583 to 1612,” Journal o f M odern H istory, X V III (Septem ber, 1946), 289-305. Closely related are the studies of the capitulatory privileges, the most im portant being G. P. du Rausas, L e régim e des capitulations dans l’em pire ottom an (Paris, 1902-1905, 2 vols.); P. M. Brown, Foreigners in Turkey: Their Juridical Status (Princeton, N. J., 1914); N. Sousa, The Capitulatory Regim e of Turkey (Baltimore, 1933). These and other works are written from the view point of Western commercial relations without considering the effect of these re lations on the O ttom an economy. A n exception is the pioneer w ork of M. A kdag, “Osmanli Im paratorlugunun kurulu§ ve inkisaf devrinde Tiirkiye’ nin ikitsadî vaziyeti,” [“T he Econom ic Position of T urkey during the F oundation and the Rise of the Ottom an Em pire,”] Belleten, X III (luly, 1949), 497-568, and XIV (July, 1950), 319-411. This valuable work emphasizes the injurious effect of W estern trade upon the Ottoman economy and presents evidence which suggests a significant parallel between O ttom an and Spanish economic history, e.g., com pare the Akdag article with E. Hamilton, “The Decline of Spain,” E conom ic H istory Review, VIII (May, 1938), 168-179. T hesam e author, M. Akdag, pre sents economic factors in the decline of the janissaries in his article “ Yeniçcri


Bibliography 889
ocak nizam inin bozulu§u,” [“D ecline of the Janissaries,”] A nkara Ü niversitesi, D il ve Tarih-Cogrâfya Fakiiltesi Dergisi, V (M ay-June, 1947), 291-313. A n other im portant w ork in this field is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by T raian Stoianovich, “L ’économ ie balkanique aux X V IIe et X V IIIe siècles” (U n i versity of Paris, 1952), w hich is based on the F rench consular archives and which contains much valuable data and interpretation. See also L. G ucer, “Le com m erce intérieur des céréales dans l’em pire ottom an pendant la seconde moitié du X V Ie siècle, “R evu e de la facu lté des sciences écon om iqu es de l’université d ’Istanbul, XI (1 9 4 9 ), 179-182. Another subject requiring serious research for an understanding of Otto m an decline is the location of power after the weakening of the sultans. W right, op. cit., pp. 56-60, states that the slave courtiers surrounding the puppet rulers controlled the empire, whereas Akdag, loc. cit., p. 394, assigns more influence to the e§raf class consisting of big landowners and high officials. Closely related is the question of the influence of various national groups at various periods. It appears that the Serbs and lew s played a dom inant role in imperial affairs to the seventeenth century and were replaced by the G reeks to 1821 and by the Bul garians and Armenians for the remaining period. To what extent was this true and precisely what was the source and nature of their influence? Also, how did Western financial imperialism affect power relationships within the empire after the Crimean War? A study of these problems would throw much light on Otto man history since the sixteenth century. A nother virgin field for research is the history and effect of the plague on the Ottoman Empire. The best general history and bibliography on the plague in gerieral is G. Sticker, A bhandlungen aus der Seuchengeschichte und Seuchenlehre (Giessen, 1908, 2 vols.). Of the numerous accounts of contemporary ob servers the following are outstanding: A. F. Bulard, D e la peste orientale (Paris, 1839); W. M acm ichael, Journey fro m M oscow to C onstantinople in the Years 1817, 1818 (London, 1819); R. Walsh, N arrative of a Journey from C onstanti nople to Eftgland ( London, 1829); and the first twelve volumes of the Journal of the R oyal Geographical Society of London, which contain the journals of num erous British travelers in the O ttom an Em pire in the early nineteenth century. Finally, see the following bibliographical article for the valuable pioneer research by Yugoslav historians on O ttom an institutions in Yugoslavia and the peninsula as a w hole: W. S. V ucinich, "The Yugoslav Lands in the O ttom an Period: Postwar Marxist Interpretations of Indigenous and Ottoman Institutions,” Journal of M odern H istory, XXVII (September, 1955), 287-305.
9. Balkan Peninsula during Ottoman Decline
Most of the scanty bibliography concerning the Balkans during this pe riod of Ottom an decline will be found above in C hapter 8 and below in the relevant “national” chapters in Part IV. N o comprehensive survey of Balkan in stitutions and developm ents during this period is available, though a considerable am ount of inform ation may be found scattered in H. A. R. G ibb and H. Bowen, Islam ic S ociety and the W est.· Vol. I, Islam ic Society in the E ighteenth C en tu ry (L ondon, 1950). Much material is also available in the num erous travel accounts, u few o f which are m entioned in the N otes for this chapter.


890 Bibliography
The evolution and character of the chifliks are analyzed in the following works: R. Busch-Zantner, Agrarverfassung, G esellschaft und Siedlung in Südos teuropa in besonderer Berücksichtigung der Türkenzeit (Leipzig, 1938); J. Tomasevich, Peasants, Politics and E conom ic Change in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1955); H. Inalcik, “Land Problem s in Turkish H istory,” M u slim W orld, XLV (July, 1955), 221-228; T. Stoianovich, “Land Tenure and Related Sectors of the Balkan Economy 1600-1800,” Journal of Econom ic H istory, X III (Fall, 1953), 398-411; and the same author’s essay in m anuscript form : “Lost Villages, Recolonization, and Peasant Servitude: A Balkan Example.” The Stoianovich articles are especially im portant in showing the economic and political repercus sions of the rise of the chiflik regime. The most important single work on the rise of commerce and industry in the Balkans during this period is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by T. Stoianovich, “L ’économ ie balkanique aux X V IIe et X V IIIe siècles” (U niversity of Paris, 1952). M aterial may also be found in G ibb and Bowen m entioned above, in F. Braudel, L a M éditerran ée et le m on de m éditerranean à l’époqu e de P hilippe II (Paris, 1949); economic histories of individual Balkan states (listed in relevant chapters below) such as I. Sakazov, Bulgarische W irtschaftsgeschichte (Berlin and Leipzig, 1929); and contem porary accounts by the consuls of foreign powers who followed economic developments— for example, F. Beaujour, A View of the Com m erce of G reece Form ed after an Annual Average from 1787 to 1797 (London, 1800). On the awakening of the Balkan peoples, see the materials given below on individual countries. Very little has been w ritten that is Balkan-wide in cover age, an exception being the interesting study by N. Moschopoulos, La presse dans la renaissance balkanique (Athens, 1931). Similar studies on a peninsular scale are needed concerning the effect upon Balkan nationalism of foreign ideologies, the development of commerce, and the rise of m erchant groups at home and in foreign cities. Analyses are needed also of the roles of various elements such as the primates, the outlaws, the church prelates, and the village priests. A comparative study of the primates among the various Balkan peoples is attem pted by S. S. Bobcev in his articles “Coup d’oeil sur le régime juridique des Balkans sous le régime ottom an,” R evu e internationale des études balkaniques, II (1935), 185-194, and “Notes com parées sur les çorbacis chez les peuples bal kaniques et en particulier chez les Bulgares,” R evu e internationale des études balkaniques, V -V I (1937-1938), 428-445. These studies are so elementary, however, that this im portant subject may be considered virtually unexplored. On the outlaws, only restricted studies are available, such as G. Rosen, D ie Balkan H aiduken im Beitrag zur innern G eschichte des Slawenthum s (Leipzig, 1878); J. W. Baggally, The K leph tic Ballads in Relation to G reek H istory 1715-1821 (O xford, 1937); and P. S. Spandonidis, “Le C lefte,” L ’H éllenism e contem poraine, January-February, 1954, pp. 3-18. General studies of the Orthodox Church are given in C hapter 7. F o r conflicting interpretations of the attitude and role of the church concerning education and the new learning in general, com pare the M arx ist historian G. K. Kordatos, N eoellenike politike historia [M odern G reek Political H istory] (A thens, 1925), with the series of articles by the Greek church official and historian M. I. Gedeon, in E kklesiastike A letheia [Ecclesiastical Truth], July 6, August 17, and September 21, 1888.


Bibliography 891
Three contemporary sources for the period 1566-1656 deserve special mention: The N egotiations o f Sir Thomas R oe in H is Em bassy to the O ttom an Porte from the Year 1621 to 1628 Inclusive . . . (London, 1740), which consists of the reports of the ambassador during the years indicated; The Turkish H istory . . . by Richard Knolles, with a Continuation to the Present Year M D C L X X X V II . . . by Sir Paul R ycaut . . . (London, 1687, 2 vols.), which includes a detailed and valuable account of this period by Rycaut; and Evliya Effendi, N arrative of T ravels in E urope, A sia, and A frica in the Seventeenth C entury. T ranslated from the Turkish by the Ritter Joseph von Ham m er (London, 1850, 2 vols.), which contains revealing firsthand accounts of the various rulers, particularly the au th o r’s idol, M urad IV. See also the report on the state of the O ttom an E m pire, by Lello, the English am bassador in Constantinople from 1597 to 1606, edited by the Turkish scholar Orhan Burian, The R eport of Lello, Third English A m bas sador to the Sublime Porte (Ankara, 1952).
For the careers of Sokolli (Sokolovich) and of his rival, Nasi, see M. BrosCh, G eschichten aus dem L eben dreier G rossw esire (G otha, 1899) and C. Roth, The House of Nasi: The D uke of N axos (Philadelphia, 1948). On the tak ing of Cyprus the standard version now is to, be found in Sir G eorge H ill’s ex haustive three-volume H istory of C yprus (Cambridge, Eng., 1940-1948), in the third volume of which there is a detailed and docum ented account of both the military and diplomatic aspects of the conquest. Im portant sources for the diplo macy of the period are E. C harrière, éd., N égociation s de la France dans le L eva n t (Paris, 1848-1860, 4 vols.), in C ollection de d ocu m en ts inédits sur l’his toire de France; and G. Tongas, Les relations de la F rance avec l’em pire ottom an durant la prem ière m oitié du X V IIe siècle (Toulouse, 1942), the latter being based on ,hitherto unpublished documents. The naval engagements during these years, including Lepanto and the C retan W ar, are described at length in R. C. A nderson, N a va l Wars in the L evan t 1559-1853 (Princeton, N. J., 1952), which includes an extensive bibliography. This w ork is almost exclusively factual and needs to be supplem ented by the m ore interpretive account in H. A. R. G ibb and H. Bowen, Islam ic Society and the W est: A S tu dy o f the Im p a ct o f W estern C iviliza tio n on M odern C ulture in the N ea r East: Vol. I, Islam ic Society in the E ighteenth C entury (N ew Y ork, 1950), pp. 88-106, which analyzes changes in naval technology. See also W. Bigge, D er K a m p f von C andia in den Jahren 1 6 6 7 -6 9 (Berlin, 1899).
For the war on the Danube, see the relevant chapters on Michael the Brave and Transylvania in R. W. Seton-W atson, A H istory o f the Roumanians from Rom an Tim es to the C om pletion o f Unity (Cambridge, Eng., 1934); C. Benda, “Les relations politiques entre la principauté transylvaine, la Moldavie et la V alachie,” R evu e d ’h istoire com parée, n. s., I (1 9 4 3 ), 35 2 -4 0 0 ; L. H udita, H istoire des négotiations entre la F rance et la Transylvanie au X V I I e siècle (Paris, 1927); D. Angyal, “Gabriel Bethlen,” Revue historique, CLVIII (M ay-June, 1928), 19-80; Etienne Bâthory: R oi de Pologne, Prince de Transylvanie (C ra cow, 1935); A. Lefaivre, Les M agyars pendant la dom ination ottom ane en H ongrie ( / 5 2 6 -1 7 2 2 ) . . . (P.aris, 1902, 2 vols.); and L. Fekete, “Osmanli Türkleri ve M acàrlar 1366 1699,” | “O ttoman Turks and the H ungarians 1366-1699,”] Belleten, XIII (October, 1949), 664 743. T he latter contains a summary of the
10. Defeat by Austria


892 Bibliography
Turkish conquest of H ungary and a good account of all aspects of H ungarian life under the Hapsburgs. F or the Persian wars, there are the biography by L. L. Bellan, Chah A b b a s 1. Sa vie, son histoire (Paris, 1932); the fascinating and fully docum ented account of the Sherley brothers in S. C. Chew, The C rescent an d the R ose: Islam and England D uring the Renaissance (New York, 1937), chs. 4 -6 ; E. D. Ross, Sir A nthony Sherley and His Persian A dventure (London, 1932); and F. Babinger, Sherleiana (Berlin, 1932), the latter using O riental sources. A related episode is described by E. Pears, “The Spanish A rm ada and the Ottom an Porte,” English H istorical R eview , V I11 (July, 1893), 439-466. T he efforts of Elizabeth to gain T urkish aid at the tim e of the A rm ada are described also in D. M. Vaughan, E urope and the Turk: A Pattern of Alliances 1350-1700 (Liverpool, 1954), pp. 166-175. This work also provides a valuable summary of the other aspccts of Turkish-European relations during the century covered by this chapter. General surveys of the second half of the seventeenth century are avail able in the relevant sections of H am m er-Purgstall, Zinkeisen, and Iorga; in the Knolles and Rycaut history listed in the preceding chapter; and in the following continuation of the latter w ork: P. Rycaut, The H istory o f the T urks Beginning with the Year 1679 . . . Until the End of the Year 1698, and 1699 . . . (London, 1700). This important source contains much firsthand information and docu mentary material. F or the Kiuprili family see M. Brosch, Geschichten aus dem Leben dreier G rosswesire (G otha, 1899), which deals with Sokolli (Sokolovich) and the first two K iuprilis; the article on the entire Kiuprili family in the E n cyclo pedia o f Islam (F ran z B abinger); and the excellent characterizations in Leopold von R anke, D ie O sm anen und die spanische M onarchie irn X V I und X V II Jahrhundert . . . (Leipzig, 1877). No adequate history of this im portant family appears to be available in any language. T he first Russo-Turkish W ar arose from Sokolli’s grandiose attem pt in 1569 to build a canal between the Don and Volga rivers, recapture A strakhan from the Russians, sail a fleet from the Black to the Caspian Sea, and thus open a second front against the Persians. T he history of this project is given in H. Inalcik, “Osmanli-Rus rekabepinin men§ei ve Don-Volga kanali tgsebbusii,” ["The Origin of the Ottoman-Russian Rivalry and the Don-Volga Canal,”] Belleten, XII (April, 1948), 349-402. Various aspects of the struggle for the Ukraine are presented in J. von H am m er-Purgstall, G eschichte der Chane der K rim unter osmanischen H errschaft . . . (Vienna, 1856); C am bridge H istory of Poland from the Origins to Sobieski (to 1696) (Cambridge, Eng., 1950); M. Hrushevsky, A H is tory of Ukraine (New Haven, Conn., 1941); W. E. D. Allen, The Ukraine: A H isto ry (Cam bridge, Eng., 1941); and C. B. O’Brien, “ Russia and T urkey, 16771681: The Treaty of Bakhchisarai,” Russian Review, XII (October, 1953), 259268. See also N. Smirnov, Rossiia i Turtsiia v X V I-X V I1 vv. (Moscow, 1946), 2 vols. (not consulted). A n excellent summ ary of the m ilitary and diplomatic aspects of the siege of V ienna and of the following w ar of the H oly League is given by J. B. W olf, The Emergence of the G reat Powers 1 6 8 5 -1715 (New York, 1951). The author makes clear the interrelation of the Turkish war and the Hapsburg-Valois feud, and also lists the most im portant sources in his footnotes and bibliography. A revealing Turkish account of the siege, left by the M aster of Ceremonies for the Sublime Porte, has been recently translated and edited by R. F. K reutel, K ara


Bibliography 893
M ustafa vor Wien, D as türkische Tagebuch der Belagerung Wiens 1683 [Osmanische G eschichtsschreiber, No. 1] (Vienna, 1955). For the Slavic sources see the fine little study by B. H. Sumner, P eter the G rea t and the O ttom an E m pire (Oxford, 1949), which presents important data on Russian relations with the Tatars, the Turks, and the Balkan Slavs. This should be supplemented with P. M. Kontogiannes, H oi H ellenes kata ton proton epi Aikaterines II rossotourkikon polem on (1 7 6 8 —1 7 7 4 ) [The G reek s during the F irst R u sso-Turkish W ar under Catherine H (1 7 6 8 -1 7 7 4 )] (Athens, 1903), which contains an introductory sec tion on early Greco-Russian relations, and by R. C. Anderson, N aval Wars in the Levant 1 5 5 9 -1 8 5 3 (Princeton, N. J., 1952), for the Venetian and Russian naval campaigns. Finally, the most detailed study of the Karlowitz (Syemski Karlovci) peace settlement is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by W. B. Munson, “The Peace of Karlowitz” (University of Illinois, 1940). The following bibliography should be noted: W. Sturminger, Bibliographie und Ikonographie der Turkenbelagerungen W iens 1529 und 1683 (Cologne, 1955).
11. Defeat by Russia
For the defeat of Peter the Great the best account is given in B. H. Sumner, Peter the G reat and the O ttom an Em pire (Oxford, 1949). Sumner con fines himself to Peter’s relations with the Rumanians and Balkan Slavs, so his account should be supplemented by P. M. Kontogiannes, H oi H ellenes kata ton proton epi Aikaterines II rossotourkikon polem on (1 7 6 8 -1 7 7 4 ) [The G reeks During the First Russo-Turkish War under Catherine H (1 7 6 8 -1 7 7 4 )] (Athens, 1903), in which pp. 11-28 deal with Peter’s relations with the Greeks. Also note worthy is S. Bogoiavlenskii, “Iz russko-serbskikh otnoshenii pri Petre Velikom,” [“On Russo-Serbian Relations at the Time of Peter the Great,”] Voprosy lstorii, nos. 8—9 (1946), pp. 19-41. An important source for this period is The D es patch es o f Sir R o b ert Sutton, A m bassador in C onstantinople ( 1 7 1 0 - 1 7 1 4 ) , edited for the Royal Historical Society by the Turkish historian, A. N. Kurat and published in the Camden Third Series, Vol. LXXVIII (London, 1953). For the adventures of Charles XII in Turkey, see A. Stille, K a rl XII (Stockholm, 1918); and A. N. Kurat, lsvec K irali X II K a rl’ in T iirkiyede Kali$i ve Bu Siralarda O sm anli im paratorlugu [The Stay in Turkey of Charles XII, K ing of Sweden, and the State of the O ttom an Em pire at That Tim e] (Istanbul, 1943). Ottoman diplomacy during the early eighteenth century is critically reviewed in A. N. Kurat, “X V III Yiizyil Ba§i Avrupa Umumi Harbinde Tiirkiye’ Nin Tarafsizligi,” [“The Neutrality of Turkey During the General European War in the XVIII Century,”] Belleten, VII (April, 1943), 245-272, in which the author maintains that the Pruth Treaty was. a mistake and that Turkey should have taken advantage of the 'involvement of the Western powers in the War of the Spanish Succession to ally herself with Sweden and defeat Russia. Various aspects of the Turkish reconquest of the Peloponnesus are con sidered in the following: Leopold von Ränke, Z u r venetianischen Geschichte (Leipzig, 1878); pp. 277-361; M. B. Sakellariou, “He anakatalepsis tes Peloponnesou hypo ton Tourkon cn etei 1715,” ["The Reconqucst of the Peloponnesus by the Turks in 1715,"| Hellenika, IX (1936), 241-260; G. Finlay, A History of Greece from Its Conquest by the Romans to the Present Time B.C. 146 to


894 Bibliography
A .D . 1 8 6 4 (O xford, 1877, rev. e d .), V, 216 ff.; and R. C. A nderson, N a va l W ars in the L eva n t 1 5 5 9 -1 8 5 3 (Princeton, N . J., 1952), ch. 8. F or the rem arkable influence of Villeneuve on Ottom an relations with A ustria and Russia, see A. Vandal, Une am bassade française en O rient sous Louis X V : L a m ission du M arqu is de V illeneuve 1728—41 (Paris, 1887). T he standard study of Eugene and his cam paigns is A. A rneth, P rinz Eugen von S avoyen (V ienna, 1858, 3 vols.). The vast bibliography on the great general is collected in B. Böhm , B ibliographie zu r G esch ich te des prin zen Eugen von Savoyen und seiner Z eit (Vienna, 1943). The A ustrian defeats following his death are described in M. E. von Angeli, D er K rieg m it der P forte 1 7 3 6 -1 7 3 9 (Vienna, 1880). For Russian-Turkish relations during these decades, see H. Uebersperger, Russlands O rien tpolitik in den letzen zw e i Jahrhunderten (Stuttgart, 1913); and A. S. Tveritinova, “K Istorii Russko-Turetskikh otnoshenii v Elizavetinskoe vrem ia,” [“On the H istory of Russo-Turkish Relations in the Tim e of E lizabeth,”] S o vyetskoe Vostokovedenie, VI (1949), 312-326, the latter being based on the reports of Veshniakov, the Russian resident in Constantinople. A convenient sum m ary is available in B. N olde, La form ation d e l'em pire russe (Paris, 1953), Vol. II, ch. 8, w hich contributes nothing new to the diplom acy of the period b u t does describe Russian colonization efforts in the southern territories. A detailed analy sis of the negotiation and provisions o f the K uchuk K ainarji T reaty is given in E. I. Druzhinina, Kiuchuk-Kainardzhiiskii M ir 1774 goda (Ego Podgotovka i Zakliuchenie) [The Kuchuk Kainarji Peace Treaty of 1774 (Its Preparation and Signing)] (Moscow, 1955). The “Introduction” in the latter work contains an analysis from a Marxist viewpoint of earlier works on this subject. T he standard w ork on Persian-T urkish relations during this period is M oham m ed-A li H ekm at, E ssai sur l’h istoire des relations politiqu es irano-ottom anes de 1722 à 1747 (Paris, 1937), which is based on French, Persian, and Turkish sources. See also L. Lockhart, N adir Shah: A C ritical Study Based M ainly upon C ontem porary Sources (London, 1938); P. Sykes, A H istory of Persia (London, 1930, 2 vols.); and M. L. Shay, The O ttom an Em pire from 1720 to 1734 as R evea led in thé D espatch es o f the V enetian Balli [Illinois Studies in the Social Sciences, Vol. X X V II, no. 3] (U rb an a, Ul., 1944), which gives the shrewd comments of the Venetian envoys on Turkish relations with Persia and Russia. T he most im portant works on Turkish-Prussian relations are R. Porsch, Beziehungen Friedrichs des Grossen zur Türkei 1740-1763 (M arburg, 1896), and S. Tansel, “Büyük Friedrich Devrinde Osm anli-Prusya M ünasebetleri H akkinda,” [“Concerning O ttom an-Prussian Relations at the T im e of F rederick the G reat,”] Belleten, X (January, 1946), 133-165; and X (April, 1946), 271-292. The latter work shows that it was Sultan M ustafa who was opposed to intervention in the Seven Y ears’ War, rather than Raghib Pasha, as commonly asserted. The most brilliant, vivid, and concise analysis of N ear Eastern diplo macy during the tim e of C atherine still is the old study by A. Sorel, L a question d'O rient au X V IIIe siècle: Le partage de la Pologne et le traité de K ainardji (Paris, 1889), also available in translation as The Eastern Q uestion in the E ight eenth Century: The Partition of Poland and the Treaty o f K ainardji (London, 1898). T he m ost useful w ork on the Polish partitions and their background is the cooperative Cam bridge H istory of Poland from Augustus II to Pilsudski (1 6 9 7 -1 9 3 5 ) (C am bridge, Eng., 1941). See also the standard study by R. H.


Bibliography 895
L ord, T he Second P artition o f P oland: A S tudy in D iplom atic H istory (C am bridge, Mass., 1915), which includes an excellent introduction on prepartition Poland and the first partition. F or Prussia’s role in the diplom acy of this period an im portant new w ork is by C. V. Easum , P rince H enry o f Prussia: B rother o f F rederick the G reat (M adison, Wise., 1942), which throws a new light on the origins of the first Polish partition and corrects the older study by Lord. The definitive biography of Frederick the G reat is the four-volum e w ork by R. Koser, G eschichte Friedrichs des G rossen (Berlin, 1921-1925, 7th e d .), which is more sym pathetic than the critical interpretation of P. G axotte,.Frederick the G reat (New Haven, Conn., 1942). On Prussia and the Triple A lliance of 1788 there is P. Bailleu, “G raf Hertzberg,” Historische Zeitschrift, XL1I (1879), 442-490. A ustria’s role in the diplom acy of the first Polish partition is examined in the unpublished doctoral dissertation by S. K. Padover, “Prince K aunitz and the First Partition of Poland” (University of Chicago, 1932). A summary of the dissertation is published under the sam e title in the Slavonic R eview , X III (Jan uary, 1935), 384-398. The same author has written a sympathetic biography of The Revolutionary Emperor: Joseph II (New York, 1934). M ore relevant to O ttom an affairs is G. R itter von A rneth, Joseph 11 und Katharina von R ussland. Ihr Briefwechsel (Vienna, 1869). 1
British policy toward Russia and the background economic factors are analyzed in the im portant study of D. G erhard, E ngland und der A u fstieg R u ss lands (M unich, 1933). T he Anglo-Russian crisis of 1791 is exam ined in G. B. H ertz, British Im perialism in the Eighteenth Century (London, 1908), ch. 5. See also Sir Richard Lodge, G reat Britain an d Prussia in the Eighteenth C entury (Oxford, 1923). Finally, see the excellent, thoroughly documented articles by M. S. Anderson,· “G reat Britain and the Russian Fleet, 1769-70,” Slavonic and East European Review, XXXI (December, 1952), 148-163; “Great Britain and the Russo-Turkish W ar of 1768-74,” English H istorical Review, LXIX (January, 1954), 39-58. The following study shows that Britain at this time was not inter ested in Poland or T urkey: D. B. H orn, British Public Opinion an d the First Partition of Poland (Edinburgh, 1945).
For the principal figures in Russian foreign policy see the biographies by A. Brückner, K ath erin e d er Z w eite (Berlin, 1883); by G. S. T hom son, C ath erine the G reat and the Expansion of Russia (New York, 1950); and by G. Soloveytchik, Potem kin: Soldier, Statesman, L over and Consort of Catherine of Russia (New York, 1947). The latter work contains important material on P otem kin’s influence on Russo-Turkish relations and on his activities in the newly conquered areas. T he Bruckner biography of Catherine is still the best available in a Western language, being based on original sources and providing full docum entation. Russia’s expansion to the Black Sea during C atherine’s reign is described in B. N olde, La form ation de l’em pire russe (Paris, 1953), chs. 9 -1 0 , which includes many quotations from Russian sources and also an analysis of the colonization and development of the new territories. T he repercussions of the Russo-Turkish wars in Greece are described in the Kontogiannes study cited above, and in M. B. Sakellariou, H e Peloponnesos kata ten deuleran Tourkokraticm , 1 7 1 5 -1 8 2 1 [Peloponnesus D uring the S econ d Turkish Rule, 1 7 15 - 1 8 2 1 \ (A thens, 1939), pp. 146-204; Auriant, “Les corsaires grecs alliés de la Russie 1787 89," I,'A cropole, IX (January March, 1934), 2 0 


896 Bibliography
28; and R. C. Anderson, N aval Wars in the Levant 155 9 -1 8 5 3 (Princeton, N. J., 1952), chs. 10, 12. T he Sakellariou study is the latest and the best on the Peloponnessian revolt, but the Kontogiannes study deals in addition with develop ments among G reek communities in the islands, Constantinople, and Asia Minor. T he role of M ontenegro during C atherine’s wars is presented in the interesting article by M. B. Petrovich, “C atherine II and a False Peter III in M ontenegro,” A m erican Slavic and East European R eview , XIV (April, 1955), 169-194. W. Persen, “The Russian Occupation of Beirut 1772-74,” Royal Central Asian Journal, X LII (July-October, 1955), 275-286, describes the circumstances under which Russia for the first time ruled an A rab area and made no effort to estab lish durable ties with the A rab world. See also E. Tarle, Chesm enskii voi i pervaia russkaia ekspeditsiia v Arkhipelag (Moscow, 1945, not consulted).
12. The Balkans, the French Revolution, and Napoleon
The most recent and useful work on Napoleon and the Ottoman Empire is by V. J. P uryear, N apoleon and the D ardanelles (Berkeley, Calif., 1951), w hich is based alm ost exclusively on docum entary sources. P uryear covers the period from 1802 to 1815. His w ork might be supplem ented by B. Mouravieff, L'alliance russo-turque au milieu des guerres napoléoniennes (Paris, 1954). This study of Russia’s N ear Eastern policy from 1799 to 1815 is w ritten from a strongly nationalistic viewpoint, is based only on F rench and Russian published materials, and needs to be checked with other works. F or N apoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798 the most useful single work is by S. G horbal, The B eginnings o f the E gyptian Q uestion and the R ise o f M eh em et A li . . . (L ondon, 1928), which makes clear the effects of N apoleon’s expedition upon E gypt’s development. F or m ore detail on the expedition itself see the doc um entary w ork of C. de la Jonquière, L ’expédition d ’E gypte (Paris, 1899-1907, 5 vols.); and also the studies by F. Charles-R oux, L es origines de l’expédition d ’E g yp te (Paris, 1910), and Bonaparte, gouverneur d ’E g yp te (Paris, 1936). An interesting sum m ary is available in the recent biography by J. M. Thom pson, N apoleon Bonaparte: H is R ise and Fall (N ew Y ork, 1952), ch. 5.
F o r Selim’s intervention on the side of N apoleon there are the detailed study by P. F. Shupp, The European Powers and the N ear Eastern Question 1806-1807 (New York, 1931), and the older pro-Napoleonic work by E. Driault, La politique orientale de N apoléon 1806-1808 (Paris, 1904). On Admiral Duck w orth’s forcing of the Straits, see J. H. Rose, “A dm iral D uckw orth’s F ailure at Constantinople,” in The Indecisiveness o f M odern War and O ther Essays (Lon don, 1927), ch. 10; and R. C. A nderson, N a va l W ars in the L eva n t 1 5 5 9 -1 8 5 3 (Princeton, N . J., 1952), ch. 15, w hich also deals with the oth er naval engage ments in Egypt and elsewhere during this period. T he abortive British expedition to Egypt is described in G. Douin and E. C. Faw tier-Jones, L ’A n gleterre et l’E gypte: La cam pagne de 1807 (C airo, 1928); and G. D ouin, M oh a m ed A ly : Pacha du Cairo, 1805-1807 (Cairo, 1926).
F or the negotiations between N apoleon and Alexander there are, in addition to P uryear, S. Tatishchev, A lex a n d re Ier e t N apoléon , 1 8 0 1 -1 8 1 2 (Paris, 1891), and A. Vandal, N apoléon et A lexan dre Ier (Paris, 1891-1894, 3 vols.). The various projects for Ottoman partition that appeared during these years are sum m arized in L. S. Stavrianos, B alkan F ederation: A H istory o f the M ovem en t


Bibliography 897
to w a rd Balkan U nity in M odern T im es (N ortham pton, Mass., 1944), ch. 2. F or Russian-Turkish-British relations there are the authoritative m onograph of S. M. Goriainov, L e Bosphore et les Dardanelles (Paris, 1910), and the documentary account of Robert Adair, N egotiations for the Peace of the Dardanelles . . . (L ondon, 1845, 2 vols.). The negotiation of the Bucharest T reaty is vividly de scribed in S. Lane-Poole’s biography of S tra tfo rd Canning (L ondon, 1858), Vol. I, ch. 4. Finally, the guarantee issue at the V ienna Congress is discussed in C. K. W ebster, The Foreign P olicy o f Castlereagh 18 1 2 -1 8 1 5 (L ondon, 1931).
T here is need for a solid, com prehensive study of the im pact of the French Revolution and of Napoleon on the Balkans as a whole. The following studies contain general data: N. lorga, La révolution française et le sud-est de l ’E urope (B ucharest, 1934); F. T hierfelder, U rsprung und W irkung d er fra n zö sischen Kultureinflüsse in Südosteuropa (Berlin, 1943); N. Moschopoulos, La presse dans la renaissance balkanique (Athens, 1931); 1789: E veil des peuples: La révolution française, l'Europe centrale et les Balkans (Paris, 1939).
F rench influence in D alm atia has been studied intensively because of the aftereffect of the Illyrian movement. First should be noted Ihe excellent analysis of econom ic policies and results: M. Pivec-Stele, La vie écon om iqu e des provin ces illyriennes, 1809-1813 (Paris, 1930). Yugoslav works on this subject are given in J. Tom asevich, Peasants, P olitics an d E con om ic C hange in Yugoslavia (S tan ford, Calif., 1955), p. 114. Then see the following: P. Pisani, La D alm atie de 1 7 9 7 à 1815 (Paris, 1893); V. Kisovec, “A perçu historique de l’Illyrie jusqu’à la révolution française,” La revue slave, VI (Septem ber-October, 1909), 105123; F. Zwitter, “Illyrisme et sentimente yougoslave,” Le monde slave, X (April, 1933), 3 9-71; II (M ay, 1933), 161-185, 233-243; and II (June, 1933), 3 5 8 375; E. D ard, “Les souvenirs napoléoniens en Y ougoslavie,” R evu e d ’histoire diplom atique XLVII (January-M arch, 1933), 1-9; V. Kisovec, “La révolution française et le royaum e de l’IUyrie,” L a revu e slave, VI (N ovem ber-D ecem ber, 1909), 253-287; P. Skok, “Le mouvement illyrien et les Français,” Le m onde slave, X II (June, 1935), 426-438; G. Cassi, “Les populations juliennes-illyriennes pendant la domination napoléonienne, 1806-1814,” Revue des études napo léoniennes, XXXI (October, 1930), 193-212; XXI (November, 1930), 257-275; X X I (D ecem ber, 1930), 355 -3 6 9 ; and C. E. Black, “ Fouché in Illyria,” Journal o f Central European Affairs, II (January, 1943), 386-396.
On French rule and influence in the Ionian Islands see P. Gratsiatos, H e H eptan esos h ypo ten xen okratian . . . [The Ionian Islands under Foreign R u le . . .] (Cephalonia, 1878); P. Chiotes, H istorika A pom nom oneym ata: III, Historia tes Heptanesou kai idios tes Zakynthou [H istorical Reminiscences: Vol. Ill, H istory of the Ionian Islands and Particularly o f Zante] (Corfu, 1863); G. Pautier, Les Iles Ioniennes pen dan t l’occupation française et le p ro tecto ra t anglais (Paris, 1 8 6 3 ); Com tesse D o ra d ’Istria, “Les Iles Ioniennes sous la dom ination de Venise· et sous le protectorat britannique,” R evu e des deux m ondes, XVI (July 15, 1858), 3 81 -4 2 2 ; E. R. Rangabè, L ivre d ’o r de la noblesse ionienne (A thens, 1925); and the standard economic studies by A. M. Andreades, P en test oikonom ikes dioikeseos tes Heptanesou epi Venetokratias [Concerning the Econom ic A dm inistra tion of the Ionian Islands under Venetian Rule] (Athens, 1914, 2 vols.), and H e Heptanesiake dem osia oikonom ia kata ten periodon 17 9 7 -1 8 1 4 [Ionian Public Econom y During the Period 1797-1814] (Corfu, 1936).
Napoleon's influence on Greece is considered in the following works: C.


898 Bibliography
Kerofilas, “N apoléon et la G rèce,” L es études franco-grecques, II (June, 1919), 145-155; II (July, 1919), 202-211; II (August, 1919), 273-281; and II (Sep tem ber, 1 919), 324 -3 3 3 ; C. Rados, N apoléon Ier et la G rèce (A thens, 1921); E. D riault, N apoléon et la résurrection d e la G rèce (Paris, 1924); the series of five articles by J. Savant, “N apoléon et la libération de la G rèce,” L ’H ellenism e con tem porain, July-O ctober, 1950, pp. 320-341 ff.; and the account by the Stephanopoli brothers, members of the Greek colony in Corsica, who were sent by Napoleon on a political mission to the Peloponnesus: Dimo and Nicolo Stephanopoli, Voyage en G rèce (Paris, 1800, 2 vols.). F or French influence on other regions of the Balkans at this time, see A. Boppe, L ’A lban ie et N apoléon 1 7 9 7 -1 8 1 4 (Paris, 1914); J. D. G hika, “La F ran ce et les principautés danubiennes, 1789-1815,” A nnales de l’école libre des sciences politiques, XI (1896), 208-229; and the documentary article of A. D um aine, “Un consulat de F rance en Bosnie sous le prem ier em pire: Pierre D avid,” R evu e d ’histoire diplom atiqu e, X X X V III (A p ril-Ju n e, 1924), 129-169; XX XV III (July-September, 1924), 301-328. For the influence of the French Revolution on the Turks, see the following article, which uses Turkish sources: B. Lewis, “T he Im pact of the F rench Revolution on T urkey,” Journal o f W orld H istory I (July, 1953), 105-125.
13. Dynamics of Balkan Politics
T he best systematic studies of the state of the O ttom an E m pire in the early nineteenth century are the recent work by H. A. R. Gibb and H. Bowen, Islam ic Society and the West: A Study o f the Im pact of W estern C ivilization on M oslem C ulture in the N ea r East: Vol. I, Islam ic S ociety in the E ighteenth C en tury (London, 1950); and the contem porary w ork by I. M. D ’Ohsson, Tableau general de l’em pire O thm an (Paris, 1788-1824, 7 vols.). D ’Ohsson was an Arm enian who served as the Swedish minister in Constantinople from 1796 to 1799 and his massive study is the standard w ork on the subject. T he num erous accounts left by travelers are listed in S. H. W eber, V oyages and Travels in the N ear East M ade D uring the N ineteenth Century: Being a Part of a Larger Cata logue o f W orks on G eograph y, C artograph y, V oyages and T ravels in the G ennadius L ibrary in A th en s (Princeton, N. J., 1952); and F. W. H asluck, C hris tianity and Islam under the Sultans (Oxford, 1929), I, xxi-lxiv. The following three reports are noteworthy in presenting different interpretations of the empire: W. Eton, A Survey of the Turkish Em pire . . . (London, 1809, 4th éd.); J. C. H obhouse, A Journey through A lbania an d O ther P rovin ces o f T urkey in E urope and A sia to Constantinople During the Years 1 8 0 9-1810 (London, 1813); and T. Thornton, The Present State of Turkey . . . (London, 1807). A striking de scription of the open insubordination in the em pire is given by N apoleon’s am bassador to Constantinople, A. F. Andreossy, C onstantinople et le Bosphore de Thrace (Paris, 1841, 3rd éd.). An excellent analysis of conditions in the mid nineteenth century based on travel accounts is given by B. Jelavich, “T he British Traveller in the Balkans: The Abuses of O ttom an Adm inistration in the Slavonic Provinces,” Slavonic and East European Review , X XXIII (June, 1955), 396-413. Ali Pasha and Pasvan-Oglu are the subjects of several studies. The fol lowing biographies of Ali Pasha are available: R. A. Davenport, The Life o f A li Pasha (L ondon, 1837); S. Christowe, The L ion o f Yanina (N ew York, 1941);


Bibliography 899
W. Plomer, A li the Lion: A li o f Tebeleni, Pasha of Yanina 1741-1822 (London, 1936); and G. Romerand, A li de Tebelen: Pacha de Janina 1744-1822 (Paris, 1929), the last two works being the most trustworthy. M any travelers and some diplomatic representatives have left accounts of Ali and his court, outstanding being the works of the F rench representative at A ll’s court, F. C. H . L. Pouqueville, V oyage en M orée, à Constantinople, en A lbanie . . . (Paris, 1805, 3 vols.); V oyage dans la G rèce . . , (Paris, 1820, 5 vols.); and of the British representative W. M. Leake, T ravels in the M orea (L ondon, 1830, 3 v o ls.), and Travels in N orthern G reece (London, 1835, 4 vols.). Less detailed but exceptionally revealing and perceptive are the travel accounts of Hobhouse listed above, and of H. Holland, Travels in the Ionian Isles, A lbania . . . During the Years 1812 and 1813 (London, 1815). See also the following studies for the im portant im pact of Ali Pasha on G reek affairs: I. Lam prides, E peirotika M eletem ata [E pirote S tu diesJ (A thens, 1 8 8 7 -9 0 ), Pts. I-X ; S. P. A ravantinos, H istoria A le Pasa . . . [H istory o f A li Pasha . . .] (A thens, 1895); F. M ichalopoulos, Ta G iannena kai he N eoelleniki Anagennesis 1648-1820 [Yanina and the M odern G reek Renais sance 1648-1820] (Athens, 1930); D. A. Zotos, H e dikaiosyne eis to kratos tou A le Pasa [Justice in the State o f A li Pasha] (A thens, 1938).
T he most im portant source for Pasvan-Oglu is the correspondence of Baron de M ériage, the F rench agent in Vidin from F ebruary, 1807, to the end of 1808. His volum inous reports to Paris have been published piecemeal in A. Boppe, L a m ission de l’adjudùnt-com m andant M ériage à Vidin (P aris, 1886); G . Iakichitch, “Notes sur Passvan-Oglu 1758-1807 par l’adjudant-com m andant M ériage,” La revue slave, I (M ay, 1906), 261-279, and following issues; I. Pavlovitch, “Documents inédits concernant la péninsule Balkanique et la Serbie (17951 8 1 3 ),” M ém oires de l’A ca d ém ie R o ya le d e la Serbie (Belgrade, 1890), Vol. II; and A. J. Odobescu, “Documente culese din Achivele M inisteriului Afacerilor S traine din Paris,” D ocu m en te P rivotore la Istoria R o m â n ilo r ( 1781—1 8 1 4 ) (Bucharest, 1895), Vol. II. The most im portant other contem porary sources are the first volum e of G· A. Olivier, V oyage dans l’em pire O thom an (Paris, 1801); “La Bulgarie à la fin du X V III0 siècle: M émoires de Sofroni, Évcque de V ratsa,” transi, from the Bulgarian by L. Leger in M élanges orientaux: Textes et traductions (Paris, 1883); and the above-mentioned works of Pouqueville, who makes pene trating com parisons of Pasvan-Oglu and Ali. See also the article in the E n cyclo pedia of Islam by F. Bajraktarevic, who provides a good bibliography, and also the study by M. Teofilova, Buntüt na Pazvan-O glu i negovoto znachenie za Bulg arskoto ozvo b o d iteln o d vizh en ie v X I X vëk [Pasvan-O glu’s Insurrection an d Its Significance fo r the Bulgarian Liberation M ovem ent of the Eighteenth Century] (Sofia, 1932). The latter, reviewed favorably as an im portant interpretation of P asvan-O glu’s career, was not available for this study. An excellent interpretation of Pasvan-O glu is available in D. Pantelic, B'eogradski pashaluk p red p rv i srpskiustanak, 1794—1804 [B elgrade 'Pashalik befo re the F irst Serbian R evo lt, 1 7 9 4 1804] (Belgrade, 1949), which makes effective use of A ustrian reports on PasvanOglu. The two most im portant works on Selim and his reform efforts are the eyewitness account of the French officer Juchereau de Saint-Denis, Les revolu tions de C onstantinople (P a ris ,-1819, 2 vols.), and the critical m onograph by C. Schlechta-W esehrd, D ie R evolutionen in C on stan tin opel (V ienna, 1880). The G reek historian N. Moichopoulos places the Selim episode in its cultural setting in


900 Bibliography
his revealing article “Le despotisme éclairé en Turquie,” Bulletin o f the Inter national C o m m ittee o f H istorical Sciences, IX (1 9 3 7 ), 147-180. Also useful is the survey of the janissaries in T heodor M anzel, “D as K orps der Janitscharen,” Beiträge zur Kenntnis des Orients, I (1902-1903), 47-94. Finally, see the article and bibliography on Selim III in the E ncyclopedia of Islam by J. H. Kramers. In T urkish there is the article by E. Z. K aral, “T anzim attan evvel garplilasm a hareketleri,” [“W esternization of T urkey before T anzim at,”] in the volume Tanzim at (Istanbul, 1940), pp. 13-30. A basic w ork on this period of O ttom an history is by the Russian his torian, A. F. Miller, M ustafa Pasha Bairaktar: O ttom anskaia Im periia v N achale X IX Veka [M ustafa Pasha Bairaktar: The O ttom an E m pire in the Beginning of the N ineteenth Century] (Moscow, 1947), who gives a valuable analysis of the state of the empire, and a new appraisal of the roles of Selim and Bairaktar. Works concerning the various economic and cultural forces responsible for the rise of Balkan nationalism are given above for C hapter 9. Greek-Slav conflict is frequently described by contem porary travelers but has not been sys tem atically studied apart from indirect references in works like A. G orovei, “Les peuples balkaniques dans le folklore roum ain,” R evu e internationale des études balkaniques, Il (1 9 3 8 ), 469-485. T h e opposite trend is well described in M. Lascaris, Hellenes kai Serboi kata tous apaleytheretikous ton agonas 1804-1830 [G reeks and Serbians During Their Wars of Liberation 1804-1830] (Athens, 1936). Cooperation am ong the Balkan peoples in the early nineteenth century requires more study, particularly because each nationalist movement seems to have had an early peninsular phase before becoming exclusive and antiforeign because of territorial disputes. Class conflict within the various subject national ities is another basic but largely ignored problem , though contem porary travelers frequently noted evidence of it. A part from the M arxists, the only historian who has considered this m atter extensively is R. H. Davison in his valuable unpublished doctoral dissertation, “R eform in the O ttom an E m pire 1856-1876” (H arv ard University, 1942). For the early phase of great-power policies in the N ear East, see W. Fritzemeyer, Christenheit und Europa (Leipzig, 1931); F. L. Baumer, “Eng land, the Turk, and the Common Corps of Christendom,” Am erican H istorical R eview, L (October, 1944), 26-48. For the changing relations between Britain and Russia in the N ear East, see D. G erhard, E ngland und der A u fstieg R uss lands (M unich, 1933), and J. H. Gleason, The G enesis o f R ussophobia in Great Britain (Cam bridge, Mass., 1950). Com mercial factors in N ear Eastern diplo m acy m ay be noted in C. Geblesco, L a question d ’O rient et son caractère éco n o m ique (Paris, 1904); S. Costopoulo, L ’em pire de l’O rient: aspects écon om iqu es et sociaux de la question d ’O rient (Paris, 1925); P. Masson, H isto ire'd u co m m erce français dans le Levant au X V IIIe siècle (Paris, 1911); A. C. Wood, A H istory o f the L evant C om pany (London, 1935); G. B. H ertz, British Im perialism in the Eighteenth Century (London, 1908), ch. 5, for a study of commercial factors during the 1791 Anglo-Russian crisis; V. J. Puryear, International E conom ics an d the D ip lo m a cy o f the N ea r E ast: A S tu d y o f British C o m m ercia l P olicy in the L evant 1 8 3 4 -1 8 5 3 (Stanford, Calif., 1935); F. E. Bailey, “The Economics of British Foreign Policy, 1825-50,” Journal of. M odern H istory, X II (Decem ber, 1940), 449-484.


Bibliography 901
A com prehensive survey of Yugoslav bibliography is given by E. H aum ant in his article “ Yougoslavie,” in H istoire et historiens depuis cinquante ans; B iblioth èqu e d e la revue historique (Paris, 1947), I, 454—468. T he im portant postW orld W ar II historical publications in Yugoslavia are thoroughly analyzed by W. S. V ucinich, “Postw ar Yugoslav H istoriography,” Journal o f M odern H istory, X X III (M arch, 1951), 4 1 -5 7 , and “T he Yugoslav Lands in the O ttom an Period: Postwar Marxist Interpretations of Indigenous and Ottoman Institutions,” Jour nal of M odern H istory, XXVII (September, 1955), 287-305. See also Ten Years of Yugoslav H istoriography, 1945-55, edited by J. Tadic (Belgrade, 1955, not consulted). The two most valuable studies of the South Slavs in W estern lan guages are E. H aum ant, La form ation de la Y ou goslavie ( X V e- X X ° siècles) (Paris, 1930) for the general historical development, and J. Tomasevich, Peasants, Politics and E conom ic Change in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1954) for the economic and social evolution. H aum ant may be supplemented by H. Wendel, D er K am pf der Südslawen um Freiheit und Einheit (Frankfort, 1925); and by G. I. M aur, D ie Jugoslawen einst und jetzt (Leipzig, 1936, 2 vols.). For the Hapsburg Slavs the best general study remains R. W. SetonWatson, The Southern Slav Question and the Hapsburg M onarchy (London, 1911). See also the excellent chapters in R. A. K ann, The M ultinational E m pire: N ationalism and N ational R eform in the H apsburg M onarchy 1 8 4 8 -1 9 1 8 (New York, 1950, 2 vols.); and O. Jaszi, The Dissolution of the H apsburg M onarchy (Chicago, 1929). On Serbia alone there are no satisfactory general histories, the following being outdated: H. W. V. Temperley, H istory of Serbia (London, 1917); G. Y. Devas, La nouvelle Servie (Paris, 1918); and C. Mijatovich, Servia and the Servians (London, 1908).
F or the intellectual and literary renaissance the most revealing w ork in English is the fascinating L ife and A d ven tu res o f D im itrije O bradovic, trans lated and edited by G. R. Noyes (Berkeley, Calif., 1953). A more meaningful analysis of O bradovich is given in M. Kostic, D o sitej O bradovic u istoriskoj persp e k tiv i X V H I i.X I X veka [D o sitej O b ra d o vic in the H istorical P ersp ective o f the XVI11 and X I X C enturies] (Belgrade, 1952). On K arajich, a useful sum m ary is available in V. Corovic, “V uk K aradzic,” Slavonic and East European R eview , X V I (A pri^ 1938), 667-677. T he most im portant full-length study is by L. Stojanovic, Z ivot i rad Vuka Stef. K aradzica [The L ife and W orks of Vuk Stef. Karadzic] (Belgrade, 1924). For the role of the church in the Serbian renaissance see L. Hadrovics, L ’église serbe sous la den om in ation turque (Paris, 1 9 4 7 ); and D. Jelavich, “Some Aspects of Serbian Religious D evelopm ent in the Eighteenth C entury,” Church H istory, X X III (June, 1954), 3-11; which includes an excellent bibliog raphy o f Yugoslav m aterials. “W orth noting here is an excellent study of the Ser bian church in the later years by J. M ousset, La Serbie et son église ( 1 8 3 0 -1 9 0 4 ) (Paris, 1908). A revealing article on Serbian historiography and general intel lectual developm ent is by M. B. Petrovich, “T he Rise of-M o d ern Serbian H isto riography,” Journal of Central European Aßairs, XVI (April, 1956), 1-24. An im portant study -of the conditions in the Belgrade pashalik before 1804 and of the steps leading lo the revolt is provided in the following work, which uses Austrian archival material«: I). Puntellö, B eogradski paXaluk p red p rvi
14. The Serbian Revolution and the South Slavs


902 Bibliography
srpski ustanak, 1 7 9 4-1804 [Belgrade Pashalik before the First Serbian R evolt 1 7 9 4 -1 8 0 4 ] (Belgrade, 1949). T he m ost im portant w orks in W estern languages on the Serbian revolution are S. N ovakovich, D er W iedergeburt des serbischen Staates (Sarajevo, 1912); Leopold von Ranke, A H istory of Servia and of the Servian R evolution (London, 1874, English ed.) based on materials provided by V uk K arajich; B.-S. C unibert, Essai h istorique sur les révolu tion s e t ïin d ép en d en ce de la Serbie depuis 1804 jusqu’à 1 8 5 0 (Leipzig, 1850, 2 vols.), by a well-in form ed Sardinian who was M ilosh’s private physician; and W. A. M orison, The R evolt of the Serbs against the Turks (1 8 0 4 -1 8 1 3 ) : Translations from the Ser bian N ational Ballads of the Period (Cam bridge, Eng., 1942). The standard work on the diplom acy of the revolution rem ains G. Yakschitch, L ’E urope et la résur rection de la Serbie, 1 8 0 4 -1 8 3 4 (Paris, 1907). See also B. von Kâllay, D ie Geschichte des serbischen Aufstandes, 1807-1810 (Vienna, 1910); P. F. Shupp, The European Powers and the N ear Eastern Question 1806-1807 (New York, 1931); A. Boppe, D ocum ents inédits sur les relations de la Serbie avec N apoléon I, 18 0 7 -1 8 1 4 (Belgrade, 1888); and M. Lascaris, Hellenes kai Serboi kata tous apeleutherotikous ton agonas, 1 8 0 4 -1830 [G reeks and Serbians During Their Wars o f Liberation, 1804-1830] (Athens, 1936). Finally, see the excellent bibli ographical article which includes Yugoslav materials: I. Avakumovic, “Litera ture on the First Serbian Insurrection (1804-1813),” Journal of Central Euro pean Affairs, X III (October, 1953), 256-260. The entire issue of Istoriski Glasnik, nos. 1-2 (1954), consisting of eleven articles, was devoted to the 1804 Serb revolt, in celebration of the 150th anniversary. This issue was not utilized during the preparation of this study. A n excellent brief description of everyday life in Serbia in the early nineteenth century is given in D. P. Subotic, “T he Serbia of Prince Milos,” Sla vonic Review, III (June, 1924), 156-165. For more details see the excellent study by T. R. Djordjevic, Srbija pre sto godina [Serbia One H undred Years Ago] (Belgrade, 1946). Valuable m aterial is to be found in travelers’ accounts, some of the most important being C. Robert, Les slaves de Turquie (Paris, 1844); A. Ubicini, Les Serbes de Turquie (Paris, 1865); A. Boué, La Turquie d ’ Europe (Paris, 1840, 4 vols.); A. M. L. de Lam artine, Souvenirs, impressions, pensées et paysages pendant un voyage en O rient 1 8 3 2-1833 (Paris, 1845).
On the political developments to 1878 the basic works are the m onu mental and unequaled studies of Slobodan Jovanovic: U stavobranitelji [Defenders of the Constitution] (Belgrade, 1912); Druga vlada M ilosa i Mihaila, 1858-1868 [The Second Reign of M ilosh and M ichael, 1858-1868] (Belgrade, 1923); Vlada Alexandra Obrenovica [Reign of Alexander Obrenovich] (Belgrade, 1936, 3 vols.); Vlada M ilana O brenovica [Reign of M ilan Obrenovich] (Belgrade, 1934, 3 vols.).
T here is no diplom atic history of Serbia in the nineteenth century com parable to that of D riault and Lhéritier for Greece. The following works are listed in the order of the period covered: M. Gavrilovic, “The Early Diplomatic Rela tions of Great Britain and Serbia,” Slavonic R eview , I (June, 1922), 86-109; I (December, 1922), 333-351; and I (M arch, 1923), 552-560; T. W. Riker, “Michael of Serbia and the Turkish Occupation,” Slavonic and East European Review, XII (July, 1933), 133-149; X II (January, 1934), 409-429; and XII (A pril, 1934), 6 4 6 -6 5 8 ; H. W endel, Bism arck und Serbien in Jahre 1866 (Berlin, 1927); J. A. von Reiswitz, Belgrad-Berlin, Berlin-Belgrad, 1866-1871 (M unich,


Bibliography 903
1936); R. W. Seton-W atson, “Les relations de l’A utriche-H ongrie et de la Serbie entre 1868 et 1874: la mission de Benjamin Kâllay à Belgrade,” L e m onde slave III (February, 1926), 211-230; III (M ay, 1926), 186-204; III (August, 1926), 27 3 -2 8 8 ; S. Jovanovic, “Serbia in the Early Seventies,” Slavonic R eview , IV (December, 1925), 385-395; V. Trivanovitch, “Serbia, Russia, and Austria dur ing the Rule of M ilan Obrenovich, 1868-78,” Journal of M odern H istory, III (Septem ber, 1931), 414—440; J. Ristic, D iplom atska istorija Srbije za vrem e srpskih ratova za oslobodjenje i nezavisnost 1875-1878 [Diplomatic H istory of Serbia during the Serbian Wars for Freedom and Independence 1875-1878] (Belgrade, 1896-98, 2 vols.). The best general source for Serbian and South Slav economic develop m ent to 1878 is in J. Tom asevich, Peasants, P olitics an d E con om ic C hange in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1954). Contem porary travelers have left im portant accounts, including A. Boué, La Turquie d ’ Europe (Paris, 1840, 4 vols.) which has data on agriculture and commerce; and W. Richter, Serbiens Zustands unter dem Fürsten M ilosch bis zu dessen Regierungs— Entsagung im Jahre 1839 (Leipzig, 1840), which describes the atm osphere in Serbia in these years. V aluable m onographic studies are by M. L. Stanojevich, D ie L an dw irtsch aft in Serbien (Halle, 1913), and J. Krikner, Industrie and Industriepolitik Serbiens (Halle, 1913). On the zadruga see D. Novakovich, La Zadrouga (Paris, 1905); E. Sicard, La Z adruga sud-slav dans l’évolu tion du grou pe dom estiqu e (P aris, 1943); and the prelim inary findings of Philip E. Mosely presented in his articles “T he Peasant Fam ily: The Zadruga or C om m unal Joint-Fam ily in the Balkans and Its Recent E volution,” in C. F. W are, ed.. The C ultural A pproach to H istory (N ew Y ork, 1940), pp. 95-108, and “Adaptation for Survival: The Varzic Zadruga,” Slavonic and East European R eview , XXI (M arch, 1943), 147-173. Yugoslav sources on the zadruga are-given in the Tom asevich study cited above. W orks concerning Illyrism during the French Revolution and Napoleon are given in the relevant chapter above. G ood material on the contributions of K opitar, K arajich, and G aj is available in the general studies by A. Fischel, D er Panslawismus bis zum W eltkrieg (Stuttgart, 1919); H. Wendel, D er K am pf der Südslawen um Freiheit und Einheit (Frankfort, 1925), and A us dem süd slawischen Risorgim ento (G otha, 1921). See also A. Wenzelides, “Liudevit Gaj, réform ateur de la littérature croate, 1809-1872,” Les Balkans, VII (N ovem berDecember, 1935), 328-338; P. E. Mosely, “A Pan-Slavist M emorandum of Liudevit Gaj in 1838,” Am erican H istorical R eview , XL (July, 1935), 704-706. T he latter article em phasizes G aj’s connections with Russia in the light of new documents. South Slav cooperation during the 1848 revolution is described in the following: G. Y. Devas, “Les origines de l’unité yougoslave,” Le m on de slave, I (April, 1918), 532-549; D. Stranjakovic, “La collaboration des Croates et des Serbes en 1848-1849,” L e m on de slave, X II (June, 1935), 394—404; L. S. Stavrianos, B alkan F ederation: A H istory o f the M o vem en t to w a rd B alkan U n ity in M odern Tim es (N ortham pton, Mass.·, 1944). F o r the M agyar-S outh Slav war, see M. Schlesinger, The W ar in H ungary, 1 8 4 8 -1 8 4 9 (L ondon, 1850, 2 vols.). Since W orld W ar II Yugoslav historians have paid attention to the role of the South Slavs in 1848, their general interpretation being critical of the “counter revolutionary” activities of Patriarch Rajachich and Baron Jcllachich. Sec V. Bogdanov, “Uloga podunuvskih slavcnskih naroda 1848-49 u svitcjlu novih


904 Bibliography
istrazivanja sovjetske historiografije,” [“T he Role Played by the D anubian Slavic Peoples in 1848-49 in the Light of N ew Investigations in Soviet H istoriography,”] H istorijski zbornik, I (1948), 43-66; and also the monograph by the same author D ru stven e i po litick e borbe u H rva tsk o j 1 8 4 8 —1 8 4 9 [Social an d P o litica l C onflicts in Croatia 1 8 4 8 -1 8 4 9 ] (Belgrade, 1949).
15. Greek Revolution and Independent Statehood
Although Greek historians have tended, for understandable reasons, to concentrate on the ancient and Byzantine periods of their history, a vast amount of published material is available on the Turkish and national periods. Before the bibliographical guides are considered the following article should be men tioned: P. W. Topping, “The Public Archives of Greece,” Am erican A rchivist, X V (July, 1952), 24 9 -2 5 7 . T he standard bibliography is E. Legrand, B ibliographie hellénique (Paris, 1885-1928, 11 vols.), which reaches 1790. F or the years 17901800 there is A. P. Bretos, N eo ellen ik e P hilologia [M odern G reek L iterature] (A thens, 1854); and for the following period, D. S. G hines and V. G. Mexas, H ellenike Bibliographia 1800-1863 [Greek Bibliography 1800-1863] (Athens, 19391941, 2 vols.). For later publications the bibliographical articles of William Miller are indispensable. These are scattered in the following journals: H istory, X (July, 1925), 110-123; C am bridge H istorical Journal, 11 (1928), 229-247, and VI (1938), 115-120; Journal of M odern History, II (December, 1930), 612-628; American Historical Review, XXXVII (January, 1932), 272-279, and XL (July, 1935), 688693; and Journal o f M odern H istory, IX (M arch, 1937), 5 6 -6 3 . See also S. H. W eber’s article which continues the survey, in Journal o f M odern H istory, XXI (Septem ber, 1950), 250-266; and also P. W. Topping, “H istorical Studies in Greece, 1940-1946,” Byzantina M etabyzantina, I (1949), 113-127. For publi cations since 1945 see the invaluable Bulletin analytique de bibliographie hellé nique, published by the F rench Institute of A thens. T he following bibliography is useful for publications in W estern languages: A. D. Brown and H. D. Jones, Greece: A Selected List o f R eferences (W ashington, D. C., Library of Congress, 1943). By far the most m eaningful history of G reece since 1453 in a W estern language is N. G. Sv'oronos, H istoire d e la G rèce m odern e (Paris, 1953). It is unfortunately very brief, yet m ore revealing than w orks many tim es its length. The most im portant studies of Greece under Turkish rule are W. Miller, “Greece under the T urks,” W estm inster R eview , CLX1I (August, 1904), 195210, and CLXI1 (Septem ber, 1904), 304—320; T. H. Papadopoullos, Studies and D ocum ents Relating to the H istory o f the G reek Church and People under Turk ish D om in ation (Brussels, 1953); D. A. Zakythinos, “L a com m une grecque: Les conditions historiques d’ une décentralisation administrative,” L ’ hellénisme con tem porain e, II (July—A ugust, 1948), 295—310, and II (Septem ber—O ctober, 1948), 414-428; N .·Moschovakis, To en H elladi dem osion dikaion epi Tourkokratias [Public Law in G reece under the Turks] (Athens, 1882); A. Andreades, L ’adm inistration financière d e la G rèce sous la dom in ation turque (Paris, 1902); T. Evangelides, He paideia epi Tourkokratias [Education under Turkish Rule] (Athens, 1936, 2 vols.). H. D. Bourazelis, H o bios tou H ellenikou laou kata ten Tourkokratian [The L ife o f the G reek People under Turkish Rule] (Athens, J9 3 9 ); G. Finlay, A H istory o f G reece (Oxford, 1877, new ed'.), Vols. VI and


Bibliography 905
V II; and the special num ber of L ’hellénism e con tem porain e, issued on M ay 29, 1953, under the title 1 4 5 3 -1 9 5 3 : L e cinq-centièm e anniversaire de la prise de C onstantinople. H alf the articles in the latter work deal with the Greek people and institutions under Turkish rule. For favorable and unfavorable interpretations respectively of the Pha nariotes, see N. Iorga, “Le despotisme éclairé dans les pays roum ains au X V IIIe siècle,” Bulletin of the International C om m ittee of H istorical Sciences, IX (1937), 100-115; and M. P. Zallony, Essai sur les Fanariotes (Marseilles, 1824). The history and the role of both the church and the Phanariotes during the Turkish period require further study. See also D. Russo, Studii istorice greco-rom âne (Bucharest, 1939, 2 vols.); R. Ortiz, “Sull ’im portanza della dom inazione fanariota in R um ania,” Stu di B izantini i N eoellenici, V (1 9 3 9 ), 25 2 -2 8 3 ; L. Galdi, Les mots d’origine neogrecque en roum ain à l'époque des Phanariotes (Budapest, 1939); J. Gottwald, “Phanariotische Studien,” Leipziger Vierteljahrschrift fur Siidosteuropa, V (1941), 1-58 (not consulted), and the informative article by P. A. A rgyropoulos, “Les G recs au service de 1’ em pire ottom an,” in 1 4 5 3 -1 9 5 3 : L e cin q-cen tièm e anniversaire de la prise de C onstantin ople (A thens, L ’hellé nisme contem poraine, 1953), pp. 151-178.
T he économ ie revival of the eighteenth century is another im portant but neglected field. A few excellent regional studies have appeared, the most im por tant being M. B. Sakellariou, H e P elopon n esos kata ten deuteran Tourkokratian 1 7 1 5 -1 8 2 1 |Peloponnesus D uring the Second Turkish Rule 1715-1821] (Athens, 1939); two works by N. Svoronos, Le com m erce de Salonique au X V IIIe siècle (Paris, 1952) and Salonique et Cavalla 1686-1792 (Paris, 1951); A. Lignos, Historia tes nesou H ydras [H istory o f H ydra Island] (Athens, 1946, 1953, 2 vols.); and E. Georgiou, Historia kai synetairism os ton A m belakion [The H istory and the Cooperative of Am helakia] (Athens, 1951). Contem porary accounts are im portant in this connection, particularly those of consuls who followed and re ported on economic developments, e.g., F. Beaujour, A V iew o f the C om m erce o f Greece, Form ed after an Annual Average from 1787 to 1797 (London, 1800).
For the intellectual awakening, the observations of Koraïs are revealing, A. Coray, M em o ire sur l’éta t actual d e la G rèce (Paris, 1803). See also N. Moschopoulos, La presse dans la renaissance balkanique (A thens, 1931); T. E. Evangelides, He paideia epi Tourkokratias [Education under Turkish Rule] (Athens, 1936, 2 vols.); F. Michalopoulos, Ta Giannena kai he N eoellenike A nagen nesis 1648—1820 [Y anina an d the M o d e m G reek R enaissance 16481820] (Athens, 1930); and the first volume of C. Dimaras, Historia tes neoellenikes logotechnias [H istory of M odem G reek Literature] (Athens, 1948), which covers the period from 1453 to 1820. The standard biography of Koraïs in English is S. G. Chaconas, A d a m a n tio s K ordfs: A Study in G reek N ationalism (N ew Y ork, 1942); a thorough study of Rhigas is by A. D ascalakis, Rhigas Velestinlis (Paris, 1937), and Les oeuvres de R higas’Velestinlis (Paris, 1937). See also L. Branousis, Regas (Athens, 1953), not consulted. T here is need for a com prehensive history of the G reek revolution w hich will include the econom ic and intellectual antecedents, the attitude and role of the various classes and interests, the connections with the other Balkan peoples, and the impact on the em pire'as a whole. The Philike H etairia also remains obscure in im portant respects, though several studies have been published recently, the outstanding being I Ch. Kandiloros, /·. P hilike H etereia [The Philike H etai


906 Bibliography
ria] (Athens, 1926). The Balkan ramifications of the Philike H etairia are con sidered in M. Lascaris, Ellenes kai Serboi kata tous A peleutherotikous ton Agonas 1 8 0 4 -1 8 3 0 [G reeks and Serbians during Their Wars o f Liberation 18 0 4 -1 8 3 0 ] (Athens, 1936). A fair num ber of participants in the revolution left memoirs, including Makregiannes, Kolokotrones, Papadopoulos, Chrysanthopoulos, Margarites, Phrantzes, Metaxas, Dragoumes, and Kassomoules, whose works may be found in the bibliographies listed above. Recent G reek studies range from the Marxist interpretation of G. Kordatos, K oinonike semasia tes Epanastaseos tou 1821 [Social Significance o f the Revolution of 1821] (Athens, 1946, rev. ed.); to the factual, multivolume study of D. A. Kokkinos, H e Hellenike Epanastasis [The G reek R evolu tion ] (A thens, 1 9 3 1 -.). T he most recent general study in English is by C. M. Woodhouse, The G reek War of Independence: Its Historical Setting (London, 1952). T here is a considerable body of literature on the philhellenic movement w hich aided the G reek revolution, the most im portant works being M. A. Cline, A m erican A ttitude tow ard the Greek War of Independence (Atlanta, 1930); V. Penn, “Philhellenism in England,” Slavonic R eview , XIV (January, 1936), 36 3 371, and X IV (A pril, 1936), 6 47-660; “ Philhellenism in Europe, 1821-28,” Slavonic R eview , XVI (A pril, 1938), 6 3 8 -6 5 3 ; D. P. W hitehill, “T h e Philhellenic M ovement in France, 1821-1830” (H arvard University, unpublished doctoral dis sertation, 1939); T. Spencer, Fair G reece Sad R elic (L ondon, 1954), which is a masterly study of English literary philhellenism before Byron; and finally D. D akin, British and A m erican P hilhellenes (Saloniki, 1955). T he latter work is especially im portant because it traces carefully the contributions of the philhellenes after their arrival in G reece, and presents the G reek secondary works on this subject. See also S. L arrabee, H ellas O b served (N ew Y ork, 1957, not consulted). For the diplomacy of the revolution see Vols. I and II of E. Driault and M. Lheritier, H istoire diplom atique de la G rece de 1821 a nos jours (Paris, 1925); C. W. Crawley, The Question of G reek Independence (London, 1930); C. K. Webster, The Foreign Policy o f Castlereagh 1815-1822 (London, 1925); H. Tem perley, The Foreign Policy o f Canning 1 8 2 2 -1 8 2 7 (L ondon, 1925); C. K. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Palm erston 1830-1841 (London, 1951, 2 vols.); J. H. Gleason, The G enesis of Russophobia in G reat Britain (Cam bridge, Mass., 1950); V. J. Puryear, France and the Levant from the Bourbon Restoration to the Peace o f K utiah (Berkeley, Calif., 1941); Vols. I and II of T. Schiemann, G esch ich te R usslands unter K aiser N ikolau s I (Berlin, 1904—1909), and O. Shparo, “Rol Rossii v borbe G retsii za nezavisim ost,” [“T he Role of Russia in the G reek W ar of Independence,”] Voprosy Istorii, VIII (August, 1949), 52-78. The latter has revealing data on the effect of the Greek uprising on Russian Black Sea com merce, but its polemical claims concerning the initiative and contribution of Russia to Greek independence need to be checked. For the Polignac plans and other O ttom an partition projects of this period, see L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan F ederation: A H istory o f the M ovem en t tow ard Balkan U nity in M odern Tim es (N ortham p ton, Mass., 1944), ch. 2. For the 1829 definition of Russia’s N ear Eastern policy, see R. J. K erner, “Russia’s N ew Policy in the N ear E ast after the P eace of A drianople; Including the Text of the Protocol of 16 Septem ber, 1829,” C am bridge H istorical Journal, V (1937), 280-290. A detailed analysis of the negotia tion, provisions, and significance o f the A drianople T reaty is given in S. T u ran


Bibliography 907
“ 1829 Edirne Antlasmasi,” [Treaty of Adrianople 1829,”] Ankara Universitesi, D il ve Tarih-Cografiya F akultesi D ergisi, IX (M arch—June, 1951), 111—151. See also S. Lascaris, D ip lo m a tik e historia tes H ellados, 1 8 2 1 -1 9 1 4 [D iplom atic History of Greece, 1821-1914] (Athens, 1947).
Fresh and interesting material on the postrevolution developments in Greece m ay be found in the firsthand accounts published frequently in periodicals like B la ck w o o d ’s E dinburgh M agazin e and R evu e des deux m ondes. T he reports of the French ambassador in Athens have been published by J. Poulos, “La G rèce d ’O thon: textes et docum ents,” L ’hellénism e con tem porain e, IX (Septem berOctober, 1955), 321-351, and IX (N ovem ber-D ecem ber, 1955), 408-447. See also the general histories of W. Miller, A H istory of the G reek People 18211921 (London, 1922); J. M avrogordato, M odern Greece: A Chronicle and Survey 1 8 0 0 -1 9 3 1 (L ondon, 1931); and E. S. Forster, A Sh ort H isto ry o f M odern G reece 1821-1940 (London, 1941). The standard work on Greek in ternational relations is the diplom atic history of D riault and Lhéritier cited above. A considerable am ount of m aterial in W estern languages is available on G reek econom ic developm ent. The best introduction is the detailed analysis of the social background in G. L. von M aurer, D as griechische Volk in öffentlicher, kirchlicher und privatrechtlicher Beziehung (Heidelberg, 1835, 3 vols.). Then see A. M. Andreades, Les progrès économ iques de· la G rèce (Paris, 1919); E. Tsouderos, L e relèvem ent économ ique de la G rèce (Paris, 1919); P. Papageorgiou, A gricultural G reece (Athens, 1915); P. A. Decasos, D ie Landwirtschaft im heutigen Griechenland (Berlin, 1904); X. Zolotas, Griechenland auf dem Wege zur Industrialisierung (Leipzig, 1926); P. Moraitinis, La G rèce telle qu’ elle est (Paris, 1877); and E. Rochetin, “Les premières associations coopératives en Grece,” Revue politique et parlementaire, XIX (1899), 91-110. Im portant data m ay also be. found in the following journals: The B oard o f T rade Journal; W eltwirtschaftliches Archiv; and L ’ économ iste français.
16. Ottoman Reform and Near Eastern Crises
F or the circum stances of M ahm ud’s accession, see the w orks cited for C hapter 13 concerning Selim’s career. T he best brief survey of M ahm ud’s reform s is in H. Tem perley, E ngland and the N ea r East: The C rim ea (L ondon, 1936), which also provides an excellent bibliography. The most thorough work on M ahm ud’s greatest accom plishm ent, the elim ination of the janissaries, is the ex cellent unpublished doctoral dissertation by H. A. Reed, “The Destruction of the Janissaries by M ahm ud II in June, 1826” (Princeton University, 1951). An in teresting w ork is B. A. M artin, The V eiled E m press (N ew Y ork, 1 933), w hich considers inconclusively the influence upon M ahm ud of his French Creole mother. O n M ehem et A li’s career see the w orks reviewed by H. L. H oskins, “Some Recent Works on M ohamed Ali and M odern Egypt,” Journal of M odern H istory, IV (M arch, 1932), 93 -1 0 3 . T he standard general biography is by H. Dodwell, The Founder o f M odern E gypt: À Study o f M uham m ad A li (C am bridge, Eng., 1931). A n im portant study of M ehem et’s w ork to 1812 is by S. G horbal, The Beginnings of the Egyptian Question and the R ise o f M ehem et A li (L ondon, 1928). T he best analysis of M ehem et’s attem pt at econom ic reconstruc tion is in A. Donné, State and E con om ics in the M id d le East (L ondon, 1948), and in F. S. Rodkey, "C olonel C am pbell’s Report on Egypt in 1840, with Lord


908 Bibliography
P alm erston’s C om m ents,” C am bridge H istorical Journal, III (1 9 2 9 ), 103-114. S. A ltundag has utilized T urkish, Egyptian, and Syrian archival m aterials in his study K a va la li M eh m et A li Pasa isyani: M isir-M eselsi 1 8 3 1 —1841 [The R e v o lt o f M ehem et A li Pasha of Kavala: The Egyptian Question 1831-1841] of which the first volum e, carrying the story to 1833, was published in A nkara in 1945. Parts of this study have been published in Belleten, VI (1942), 229-251, on the O tto man mission to London in 1832 to obtain aid; and V III (1944), 231-243, on the administration of Syria by the Egyptians. See also the articles by J. H. K ram ers in the E n cyclopedia o f Islam on “M uham m ad A li” and “K hediw .” On the Algerian episode of 1830 there are G. Doutn, M oham ed A li et l'expédition d ’ A lger ( 1829-1830) (Cairo, 1930); V. J. Puryear, France and the Levant from the Bourbon Restoration to the Peace of Kutiah (Berkeley, Calif., 1941); and J. E. Swain, The Struggle for C ontrol of the M editerranean Prior to 1848 (Philadelphia, 1933). The most im portant works dealing with the crisis period 1831-1841 as a w hole are M. Sabry, L ’em pire égyptien sous M o h a m ed -A li et la question d O r ie n t (1 8 1 1 - 1 8 4 9 ) (Paris, 1930); F. S. Rodkey, The Turco-E gyptian Q uestion in the R elation s o f England, France and Russia 1 8 3 2 -1 8 4 1 (U rb an a, 111., 1924); H. T em perley, E ngland and the N ea r East: The C rim ea (L ondon, 1936); S. G oriai nov, Le Bosphore et les Dardanelles (Paris, 1910); V. J. Puryear, International E con om ics and D ip lo m a cy in the N ea r East (Stanford, Calif., 1935); and C. Webster, The Foreign Policy of Palm erston 1830-1841 (London, 1951, 2 vols.). The following more specialized works are also im portant: P. E. Mosely, Russian D iplom acy and the O pening of the Eastern Question 1838-9 (C am bridge, M ass., 1934); E. G uichen, La crise d ’O rient de 1839 à 1841 et l'Europe (Paris, 1922); F. Charles-Roux, Thiers et M éhém et-Ali: La grande crise orientale et européenne de 1840-1841 (Paris, 1951); A. Hasenclever, D ie orientalische F rage in d em Jahren 1 8 3 8 -1 8 4 1 (Leipzig, 1914); E. D riault, L ’Ê gypte et l’E urope: La crise d e 1 8 3 9 -4 1 (C airo, 1930-1934, 4 v o ls.); G. H. Boisover, “Nicholas I and the Partition of Turkey,” Slavonic and East European Review, X X V II (D ecem ber, 1948), 118-145; F. S. Rodkey, “Lord Palm erston and the Rejuvenation of Turkey, 1830-41,” Journal of M odern H istory, I (December, 1929), 570-593, and II (January, 1930), 193-225; and M. Vereté, “Palmerston and the Levant Crisis, 1832,” Journal of M odern H istory, XXIV (June, 1952), 143-151. T he latter corrects a m isconception concerning P alm erston’s attitude to T urkey, a point that W ebster also refers to in his w ork cited above, I, 284, ft. 1. On the significant influence of public opinion during the crisis see the careful study by J. H. Gleason, The G enesis o f R ussophobia in G reat Britain (Cam bridge, Mass., 1950); and also G. H. Bolsover, “David U rquhart and the Eastern Question, 1833-37: A Study in Publicity and Diplom acy,” Journal of M odern H istory, V III (December, 1936), 444-467. On the significance of the routes through the N ea r East the standard w ork is H . L. Hoskins, British R o u tes to India (New York, 1928). A general but uneven survey of the O ttom an reform m ovem ent is avail able in E. Engelhardt, La Turquie et le tanzim at: histoire des réform es dans l’em pire o ttom an depu is 1828 ju squ ’à nos jours (Paris, 1882—1884, 2 vols.). T he following article is largely a sum m ary of Reshid’s m em orandum to M etternich of M arch 10, 1841: N. Milev; “Réchid Pacha et la réform e ottom ane,” Z eitschrift für osteuropäische G eschichte, II (M ay, 1912), 382-398. See also the useful


Bibliography 909
survey of the Tanzim at in the E ncyclopedia o f Islam by J. H. K ram er. In Turkish there is the im portant volum e T an zim at (Istanbul, 1940), published under the auspices of the Ministry of Education and consisting of 29 articles on various aspects of the reform movement. For the relationship between the Tanzim at and the European powers see F. E. Bailey, British P olicy and the Turkish R efo rm M o vem en t: A S tudy in A nglo-T urkish R elation s 18 2 6 -1 8 5 3 (C am bridge, Mass., 1942); S. Lane-Poole, The Life of Stratford Canning (London, 1888, 2 vols.); the works by Temperley and Webster cited above, and the article by Rodkey on the “Rejuvenation of T urkey,” also cited above. Bailey and Tem perley may be com pared for contrast ing estimates of the effectiveness of foreign influence on the T anzim at. T here is need, as indicated in the text, for a study of the nature and the operations of the vested interests opposed to reform . This might obviate such frequent recourse to the mysterious mind and soul of Orientals as is to be found, for example, in T em perley.
17. Crimean War
Serious study of the diplomacy of the Crimean W ar did not begin until 1910, with S. M. G oriainov’s analysis of the Russian docum ents in his Le Bosphore et les Dardanelles (Paris, 1910). An excellent brief survey was presented next by B. E. Schm itt, “D iplom atic Prelim inaries of the Crim ean W ar,” A m erican H is torical R eview, XXV (January, 1919), 33-67. In recent years three historians have presented basic full-length studies: V. J. Puryear, England, Russia, and the S traits Q uestion 1 8 4 4 -1 8 5 6 (Berkeley, Calif., 1931); H. Tem perley, E ngland and the N ear East: The Crim ea (London, 1936); and E. Tarle, K rim skaia Voina [Crimean War] (Moscow, 1945, 2 vols.). Puryear has a chapter on “Commercial Prelim inaries,” which presents new m aterial on the diplom acy which in general is most critical of Stratford Canning. Tem perley begins with M ahm ud II and stops with the outbreak of the war, and he takes issue with Puryear on many points, such as the role of Stratford Canning and the significance of the 1844 Nesselrode M emorandum and the Seymour Conversations. Tarle has new data on British-Russian econom ic rivalry and considers in detail the military cam paign w hich the other two ignore, but his analysis of the diplom acy is tendentious and replete with unsupported charges. A nother im portant recent study is by G. B. Henderson, Crimean War D iplom acy and Other H istorical Essays (Glasgow 1947), a m em orial volum e of articles published in various journals. T he articles clear up many obscure points, particularly on the diplomacy during the war, when the British and the French, as Henderson shows, were quite as devious as the A ustrians. T he high standard of these articles is a tribute to the author, whose prem ature death in 1945 was a signal loss to Tnstorical scholarship. An excellent and useful analysis of Russian diplom acy is given by G: H. Bolsover, “N icholas I and the Partition of Turkey,” Slavonic and East European R eview , XXVII (December, 1948), 115-145. Other significant works are H. Friedjung, D er K rim krieg und die oesterreichische Politik (Stuttgart, 1911), poorly documented but a sound expositiort; Vicom te de G uichen, I.a g u erre-de C rim ée ( 1 8 5 4 -6 ) et /’ attitude des puissances européennes ( Paris, 1936), based on archival sources but poorly done; F. A. Simpson, N apoleon III and the R ecovery o f France (L ondon, 1923) strongly


910 Bibliography
biased against Stratford Canning; and the old classic by A. W. Kinglake, The In vasion o f the C rim ea (London, 1863—1880, 8 vols.), well w ritten but also biased against Stratford Canning and particularly Napoleon, the author being an un successful rival for the favor of the F rench E m peror’s English mistress, Miss Howard. T he best account of the w ar is by C. Rousset, H istoire de la guerre de Crim ée (Paris, 1877, 2 vols.). See also the firsthand account by E.I. Todleben, D éfense de Séhastopol (St. Petersburg, 1863-1874, 2 vols.). Most of the second volume of T arle’s above-m entioned w ork is devoted to the C rim ean cam paign and the K ars siege. A good sum m ary of the K ars siege is in W. E. D. Allen and P. Muratoff, Caucasian Battlefields 1828-1921 (Cambridge, Eng., 1953). The atm osphere o f the Crim ean W ar and the personalities involved are recaptured in the sprightly and absorbing works of C. W oodham-Smith, Florence Nightingale 1820-1910 (New York, 1951) and The Reason Why (New York, 1954). An excellent and indispensable study of the influence of public opinion in Britain is provided by B. Kingsley M artin, The Trium ph o f L o rd Palm erston: A Study o f P ublic O pinion in E ngland before the C rim ean W ar (London, 1924). T he peace conference itself is analyzed in H. Tem perley, “T he T reaty of Paris and Its Execution,” Journal of M odern H istory, IV (September, 1932), 387414 and IV (December, 1932), 523-543. A n excellent analysis of the commercial background of the Crimean W ar is given in V. J. P uryear, International E con om ics and D iplom acy in the N ear East: A S tudy o fBritish C om m ercial P olicy in the L evan t 1 8 3 4 -1 8 5 3 (Stanford, Calif., 1935) ; and in F. E. Bailey, British P olicy and the Turkish R efo rm M o vem en t: A Study in A nglo-Turkish R elations 1 8 2 6 -1 8 5 3 (Cam bridge, Mass., 1942). A convenient sum m ary of the com m ercial m aterial in the latter w ork is available in F. E. Bailey, “The Economics of British Foreign Policy, 1825-50,” Journal of M odern H istory, XII (December, 1940), 449-484. M ost im portant is the following thorough bibliographical survey that appeared after the completion of this chapter: G. D. Gooch, “A Century of His toriography on the Crimean W ar,” Am erican Historical Review , LXII (October, 1956), 33-58.
18. Making of Rumania
A n excellent and very com prehensive bibliography for R um ania’s his tory is given in two articles by Paul H enry: “H istoire roum aine,” R evu e histo rique, CLXXVI (July-Decem ber, 1935), 468-537, and “Histoire de Roumanie,” Revue historique, CXCIV (January-M arch, 1944), 42-65, CXCIV (A pril-June, 1944), 132-150, and CXCIV (July-Septem ber, 1944), 232-252. The Communist regime of Rum ania following World W ar II published a nineteen-volume collec tion of docum ents on Rumanian history since the eleventh century: M. Roller et al., eds., D ocum ente Privind Istoria R om aniei (Bucharest, 1952-1953). This collection, which was not used for this study, is reviewed, together with other publications of the Com m unist regime, by S. A. Fischer-G alati, in the June, 1955, issue of the Journal o f M odern H istory.
The only extensive history of R um ania in English is by R. W. SetonW atson, A H istory o f the Roumanians from Rom an Tim es to the Com pletion of Unity (Cambridge, Eng., 1934), which carries the story to the Trianon Treaty.


Bibliography 911
Important works in other Western languages are by N. Iorga, Geschichte des rumänischen Volkes (Gotha, 1905, 2 vols.), and A. D. Xenopol, Histoire des Roumains de la Dacie Trajane, depuis les origines jusqu’ à l’union des principautés en 1859 (Paris, 1896, 2 vols.). The most extensive histories in Rumanian are by C. C. Giurescu, Istoria Românilor (Bucharest, 1935-1937, 4 vols.), and N. Iorga, Istoria Românilor (Bucharest, 1936-1939, 10 vols.). See also L. Galdi, et al., Geschichte der Rumänen (Budapest, 1942), not consulted. Among the more important contemporary sources for the pre-union period are W. Wilkinson, A n Account of the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia . . . (London, 1820); M. Ubicini, Valachie et Moldavie (Paris, 1856); and J. A. Vaillant, La Romanic, ou histoire, langue, littérature, orographie, statistique des roumains (Paris, 1844—1845, 4 vols.). For contrasting interpretations of Phanariote rule in the principalities, see the favorable analysis by the Rumanian his torian N. Iorga, “Le despotisme éclairé dans les pays roumains au X V IIIe siècle,” Bulletin of the International Committee of Historical Sciences, IX (March, 1937), 110-115; and the critical by the contemporary Greek observer, M. P. Zallony, Essai sur les fanariotes (Marseilles, 1824). See also the informative article by P. A. Argyropoulos, “Les Grecs au service de l’empire ottoman,” in 1453-1953: Le cinq-centième anniversaire de la prise de Constantinople (Athens, L ’hellé nisme contemporaine, 1953), pp. 151-178. A n interesting account of Rumanian society is provided by L. Sainéan, “Le régime et la société en Roumanie pendant le règne des Phanariotes (1711-1821),” Revue internationale de sociologie, X (October, 1902), 717-748. A noteworthy interpretation of Vladimirescu’s revolt in 1821 is given in S. I. Samoilov, “Narodno-osvoboditelnoe vosstanie 1821 g. v Valakhii,” [“The National Liberation Uprising of 1821 in Wallachia,”] Voprosy Istorii, no. 10 (October, 1955), pp. 94-105. The most thorough study of the development of Rumanian nationalism is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by J. C. Campbell, “French Influence and the Rise of Roumanian Nationalism” (Harvard University, 1940). See also his article on “The Influence of Western Political Thought in the Rumanian Princi palities, 1821-1848: The Generation of 1848,” Journal of Central European Affairs, IV (October, 1944), 262-273. On the 1848 revolution there is the brief study by M. Roller, “The Rumanians in 1848,” in The Opening of an Era 1848: An Historical Symposium, ed. by F. Fejtö (London, 1948), pp. 298-311; and also J. C. Campbell, “The Transylvanian Question in 1849,” Journal of Central European Affairs, II (April, 1942), 20-34. Two excellent studies of the unification of the Principalities are available: W. G. East, The Union of Moldavia and Wallachia, 1859: A n Episode in Diplomatic History (Cambridge, Eng., 1929); and the more comprehensive work of T. W. Riker, The Making of Roumania: A Study of an International Problem, 1856-1866 (Oxford, 1931). An important documentary source is Trois années de la question d’ Orient, 1856-1859, d’ après les papiers inédit de M . Thouvenel (Paris, 1897). A good picture of Franco-Russian rela tions after the Crimean War is given in F. Charles-Roux, Alexandre II, Gortchakoff et Napoléon III (Paris, 1913).
For the postunion years there is the careful study by Paul Henry, L ’ abdication du Prince Cuza et l’avènement de la dynastie du Hohenzollern au trône de Roumanie (Paris, 1930). The memoirs of Charles I are available in the German edition Aus dem I.eben König Karls von Rumänien (Stuttgart, 18941900, 4 vols.), which is preferable to the expurgated French edition Notes sur la


912 Bibliography
vie. du roi Charles de R oum anie . . . (Bucharest, 1894—1901, 4 vols.). On Ru manian foreign policy during these years see N. Iorga, Correspondance diploma tique roum aine sous le roi Charles I er ( 18 6 6 -1 8 8 0 ) (Paris, 1923); and chs. 4 and 5 of L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History o f the M ovem ent toward Balkan U nity in M odern Times (Northampton, Mass., 1944).
On the agrarian question in Rumania, two first-rate studies are available in English: D. Mitrany, The L and and the Peasant in Rum ania (London, 1930), and H. L. Roberts, Rum ania: Political Problems o f an Agrarian State (New Haven, Conn., 1951). The first carries the story to the agrarian reforms of the World War I period; Roberts concentrates on the twentieth century and includes a study of reforms during and after World War II. An excellent analysis of the Rumanians in Transylvania, Bukovina, and Bessarabia is to be found in chs. 4, 7, 10, 13, and Appendix I of Seton-Watson’s Rumanian history listed above, which also provides a bibliography.
19. Bulgarian Awakening
The standard bibliography of materials on Bulgaria in Western European languages is R. J. Kerner, Slavic Europe (Cambridge, Mass., 1918). See also P. E. Mosely, “The Post-War Historiography of Modern Bulgaria,” Journal o f M odern History, IX (September, 1937), 348-366; H. Trenkov, “Bulgarian Bib liography,” Slavonic and East European Review, X X V III (December, 1948), 259-277; and the articles on Bulgarian historians by J. F. Clarke, “Bobchev and Bulgaria (1853-1940),” Slavonic and East European Review, X X I (March, 1943), 188-193, and “Zlatarski and Bulgarian historiography,” Slavonic Review, X V (January, 1937), 435-439. For bibliographies in Bulgarian, see the titles listed in the above article by Trenkov. An interesting account of the early Bul garian books and the national revival is given in J. F. Clarke, “The First Bulgarian Book,” H arvard Library Notes, no. 30 (March, 1940), pp. 295-302. The best general accounts of Bulgaria under the Turks are A. Hajek, Bul garien unter der Türkenherrschaft (Stuttgart, 1925); H. Wendel, Der K a m p f der Sudslawen um Freiheit und Einheit (Frankfort, 1925) ;the second part of N. Stanev’s G eschichte der Bulgaren entitled V om Beginn der Türkenzeit bis zur Gegenwart (Leipzig, 1917); F. Hÿbl, D ëjiny N âroda Bulharského [History o f the Bulgarian People] (Prague, 1930, 2 vols.); and N. S. Derzhavin, lstoriia Bolgarii [History o f Bulgaria] (Moscow, 1947), of which Vol. Ill is on the Ottoman period. Noth ing in the English language approaches the above works; D. Mishew, The Bul garians in the Past (Lausanne, 1919) is strongly nationalist and polemical but contains a good deal of material. The following works by S. S. Bobchev are sug gestive but too brief: La société bulgare sous la dom ination ottom ane (Sofia, 1935), and “Notes comparées sur les çorbacis chez les peuples balkaniques et en particulier chez les Bulgares,” R evue internationale des études balkaniques, III (1938), 428-445. Interesting source material is to be found in the work of M. Leo, La Bulgarie et son peuple sous la dom ination ottom ane tels que les ont vus les voyageurs anglo-saxons (15 8 6 -1 8 7 8 ) (Sofia, 1949).
The most important study of the Bulgarian cultural awakening is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by J. F. Clarke, “Bible Societies, American Missionaries and the National Revival of Bulgaria” (Harvard University, 1937), which is more broad in scope than the title suggests. The following articles arc


Bibliography 913
based on this dissertation: “Father Paisi and Bulgarian History,” in Essays in H onor o f Lawrence B. Packard, ed. by H. Stuart Hughes (Ithaca, N. Y., 1954), pp. 258-283; and “Serbia and the Bulgarian Revival (1762-1872),” Am erican Slavic and East European Review, IV (December, 1945), 141-162. A brief but useful study of the Bulgarian awakening is L. Leger, La Bulgarie (Paris, 1885). A valuable analysis of the role of writers in the Bulgarian awakening is given in V. Pinto, “The Civic and Aesthetic Ideals of the Bulgarian Narodnik Writers,” Slavonic and East European Review, X X X II (June, 1954), 344-366, which is based on the author’s doctoral dissertation, The N arodnik M ovem ent in Bulgarian Literature and the Influence on That M ovem ent o f Russian Literature and Thought (University of London, 1952). See also the following biographies of two im portant leaders of the renaissance: M. Arnaudov, Aprilov: Zhivot, deinost, siivrem enitsi (1 789-1847) \Aprilov: L ife, W ork, Contemporaries] (Sofia, 1935); and M. Arnaudov, Neofit H ilendarski Bozvali, 1785—1848 (Sofia, 1930).
The fullest Bulgarian account of the exarchate struggle is by P. Nikov, Vüzrazhdane na bälgarskiia narod: Tsurkovno-natsionalni horhi i postizheniia [The Renaissance o f the Bulgarian People: The A chievem ents of the Struggle for a National Church] (Sofia, 1929). Other Bulgarian accounts are S. Zankow, Die Verfassung der bulgarischen orthodoxen Kirche (Zurich, 1918); and T. S. Burmov, Bälgaro-grtskata tserkovna raspria [Bulgarian-Greek Church Struggle] (Sofia, 1902), the latter being a detailed and important exposition by a leader of the moderate Bulgarian nationalists in Constantinople who was also in close touch with the Russian embassy. An excellent Greek survey is available in the article by the erudite archbishop of Athens, Chrysostomos, “Bulgaria, Church,” M egale Ellenike Egkyklopaideia, VII, 672-682, and in E. J. Karpathios’s article on the “Bulgarian Church,” in Religious and Christian Encyclopedia (Athens, 1937), II, 628-686, the latter providing an extensive bibliography. More details are available in M. I. Gedeon, Eggrapha patriarchika kai synodika peri tou boulgarikou zetem atos (1852—1873) [Patriarchal and Synodical D ocum ents concerning the B ul garian Question (18 5 2 -1 8 7 3 )] (Constantinople, 1908). An important Russian source is the text in French of Ignatiev’s memorandum written in 1874 reviewing his ten years in Constantinople, and published in Izvestiia M inisterstva Inostrannykh D el (1914), Bks. I—VI, and (1915), Bks. I—VI. Russian material is also used in the following articles: G. Trubetzkoi, “La politique russe en Orient: le schisme bulgare,” R evue d'histoire diplom atique, X X I (1907), 161-198, 394-426; and B. H. Sumner, “Ignatiev at Constantinople, 1864-1874,” Slavonic Review , II (January, 1933), 341-353, and II (April, 1933), 556-571. The following article contains data concerning Protestantism in Bulgaria and also references to works concerning Catholicism in Bulgaria: J. F. Clarke, “Protestantism and the Bul garian Church Question in 1861,” Essays in the History o f M odern Europe, ed. by D. C. McKay (New York, 1936), pp.' 79-97. See also L. S. Stavrianos, “L ’institution de l’exarcat bulgare: Son influence sur les relations interbalkaniques,” Les Balkans, IX (1939), 56-69. For conditions in Bulgaria in the 1860’s and the reform efforts of Midhat Pasha, see the excellent account in the unpublished doctoral dissertation by R. H. Davison, “Reform in the Ottoman Empire, 1856-1876” (Harvard University, 1942), chs. 4-6; and The L ife -o f M idhat Pasha . . . by His Son A li Haydar. M id hat Bey (London, 1903), ch. 2. The relationship between the spread of the chifliks and peasant unrest is demonstrated in the following important work utilizing


914 Bibliography
Turkish materials: H. Inalcik, Tanzim at ve Bulgar M eselesi [The Tanzim at and the Bulgarian Question] (Ankara, 1943). On this subject see also N. G. Levintov, “Agrarnye otnosheniia v Bolgarii nakanune osvobozhdeniia i agrarnyi perevorot 1877-1879 Godov,” [“Agrarian Relations in Bulgaria on the Eve of the Libera tion and the Agrarian Revolution of 1877-1879,”] in O svobozhdenie Bolgarii ot Turetskogo Iga [The Liberation o f Bulgaria fro m Turkish R ule] (Moscow, 1953), pp. 139-221. For a brief survey of the revolutionary movement and a bibliography of Bulgarian sources, see C. E. Black, The Establishm ent o f Constitutional G overn m ent in Bulgaria (Princeton, N. J., 1943), and also the same author’s “The In fluence of Western Political Thought in Bulgaria, 1850-1885,” A m erican H is torical Review , X L V III (April, 1943), 507-520. A'fuller account of the revolu tionary movement from Rakovski to 1876 is available in A. Burmov, Bulgarski R evoliutsionen Tsentralen K om itet 1868—1876 [The Bulgarian R evolutionary Cen tral C om m ittee 1868-1876] (Sofia, 1943). See also N. T. Obrctenov, Spom eni za bulgarskite vuzstaniia [M emoirs o f the Bulgarian Uprisings] (Sofia, 1943). PostWorld War II developments in Bulgaria have stimulated studies of BulgarianRussian relations, including the following on the period before 1878: N. I. Kaza kov, “Iz istorii russko-bolgarskikh sviazei v period voiny Rossii s Turtsiei (18061812 gg.),” [“From the History of Russo-Bulgarian Ties During the Russian War with Turkey (1806-1812),”] Voprosy Istorii, no. 6 (June, 1955), pp. 42-55; and A. Burmov, “Kum istoriiata na rusko-bulgarskite vrozki prez 1876 g.: Balgarsko Chelovekoliubivo Nastoiatelstvo v Bukureshch,” [“On the History of Russo-Bul garian Relations in 1876: ‘The Bulgarian Philanthropic Society’ in Bucharest,”] lzvestiia (Sofia), nos. 1-2 (1951), pp. 81-98. The May, 1876, Bulgarian revolt and the resulting massacres are thoroughly analyzed by D. Harris, Britain and the Bulgarian Horrors o f 1876 (Chicago, 1939). Finally, see L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History o f the M ovem ent toward Balkan Unity in M odern Times (Northampton, Mass., 1944), ch. 5, for the relations of the Bulgarian revolu tionaries with their neighbors, and their views concerning inter-Balkan relations. The color and atmosphere of the Bulgarian revolutionary movement may be gained from the following works in English: Z. Stoyanov, Pages fro m the A u to biography o f a Bulgarian Insurgent (London, 1913); A. H. Beaman, M . Stam buloff (London, 1895); and the novel by the Bulgarian poet Ivan Vazov, Under the Yoke: A R om ance o f Bulgarian Liberty, first published in English in 1893 and revised in 1912.
20. Reform and Revolution in the Ottoman Empire
By far the best work on Ottoman history after the Crimean War is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by R. H. Davison, “Reform in the Ottoman Empire, 1856-1876” (Harvard University, 1942). This study is much broader than the title suggests and was leaned on heavily in the preparation of this chapter. Less comprehensive and perceptive is E. Engelhardt, La Turquie et le Tanzim at (Paris, 1884, 2 vols.). The best contemporary sources are A. Ubicini, Letters on Turkey (London, 1856, 2 vols.); and A. D. Mordtmann, Stam bul und das rnoderne Tiirkenthum (Leipzig, 1877-1878, 2 vols.). In Turkish there is the important volume Tanzim at (Istanbul, 1940) published under the auspices of the ministry


Bibliography 915
of education and consisting of 29 articles on various aspects of the reform move ment. For the literary and intellectual awakening see the excellent summary in ch. 7 of Davison, and also the standard work of E. J. W. Gibb, A History o f O ttom an Poetry (London, 1900-1909, 6 vols.). See also A. Emin, The D evelop m ent o f M odern Turkey as M easured by Its Press (New York, 1914); the recent biography by V. Heyd, Foundations o f Turkish Nationalism : The L ife and Teach ings o f Ziya G ökalp (London, 1950); and the memoirs of the successive pres idents of Robert College: C. Hamlin, A m o n g the Turks (New York, 1878); G. Washburn, F ifty Years in C onstantinople and Recollections o f R obert College (Boston, 1909); and C. F. Gates, N o t to M e A lone (Princeton, N. J., 1940). The connection between Turkish nationalism and historiography is revealingly outlined by B. Lewis, “History-Writing and National Revival in Turkey,” M iddle Eastern Affairs, IV (June-July, 1953), 218-227. On the reform of the millets, Davison presents the only consecutive ac count in ch. 5. For more details see L. Arpee, The A rm enian A w akening: A H is tory o f the A rm enian Church, 1820-1860 (Chicago, 1909); H. J. Sarkiss, “The Armenian Renaissance, 1500-1863,” Journal o f M odern H istory, IX (1937), 433—448; A. O. Sarkissian, H istory o f the A rm enian Question to 1885 (Urbana, 111., 1938); A. D. Kyriakos, G eschichte der Orientalischen K irchen von 14531898 (Leipzig, 1902); M. Franco, Essai sur l’histoire des israélites de l’empire ottom an depuis les origines jusqu’à nos jours (Paris, 1897).
Ottoman economic history is a neglected topic, but the foreign-loan as pect is well covered by A. Du Velay, Essai sur l ’histoire financière de la Turquie (Paris, 1903); C. Morawitz, Die Türkei im Spiegel ihrer Finanzen (Berlin, 1903); and D. C. Blaisdell, European Financial Control in the O ttom an Em pire (New York, 1929), The diplomacy of the Balkan crisis will be considered in the following chapter. For domestic Turkish developments in 1876 and 1877 see The L ife o f M idhat Pasha . . . by H is Son A li H aydar M idhat Bey (London, 1903); The M em oirs o f Ismail K em al Bey (London, 1920); H. Temperley, “British Policy towards Parliamentary Rule and Constitutionalism in Turkey (1830-1914)” Cambridge Historical Journal, IV (1932), 156-191; H. G. Elliot, Som e R evolu tions and Other Experiences (London, 1922); E. Pears, Forty Years in Constan tinople (New York, 1916). Works on Abdul Hamid are listed in chapter 28.
21. Balkan Crisis and the Treaty of Berlin
The best account of the Balkan crisis from the viewpoint of European diplomacy is the admirable study by W. L. Langer, European Alliances and A lign m ents 1871-1890 (New York, 1931), chs. l-"2. The second edition (1950) con tains supplementary bibliographies. The Balkan diplomatic background and par ticularly the first Balkan alliance system are considered in L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A H istory o f the M o vem en t toward Balkan U nity in M odern Tim es (Northampton, Mass., 1944), ch. 5. The most detailed study of the crisis is by D. Harris, A D iplom atic History o f the Balkan Crisis o f 1875-1878: The First Year (Stanford, Calif., 1936), though it has not been continued beyond the first year. The entire three-year period is covered adequately by M. D. Stojanovic, Great Powers and the Balkans 1875-1878 (Cambridge, Eng., 1938). A large


916 Bibliography
number of excellent studies have appeared in recent years on particular aspects of the crisis, the most important being D. Harris, Britain and the Bulgarian H or rors o f 1876 (Chicago, 1939); W. Jahrmann, Frankreich und die orientalische Frage 1875-1878 (Berlin, 1936); D. E. Lee, Great Britain and the Cyprus C on vention Policy o f 1878 (Cambridge, Mass., 1934); G. H. Rupp, A Wavering Friendship: Russia and Austria 1876-1878 (Cambridge, Mass., 1941); R. W. Seton-Watson, Disraeli, G ladstone and the Eastern Question (London, 1935); B. H. Sumner, Russia and the Balkans 1870-1880 (Oxford, 1937); the public opinion study by W. G. Wirthwein, Britain and the Balkan Crisis 1875-1878 (New York, 1935); and S. Goriainov, La question d ’O rient à la veille du traité de Berlin, 1870-1878 (Paris, 1948).
On the role of the Balkan states during the crisis there are M. Lhéritier, Histoire diplom atique de la Grèce (Paris, 1925, Vol. Ill); S. T. Lascaris, La politique extérieure de la Grèce avant et après le congrès de Berlin (Paris, 1924); N. Iorga, ed., Correspondance diplom atique roum aine sous le roi Charles 1 (Paris 1923); third volume of A u s dem Lehen K önig Karls von R um änien (Stuttgart, 1897); R. Rosetti, “Roumania’s Share in the War of 1877,” Slavonic Review , V III (March, 1930), 548-551; R. W. Burks, “Romania and the Balkan Crisis of 1875—78,” Journal o f Central European Affairs, II (July, 1942), 119-134, and II (October, 1942), 310-320; J. Ristic, Diplom atska Istorija Srhije za vrem e srpskih ratova za oslohodjenje i nezavisnost, 1875-1878 (Diplomatic History of Serbia in the Time o f the Serbian Wars for Liberation and Independence, 18751878) (Belgrade, 1896-1898); V. Gcorgevitch, La Serbie au congrès de Berlin (Paris, 1891), which was published the same year in R evue d ’histoire diplom a tique; R. W. Seton-Watson, “Les relations de l’Autrichc-Hongrie et de la Serbie entre 1868 et 1874: la mission de Benjamin Kâllay à Belgrade,” Le m onde slave, III (February, 1926), 211-230, III (May, 1926), 186-204, and III (August, 1926), 273-288; V. Trivanovitch, “Serbia, Russia and Austria during the Rule of Milan Obrenovich,” Journal o f M odern H istory, III (September, 1931), 414440; S. Jovanovic, “Serbia in the Early ’Seventies,” Slavonic Review , IV (Decem ber, 1925), 384-395. An excellent account of the campaigns is given in P. K. Fortunatow, Der Krieg 1877-78 und die Befreiung Bulgariens (Berlin, 1953), which includes an analysis of the Caucasian as well as Balkan campaigns. See also the “Daily N ew s" War Correspondence (London, 1878, 2 vols.); F. V. Greene, The Russian A rm y and Its Campaigns in Turkey in 1877-1878 (London, 1879); C. B. Nor man, A rm enia and the Campaign o f 1877 (London, 1878); C. Williams, The Arm enian Campaign: A Diary of the Campaign o f 1877 in Arm enia and Koordistan (London, 1878); and W. E. D. Allen and P. Muratoff, Caucasian Battle fields: A H istory o f the Wars on the Turco-Caucasian Border 1821—1921 (Cam bridge, Eng., 1953), Bk. III. Finally, there are the excellent detailed study by W. N. Medlicott on The Congress o f Berlin and After: A Diplomatic History o f the Near Eastern Settlem ent 1878-1880 (London, 1938), and the same author’s recent study of Bism arck, G ladstone and the Concert o f Europe (London, 1956).


Bibliography 917
A brief but comprehensive analysis of imperialism, with excellent bib liographical references, is available in ch. 3 of W. L. Langer, Diplomacy o f Im perialism 1890-1902 (N ew Y ork, 1951, 2nd e d .). A sum m ary of the m aterial in this chapter is given in his article “A C ritique of Im perialism ,” Foreign Affairs, XIV (October, 1935), 102-115. For a general analysis of railway construction in both the Balkans and the Middle East, see chs. 13 and 15 of H. Feis, Europe the World’s Banker 18701914 (New Haven, Conn., 1930). The political rivalries behind railway building in the Balkans are well brought out in the articles by A. J. May, “T he N ovibazar Railway Project,” Journal of Modern History, X (December, 1938), 496-527, and “Trans-Balkan Railway Schemes,” Journal of Modern History, XXIV (D e cem ber, 1952), 352-367; and also in W. S. Vucinich, Serbia between East and West: The Events of 1903-1908 (Stanford, Calif., 1954), pp. 210-230. The standard works on railway construction in Asiatic T urkey are E. M. Earle, Tur key, the Great Powers, and the Bagdad Railway (N ew Y ork, 1923); and W. B. Wolf, The Diplomatic History of the Bagdad Railroad (Colum bia, Mo., 1936). An excellent general survey of the finances of Turkey and the Balkan states is given in chs. 12 and 14 of Feis, op. cit. F or more detailed inform ation, see D. C. Blaisdell, European Financial Control in the Ottoman Empire (N ew York, 1929); A. Lcvandis, The Greek Foreign Debt and the Great Powers 18211898 (N ew York, 1944); K. C. Popov, La Bulgarie économique (Sofia, 1920); D. Kastris, Les capitaux étrangers dans la finance roumaine (Paris, 1921); M. Simitch, La dette publique de la Serbie (Paris, 1925).
T here is no study of the origins, evolution, and effects of capitalism in the Balkans as a whole. T he best introduction to the subject is given by D. W arriner, “Some C ontroversial Issues in the H istory of A grarian E urope,” Slavonic and East European Review, XXXII (December, 1953), 168-186. This article, which refers to all of Eastern Europe, brings out some of the basic problems and advances stim ulating theories. F or detailed inform ation it is necessary to turn to national econom ic and social histories which arc given below in the bib liographies relating to individual countries. Outstanding among these histories are I. Sakazov, Bulgarische Wirtschaftsgeschichte (Berlin, 1929); I. T. Sanders, Bal kan Village (Lexington, Ky., 1949); J. Tom asevich, Peasants, Politics and Eco nomic Change in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1955); R. T routon, Peasant Ren aissance in Yugoslavia 1900-1950 (L ondon, 1952); D. M itrany, The Land and the Peasant in Rumania (London, 1930);. H. L. Roberts, Rumania: Political Problems of an Agrarian State (N ew Haven, Conn., 1951); Ch. Evelpides, Oikonomik'e kai koinonike historia tes Hellados [Economic and Social History of Greece] (Athens, 1950);- G. K ordatos, Eisagoge sten historia tes hellenikes kephalaiokratias [Introduction to the History o f Greek Capitalism] (Athens, 1930), the latter being a M arxist interpretation. Noteworthy also are these studies of specific topics: E. Zaleski, Les courants commerciaux de l’Europe danubienne au cours de la première moitié du X X mr siècle (Paris, 1952), and W. Moore, Economic Demography 'of Eastern and Southern Europe (Geneva,- 1945).
22. Dynamics of Balkan Politics


918 Bibliography
F or bibliographies and general histories of Bulgaria see the works given for C hapter 19. T here is need for a com prehensive history of Bulgarian political and econom ic developm ent since 1878. N othing is available com parable to the works of R. W. Seton-Watson, D. M itrany, and H. Roberts in the Rumanian field. In Bulgarian there is the w ork of N. Stanev, Istoriia na nova Bülgariia 18781928 [History of Modern Bulgaria 1878-1928] (Sofia, 1929). T he study by G. C. Logio, Bulgaria Past and Present (M anchester, Eng., 1936) is fresh and per ceptive but scrappy and strongly opinionated. Two informative biographies of Prince Alexander are available, both having considerable docum entary material: E. C. Corti, Alexander von Batten berg: Sein K am pf mit den Zaren und Bismarck (Vienna, 1920), and A. Koch, Prince Alexander of Battenberg (London, 1887). See also the short appreciation by the London Times correspondent J. D. Bourchier, “Prince A lexander of Bat tenberg,” Fortnightly Review, LXI (January, 1894), 103-118; and the accounts by the G erm an correspondent A. von H uhn, The Struggle o f the Bulgarians for National Independence (London, 1886) and The Kidnapping of Prince Alexander of Battenberg (London, 1887). The best works on the domestic developments under Alexander are C. E. Black, The Establishment of Constitutional Govern ment in Bulgaria (Princeton, N. J., 1944) and A. Hajek, Bulgariens Befreiung und staatliche Entwicklung unter seinem ersten Fürsten (M unich, 1939). The form er uses the British and Austrian archives and carries the story to 1885; the latter is a m ore general analysis of the same period and a valuable source despite the references in the Preface to “world poisoning internationalism ” and to H itler’s “New O rder,” reflecting the date of publication. See also C. E. Black, “The In fluence of W estern Political Thought in Bulgaria, 1850-1885,” American His torical Review, X L V III (A pril, 1943), 507—520. Also notew orthy is K. S. Vasilev, “Borba bolgarskogo naroda protiv reshenii berlinskogo kongressa 1878 goda,” [“T he Struggle of the Bulgarian People against the Decisions of the Berlin C on gress in 1878,”] Voprosy Istorii, no. 8, A ugust, 1955, pp. 119-130, which includes an analysis of the economic and social effect of the Berlin decisions upon the Bulgarian lands. F or diplom atic developments during A lexander’s reign see W. L. Langer, European Alliances and Alignments 1871-1890 (N ew York, 1931), ch. 10; J. V. Fuller, Bismarck’s Diplomacy at Its Zenith (C am bridge, Mass., 1922), chs. 2, 3; A. M. H yde, A Diplomatic History of Bulgaria from 1870 to 1886 (U rbana, 111., 1927), which is mostly outdated; W. N. M edlicott, “T he Powers and the Unifica tion of the Two Bulgarias 1885,” English Historical Review, LIV (January, 1939), 67-82, and LIV (April, 1939), 263-284; M. Lascaris, “Greece and Serbia during the W ar of 1885,” Slavonic Review, XI (July, 1932), 88-99. A satisfactory biography of F erdinand of Saxe-Coburg is not available. H. R. M adol, Ferdinand de Bulgarie: la rêve de Byzance (Paris, 1937) is apolo getic, while J. M acdonald, Czar Ferdinand and His People (London, 1913) is a useless panegyric. A. H. Beam an, M. Stambuloff (London, 1895) is by an adm irer of the Bulgarian statesman yet informative and useful. Bulgarian foreign policy under F erdinand may be traced in the short though im portant study by K. K ratchounov, La politique extérieure de la Bulgarie 1880-1920 (Sofia, 1932), and in A. S tandoff, Recollections o f a Bulgarian Diplomatist's Wife (London, 1930);
23. Making of Bulgaria


Bibliography 919
C. Jelavich, “Russo-Bulgarian Relations, 1892-1896, with Particular Reference to the Problem of the Bulgarian Succession,” Journal of Modern History, XXIV (December, 1952), 341-351; E. Walters, “The Serbo-Bulgarian Secret Treaty of 19 February 1897,” Slavonic and East European Review, X X V III (A pril, 1950), 493-499; E. C. Helmreich and C. E. Black, “The Russo-Bulgarian Military Con vention of 1902,” Journal o f Modern History, IX (Decem ber, 1937), 471—482; and L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History of the M ovement toward Bal kan Unity in Modern Times (N ortham pton, Mass., 1944), chs. 6, 7. F or w orks dealing with the M acedonian question and Bulgarian diplomacy during the Bos nian crisis, the Balkan Wars, and W orld W ar I see the bibliographies of the appropriate chapters below. The most important general economic histories are I. Sakazov, Bul garische Wirtschaftsgeschichte (Berlin, 1929); W. K. W eiss-Bartenstein, “U ber Bulgariens volkswirtschaftsliche Entwicklung,” Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung, X X II (1 9 1 3 ), 407-428, and the same author’s Bulgariens volkswirtschaftsliche Verhältnisse (Berlin, 1917), which parallels the earlier work; A. laranofï, La Bulgarie économique (Lausanne, 1919), which has m any statistical tables; and the short section on the pre-1914 period in L. Pasvolsky, Bulgaria’s Economic Position (W ashington, D. C., 1929). F o r special aspects of Bulgaria’s econom y see the short doctoral disserta tion on the guilds by S. S. Kalpakcbiev, “D ie Z unft Bulgariens im X IX Jah rh u n dert” (Greifswald, 1900); the study of zadrugas in J. E. Guechoff, “Les associa tions agricoles et ouvriers en Bulgarie,” Nouvelle Revue, LXIV (1890), 381-391; the short dissertation by N. Sakarov, “Die industrielle Entwicklung Bulgariens” (Berlin, 1904); another dissertation by the brother of Prince Alexander and consisting mainly of government statistics— Franz Joseph, Prinz von Battenberg, “Die volkswirtschaftliche Entwicklung Bulgariens von 1879 bis zur Gegenwart (Leipzig, 1890); and the study of government tax policy by J. Raudnitz, “Die staatswirtschaftsliche Entwicklung Bulgariens,” Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung, X X II (1 9 1 3 ), 429-462. Finally, there is the· in dispensable article by N. Levintdv, “Agrarnyi perevorot v Bolgarii v 1877-1879 godakh,” [“The A grarian Revolution in Bulgaria in 1877-1879,”] Voprosi Istorii, no. 12 (D ecem ber, 1951), 5 5 -7 6 , which utilizes the archives of the Russian oc cupation forces and the personal correspondence of Prince Dondukov-Korsakov.
24. Serbia and the South Slavs
A general bibliography on Serbia and the South Slavs is given above in C hapter 14. F o r the reigns of M ilan and A lexander Obrenovich, the basic sources are the unequaled m ultivolum e works by S. Jovanovic, Vlada Milana Obrenovica (Belgrade, 1934, 3 vols.); and by Z. Zivanovi6,'Politicka istoriija Srbije u drugoj polovini devetnaestog veka [Political History o f Serbia in the Second Half of the Nineteenth Century] (Belgrade, 1923-1925, 4 vols.). For the change of dynasty in 1903 and the consolidation of the new regim e to 1908 the definitive work is W. S. Vucinich, Serbia between East and West: The Events o f 1903-1908 (Stan ford, Calif., 1954). See also the interesting account of C. Mijatovich; A Royal Tragedy (London, 1906), who is sym pathetic to A lexander. . ' In the field o f Serbian foreign relations there is nothing com parable to D riault und Lhéritiur's diplom atic history o f G reece, though a good brief survey


920 Bibliography
is available in V. Popovic, Evropa i srpsko pitanje u periodu oslobodjenja 18041918 [Europe and the Serbian Question in the Period of the Liberation 18041918] (Belgrade, 1938). T he general histories by Jovanovic and Zivanovic cited above contain detailed inform ation on foreign relations. See also the important works of J. Ristic, Diploinatska istorija Srbije za vreme srpskih ratova za oslobodjenje i nezavisnost 1875-1878 [Diplomatic History of Serbia during the Serbian Wars for Liberation and Independence 1875-1878] (Belgrade, 1896-1898, 2 vols.), and Spoljasnji odnosaji Srbije [Foreign Relations o f Serbia] (Belgrade, 1897, 3 vols.). F or the later period see V. Corovic, Odnosi izmedju Srbije i Austro-Ugarske u X X veku [Relations between Serbia and Austria-Hungary in the Twentieth Century] (Belgrade, 1936), and D. Popovic, liorba za narodno ujedinjenje od 1908 do 1914 [Struggle for National Unification from 1908 to 1914[ (Belgrade, 1938). A part-from Serbian sources there is an excellent synthesis of Serbian diplom acy during M ilan’s subservience to A ustria in W. L. Langer, Euro pean Alliances and Alignments 1871—1890 (N ew York, 1931), ch. 10. For more details see A. F. Pribram , “Milan IV von Serbian und die Geheimverträge Öster reich-Ungarns mit Serbien, 1881-1889,” Historiche Blätter, 1 (1 9 2 1 -1 9 2 2 ), 46 4 494; and the same author’s The Secret Treaties o f Austria-Hungary 1879-1914 (Cam bridge, Mass., 1920, 2 vols.). Serbian foreign policy between 1903 and 1908 is thoroughly covered by Vucinich in his w ork cited above. See also the in teresting memoirs of the A ustrian envoy in Belgrade, C. D um ba, Memoirs of a Diplomat (Boston, 1932); and also C. Mijatovich, The Memoirs of a Balkan Diplomatist (London, 1917). The best general source for Serbian and South Slav economic develop ment between 1878 and 1914 is J. Tom asevich, Peasants, Politics and Economic Change in Yugoslavia (Stanford, Calif., 1954). The best account of both the econom ic and the diplom atic aspects of the “Pig W ar” is given in ch. 7 of the Vucinich study cited above. Sec also the analysis of handicraft and factory devel opments in J. Krikner, Industrie und Industriepolitik Serbiens (Halle, 1913); the excellent general survey in M. L. Stanojevich, Die Landwirtschaft in Serbien (H alle, 1913); M. Simitch, La dette publique de la Serbie (Paris, 1925); and the invaluable survey of social and cultural trends in R. T routon, Peasant Renais sance in Yugoslavia 1900-1950 (London, 1952).
G eneral studies of the H apsburg Slavs are listed above in C hapter 14. An important analysis of the problem of Bosnia-Herzegovina on the eve of the w ar is given in J. M. Baernreither, Fragments o f a Political Diary (London, 1930). The author, a broad-minded Bohemian German, favored the creation of a triune Hapsburg state, to which he believed the kingdom of Serbia would be draw n like a filing to a magnet. A nother im portant w ork is V. Maslesa, Mlada Bosna [Young Bosnia\ (Belgrade, 1945), a study, from a M arxian viewpoint, of the activities, objectives, and leadership of the revolutionary youth movement in Bosnia before and during W orld W ar I. Convenient sum m aries of the Yugoslav revolutionary m ovement are also available in D. Loncarevic, Jugoslaviens Entste hung (Zurich, 1929); L. Albertini, The Origins of the War o f 1914, tr. and ed. by I. M. Massey (London, 1953), Vol. II, ch. 1; R. W. Seton-W atson, Sarajevo (London, 1926), ch. 3; and S. B. Fay, The Origins o f the World War (New Y ork, 1934, rev. e d .), Vol II, ch. 2. W orks on the 1908 Bosnian crisis and the 1914 Sarajevo crisis are given in the relevant chapters below.


Bibliography 921
The basic works on nineteenth century G reece will be found in the bibli ography for C hapter 15. T he outstanding authority on G reece at the turn of the century is W illiam Miller, who lived there at the time. See especially his Travels and P olitics in the N ea r East (London, 1898). An im portant source is the biography by D. Pournaras, Charilaos Trikoupes: H e zo e kai to ergon ton [C harilaos Trikoupes: His L ife and W ork] (Athens, 1950, 2 vols.), which provides much background material on the preceding decades of Greek history. There are several biographies of Venizelos, the most recent and the best being by D. Alastos, V enizelos: P atriot, Statesm an R evolu tion ary (London, 1942). See also S. B. C hester, L ife o f V en izelos (London, 1921); H. A. G ibbons, V enizelos (N ew York, 1923); V. J. Seligman, The Victory of Venizelos: A Study of G reek Politics, 1910-1918 (London, 1920). The 1909 revolution of the Military League has been described by the leader of the League, Colonel N. K. Zorbas, Apornnemoneum ata [Reminiscences] (Athens, 1925); and by A. Thcodorides, H e epanastasis kai to ergon tes [The Revolution and Its W ork] (Athens, 1914). For the constitutional issues involved, see N. Kaltchas, Introduction to the Constitutional H istory of M odern G reece (New York, 1940). On the international relations of Greece during these decades, the most detailed and authoritative work is the fourth volume of E. D riault and M. Lhéritier, H istoire diplom atiqu e de la G rèce (Paris, 1926). On specific issues, see S. T. Lascaris, L a politiqu e extérieu re d e la G rèce avant et après le con grès de Berlin (Paris, 1924); and the same author’s “G reece and Serbia during the W ar of 1885,” Slavonic R eview , XI (July, 1932), 88-99. On the Cretan question and the GrecoT urkish W ar, the best survey, and one on which I have leaned heavily, is W. L. Langer, The D iplom acy o f Im perialism 1 890-1902 (New York, 1935), Vol. I, chs. 10, 11, which provides a very extensive bibliography of W estern sources. M aterials published m ore recently, such as Vol. X III of the first series of D ocum ents diplom atiques français (Paris, 1953), do not alter the account as given in Langer. Of the G reek materials, the most im portant is A. Ainian-M azarakes, H istorike m elete 1 8 2 1 —1907 kai o p olem os tou 1897 (M eta parartem atos 1 898—1 9 0 8 ) [H istorical S tu dy 1 8 2 1 —1907 an d the W ar o f 1897 (W ith a S u pple m ent on the Years 1 8 9 8 -1 9 0 8 )] (Athens, 1950, 2 vols.), which provides much background m aterial on the earlier decades as well as a 500-page analysis of the political and m ilitary aspects of the war. On Crete after the 1897 war, see J. S. D utkow ski, L ’occu pation de la C rète, 1 8 9 7 -1 9 0 9 ; une expérience d'adm inistration internationale d ’un territoire (Paris, 1953).
The basic works on G reek econom ic development in the nineteenth cen tury are listed in the bibliography for C hapter 15. For the financial difficulties of the 1890’s there is the excellent study by J. A. Levandis, The G reek Foreign D eb t and the G reat Powers 1821-1898 (New York, 1944). On the agrarian question there are available in English the following: “A grarian Reform ,” International R eview of Agricultural Econom ics, X II (August, 1921), 462-472; G. Servakis and C. Pertountzi, “T he A gricultural Policy of G reece,” in O. S. M organ, ed., Agricultural System s of M iddle Europe (New York, 1953), ch. 4; and K. A. Doukas, “A grarian Reform in G reece,” A m erican Journal o f E conom ics and Sociology, V (October, 1945), 79-92. The basic work remains that of D. Zogra
25. Greece


922 Bibliography
phos, Historia tes hellenikes georgias [History of Greek Agriculture] (Athens, 1922-1924, 3 vols.). For a colorful account of the struggles of the Thessalian peasants by one of their leaders, see D. Bousdras, He apeleutherosis ton sklavon agroton [The Liberation o f the Enslaved Peasants] (A thens, 1951). On the curran t problem there is J. Kipps, “T he G reek C urrant T rade,” Economic His tory, II (January, 1930), 137-153. T he best study of G reek em igration to all countries is by N . J. Polyzos, Essai sur Immigration grecque (Paris, 1947). H . P. F airchild’s Greek Immigra tion to the United States (N ew H aven, Conn., 1911) rem ains the best w ork on the subject. See also T. Saloutos, They Remember America: The Story of the Repatriated Greek-Americans (Berkeley, Calif., 1956), an analysis of why Greek-Americans returned to their homeland and of their ideas and influence. On the significance of em igrant remittances, see E. G. Mears, “The Unique Posi tion in G reek T rade of Em igrant R em ittances,” Quarterly Journal o f Economics, XXXVII (May, 1923), 535-540.
26. Rumania
For bibliographies, sources, and general histories, see the works given for C hapter 18. T he Com m unist regime in R um ania following W orld W ar II pub lished a three-volume collection of documents on the period 1877-1878: M. Roller, V. Cherestesiu, V. M aciu, and S. Slirbu, cds. Documente Privind Istoria Romaniei: Razboiul Pentru lndependenta (Bucharest, 1952-1953). This collec tion, which was not used for this study, is reviewed by S. A. F ischer-G alati in the June, 1955, issue of the Journal of Modern History. A n analysis of Rum anian diplom acy during the Russo-Turkish W ar is given in R. V. Burks, “R om ania and the Balkan Crisis of 1875-78,” Journal of Central European Affairs, II (July, 1942), 119-134, and II (October, 1942), 310-320. For à broader picture of R um anian foreign policy, see E. Ebel, Rumänien und die Mittelmächte von der russisch-türkischen Krise 1877-78 bis zum Bukaresten Frieden vom 10 August 1913 (Berlin, 1939). A convenient summ ary of the steps leading to the 1883 secret alliance is given by W. L. Langer, European Alliances and Alignments 1871-1890 (N ew Y ork, 1931). See also the data in A us dem Leben König Karls von Rumänien (Stuttgart, 1894-1900, 4 vols.); and the brief review in the pam phlet by G. I. Bratianu, “La politique extérieure du roi Charles I de Rou manie” (Bucharest, 1940). F or domestic developments after 1878 see the general histories given under C hapter 18. T he indispensable secondary w orks for the 1907 P easant Revolt are D. M itrany, The Land and the Peasant in Rumania (L ondon, 1930), and H. L. Roberts, Rumania: Political Problems o f an Agrarian State (N ew H aven, Conn., 1951). The Communist Rumanian government has published a threevolume collection of docum ents on the revolt: M. Roller, ed., Rascoala Taranilor din 1907 (Bucharest, 1948-1949). This collection, which has not been used for this study, is also reviewed in the June, 1955, issue of the Journal of Modern History. A revealing account of the plight of the peasantry at this time and of their revolt is given in the novel by Leo K atz, Seedtime (N ew Y ork, 1947). F or a contrast see the memoirs of Princess A nne-M arie Callimachi, Yesterday Was Mine (New York, 1949), which portrays the life of the Greco-Rum anian aristoc racy in the nineteenth century.


Bibliography 923
F or the economic development of Rum ania apart from agriculture, see C. N. Jordan, The Rumanian Oil Industry (N ew York, 1955); D. Kastris, Les capitaux étrangers dans la finance roumaine (Paris, 1921); S. Radulesco, La politique financière de la Roumanie (Paris, 1923); A Theveneau, La Roumanie économique et le change roumain au lendemain de la guerre (Paris, 1928); and Rumania: A n Economic Handbook by United States D epartm ent of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Special Agents Series, no. 222 (W ashington, D. C., 1924). On em igration there is C. A. Galitzi, A Study of Assimilation among the Roumanians in the United States (N ew York, 1929).
An excellent account of the Transylvanian Rum anians after 1878 is given by R. W. Seton-Watson, A History of the Roumanians (Cambridge, Eng., 1934). F or the Rum anian interest in the Vlachs see the memoirs of the Rum anian diplo matist, T. G. Djuvara, Mes missions diplomatiques (Paris, 1930), excerpts of which were published in installm ents in the 1929 and 1930 issues of Revue des sciences politiques.
27. Albanian Awakening
A lbanian historiography is in a rudim entary state, careful studies being needed in almost every phase of the country’s, history. Several bibliographies are available: F. M anek, G . Pekmezi, A. Stotz, Albanesische bibliographie (V ienna, 1909); E. Legrand, Bibliographie albanaise: description raisonnée des ouvrages publiés en albanais ou relatifs à l’Albanie du quinzième siècle à l’année 1900 (Paris, 1912); N. B. Jopson, “A Survey of Albanian Studies,” Slavonic Review, III (1924-1925), 412-418; J. G. Kersopoulos, “Albanie: ouvrages et articles de revues parus de 1555 à 1934,” Les Balkans, V (1934), 377-424, 651-712. The best general history is by J. Swire, Albania: The Rise o f a Kingdom (L ondon, 1929), although it is very spotty and has an abom inable reference sys tem. The following surveys are also useful, but the authors are ardent nationalists and write accordingly: C. A. Dako, Albania: The Master Key to the Near East (Boston, 1919); C. A. Chekrezi, Albania: Past and Present (N ew York, 1919). T he D ako w ork is the m ore im portant, containing revealing autobiographical sections. R. A lmagia, L'Albania (R om e, 1930) is a useful general handbook with a bibliography. See also the very revealing chapters on A lbania in H. N . Brails ford, Macedonia: Its Races and Their Future (London, 1906); and C. Eliot, Turkey in Europe (London, 1908). A vivid picture of customs and m anners is given by two well-known English authorities: M argaret Hasluck, The Unwritten Law in Albania (Cam bridge, Eng., 1954), and M ary E. D urham , High Albania (London, 1909). The only w ork analyzing the social structure in Albania at the time of th e T urkish conquest is by N . D. Sm irnova and I. G. Senkevich, “Osvoboditelnaia Borba Albanskogo N aroda Protiv Turetskikh .Porabotitelei v XV Veke,” [“T he A lbanian People’s W ar of Liberation against the T urkish Oppressors in the Fifteenth C entury,”] Voprosy Istorii no. 12 (D ecem ber, 1953), pp. 80-97. F o r the career, of Skanderbeg see Bishop F an S. Noli, George Castrioti Scanderbeg (1405-1468) (New York, 1947); A. Gegaj, L ’Albanie et l’invasion turque au XV" siècle (Louvain, 1937); J. H. K ram ers, “Skanderbeg,” Encyclopedia of Islam; and J. Radonié, Djuradj Kastriot Skenderbeg [George Kastriotis Skanderbeg| (Belgrade, 1942). The latter work, published under the'auspices of the


924 Bibliography
Serbian Academy of Sciences, was not available for this study. See also F. Pall, “Die Geschichfe Skanderbegs im Lichte der neuren Forschung,” Leipz. Vierteljahrschrift /. Siidosteuropa, VI (1 9 4 2 ), 85 -9 6 (n o t consulted). T here is no careful history of events and institutions in A lbania during the centuries of Turkish rule. Most accounts concentrate on outstanding person alities like Skanderbeg and Ali Pasha— see bibliography on Ali Pasha in C hapter 13. T here is especial need for a study of the land system and social structure in the Turkish period, including an analysis of the few dominant families, their rela tions with each other and with the imperial government. On the A lbanian national aw akening there is S. Skendi, “ Beginnings of A lbanian Nationalist Trends in Culture and Education (1 8 7 8 -1 9 1 2 ),” Journal of Central European Affairs, X 11 (January, 1953), 356-367, which is useful but of a survey nature. T here is need for a detailed study of the national aw akening in its educational, literary, and political aspects. A nother gap is the history of the A lbanian colonies, which played so im portant a role in the renaissance. T here is the excellent account of the A lbanians in the United States by the Federal W riters’ P roject of the W orks Progress A dm inistration, The Albanian Struggle in the OUl World and New (Boston, 1939), as well as some studies of the com m unities in Italy-:—see references in the Skendi article cited above. But there do not appear to be histories of the im portant colonies in Constantinople, Sofia, Egypt, Bucharest, and elsewhere. T he first impact of Albanian nationalism on E uropean diplom acy is well described in S. Skendi, “ Beginnings of A lbanian N ationalist and A utonom ous Trends: The Albanian League: 1878-1881,” American Slavic and East Euro pean Review, X II (A pril, 1953), 219-232. F or the period between 1881 and the Balkan W ars there is (he revealing study by S. Skendi, “A lbanian Political Thought and Revolutionary Activity, 1881-1912,” Siidost-Forschungen, XIII (1 9 5 4 ), 1-40. See also I. S. G alkin, “Iz Istorii Natsionalnogo-osvoboditelnogo dvizheniia v A lbanii v 1910-12 G odakh,” [“F rom the History of the N ational L ibera tion M ovem ent in A lbania in 1910—12,”] Voprosy Istorii, no. 11 (1 9 5 4 ), pp. 3 5 46; The Memoirs oj Ismail Kemal Bey (London, 1920); M. E. Durham, The Struggle for Scutari (London, 1914); H. C. Woods, The Danger Zone of Europe (London, 1911); and R. W. Graves, Storm Centres of the Near East (London, 1933). C hapter 13 of the latter w ork is a revealing account of a journey through out Albania on the eve of the Balkan Wars.
28. Diplomatic Developments
M uch has been written on the M acedonian question, yet there is no adequate comprehensive study. Most available works are either frankly partisan or else general and superficial with much emphasis on the anarchy and conflicting claims but without careful research and analysis. A definitive work remains to be written on the basis of the Balkan materials, traveler and missionary accounts, and Western archive materials. M onographic studies are also needed: for exam ple, an analysis of the relations between the 1MRO and the External Organiza tion, and also an analysis of the work of the exarchate in M acedonia to determine the extent to which it was responsible for the Bulgarophil sentiments of the M ace donian population as reported by most contem porary travelers. A good introduction to the M acedonian question may be obtained by


Bibliography 925
reading first H. R. W ilkinson, Maps and Politics: A Review of the Ethnographic Cartography of Macedonia (Liverpool, 1951), a valuable study by a geographer who traces the evolution of ethnographic theories and national claims regarding M acedonia; and then H. N. Brailsford, Macedonia: Its Races and Their Future (London. 1906), which is the best general study available. A m ong the best of the recent studies are G. Weigand, Ethnographie von Makedonien (Leipzig, 1924); J. Ancel, La Macédoine (Paris, 1930); W. Jacob, Die makedonische Frage (Berlin, 1931); K. Koitscheff, Mazedonien geschichtlich, staatspolitisch und völkerrechtlich in Verbindung mit der Entwicklung des bulgarischen Staates bis zum Balkankrieg 1912 (H eidelberg, 1948). Contem porary W estern accounts include R. von Mach, Die Macedonische Frage (Vienna, 1895); V. Bérard, La Macédoine (Paris, 1897); and W. Miller, Travels and Politics in the Near East (L ondon, 1898). See also the references to M acedonia in W. S. V ucinich, Serbia between East and West: The Events of 1903-1908 (Stanford, Calif., 1954), which includes important information on recent research and interpretations on the Macedonian question by Yugoslav historians. A comprehensive survey of M acedonia’s development, with em phasis on the geographic background, is avail able in the unpublished doctoral dissertation by H. L. K ostanick, “M acedonia: A Study in Political Geography” (Clark University, 1948). The Bulgarian viewpoint is presented in I. Ivanov, La question macédoine (Paris, 1920); S. Radeff, La Macédoine et la renaissance bulgare (Sofia, 1918); Historicus [S. Panaretoff], Bulgaria and Her Neighbors (N ew Y ork, 1917); and V. A. Tsanov, Reports and Letters from American Missionaries Referring to the Distribution of Nationalities in the Former Provinces o f European Turkey 18581918 (Sofia, 1919). F o r the Serbian viewpoint, see T. R. Georgevich, Macedonia (London, 1918); J. Cvijic, Remarks on the Ethnography o f the Macedonian Slavs (London, 1906); and the pioneer Serbian claim for M acedonia in S. Gopcevic, Makedonien und Alt-Serbien (Vienna, 1888). The Greek claims are set forth in C. Nicolaides, La Macédoine (Berlin, 1899); N. Stroumzi, La ques tion macédonienne, étude d ’histoire diplomatique et de droit public (Lyons, 1932); V. Colocotronis, La Macédoine et l’hellénisme: étude historique et ethnog raphique (Paris, 1919); S. P. Phocas Cosm etatos, La Macédoine: son passé et son présent (Lausanne, 1919); N. Kasasis, L ’hellénisme et la Macédoine (Paris, 1903); and N. B. Vlachos, To Makedonikon os Fasis tou Anatolikou Zetematos, 1878-1908 [The Macedonian Problem as a Phase o f the Eastern Question, 18781908] (A thens, 1935). The latter is the only significant w ork in the G reek language on the M acedonian problem, the others being either polemical tracts or restricted local histories. Finally, on the Vlachs there is G. W eigand, Die Aromunen (Leipzig, 1895); for the use Rumania made of the Vlachs see the account of the Rum anian diplom at T. G. Djuvara, Mes missions diplomatiques (Paris, 1930), and “Souvenirs diplomatiques,’” Revue des sciences politiques, L1I (A pril-June, 1929), 205-229 and continued in three following issues. For the Balkan policies of the great powers after 1878 see the brief but lucid and well-documented survey in W. L. Langer, European Alliances and Alignments 1871-1890 (N ew Y ork, 1931), ch. 10. F or special aspects see A. F. Pribram , The Secret Treaties o f Austria-Hungary, 1879-1914 (Cam bridge, Mass., 1920, 2 vols.); G. Yacklchitch, “ Le traité secret austro-serbe du 28 juin, 1881 et du 9 février, 1889," Revue d ’histoire diplomatique, 1.1 (O ctober-D ecem ber, 1937), 429 466, and I II (January M arch, 1938), 6 5 -1 0 5 ; M .'C . W ren, “Pobe


926 Bibliography
donostsev and Russian Influence in the Balkans, 1881-1888,” Journal of Modern History, X IX (June, 1947), 130-141; W." N . M edlicott, “T he Powers and the U nification of the Two Bulgarias,” English Historical Re-view, LIV (January, 1939), 263-284; C. Jelavich, “Russo-Bulgarian Relations 1892-1896,” Journal of Modern History, XXIV (December, 1952), 341-351. F o r inter-Balkan relations from 1878 to 1914 see the general survey in L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History o f the M ovem ent toward Balkan Unity in Modern Times (N ortham pton, Mass., 1944), chs. 6, 7, which provides a full bibliography. See also M. Lascaris, “Greece and Serbia during the W ar of 1885,” Slavonic Review, XI (July, 1932), 88-99; E. Walters, “The Serbo-Bulgarian Secret T reaty of 19 F ebruary, 1897,” Slavonic Review, X X V III (A pril, 1950), 493-499; E. C. Helmreich and C. E. Black, “The Russo-Bulgarian Mili tary Convention of 1902,” Journal of Modern History, IX (December, 1937), 471-482. M ost accounts of Abdul Hamid are of the “bloody Sultan” variety. Typi cal is E. Pears, Life o f Abdul Hamid (London, 1917), and his Forty Years in Constantinople (New York, 1916). Better balanced though far from adequate are G. Roy, Abdul Hamid, le sultan rouge (Paris, 1936) and A. W ittlin, Abdul Hamid: The Shadow of God. Tr. from the G erm an by N. Denny. (London, 1939). T he only com prehensive study of the origins of the Young T urk m ovem ent is by E. E. Ram saur, Jr., The Young Turks: Prelude to the Revolution of 1908 (Prince ton, N . J., 1957). A M arxist interpretation is given in Kh. Z. G abidullin, Mladoturetskaia revoliutsiia [The Young Turk Revolution] (M oscow, 1936). U nfor tunately this is not based on original research but interprets well-known facts to show that the Y oung T urks were bourgeois in outlook and “against the prole tariat” (p. 225). T he most im portant w ork on the Young T urks in Paris before 1908 is P. Fesch, Constantinople aux derniers jours d ’ Abdul Hamid (Paris, 1907). This contains much docum entary material on the struggle between Riza and Sabaheddin. The author, a F rench priest, interested himself in Sabaheddin and is partial to him. Once the revolution occurred, numerous contemporary accounts were written by W estern travelers and journalists attracted by the sensational news. These accounts vary greatly and reflect several viewpoints— pro-Y oung Turk, pro-Liberal Union, pro-nationalities, but none of them pro-A bdul Hamid. Taken together they constitute a valuable source. G. F. A bbott, Turkey in Transition (London, 1909); V. Bérard, La révolution turque (Paris, 1909); H. Diam antopoulo, Le réveil de la Turquie (A lexandria, 1909); A. D urand, Jeune Turquie, vieille France (Paris, 1909); Y. Fehm i, La révolution ottomane (1908-1910) (Paris, 1911); E. F. Knight, Turkey: The Awakening of Turkey: The Turkish Revolution of 1908 (Boston, 1910); R. Pinon, L ’Europe et la jeune Turquie (Paris, 1911); A. Sarrou, La jeune Turquie et la révolution (Paris, 1912); A. G raf von Sternberg, Die türkische Revolution (Berlin, 1909); W. M. Ramsay, The Revolution in Constantinople and Turkey (London, 1909); F. M cCullagh, The Fall o f Abd-ul-Hamid (London, 1910). Also w orth noting are the diplom atic reports on the Young Turk revolution in Die Grosse Politik der europäischen Kabinette 1871—1914, X X V, Pt. II, 557—626; and British Documents on the Origins o f the War 1898-1914, V, 247—320.
T he standard w orks on the Bosnian crisis are B. E. Schm itt, The Annexa tion o f Bosnia 1908-1909 (Cam bridge, Eng., 1937) and N. N intchitch, La


Bibliography 927
crise bosniaque (1908-1909) et les puissances européennes (Paris, 1937, 2 vols.), the latter work being written by a former Yugoslav foreign minister who em ploys Serbian archive m aterial. See also W. D. David, European Diplomacy in the Near Eastern Question 1906—1909 (U rbana, 111., 1940); and W. M. C arlgren, Iswolsky und Aehrenthal vor der bosnischen Annexionkrise: russische und österreichisch-ungarische Balkanpolitik, 1906-1908 (Uppsala, 1955).
T he indispensable study of the Balkan wars is E. C. H elm reich, The Diplomacy of the Balkan Wars 1912-1913 (Cam bridge, Mass., 1938), which in cludes a clear summary of the military campaigns and full docum entation. See also the Report of the International Commission to Inquire into the Causes and Conduct of the Balkan Wars (W ashington, D. C., 1914), w hich contains inter esting data and which appears quaint in retrospect after two world wars. A nother w ork of this type that is w orth note is by D iplom atist [George Young], National ism and War in the Near East (O xford, 1915).
The most detailed account of Balkan diplomatic developments on the eve of W orld W ar I is in the unpublished doctoral dissertation by M. Faissler, “E uropean Diplomacy in the Balkan Peninsula, A ugust 10, 1913-June 28, 1914” (U niversity of Chicago, 1938). See also the valuable m aterial in “w ar origins” books such as S. B. Fay, The Origins of the World War (N ew York, 1934, 2nd rev. ed., 2 vols.); B. E. Schmitt, The Coming o f the War, 1914 (N ew York, 1930, 2 vols.); and L. A lbertini, The Origins of the War o f 1914 (London, 1952, 2 vols.), the latter work having been published first in Italy in 1942 and then translated and edited by Isabella M. Massey.
29. Sarajevo and War
W orks on the Yugoslav revolutionary m ovement and on the situation in Bosnia are given in C hapter 24 on Serbia and the South Slavs, 1878-1914. T he best and most recent analysis of the Sarajevo m urder and of the responsibility for the crim e is given in L. A lbertini, The Origins o f the War o f 1914, tr. and'ed. by I. M. Massey (London, 1953), Vol. II, chs. 1-3, which presents new material based on personal interviews. This should be supplemented by recent Yugoslav interpretations of the Black H and w hich are described in W. S. V ucinich, Serbia between East and West: The Events o f 1903-1908 (Stanford, Calif., 1954), pp. 102-105. See also S. G avrilovic, “N ew Evidence on the Sarajevo Assassination,” Journal of Modern History, X X VII (Decem ber, 1955), 410-414, which gives the text of a statem ent that D im itrijevich allegedly w rote concerning his role in the Sarajevo murder. In addition there are the standard studies of the Kriegs schuldfrage. The best G erm an statements are by A. von Wegerer, Der Ausbruch des Weltkrieges (Berlin, 1939, 2 vols.); H. Lutz, Die europäische Politik in der Julikrise, 1914 (Berlin, 1930); and E. Anrich, Europas Diplomatie am Vorabend des Weltkrieges (Berlin, 1937). F or French interpretations-see P. Renouvin, Les origines immédiates de la guerre (Paris, 1937); C. Bloch, Les causes de la guerre mondiale (Paris, 1933); and J. Isaac, Un débat historique (Paris, 1933), the latter author criticizing his French colleagues. The best American studies are by S. B. Fay, The Origins o f the World War (N ew York, 1934, rev. ed., 2 vols.), which is most critical of Russia, A ustria, and F rance; and B. E. Schmitt, The Coming of the War, 1914 (New York, 1930, 2 vols.), which is most critical of G erm any and Auitria. Finally, there is R. W. Seton-W atson, Sarajevo (London,


928 Bibliography
1926), w hich is valuable for the Yugoslav nationalist m ovem ent and which seeks to exculpate Serbia. Its conclusions should be checked with the more recent evi dence presented by Albcrtini. The Serbian victory in 1914 and defeat in 1915 are described eloquently by J. C. Adam s, Flight in Winter (Princeton, N. J., 1942), who recaptures ad mirably the atmosphere of those years. F or the intervention of Turkey, see the fully docum ented account of H. N. H ow ard, The Partition of Turkey: A Diplo matic History 1913-1923 (N orm an, Okla., 1931), ch. 3. On the Dardanelles and G allipoli expeditions, see M. Larcher, La guerre turque dans la guerre mondiale (Paris, 1926), which is based on official T urkish docum ents; C. F. AspinallOglander, Military Operations, Gallipoli (London, 1929), based on official British docum ents; the personal reports of W inston Churchill, The World Crisis (New York, 1928) Vol. II; and Liman von Sanders, Dardanellensieg (M unich, 1920). F o r the diplom atic aspects of the Straits problem , sec R. J. K erner, “ Russia, the Straits and Constantinople, 1914-1915,” Journal of Modern History, 1 (Septem ber, 1929), 4 00-415; and the same author’s “ Russia and the Straits, 1915-1917,” Slavonic Review, VIII (M arch, 1930), 589-593. Two recent publications are relevant here: C. J. Smith, Jr., The Russian Struggle for Power, 1914-1917: A Study o f Russian Foreign Policy During the First World War (N ew York, 1956), which throws much light on the roles of all the Balkan countries at this time; and A. M oorehead, Gallipoli (London, 1956), an absorbing and well-written ac count that is com parable to Cecil W oodham -Sm ith’s works on Ihc Crim ean War. T he best m onographic study on Bulgaria’s intervention is the unpub lished dissertation by J. M. Potts, “Russian Diplomacy and Bulgaria, 1914-1915” (Colum bia University, 1951), which gives a full bibliography of Slavic and W est ern sources. A briefer but more available analysis is given in H ow ard, op. cit., pp. 152-166. Im portant personal accounts may be found in V. Radoslavov, Bulgarien und die Weltkrise (Berlin, 1923); and N. and C. R. Buxton, The War and the Balkans (L ondon, 1915). A M arxist interpretation is given by T. Vlakhov, “Bolgariia i Tsentralnite Sili v N advecherieto na Pervata Svetovna V oina,” (“ Bul garia and the Central Powers on the Eve of the First W orld W ar,”] Izvestiia (Sofia), nos. 1-2 (1951), pp. 39-80. The latter work denounces Ferdinand and the bourgeois politicians for intervening in the war for “chauvinist-revanchist” reasons, and praises the “N arrow ” Socialists for opposing the war, as did Lenin. T here is no full-scale study of Rum anian diplom acy during W orld W ar I. A com prehensive and convenient account is given in R. W. Seton-W atson, A History of the Roumanians (Cambridge, Eng., 1934), chs. 5-6. On the Bessara bian dispute, see C. Uhlig, Die Bessarabische Frage (Breslau, 1926); G. I. Bratianu La problème des frontières Russo-Romaines (Bucharest, 1928); and, for the Soviet viewpoint, A. D olnik, Bessarabiia pod vlastiu Rum inskikh boyar 19181940 [Bessarabia under the Rule of the Rumanian Boyars] (M oscow, 1945).
Much material has been published on Greece in World W ar I because of the controversy involved. For the diplomatic aspects, see Vol. V of E. Driault, Histoire diplomatique de la Grèce (Paris, 1926), which uses the G reek Foreign Office archives and which seeks to steer a middle course between the Venizelists and the Royalists; and the unpublished doctoral dissertations by J. H. Lehm ann, “Greece and Salonica: A Study in Allied Cooperation 1914-1917” (Northwestern University, 1949), and by J. K. W arren, “The Diplomatic Relations between Greece, France and England 1914-1917” (Ohio State University, 1924). The


Bibliography 929
outstanding pro-Constantine accounts are by A. Frangoulis, La G rèce et la crise m ondiale (Paris, 1926) and S. Phocas-C osm etatos, The T ragedy o f G reece (L o n don, 1928), both of which present many documents from the Greek archives. T he Venizelist viewpoint is presented in the num erous biographies of the states man, of which the best are by W. H. Crawfurd-Price, Venizelos and the War (London, 1917), and D. Alastos, Venizelos (London, 1942). See also Venizelos’ own speeches in the chamber, published in G reece in H er True Light as E xpounded by E. K . Venizelos, tr. by X anthaki and Sakellarios (New York, 1916); and also the account by a member of the Greek royal family: Prince Nicholas, Political M em ories 1 9 1 4-1917 (London, 1928). Finally, see the excellent bibliographical essay on this topic in A. A. Pallis, G reece’s A n atolian A d ven tu re— and A fte r . . . (London, 1937), App. I. Finally, for the Saloniki cam paign which ended the w ar in the Balkans there is the well-written official British history by C. Falls and A. F. Becke, M ili tary O perations in M acedonia (L ondon, 1933, 2 vols.), and the outspoken account by the French com m ander, General M. P. Sarrail, M on com m andem ent en Orient 1916-1918 (Paris, 1930).
30. Peace Settlement
By all odds the best general account of the peace settlem ent is H. W . V. Temperley, ed., A H istory of the Peace Conference of Paris (London, 19201924, 6 vols.), which does not, however, cover the treaties with Turkey. See also S. Saucerm an, International Transfers o f T erritory in E urope (W ashington, D . C., 1937) for convenient statistical data concerning territorial changes. F or the breakup of Austria-Hungary, see D. F. Strong, Austria ( O ctober 1918-M arch 19 1 9 ): Transition from Em pire to Republic (New York, 1939); F. Déak, Hun gary at the Peace Conference: The D iplom atic H istory of the Treaty of Trianon (New York, 1942); C. A. Macartney, Hungary and H er Successors: The Treaty of Trianon and Its Consequences 19 19 -19 37 (New York, 1937); and H. W. V. Temperley, “How the H ungarian Frontiers Were Draw n,” Foreign A ßairs, VI (April, 1928), 432-447, the latter being a vigorous defense of the Trianon Treaty against the revisionists. A n excellent sum m ary of R um ania in the w ar and peace conferences is given io R. W. Seton-Watson, A H istory of the Roumanians from Rom an Tim es to the Com pletion o f U nity (Cambridge, Eng., 1934), chs. 15-17. A considerable num ber of w orks have been published or} the making of Yugoslavia, the best being E. Holzer, D ie E ntstehung des Jugoslawischen Staates (Berlin, 1929); Z. S. Tom itch, La form ation de l’état you goslave (Paris, 1927); R. J. K erner, The Jugo-Slav M o vem en t (Cam bridge, M ass., 1918); R. J. K erner, “Yugoslavia and the Peace Conference,”· in Yugoslavia, ed. 'bÿ R. J. K erner (Berkeley, C alif., 1949), ch. 6; and C. Jelavich, “Nikola P. Pasic: G reater Serbia or Jugoslavia,” Journal of Central European A ßairs, II (July, 1951), 133-152. Various partici pants have also left accounts because of the controversies involved: S. Pribitchevich, La dictature du roi A lexandre (Paris, 1933); A. Pavelic, A u s dem K am pfe um den selbständigen Staat Kroatien (Vienna, 1931); Count Carlo Sforza, Fifty Y ears o f War and D iplom acy in the Balkans (N ew Y ork, 1940); and the “A u to biography o f Stephen Kail ich ,” Current H istory, X X I X (O ctob er, 1928), 82-102. S e e also the e x ce lle n t d etailed accou n t in the u n p u b lish ed m aster’s thesis by D . N.


930 Bibliography
Ristic, “Foreign Relations of Yugoslavia 1914-1934” (University of California, Los Angeles, 1953), chs. 1, 2. On the Neuilly Treaty there is, in addition to the chapters in the Tem perley volumes cited above, the study by L. Kratchounov, La politique extérieure de la Bulgarie 1880-1920 (Sofia, 1932), which is excellent though brief. Interest ing details are given by K. Todorov, Balkan Firebrand: The Autobiography of a Rebel, Soldier and Statesman (Chicago, 1943), who served at the time as minister to Belgrade. See also “Dnevnikot na Mikhail Sarafov za Sklinchvaneto na Mirniia D ogovor v N oii pres 1919g.,” [“T he D iary of M ikhail Sarafov on the Signing of the Peace Treaty of Neuilly in 1919,”] lzvestiia, nos. 3 -4 (1951), pp. 314-365. This article, published in the journal of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, in cludes a preface by Khristo Khristov (pp. 314-319), which presents the current Communist interpretation of the Neuilly Treaty, including an attack upon the A m erican consul in Sofia on the grounds that he aided the Bulgarian bourgeoisie to suppress the army rebellion, save capitalism, and use Bulgaria as a base for intervention against the Soviet Union. The relations of the United States to these treaties are analyzed in the following w orks by V. S. M am atey: “T he United States and Bulgaria in W orld W ar I,” American Slavic and East European Review, X II (April, 1953), 233-257; “The United States and the Dissolution of A ustria-H ungary,” Journal of Central European Affairs, X (October, 1950), 256-270; “The United States and the Origins of the Adriatic Question, 1918,” Florida State University Studies, no. 4 (1951), pp. 45-60. The best comprehensive account of the Sèvres Treaty and of the preced ing secret treaties is H. N . H ow ard, The Partition o f Turkey: A Diplomatic History 1913-1923 (N orm an, Okla., 1931). An interesting and revealing per sonal account of the Turkish nationalist m ovem ent is given in H alidé Edib, The Turkish Ordeal (N ew York, 1928). See also K cm al’s m arathon speech to the People’s P arty Congress in which he reviewed the nationalist m ovem ent from 1919 to 1924: A Speech Delivered by Ghazi Mustapha Kemal . . . October 1927 (Leipzig, 1929). V aluable data on the conditions in Turkey, out of which the nationalist m ovem ent developed, are given in A hm ed Emin, Turkey in the World War (New Haven, Conn., 1930). Finally, the Soviet Orientalist, A. F. Miller, has w ritten Kratkaia Istoriia Turtsii [A Short History of Turkey] (M oscow, 1948), in which he presents the M arxist interpretation that the Anatolian peasant was the main foundation of the Turkish struggle for independence; that the proletariat was too weak to head the struggle; that the bourgeoisie consequently headed the movement; and that the revolution therefore did not proceed beyond the winning of independence, leaving class relationships and land arrangements largely un touched. F o r further references see M. D. M ercanligil, Catalogue o f Books on Ataturk and the Turkish Revolution (A nkara, 1953).
T he best single volume on the G reek crisis is by A. A. Pallis, Greece’s Anatolian Venture— and After (London, 1937). M ore detailed accounts are available in A. Frangoulis, La Grèce et la crise mondiale (Paris, 1926) which is anti-Venizelist; G. Ventires, He Hellas tou 1910-20 [Greece in 1910-20] (Athens, 1931), which is pro-Venizelist; and the fifth volume of E. D riault and M. Lhéritier, Histoire diplomatique de la Grèce contemporaine jusqu’à nos jours (Paris, 1926). The latter work takes an independent position, and as a result the Greek governm ent of 1925 attem pted to prevent its publication. This episode is described


Bibliography 931
in E. Driault, Le roi Constantin (Paris, 1930). Finally, see the excellent biblio graphical essay on this topic in Appendix I of the Pallis work listed above. The best account of the G reco-Turkish war in a W estern language is by J. L. E. Bujac, Les campagnes de l’armée héllenique, 1918-1922 (Paris, 1930). F o r the Lausanne Treaty, see the relevant chapters in the H ow ard study cited above, and also the excellent analysis by R. H. Davison, “Turkish Diplomacy from Mudros to Lausanne,” in The Diplomats 1919-1939, ed. by G. A. Craig and F. G ilbert (Princeton, N. J., 1953), ch. 6. Finally, on the refugees and population exchange, there are several fine studies: Greek Refugee Settlement (Geneva, 1926); H. M orgenthau, / Was Sent to Athens (N ew York, 1929); C. B. Eddy, Greece and the Greek Refugees (L o n don, 1931); and S. P. Ladas, The Exchange o f Minorities: Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey (New York, 1932). These accounts should be checked with the more critical analysis of the ethnographic effect of the population shifts upon M acedonia given in H. R. W ilkinson, Maps and Politics: A Review o f the Ethnographic Cartography of Macedonia (Liverpool, 1951), pp. 260-273.
31. Dynamics of Balkan Politics
The most valuable source for data on interwar Balkan economic develop m ents is Economic Development in S. E. Europe (London, Political and Econom ic Planning, 1945). This includes much statistical material compiled during World W ar II by experts from all the Eastern European countries except Russia. M uch m aterial is also given in the two studies by the Royal Institute of International Affairs: The Balkan States: 1. Economic (1 9 3 6 ), and South-Eastern Europe: A Political and Economic Survey (1939). Thé distinguished G reek agricultural economist, C. Evelpidi, who has written authoritatively on Greek economic de velopment, has also analyzed the wider Balkan scene in Les états balkaniques (Paris, 1930), and “Le revenu national des pays balkaniques,” Metron, XIV (June 15, 1940), 159-169. T he studies of the English authority, D oreen W arriner, are also noteworthy, especially Economics o f Peasant Farming (N ew York, 1939), and “Some Controversial Issues in the H istory of A grarian E urope,” Slavonic and East European Review, X X X II (Decem ber, 1953), 168—186. An early study that still is of some value is Li Pasvolsky, Economic Nationalism of the Danubian States (N ew York, 1928), though it deals mostly with international econom ic m atters such as trade, debts, and reparations. E qually specialized is S. D. Zagoroff, J. Vegh, and A. D. Bilimovich, The Agricultural Economy o f the Danubian Countries 1935-45 (Stanford, Calif., 1955), whose main concern is agriculture and food in Hungary, Rum ania, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia during W orld W ar II, though considerable data are given on the 19-30’s. Finally there is the disappointing unpublished doctoral dissertation by M. K. Begdes, “Balkan Economic Problems” (Indiana University, 1944). The author, a Turkish student, is enthusiastic and diligent, but his lack of historical background, together with the broadness of the topic, has resulted in a superficial com pendium of wellknown facts. Excellent studies have been published on the population problem in Eastern Europe, the most important being W. E. Moore, Economic Demography o f Eastern and Southern Europe (G eneva, 1945); and D. Kirk, Europe’s Popula tion in the Interwar years (G eneva, 1946). See also the more theoretical analysis


932 Bibliography
by D. W arriner, “The Population Q uestion in Eastern E urope,” Slavonic Review, XVI (April, 1939), 629-637. Germ an economic domination on the eve of World W ar 11 is analyzed by H. W. A rndt, Economic Lessons of the Nineteen-Thirties (London, 1944) and A. Basch, The Danube Basin and the German Economic Sphere (New York, 1943). The latter work emphasizes the sinister aspects of G erm an economic penetration while the form er points out the benefits derived by the Balkan states. Social conditions are presented in the statistical data given in the above works by Zagoroff and by Political and Economic Planning of London. See also Nutrition: Final Report of the Mixed Committee of the League of Nations on the Relation o f Nutrition to Health, Agriculture and Economic Policy (G eneva, 1937), which has a section on “Central and Eastern Europe.” See also the article by the famous Yugoslav health expert, A. Stampar, “Observations of a Rural H ealth W orker,” in the October, 1939, issue of the International Journal of Agrarian Affairs. Educational conditions and problem s are considered in scattered passages of W. M. Kotschnigg, Unemployment in the Learned Professions (L o n don, 1937). Political developm ents in the Balkans in the interw ar period were first analyzed in a m eaningful m anner by H. Seton-W atson, Eastern Europe between the Wars 1918-1941 (Cam bridge, Eng., 1945), especially ch. 5. A grarianism is considered briefly by the Bulgarian peasant leader G. M. Dimitrov, “A grarian ism,” in European Ideologies, ed. by F. Gross (N ew Y ork, 1948), ch. 10. F o r a full-length study, see D. M itrany, Marx against the Peasant: A Study in Social Dogmatism (Chapel Hill, N. C., 1951); and the unpublished doctoral dissertation by B. N. Peselj, “ Peasant M ovements in Southeast E urope” (G eorgetow n U niver sity, 1951). The latter analyzes the political, social, and economic doctrines of A grarianism in general, and sum m arizes the histories of the individual Peasant parties. Works dealing with the Communist parties of individual Balkan coun tries are given in the bibliographies for the relevant chapters below. All the Bal kan parties are covered in K hr. Kabakchiyev, B. Boshkovich, and Ch. D. Vatis, Kommunisticheskie part'd balkanskikh stran [Communist Parties of the Balkan Countries] (M oscow, 1930). T he attitude of the Balkan Com m unist parties toward Balkan federation is analyzed in L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History of the M ovement toward Balkan Unity in Modern Times (N ortham pton, Mass., 1944); and their attitude toward the M acedonian problem is traced in E. Barker, Macedonia: Its Place in Balkan Power Politics (London, 1950). T here is need for objective studies of both the Agrarian and Communist movements in the Balkan Peninsula, including an analysis of such broad problems as the origins of their ideologies, the reasons for Communist predom inance over the Socialists, the rea sons for A grarian weakness in Greece and Serbia, relations with the Soviet Union, as well as detailed presentations of the program s and histories of the in dividual Agrarian and Communist parties.
32. Yugoslavia
F or the early constitutional struggle leading to the adoption of the 1921 constitution, see R. J. Kerner, The Jugo-Slav Movement (Cambridge, Mass., 1918); the collection of documents in The Jugo-Slav Movement, H andbook Pre


Bibliography 933
pared under the H istorical Section of the Foreign Office, no. 14 (London, 1920); and the excellent analysis by C. Jelavich, “Nikola P. Pasic: G reater Serbia or Jugoslavia?” Journal o f Central European Affairs, XI (July, 1951), 133—152. Considerable material on the first days of the Yugoslav state may be found in the reports of Am erican official observers published in Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States: Paris Peace Conference, 1919, especially Vol. II (W ashington, D. C., 1942), and Vol. XII (Washington, D. C., 1947). There is no satisfactory political history of Yugoslavia in the interw ar period. One work covering the ground is the unpublished doctoral dissertation by E. N. M ittleman, “The Nationality Problem in Yugoslavia: A Survey of Develop ments 1921-1953” (New York University, 1954), but this describes only the constitutional conflict between the centralists and federalists and throws little light on the forces behind the scenes that moved the political leaders. A nother survey of constitutional developments is available in the chapters on the “Yugoslav M ovem ent” and “C onstitutional D evelopment 1914-1941” by R. J. K erner and M. W. G raham , respectively, in R. J. K erner, ed., Yugoslavia (Berkeley, Calif., 1949). The constitutional and administrative issues are analyzed in Charles A. Beard and G. Radin, The Balkan Pivot: Yugoslavia: A Study in Government and Administration (New York, 1929). For various interpretations of the political developm ents in the interwar period see H. Seton-W atson, Eastern Europe be tween the Wars 1918-1941 (Cam bridge, Eng., 1946), w hich is critical of the dic tatorship; and Stephen G raham , Alexander of Yugoslavia (New Haven, Conn., 1939), a sympathetic biography. See also the valuable inform ation concerning the Saloniki trial and its recent historiography, in W. S. Vucinich, Serbia between East and West: The Events of 1903-1908 (Stanford, Calif., 1954), pp. 104 ff. The economic developm ent of Yugoslavia has been analyzed in the mas terful study by J. Tom asevich, Peasants, Politics, and Economic Change in Yugo slavia (Stanford, Calif., 1955). This basic work is essential for the political and social as well as econom ic growth of Yugoslavia, and consequently has been used heavily in the preparation of this study. The condition of the Yugoslav lands during W orld W ar I is well described in ch. 12 of T om asevich’s book, which contains a full bibliography on this topic on p. 217. F or those aspects of Yugo slav economic developm ent not considered fully in the Tom asevich study, see his article on “Foreign Econom ic Relations 1918-1941,” in R. J. K erner, ed., Yugo slavia (Berkeley, Calif., 1949), ch. 11; S. D. Obradovic, La politique commerciale de la Yougoslavie (Belgrade, 1939); and S. M. Kukoleca, lndustrija Jugoslavije 1918-1938 [Industry o f Yugoslavia 1918-J938] (Belgrade, 1941); and relevant chapters in S. D. Zagoroff et al., The Agricultural Economy o f the Danubian Countries 1935-45 (Stanford, Calif., 1955). F or social and intellectual developm ents see the relevant chapters in Tom asevich, plus R. T routon, Peasant Renaissance in Yugoslavia 1900-1950 (L ondon, 1952); O. Lodge, Peasant Life in Jugoslavia (N ew York, 1942); O. Lodge, “Infant and M aternal M ortality in Jugoslavia, with a Background of G en eral Conditions,” Population, I (Novem ber, 1934), 55-82, and II (November, 1935), 111-148. L. A dam ic, The Native’s Return (N ew Y ork, 1934); and the articles in K erner’s Yugoslavia by A. N . Dragni.ch, “Social S tructure” ; by S. K. Turosienski, “Education”; by M. Spinka, “Modern Ecclesiastical Development” ; and by W. S. V ucinich, “Yugoslavs of the Moslem F aith.” Finally, the history of the socialist and com m unist movements in Yugoslavia is described in D. Lapche


934 Bibliography
vich, Istorija Socializma u Srbiji [History o f Socialism in Serbia] (Belgrade, 1922); and in Josip Broz T ito’s Report Delivered at the V Congress o f the Communist Party of Yugoslavia (Belgrade, 1948). The latter work includes a survey of the history o f the socialist and com m unist m ovem ents in all parts of Yugoslavia from their origins to the present. The beginnings of Slovenian trade unionism are de scribed in J. G. Polach, “The Beginnings of Trade Unionism among the Slavs of the Austrian Em pire,” American Slavic and East European Review, XIV (April, 1955), 239-259. A bibliographical survey of this topic is given by Ivan A vakumovic, “Literature on the M arxist M ovement in Yugoslavia,” Journal of Central European Affairs, XV (April, 1954), 66-70.
33. Bulgaria
T here is need for a com prehensive history of Bulgarian politics com parable to R. W. Seton-W atson’s w ork on R um ania, and of Bulgarian economics com parable to J. Tom asevich’s w ork on Yugoslavia. F or bibliographies see the works given for C hapter 19. T here is a considerable periodical literature on Stambuliski because of the attention he attracted, and some of the articles are excellent, e.g., J. D. Bourchier, “Alexander Stambolisky,” Contemporary Review, CXV1II (November, 1920), 784-789; P. G entizon, “Stam boulisky et le peuple bulgare,” Revue de France, V (O ctober 1, 1923), 593-608. Full-length studies are available in N. D. Petkov, Aleksandr Stamboliiski: Lichnost i idei [Alexander Stambuliski: Personal ity and Ideas] (Sofia, 1930); and the biography published in Serbian in Belgrade by one of his followers, K. Todorov, in 1930. Todorov has also published his mem oirs, w hich throw light on various aspects of Bulgarian history in the inter w ar years— Balkan Firebrand (Chicago, 1943). Stam buliski’s A grarian party is described •briefly in A. Omelianov, “A Bulgarian Experim ent,” in A Systematic Source Book in Rural Sociology, ed. by P. A. Sorokin, C. C. Zim m erm an, and C. J. Galpin (Minneapolis, 1931), II, 638-647; G. M. Dimitrov, “Agrarianism” in F . Gross, European Ideologies (N ew Y ork, 1948), pp. 396-451; and in more detail in P. K iranov, Bulgarskoto zemledelsko dvizhenie [The Bulgarian Agrarian Movement] (Sofia, 1927). F o r Stam buliski’s efforts in behalf of a “G reen In ter national,” see M. H odza, Federation in Central Europe: Reflections and Rem i niscences (L ondon, 1942); and for the com pulsory labor service the best account is by B. G. Djimreff, Le service obligatoire de travail en Bulgarie (Toulouse, 1936). Full Bulgarian sources are given in the excellent summary of Stambuliski in X IV , 317, of the Encyclopedia o f the Social Sciences, by V. Sharenkoff. W orth noting here is the very opinionated w ork by G. C. Logio, Bulgaria Past <& Present (M anchester, Eng., 1936), w hich is strongly anti-Stam buliski and proVelchev, but which does contain much valuable material. The fullest study of the IM R O is by J. Swire, Bulgarian Conspiracy (L ondon, 1940) which is pro-Stam buliski and pro-Federalist. S. Christowe, Heroes and Assassins (N ew Y ork, 1935), is strongly anti-Stambuliski and rather pro-M ihailov. A brief but clear and balanced account is available in E. Barker, Macedonia: Its Place in Balkan Power Politics (London, 1950). F or the role of Stam buliski and the IM R O in Balkan affairs, see L. S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History of the M ovement toward Balkan Unity in Modern Times (N ortham pton, Mass., 1944).


Bibliography 935
The history of the C om m unist and Socialist m ovem ents in Bulgaria is described in T. Tchitchovsky, The Socialist M ovement in Bulgaria (London, 1931); Khr. Kabakchiev, “Bolgarskaia Kommunisticheskaia Partiia,” in Khr. Kabakchiev, B. Boshkovich, and Ch. D. Vatis, Kommunisticheskie Partii Balkanskikh Stran [Communist Parties o f the Balkan Countries] (M oscow, 1930); and George D im itrov’s R eport to the F ifth Congress of the Bulgarian Com m unist party, December, 1948, which gives an official history of the party. F or Bulgaria’s econom ic developm ent see, first, G. T. Danailov, Les effets de la guerre en Bulgarie (Paris, 1932); and then L. Pasvolsky, Bulgaria’s Eco nomic Position (W ashington, D. C., 1930). For the later years, see the periodic reports on “Econom ic Conditions in Bulgaria” issued in London by the British D epartm ent of Overseas T rade— i.e., C. Bramwell report in 1928; S. H arrison re port in 1930; T. C. Rapp report in 1932; R. B. B. Tollinton reports in 1935 and 1937; and T. V. Brenan report in 1939. See also the general survey and interpre tation in L. P. Savadjiev, Les caractères et les effets de la politique du nationalisme économique en Bulgarie (Lyons, 1939). The best studies of Bulgarian agriculture are by J. S. Molov, ed., Die sozialokonomische Struktur der bulgarischen Landwirtschaft (Berlin, 1936); the same author’s “ Bulgarian A griculture,” in Agricul tural Systems o f Middle Europe, ed. by O. S. M organ (N ew Y ork, 1933), pp. 4 1 -8 6 ; and the relevant chapters in S. D. Zagoroff, et al., The Agricultural Econ omy of the Danubian Countries 1935-45 (Stanford, Calif, 1955). Special aspects of Bulgaria’s econom y are covered by T. S. KosarofF, La dette publique extérieure de la Bulgarie (/879-1932) (Paris, 1933); A. Beshkov, “Tobacco in Bulgaria,” Economic Geography, XVI (A pril, 1940), 188-194; and T. Chipkoff, L ’industrie de la rose et de l’essence de roses en Bulgarie (Strasbourg, 1937).
By far the best analysis of Bulgarian peasant life is presented by the A m erican scholar I. T. Sanders, Balkan Village (Lexington, Ky., 1949), a de tailed and revealing sociological study of the village of Dragalevtsy near Sofia. See also T. Tchitchovsky, “Political and Social Aspects of Modern Buglaria,” Slavonic Review, VII (January-M arch, 1929), 272-287, 594-603, and V III (June, 1929), 176-187; H. Leslie, Where East Is West: Life in Bulgaria (Boston, 1933); W. F. Russell, Schools in Bulgaria (New York, 1924); K. S. C handan, La presse Bulgare de son origine à nos jours (Paris, 1933); O. Lodge, “Infant and M ortality Rates in Bulgarian Villages, with a Background of G eneral C ondi tions,” Population, II (Decem ber, 1937), 60-80; and I. Golosmanoff, The Public Health Services o f Bulgaria (Lyons, 1926).
34. Greece
Probably more has been published in W estern languages on modern Greece than on any other Balkan country, presumably because of the traditional interest in the homeland of ancient civilization. But most publications are frag m entary or superficial, and em phasize cultural topics or local regions. T here is no solid comprehensive political history com parable to that of R. W. Seton-Watson on Rumania, or an adequate economic survey comparable to the Mitrany and Roberts studies on Rumania and the Tomasevich study on Yugoslavia. These are serious gaps in G reek historiography, which the factual, anecdotal, and uninterpretive works of W illiam Miller and others have done little to fill.
For bibliographies and general histories sec the bibliography for Chapter 15.


936 Bibliography
Po litical developments in the interw ar period are described by W . M ille r, Greece (Lo n do n , 1928); J. M avrogordato, Modern Greece: A Chronicle and a Survey 1800-1931 (Lo n d o n , 1931); and E . S. Forster, A Short History of Modern Greece 1821-1945 (Lo n d o n , 1946). O n constitutional developments there are N . Kaltchas, Introduction to the Constitutional History of Modern Greece (N e w Y o rk, 1940); P. J. Zepos, Greek Law: Three Lectures Delivered at Cambridge and Oxford in 1946 (A th en s, 194 9); and G . T . Bacopoulos, Outline o f the Greek Constitution: Political Systems Since the Greek Revolution of 1821 (Athens, 1950). T he follow ing biographies are all positive toward their subjects but do provide im portant m aterials: D . Alastos, Venizelos (Lo n d o n , 1942); P. N . Pipineles, Georgios II [George II] (A th en s, 1 95 1); I. A . Pepones, Nikolaos Plasteras sta gegonota 1909-45 [Nicholas Plastiras in the Events o f 1909-45] (Athens, 1947, 2 v o ls .); D . Gatopoulos, Andreas Michalakopoulos, 1875-1938 (Athens, 194 7), the latter being based on the prem ier’s personal papers. F o r the M etaxas dictatorship there is the general’s |Personal Diary] To prosopiko tou hemerologio (A th en s, 1951-1952, 2 v o ls .), w h ich reaches o n ly to Ja n u a ry , 1921. T h e dictatorship is defended by M . M alain o s, 4 Augoustou: Pos kai diati epeblethe he diktatoria tou I. Metaxa [4th of August: How and Why the Dictatorship of J. Metaxas Was Imposed] (A th en s, 194 7); and attacked by I. G . Koronakes, He politeia tes 4 Augoustou [The Polity of the 4th o f August] (A th en s, 1950). A n A ustralian journalist w ho visited the islands w here the politi cal prisoners were kept w rote an interesting and very critical account: B . Birtles, Exiles in the Aegean (Lo n d o n , 1938).
T h e crisis that developed in G reece during and follow ing W o rld W a r II , leading to the enunciation of the T ru m an D o ctrin e and to massive A m erican aid, stimulated considerable study of the ailing G reek economy. T he most important study o f a general nature is the unpublished d octoral dissertation by A . Pepelasis, “ Socio-C ultural B arriers to the E c o n o m ic D evelopm ent o f G re e c e ” ( U n i versity of C alifo rn ia, Berkeley, 1955), w hich analyzes the econom ic development o f G re e c e as w ell as the retarding influence o f the adm inistrative system, the ch urch , the schools, and so on. Several p rom inen t G re e k economists are w riting on the evolution and the problems of their econom y, outstanding being A . Angelopoulos, Ch. Evelpides, and X . Zolotas. E a c h has written a num ber o f w orks which are cited in the Pepelasis study. F o r the econom ic state o f G reece during W o rld W a r I and im m ediately thereafter, see A . Andreades, éd., Les effets économiques et sociaux de la guerre en Grèce (P a ris , 1926), and E . G . M ears, Greece Today: The Afterm ath o f the Refugee Impact (Sta n fo rd , C a lif., 1929), the author o f the latter w ork being form erly A m erican Resident T rad e Com m issioner in Greece. T h e standard w o rk on the natural resources o f G re e c e is b y the U N R R A Com m ittee on the Developm ent of the Productive Resources of Greece. Its Sub com m ittee on M in e ra l Resources published Ho oryktos ploutos tes Hellathos [The Mineral Wealth o f Greece] (A th en s, 1947). T h e most im portant general study o f G re e k agriculture in En g lish is the Report of the F AO Mission for Greece (W a sh in g to n , D . C ., M a rc h , 194 7). A m ore an a lytical study is given b y G . Coutsoum aris, “ Possibilities o f Eco n o m ic Developm ent in G reek A g ricu ltu re” (U n ive rsity o f Chicago, unpublished doctoral dissertation, 1953). F o r the evolu tion o f G re e k ag riculture in the interw ar years, see “ G re e c e : T h e A g ra ria n R e form ,” International Review of Agricultural Economics, X I I ( August -September, 1921), 463-472; G . Servakis and C . Pertountzi, “ The Agricultural Policy of


Bibliography 937
G reece,” in Agricultural Systems o f Middle Europe, ed. by O. S. M organ (N e w Y o rk , 1933); and K . A . Doukas, “ A g rarian R efo rm in G reece,” American Jour nal of Economics and Sociology, V (O ctober, 1945), 79-92.
T h e standard study o f G re e k industrial developm ent is b y G . Anastasopoulos, Historia tes Hellenikes biomechanias [History o f Greek Industry] (A thens, 1948, 3 vo ls.). See also Report on Economic and Commercial Conditions in Greece (London, 1938); and S. R . Jordan, Report on Economic and Commercial Conditions in Greece (L o n d o n , 1937). T h e standard w o rk on G re e k labor is by the M arxist historian G . K . Kordatos, Historia tou Hellenikou ergatikou kinematos fHistory o f the Greek Working Class Movement] (A th en s, 1931-1932, 2 v o ls ), w h ich reaches 1918. F o r the later years see the section on the G re e k C o m munist party in K h r. Kabakchiev, B. Boshkovich, and Ch. D . Vatis, Kommunisticheskie partii balkanskikh stran [Communist Parties of the Balkan Countries] (M o s c o w , 1 9 3 0 ); and the official history issued by the C e n tra l C o m m ittee o f the G reek Com m unist party: Deka chronia agones 1935-1945 [Ten Years of Struggle 1935-1945] (Athens, 1945). L ab o r legislation and governm ent-trade union rela tions are analyzed in Labour Problems in Greece (G e n e v a , 1949). F in a lly , there is the revealing study sponsored by the R o ck e fe lle r F o u n d a tio n : L . G . A llb au g h , Crete: A Case Study of an Underdeveloped Area (Prin ceton , N . J., 1953), w hich analyzes in detail industry, com m erce, agriculture, and governm ent as w ell as social conditions, and thereby sheds light on the general problem o f G reece as w ell as that o f Crete. O n social developm ents see the relevant chapters in the Pepelasis study listed above and also D orothy Lee, “ G reece,” in Cultural Patterns and Technical Change, ed. by M argaret M ead (N e w Y o rk , 1952). On education in Greece, the best and most recent study is by K . D . A n to n a k a k i, Greek Education ( N e w Y o r k , 1955), w hich has a good bibliography. A convenient and excellent sum m ary of literature and the arts in m odern G re e ce is available in the Encyclopedia A m eri cana, “ G reece— M odern C u lture” by E . P . and B. M . Panagopoulos. T h e standard histo ry o f literature, w h ich is also a history o f intellectual developm ent, is by K . T h . D im aras, lstoria tes Neoellenikes Logotechnias [History o f Modern Greek Lit erature] (A th e n s, 1948-1949, 2 v o ls .). A n anthology o f m odern G re e k poetry in English translation is by R ae D alven, Modern Greek Poetry (N e w Y o rk , 1949). See also “ Perspective of G reece,” ' Atlantic Monthly Supplement, June, 1955, w h ich contains a bibliography o f w orks in English on m odern G re e k lit erature. T h e standard w o rk on the language problem is b y M . A . T ria ntap h yllid es, Neoellenike Grammatike [Modern Greek Grammar] (A th en s, 1938), w hich is w ritten from the vernacular view point and contains a lengthy historical introduc tion w ith specimens o f the language from the earliest inscriptions down to the present-day colloquial. See also on this matter J. M . R ife, “ T h e Language Situ a tion in G ree ce T o d a y ,” Classical Journal, X X X V I I (N o ve m b e r, 1941), 65-72; “ G reek Literary L ife ,” The Times Literary Supplement, August 5, 1955, p. xxi;, and the two articles by W . R . Loader, “ Spoken G reek,” Greece and Rome, X I I I (Ju n e , 1944), 73-80, and “ Purified or Po p u lar? A N ote on the Language Pro b lem of M odern G reece,” Greece and Rome, X I X (O ctober, 1950), 116-122.


938 Bibliography
35. Rumania
B y fa r the most im po rtant study o f R u m a n ia in the in terw ar years is by H . L . Roberts, Rumania: Political Problems o f an Agrarian State (N e w H aven , C o n n ., 1 9 5 1 ). T h is w o rk , upon w h ich this chapter is largely based, provides a penetrating analysis o f econom ic and p o litical developm ents as m anifestations of the adjustm ent o f a self-sufficient ag rarian society to the intrusion o f W estern in dustrial civilization. F o r the W o rld W a r I period, see N . Basilescu, La Roumanie dans la guerre et dans la paix (P a ris , 1919-1923, 2 v o ls .); G . A n tip a, L ’occupation ennemie de la Roumanie et ses conséquences économiques et sociales (P a ris, 19 2 9 ); and G . Ionescu-Sisesti, L ’agriculture de la Roumanie pendant la guerre ( N e w H a v e n , C on n., 1 92 9). F o r the in terw ar years there are, in addition to Roberts, J. S. Roucek, Contemporary Roumania and Her Problems (Stanford, C a lif., 1 9 3 2 ), w h ich contains useful data but is w eak on interpretation; G . C . Logio, Rumania: Its History, Politics and Economics (M anchester, Eng., 1932), w h ich is va lu ab le fo r the author’s experiences; and the excellent chapter on Rum anian interw ar politics in H . Seton-Watson, Eastern Europe between the Wars, 1918-1941 (C am b rid g e, En g ., 1945). F o r econom ic developm ents there is, in addition to Roberts, D . M itra n y , The Land & the Peasant in Rumania (N e w H a v e n , C onn., 193 0), the definitive study o f the land reform s and their repercussions. A n o th e r im portan t source is the Departm ent o f Overseas T rade (L o n d o n ), w hich published annual reports fro m 1919 to 1936 (except 1920 and 1925) on econom ic conditions in R u m an ia. F o r various aspects o f R um an ian econom ic developm ent sec X . N etta, La dette publique de l’état roumain (P a ris, 193 5); A . Pantazi, Contribution à l’histoire monétaire de la Roumanie (P a ris, 193 4); P . G . Razus, Les entreprises écono miques de l’état (P a ris, 1 9 3 9 ); A . P . Iancoulesco, Les richesses minières de la nouvelle Roumanie (P a ris , 192 8); and C . N . Jo rd an , The Romanian Oil Indus try ( N e w Y o r k , 1945). T h e im portant R um an ian sociological studies o f peasant life are described by P . E . M osely, “ T he Sociological School o f D im itrie G u sti,” Sociological Review, X X V I I I (A p r il, 1936), 149-165. See also J . Berkow itz, La question des Israélites en Roumanie (P a ris, 192 3); H . Schuster, Die Judenfrage in Rumänien (Leip zig , 1939); L . Feraru , The Development of Rumanian Poetry (N e w Y o rk , 1929); and G . Oprescu, Roumanian A rt from 1800 to Our Days (M alm ö , Sweden, 1935).
36. Albania
F o r bibliographies and general histories o f A lb a n ia , see the bibliography above for Chapter 27. T o this should be added two general histories of A lb an ia in the twentieth cen tu ry: V . R obinson, Albania’s Road to Freedom (L o n d o n , 1941), and S. Skendi, “ The Political Evolution of Albania, 1912-1944” (N e w Y o rk , M id-European Studies Center o f the N atio nal Com m ittee for a Free E u ro p e , M im eo g rap h ed Series, M a rc h 8, 1 9 5 4 ). T h e d iplom atic history o f the period is surveyed in the unpublished d octoral dissertation by G . M . Self, “ F o r eign R elations o f A lb a n ia ” (U n iv e rs ity of Chicago, 1943), w hich covers the


Bibliography 939
period 1912 to 1939. T h is is a useful study, though tending at tim es to accept uncritically the A lb an ian viewpoint. T h e period 1912 to 1914 is w ell treated by J . Sw ire, Albania: The Rise of a Kingdom (Lo n d o n , 1939), who makes use of m aterials provided by Prince W illia m and other participants. S w ire ’s view p o in t is strongly pro-A lb anian and pro-Italian, and an ti-G reek and anti-Yugoslav. A n o th e r p ro-A lb anian accou nt is by M a ry E . D urham , The Struggle for Scutari (Lo n d o n , 1914), the author being an En g lish w o m an w h o w as engaged in re lie f w o rk in northern A lb a n ia fro m 1911 to 1913. T h e d ip lo m acy o f these p rew a r years is considered m ost th oro ug hly in the unpublished d o cto ral dissertation by C . R . Sa lit, “ A lb a n ia as an In d e x to European Pre-W ar D iplom acy” (H a rva rd University, 1938). T h e d ip lo m acy o f the W o rld W a r I period and the Peace C o n feren ce is treated in S e lf’s dissertation listed above, and in the thorough and va lu ab le study by E . P. Stickney, Southern Albania or Northern Epirus in European Interna tional Aßairs, 1912-1923 (Stanford, C alif., 1926). T he latter study provides an excellent bibliography, p articu larly of the volum inous propaganda m aterials issued during the Peace Conference. F o r domestic developments during this period, see S w ire ’s history and, above all, the valuab le reports o f the Leag u e C o m m is sion published in the League o f Nations Official Journal, especially I I I , 491-510, and I V , 572-582. See also the reports o f th e 'L e a g u e ’s fin an cial adviser to A l bania in the Official Journal, I V , 162-168, 727-728, 761-763. Z o g ’s rule during the in terw ar years is presented sym p ath etically by Sw ire. T he views and activities o f the anti-Zog A lb an ian organization in the U n ite d States are described in The Albanian Struggle in the Old World and the New. Com piled and W ritten by M em bers of the Federal W riters’ Project of the W o rk s Progress Adm inistration of Massachusetts (Boston, 1939). Considerable data on all aspects o f A lb a n ia ’s developm ent are to be found in the w eek ly B ritish periodical The Near East and India. See also “ A lb an ia: T he Problem o f the A d ria tic ,” Foreign Policy Reports, V I I I ( Jlin e 8, 1932), 80-86. F o r the Italian invasion o f A lb a n ia , see, in addition to S e lf’s dissertation, Ciano’s Hidden Diary 1937-1938 (N e w Y o rk , 1953) and The Ciano Diaries 1939-1943 (N e w Y o rk , 1946). T h e Italian s understandably have published the best w orks on A lb a n ia ’s econom ic developm ent, outstanding being G . Lo ren zo n i, La questione agraria albanese (B a r i, 1930) and A . B ald a cci, L ’Albania (R o m e , 193 0), the latter w o rk em phasizing econom ic matters. M o re up-to-date is D . Z a va la n i, Die landwirt schaftlichen Verhältnisse Albaniens (B e rlin , 1938). Excellent surveys of all aspects o f A lb a n ia ’s e co n o m y are availab le in the reports o f the A m e ric a n rep resentatives: M . Blake, “ Econom ic Conditions in A lb an ia,” Commerce Reports Issued by the Bureau o f Foreign and Domestic .Commerce·, United States Depart ment of Commerce, no. 83, (A p r il 2, 1923), pp. 1-10; and J. C . H olm es and R . R . Jo rd a n , “ E c o n o m ic D evelopm ents in A lb a n ia ,” ibid., no. 32 (A u g u s t 1.1, 1 9 3 0 ), pp. 372-374. A valu ab le account o f health conditions is given in the re p ort o f D r. W . E . H a ig h , w h o was in A lb a n ia in 1923 and 1924 fo r the Leag u e o f N ations: “ M a la ria in A lb a n ia ” (G e n e va , League of N ations H ealth O rganiza tion, M im eographed, C. H . 272, February, 1925). Social organization and customs have been analyzed in several excellent w orks, these being in chron olog ical o rd er: J . G . von H a h n , Albanesische Studien (Je n a , 1854), und Griechische und albanesische Märchen (Leip z ig , 1864); A .


940 Bibliography
D ozon, Contes albanais (P a ris , 1 8 8 1 ); M a r y E . D u rh am , High Albania (L o n d o n , 1909), and Some Tribal Origins, Laws and Customs o f the Balkans (Lo n d o n , 1 9 2 8 ); and M . H as lu ck, The Unwritten Law in Albania (C a m b rid g e, E n g ., 1954).
37. Diplomatic Developments
T h e re is no full-length study o f B a lk a n d ip lo m acy between the wars. Developm ents m ay be traced in the yearly Survey of International Affairs, edited by A rn o ld J. Toynbee and published by the R o yal Institute o f International A f fairs since 1925. See also the yearly Documents on International Affairs published under the same auspices. T h e period afte r 1934 is analyzed in detail in J . A . Lukacs, The Great Powers and Eastern Europe (N e w Y o rk , 1953). Briefer p u r veys o f interw ar B alkan diplom acy are to be found in L . S. Stavrianos, Balkan Federation: A History o f the M ovement toward Balkan Unity in Modern Times (N o rth a m p to n , M ass., 1944), chs. 8, 9; H . Seton-W atson, Eastern Europe between the Wars 1918-194! (C am b rid g e, Eng., 1946), chs. 8-10; E . B ark e r, Macedonia: Its Place in Balkan Power Politics (Lo n d o n , 1950), ch. 2; South-Eastern Europe: A Political and Economic Survey (Lo n d o n , 1939), chs. 2-3; and the excellent interpretive essay by H . L . Roberts, “ International Relations between the W a rs,” in Challenge in Eastern Europe, ed. by C . E . B la c k (N e w B ru n sw ick , N . J., 1954), ch. 9. T h e B alkan conferences and entente are considered in the follow ing w ork s: A . P. Papanastassiou, Vers I’union balkanique (P a ris , 193 4); N . J . Padelford, Peace in the Balkans: The M ovem ent towards International Organization in the Balkans (N e w Y o rk , 1935); R. J. K ern cr and H. N . H ow ard, The Balkan Conferences and the Balkan Entente 1930—1935 (B e rk e le y , C a lif., 1936); T . I. Geshkoff, Balkan Union: A Road to Peace in Southeastern Europe (N e w Y o rk , 1940); and Stavrianos, cited above, the latter w ork being the only one tracing inter-Balkau relations since the eighteenth century. See also two journals inspired by the Balkan federation m ovem ent: Les Balkans (Athens, October, 1930-1939), and Revue Internationale des etudes balkaniques (Belgrade, 1934-1940).
T h e history o f G e rm a n ascendancy in the B alk an s in the late 1930’s is inseparable from the general Eu ro p ean diplom atic history. Bibliographies for specific events such as the Anschluss and the M u n ich A greem ent are to be fo u n d in L u k a c s cited above. N o te w o rth y is the fo llo w in g study based on official Y u g o s la v sources: J . B. H optner, “ Y u g o s la via as N e u tralist: 1937,” Journal of Central European Affairs, X V I (Ju ly , 1956), 156-176. T he rise of G erm an in fluence in the Balkan s is w ell analyzed in Survey of International Affairs 19391946: The World in March 1939, ed. by A rn o ld T oynbee and F . T . AshtonG w a tk in (Lo n d o n , 1952), pp. 206-292; and m ore briefly in H . Seton-Watson, The East European Revolution (L o n d o n , 1950), ch. 3.
F o r the Germ an-Russian Nonaggression Pa ct o f 1939, the basic source is the docu m en tary collection by R . J . Sontag and J . S. Bed d ie, Nazi-Soviet R e lations 1939-1941 (N e w Y o rk , 1948). T he best and most recent analysis of the hectic d ip lo m acy between 1939 and 1941 is by G . L . W e in b erg , Germany and the Soviet Union 1939-1941 (Leid en , 1954). See also A . Rossi, The RussoGerman Alliance August 1939-June 1941 (Boston, 1951); D . D allin , Soviet For eign Policy 1939-1942 (N e w H a v e n , C o n n ., 1 9 4 2 ); the first part o f G . G a fc n cu , Prelude to the Russian Campaign, from the Moscow Pact (August 21, 1937) to


Bibliography 941
the Opening of Hostilities in Russia (June 22, 1941) (Lo n d o n , 194 5); and the same author’s Last Days of Europe: A Diplomatic Journey in 1939 (N e w H a ve n , Conn., 1948). T h e dism em berm ent o f R u m a n ia is described in the second part o f G a fe n c u ’s Prelude to the Russian Campaign, cited above; A . H illg ru b er, Hitler, König Carol und Marschall Antonescu: die deutsch-rumänischen Beziehungen, 1938-1944 (W iesbaden, 1954); and the two articles by P . E . M osely: “ Is Bessara bia N e x t?” Foreign Affairs, X V I1 1 (A p ril, 1940), 557-562, and “ T ran sylvan ia Partitioned,” Foreign Affairs, X I X (O ctober, 1940), 237-244. The diplom atic background of the Italian invasion of G reece on October 28, 1940, is given in R o y a l M in is try fo r Fo re ig n A ffairs, Greek White Book: Italy’s Aggression against Greece: Diplomatic Documents (A th en s, 1940). T he unprovoked aggression thesis o f this collection is supported by postw ar Ita lia n accounts: The Ciano Diaries, 1939-1943 (N e w Y o r k , 1 9 4 6 ); the account o f the Ita lia n m inister in A thens, E . G razzi, 11 principio della fine (R o m e , 1 9 4 5 ); and of the m ilitary attache, L . M o n d in i, Prologo del conflitto Italo-Greco (R o m e , 1945). T h e most im portant secondary accounts o f the diplom acy of the Ita lia n invasion are by E . S. K . Sch ram m (v o n T h a d d e n ), Griechenland und die Gross mächte im zweiten Weltkrieg (W iesbaden, 1955); and E . W iskem ann, The RomeAxis (N e w Y o rk , 1949), ch. 14. See also P . Pipinelis, Historia tes exoterikes politikes tes Hellados, 1923—1941 [History o f the Foreign Policy of Greece, 1923-1941] (Athens, 1948, not consulted). F o r the m ilita ry aspects o f the Italo - G reek W a r , see the accounts o f the riv a l com m anders: A . Papagos, Ho polemos tes Hellados 1940-41 [The War of Greece 1940-4I\ (N e w Yo rk, 1941); U . Cavallero, Commando Supremo (B o logna, 1 9 4 8 ); S. V isco n ti Prasca, to ho aggredito la Grecia (M ila n , 1 9 4 6 ); and P . Badoglio, L ’ltalia nella seconda guerra mondiale (M ila n , 1946). N o tew o rth y also are the strongly critical accounts o f the G reek conduct of the w ar by certain G reek generals: N . Gregoriades, Ho pankosmios polemos 1939-1945: A. Hellenoitalo-germanikos polemos 1940-41 [The World War 1939-1945: I. Greek-ItalianGerman War 1940-41] (A th en s, 1 9 4 5 ); and D . Katheniotes, A i kyrioterai strategikai phaseis tou polemou 1940-1941 [The Main Strategic Phases of the War 1940-1941] (Athens, 1946). F o r the circum stances of the G erm an invasion o f the Balkans in 1941, see the w orks cited above co ncerning the G erm an-R u ssian pact, and especially W einb erg’s study, w hich has been follow ed closely for this chapter. W einb erg’s thesis is criticized and defended in the follow in g exchange: G . L . W ein b erg , “ D e r deutsche Entschluss zum A ng riff auf die Sowjetunion,” Vierteljahrshefte für Zeit geschichte, I (O ctober, 1930), 301-318; and H .-G . Seraphim and A . H illgruber, “ H itle rs Entsch luss zum A n g riff auf Russland,·” in the same journ al, I I ( Ju ly , 1954), 241-254. See also W . L . Lan ger and S. E . Gleason, The Undeclared War 1940-1941 ( N e w Y o r k , 1 95 3 ), chs. 5, 13, w h ich reveals ad m irab ly the interrela tionship between events in the B alk a n s and other parts o f E u ro p e as w ell as A sia . F o r Y u g o s la via ’s involvem ent, see C . F o tic h , The War We Lost (N e w Y o rk , 1948); R . L . Knejevitch, “ Prin ce Paul, H itle r and Salon ika,” International Affairs, X X V I I (Jan u ary, 1951), 38-44, and the reply by D. Tsvetkovich, “ Prince Paul, H itler and Salonika,” International Affairs, X X V I I (O ctober, 1951), 463-469. F o r T u r k e y ’s role ui this time, see I I . N . H o w ard , “ G e rm a n y , the Soviet U n io n and T u r k e y during W o r l d W a r II,” Department o f State Bulletin,^J u l y 18, 1948;


942 Bibliography
C . A c ik a lin , “ T u r k e y ’s In tern ation al R elatio n s,” International Affairs, X X I I I (O ctober, 1947), 477-491; and E . R . Vere-Hodge, Turkish Foreign Policy 19181950 (L o n d o n , 1 9 5 1 ). G re e c e ’s role, dip lom atic as w ell as m ilita ry, is m ade clear by W in sto n C h u rch ill, The Second World War: The Grand Alliance (Boston, 1 95 0), chs. 1, 6, 9, 12, 15, 16. See also F ie ld M a rs h a l L o rd W ils o n o f L ib y a , Eight Years Overseas 1939-47 (Lo n d o n , 1950); S ir Fra n cis D e Guingand, Op eration Victory (Lo n d o n , 1947); G . Lon g , Australia in the War o f 1939-45 (L o n d o n , 1 9 5 4 ); C. B u c k le y , Greece and Crete, 1941 (L o n d o n , 1 9 5 3 ); and R . de B elot, The Struggle for the Mediterranean 1939—1945 (P rin ce to n , N . J., 1952). F in a lly , much m aterial m ay be found in the fourteen volum es and ap pendices of the Nurem berg transcript, International M ilita ry Tribunal, Nazi Con spiracy and Aggression (W ashing ton, D . C ., 1947); and in V ols. X I I - X I V o f the subsequent Trials of War Criminals before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals (W a s h in g to n , D . C ., 1949-1953, 15 v o ls .).
38. Occupation, Resistance, and Liberation
T h e best general surveys o f the B a lk a n countries under A x is rule are to be found in R . L . W o lff, The Balkans in Our Time (C am b rid g e, M ass., 1 95 6), ch. 8; H . Seton-Watson, The East European Revolution (Lo n d o n , 1950), chs. 4—7; and in A rn o ld T o yn b ee and V . M . T oynbee, eds., Survey of International Affairs 1939-1946: Hitler’s Europe (L o n d o n , 1954), P t. V I . A good analysis of the patterns o f occupatio n and resistance is given by J . A m e ry , “ O f R esistance,” Nineteenth Century, C X L V (M a rch , 1949), 138-149. T he m ilitary characteris tics o f the B alk an resistance struggle are described from different view points by A . Papagos, “ G u e rrilla W a rfa re ,” Foreign Affairs, X X X (Ja n u a ry , 1952), 215230; and D . K ved er, “ T errito rial W a r : T he N e w Concept of Resistance,” Foreign Affairs, X X X I I (O ctober, 1953), 91-108. F e w sources are available concerning Rum ania during W o rld W a r I I because there were no resistance exploits to be recounted and no A llie d agents to leave accounts. A n “ o fficial” pro-Com m unist and pro-Soviet version is given in B. M . K olker, “ Natsionalno-osvoboditelinaia borba v R um yn ii v 1941-1944 G o d a kh ,” [“ T he W a r o f N ational Lib eration in R um ania 1941-1944,” ] Voprosy Istorii, no. 8 (A ugust, 1954), pp. 79-85. Docum ents concerning the history of the Rum an ian Com m unist party have been published by the postwar regim e: Documente din lstoria Partidului Muncitoresc din Romania, 1917-1922 (B u c h a rest, 1953); Documente din lstoria Partidului Communist din Romania, 19231928 (Bucharest, 1953); and Documente din lstoria Partidului Muncitoresc din Romania (B u ch a re st, 1 95 1 ), the latter w o rk covering the years 1917 to 1944. O n e o f the few solid w orks on R u m a n ia during the w a r years is by A . H illg ru b e r, Hitler, König Carol und Marschall Antonescu: die deutsch-rumänischen Bezie hungen, 1938-1944 (W iesbaden, 1954). On the same subject considerable m a terial is to be found in the m em oirs o f the c h ie f interpreter in the G e rm a n F o r eign Office at that tim e: P. Schm idt, Statist auf diplomatischer Bühne, 1923-45 (B o n n , 1949). See also the laudatory biography by H . Laeuen, Marschall A n tonescu (Essen, 1943). T he agrarian developments during the w ar are analyzed by H . L . Roberts, Rumania: Political Problems of an Agrarian State (N e w H aven , C o n n ., 1 9 5 1 ). P o s tw a r developm ents are sum m arized in the R oberts study, and are described at length b y an inform ed and very critical correspondent: R . H .


Bibliography 943
M arkham , Rumania under the Soviet Yoke (Boston, 1949). T he same critical view p o in t is shared by tw o observers, R . Bishop and E . S. C rayfield , Russia Astride the Balkans (L o n d o n , 1 94 9). A n enthusiastic pro-Com m unist account is given by J. Lindsay and M . Cornforth, Rumanian Summer (Lo n do n , 1953). The govern m ent view point is also set forth in Trial o f the Former National Peasant Party Leaders Maniu, Mihalache . . . after the Shorthand Notes (Bucharest, 1947). A considerable number o f “ official” accounts of Bulgaria during W o rld W a r I I and of the resistance movem ent have been published under the postwar Com m unist regime. Som e o f these are analyzed by L . V a le v , “ K n ig i о natsionalnoosvoboditel nom dvizhenii v Bolgarii v period vtoroi m irovoi voiny,” [“ Books on the N ational Liberation M ovem ent in Bulgaria D uring the Second W o rld W a r ,” ] Voprosy lstorii, no. 12 (D ece m b e r, 1 9 5 0 ), pp. 134-138. See also N . G o rn en ski, “ Pregled na Partizanskite D eiistviia u nas prez 1941-1943 g.,” [“ R e vie w o f the A ctivitie s o f O u r Partisans 1941-1943,” ] Izvestiia na Instituta za BUlgarska Istoriia, nos. 3-4 (So fia, 1 9 5 1 ), pp. 181-230, T h e latter account reveals c le a rly the difficulties under w hich the Bulgarian guerrillas operated and the hit-and-run na ture o f their operations. A briefer survey o f guerrilla activities is given in ch. 1 o f F . T . Konstantinov, Bolgariia na putik sotsializma [Bulgaria on the Road to Socialism] (M oscow , 1953). A m ong W estern accounts the most useful are by E . B arker, Macedonia: Its Place in Balkan Power Politics (L o n d o n , 1950), w h ich describes Bu lg aria n p o licy in the occupied territories; I. T . Sanders, Balkan Village (Le x in g to n , K y ., 1949), w hich analyzes events before and during the w ar in the village of Dragalevtsy near Sofia; and There Is a Spirit in Europe: A M emoir o f Frank Thom p son (Lo n d o n , 1948), w hich concerns a British officer w ho lost his life fighting w ith the Bulgarian Partisans, and provides an excellent picture of the type of struggle conducted by the bands. O fficial and hostile accounts o f postwar devel opments in B u lg a ria are available in The Trial of Nikola D. Petkov (So fia, 1 9 4 7 ); and M . Padev, Dimitrov Wastes N o Bullets (Lo n d o n , 1948). T he violent and revolutionary course of Yugoslav history during W o rld W a r I I has evoked a great volum e o f literature, much o f it as controversial as the events it describes. T he flood o f Yugoslav writings on the Com m unist party before the w a r and on the Pa rtisa n m ovem ent during the w a r years is co n ven ien tly sum marized in the bibliographical article by I. A vaku m o vic, “ Literature on the M a rx ist M ovem ent in Yugoslavia (18 72 -19 44 ),” Journal of Central European Affairs, X V (A p ril, 1955), 66-70. T he most im portant “ official” sources available in En g lish are the biography Tito (N e w Y o r k , 1953) by one o f T ito ’s close associates, V . D edijer; the official record o f the M ih ailo vich trial, The Trial of DragoljubDrazha Mihailovich (Belg rad e, 194 6); and Josip Bro z T ito ’s Report Delivered at the V Congress o f the Communist Party o f ■Yugoslavia (Belgrad e, 1948).
T h e M ih a ilo v ic h cause is strongly defended by D . M a rtin , A lly Betrayed: The Uncensored Story of Tito and Mihailovich (N e w Y o rk , 1946); by the Y u g o slav am bassador to W ashington, C . Fo titch , The War We Lost: Yugoslavia’s Trag edy and the Failure o f the West (N e w Y o r k , 194 8); and in K in g P e te r’s auto biography, A King’s Heritage ( N e w Y o r k , 195 4). See also E . Y o u ric h itc h , Le proces Tito-Mihailovitch (P a r is , 1 9 5 0 ), the author, a form er C hetnik, is v e ry critical o f the Partisans,
Im portant accounts have been written by m em bers of the British military m issions in Y u g o s la v ia : th e h e a d o f die British m ission to T ito , Ij. M a c le a n , East


944 Bibliography
ern Approaches (L o n d o n , 194 9); a liaison officer in H ungarian-occupied territory, B . D avid so n, Partisan Picture (B e d fo rd , E n g ., 1 9 4 6 ); a liaison officer w ith C h etn ik units in northeast Serbia, J . Rotham , Miss Fire: The Chronicle of a British Mission to Mihailovich, 1943—1944 (L o n d o n , 1 9 4 6 ); a liaison officer to the Partisans in Slovenia, W . Jones, Twelve M onths with Tito’s Partisans (B e d fo rd , En g ., 1 94 6); a m ember o f the mission to Tito, S. Clissold, Whirlwind: A n Account of Marshal Tito’s Rise to Power (L o n d o n , 1 9 4 9 ); a liaison officer to the C h etn iks in Serbia in 1941-1942, C . Law rence, Irregular Adventure (Lo n d o n , 1947). A m o n g the num erous secondary accounts, the most im portant proPartisan works are by K . Zilliacus, Tito o f Yugoslavia (Lo n d o n , 1952), and L . A d a m ic , The Eagle and the Roots ( N e w Y o r k , 1952). A nti-T ito accounts are provided by A . N . D rag n ich , Tito’s Promised Land: Yugoslavia (N e w Bru n sw ick, N . J., 1 9 5 4 ); and by R . H . M a rk h am , Tito’s Imperial Communism (C h a p e l H ill, N . C., 1947). M o re balanced versions m ay be found in H . Seton-Watson, The East European Revolution (London, 1950), ch. 6; W . S. V ucinich, “ The Second W o rld W a r and Beyo n d ,” in Yugoslavia, ed. by R . J. K e rn e r (Berk eley, C alif., 1949), ch. 20; and R. L . W olff, “ M ih ailo vich : A Post-M ortem ,” Atlantic, C L X X V I I I (O cto b er, 194 6), 43-49. See the reply to the latter article by C o n stantin F o titc h in the D ecem ber, 1946, issue o f the Atlantic, and W o lf f’s response in the same issue. T h e im pact o f the w a r and the resistance struggle upon village life and the peasant m ind is analyzed by R . T ro u to n , Peasant Renaissance in Yugoslavia 1900-1950 (Lo n d o n , 1952), Bk. III. F o r the c ritical split between T ito and the K re m lin in 1948 see The Soviet-Yugoslav Dispute (London , 1948); H . F . Arm strong, Tito and Goliath ( N e w Y o r k , 1 9 5 1 ); and A . B . U la m , Titoism and the Cominform (C am b ridg e, Mass., 1952). Bibliographies o f materials on occupied G reece are provided by L . S. Stavrianos and E . P . Panagopoulos, “ Present-Day Greece,” Journal of Modern History, X X (Ju n e , 1948), 149-158; and by F . A . Spencer, War and Postwar Greece: A n Analysis Based on Greek Writings (W ashington, D. C., L ib rary of Congress, European A ffairs Division, 1952). W o rk s on occupied Greece reflect the controversial nature of their sub ject. Secondary studies representing divergent view points are by W . H . M c N e ill, The Greek Dilemma: The War and Aftermath (N e w Y o rk, 1947); and L . S. Stavrianos, Greece: American Dilemma and Opportunity (Chicago, 1952). F o r divergent view points o f B ritish officers in occupied G reece, see C . M . W o odh ou se, Apple of Discord: A Survey o f Recent Greek Politics in Their International Set ting (Lo n d o n , 1948); and C . W . M yers, Greek Entanglement (Lo n d o n , 1955). Com pare also the accounts of one o f the E D E S leaders, K . Pyrom aglou, He ethnike antistasis [The National Resistance] (A th en s, 1 9 4 7 ); and o f the E L A S m ilitary leader, S. Saraphis, Ho ELAS [ELAS] (Athens, 1946).. T he program and ideology o f the E A M are presented in the famous and w id e ly distributed booklet by D . G lenos, Ti einai kai ti thelei to EAM ? [What Is the E A M and What Are Its Aims?] (A thens, 1942). T he most complete account o f the resistance struggle is given in the Saraphis book listed above, w h ich has been translated in abridged form as S. Sarafis, Greek Resistance Army: The Story of E L A S (Lo n d o n , 1951). A n invaluable docum entary source for the or ganization o f the E A M and the adm inistration o f its liberated territories is the Archeio ethnikes antistasis [Archives o f National Resistance] (A thens, 1946).


Bibliography 945
T w o num bers o f this pu blication, w h ich appeared in A p r il and A ugust, 1946, together provide 104 pages o f basic docu m en tary m aterial. E q u a lly va lu ab le is D . Zepos, Laike dikaiosyne eis tas eleutheras periochas tes ypo katochen Hellados [People's Justice in the Liberated Territories o f Occupied Greece] (A thens, 1945), a careful technical study by a law yer o f the adm inistrative and legal system in troduced b y the E A M in its liberated territories. A conven ient analysis and su rvey o f the organization and ad m inistrative policies o f the E A M is given in L . S. Stavrianos, “ T he G re e k N ational Liberation F ro n t ( E A M ) : A Study in Resistance Organization and A dm inistration,” Journal of Modern History, X X I V (M a rch , 1952), 42-55. T h e best picture o f A lb a n ia during W o r ld W a r II is given by the head of a B ritish mission to the Ballist forces: J . A m e ry , Sons o f the Eagle: A Study in Guerilla War (L o n d o n , 1948). M o re than a story o f personal adventure, it an alyzes with considerable insight the historical and social background in A lb a n ia as w ell as the general characteristics and problem s o f B a lk a n gu errilla w arfare. A British officer w ith the A lb anian Partisans has also left an account: Brigadier E d m u n d “ T ro tsky” D avies, Illyrian Venture: The Story of the British Military Mission to Enemy-Occupied Albania 1943—44 (Lo n d o n , 1952), but this is not as inform ative as the A m e ry w ork because the author was captured before he was able to operate w idely. See also the novel by A n th o n y Q u ayle, Eight Hours from England (Lo n d o n , 1945), based on personal experiences in occupied A lban ia. U se fu l secondary accounts are availab le in W . S. V u c in ic h , “ C o m m u n ism G a in s in A lb an ia,” Current History, X X I (O ctober, 1951), 212-219; and in S. Skendi, “ A lb a n ia w ith in the S la v O rb it: A d v e n t to P o w e r of the C om m unist P a r ty ,” Po litical Science Quarterly, L X I I I (Ju n e , 1948), 257-274. F in a lly , see the im p o r tant account by V . Dedijer, Jugoslovensko-albanski odnosi ( 1939-1948) [Yugoslav-Albanian Relations ( 1939-1948) ] (Belg rad e, 1949), w hich is based on official Y u g o slav m aterials and statistics, describes the role o f the Y u g o slav C o m m unist party in uniting the A lb an ian party, and claim s that after the w a r Y u g o slavia gave m ore to A lb a n ia than she received. Som e o f the m aterials in this book have been republished by the same author in “ A lb a n ia : So vie t Pawn·,” Foreign Affairs, X X X (O ctober, 1951), 103-111.
39. Hidden War, Cold War, and Peace Settlement
Because o f the m any controversies involved, a good deal o f m aterial has appeared concerning p ost-W orld W a r I I developments in the Balkans and also the inter-Allied conflicts during the w ar years. T h e most recent and detailed study is b y R . L . W o lff, The Balkans in Our Time (C am b rid g e, M ass., 1956). M u c h data are also available in two publications of. the R o y a l Institute o f International A ffairs: W . H . M c N e ill, America, Britain, & Russia: Their Co-Operation and Conflict 1941-1946 (Lo n d o n , 1953), and A rn o ld and V e ro n ica M . Toynbee, eds., The Realignment of Europe (Lo n d o n , 1955), the first of these works emphasizing great-power policies and the second the domestic developm ents w ithin the E u r o pean countries. H. Seton-Watson, The East European Revolution (London, 1950) is valu ab le and inform ed. O th er n otew orth y w orks dealing w ith this period are R. R. Betts, ed., Central and South East Europe 1945-1948 (Lo n d o n , 1950); J. A . Lukacs, The Great Powers A Eastern Europe (N e w Y o r k , 1953); A . G yo rg y, Governments o f Danubian Europe ( N e w Y o rk , 1949); С. E. Black, cd., Chal


946 Bibliography
lenge in Eastern Europe (N e w B ru n sw ick , N . J., 1 9 5 4 ); C . E . B la c k , ed., Read ings on Contemporary Eastern Europe (N e w Y o r k , M id - Eu ro p ean Studies Center o f the N a tio n a l C om m ittee fo r a F re e E u ro p e , In c ., 1 9 5 3 ); E . B a rk e r, Truce in the Balkans (L o n d o n , 1 9 4 8 ); and D . W a rrin e r, Revolution in Eastern Europe (London, 1950). F o r developments w ithin the B alkan countries during the w ar and post w a r years see the bibliograph y fo r the preceding chapter. H e re w e are concerned w ith great-power policies, and since the Russians do not take to the pen we must depend on A m erican and British sources which throw considerable light on R us sian actions. B y fa r the most im p ortan t B ritis h contribution is the six-volume history by W inston C h u rch ill, The Second World War (Boston, 1949-1953). M o st o f the British w orks naturally deal with developments in G reece, the most im portant o f these being Field M arshal L o rd W ilso n o f Lib y a , Eight Years Over seas 1939-1947 (L o n d o n , 195 0); S ir R egin ald Leeper, When Greek M eets Greek (Lo n d o n , 1950); C . M . W oodhouse, Apple of Discord: A Survey of Recent Greek Politics in Their International Setting (L o n d o n , 194 8); and E . C . W . M yers, Greek Entanglement (Lo n d o n , 1955). These British accounts should be balanced by E A M materials, especially the E A M White Book (N e w Y o rk , 1945); and S. Saraphis, Ho E L A S [E L A S ] (A th e n s, 1 94 6), w h ich has been translated in abridged form as Greek Resistance A rm y: The Story of E L A S (L o n d o n , 1951). D ifferent interpretations o f the origins of the battle o f Athens are presented by W . H . M c N e ill and L . S. Stavria no s in the D ecem ber, 1949, issue o f the A m er ican Slavic and East European Review. See also W . H . M c N e ill, The Greek D i lemma (Philadelphia, 1947), and L . S. Stavrianos, Greece: American Dilemma and Opportunity (Chicago, 1952).
O n the A m e ric a n side there is no counterpart to C h u rc h ill’s m assive co n tribution. A num ber o f R o o sevelt’s close associates have le ft accounts, includ ing R . E . Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins: A n Intimate History (N e w Y o rk , 1948); W . D . Le a h y , I Was There (N e w Y o rk , 1950); and E llio tt Roosevelt, A s He Saw It (N e w Y o rk , 1946). A lso, three secretaries o f state have left m emoirs; C ordell H u ll, Memoirs (N e w Y o rk , 1948, 2 v o ls .); Jam es F . Byrnes, Speaking Frankly ( N e w Y o r k , 194 7); E d w a rd R . Stettinius, Jr ., Roosevelt and the Russians: The Yalta Conference, ed. by W a lte r Johnson (N e w Y o rk , 1949). M ost recent are President H a r r y S. T ru m a n ’s M emoirs ( N e w Y o r k , 1955, 2 v o ls .), w h ich should be consulted together w ith B y rn e s ’s vo lu m e fo r the Po tsd am C o n fere nce and the fo llo w in g events, especially the T ru m a n D o ctrin e. F in a lly , there is a useful collection o f articles in R . D ennet and J . E . Johnson, Negotiating with the Rus sians (B o sto n , 1 95 1), w h ich contains the account b y M a r k Eth rid g e and C . E . B lack , “ Negotiating on the Balkans, 1945-1947.” O ther notew orthy books are J . L . Snell, ed., The Meaning of Yalta . . . (B a to n Rouge, L a ., 1956); and the docum entary collection Foreign Relations o f the United States: Diplomatic Papers: The Conferences at Malta and Yalta 1945 (W ashington, D . C., 1955).
Excellent summaries of the peacem aking at the end of W o rld W a r I I are given by C . E . B la ck , “ T he A xis Satellites and the G rea t Po w ers,” Foreign Policy Reports, X X I I ( M a y 1, 1 94 6), 38-52; W . N . H ad sel, “ T h e F iv e A x is Satellite Pea ce T reaties,” Foreign Policy Reports, X X I I I (A p r il 15, 1 94 7), 2232; and S. L o w ery, “ T he Peace Settlement in Eastern Eu ro p e,” in A rn o ld and V eronica M . Toynbee, The Realignment of Europe, cited above, pp. 332-352.




A a li Pasha, 385, 389 Abbas I, 154, 162, 164, 315 Abbassids, 133 A bdul Aziz, Sultan, 378, 389-391, 401, 417 A bdul Ham id, Sultan, 315, 382, 413 A bdul Ham id II , Sultan, 391-392, 524-528 A bdul Mejid, Sultan, 310, 315-316 Aberdeen, Lord, 322, 325-326, 327, 329, 330, 331, 335 A boukir B ay, 200 Absolutism, 612-613 Achaean League of G reek States, 20 Achaeans, 16, 17 Acheloos River, 5 Ackerm an Convention, 250, 289 Acre, siege of, 220 A dair, Robert, 209, 210 Adalia, 34 Adrianople, captured by M urad I, 43 during Ottoman period, 99 Adrianople Treaty (1713), 181; (1829), 250, 252, 290, 328, 341, 343 Aegean Islands, 181 Aehrenthal, Count Alois, 528-530, 531 Agriculture, Balkan, 420 following W orld W a r I, 593-599, 610·612 . See also under names of countries Ahm ed I, Sultan, 118, 159 Ahm ed I I I , Sultan, 179 Akhis, 37 A kritai, 37 A laric, 22-23 Albania, 496-512, 709-731 Agrarian Reform L a w (1930), 724 agriculture, 715, 727-728, 729 Anti-Fascist Council of National Libera tion, 797 autonomy, struggle for, 506-511 Committee of National Defense, 713 Communism in, 795-797 Com pany for the Econom ic Development of ( S V E A ) , 722 conquered by Simeon, 26 conquered by T urks, 64
cultural backwardness, 715 cultural development, 729 731.


Index
economy, 715, 721-722, 727-729 education in, 730-731 foreign trade, 729 frontiers, question of, 714 independence, problem s of, 715-717 independence regained (1918-1920), 711-714 independent state, 511, 709 industry, 715, 728-730 Italian occupation of, 725-726, 746, 795 larid reform , 716, 717 liberation of (1944), 797 N ational Bank of, 721-722 N ational F ront (Balli K om betar), 796797 N ational Liberation Front (L N C ), 795797 nationalism , 504-506 occupation by Axis powers, 762-763, 795-797 occupation of (1914-1918), 709-711 ■ d u rin g O ttom an period, 101 political instability, 717-720 political parties, 717 politics, 715-716 social conditions, 729-731 social problem s, 716 social stratification in, 498-500 successful against m any Turkish attacks, 54, 63-64 Tirana Pact, 723 transportation facilities, 715, 729, 730 under Turkish rule, 496-502 V atra, 506, 718 after W orld W ar I, 709 W orld W ar II, 795-797 u n d e r Zog", 7 2 1 -7 2 5 Albanian Autocephalous O rthodox Church, 506, 717 Albanian language, 496-497, 501, 505, 715 A lbanian League, 469, 502-504 A lbanian M ountains, 3 A lbanian N ational Society, 506 A lbanians, 32 as an ethnic group, 8, 11, 13, 98 religious differences am ong, 497-498, 500-501
940


950 Index
A lb ert, P rin ce, 351 A lb e rtu s M agnus, 131 A lexander, H arold, 827 Alexander, King, of Greece, 568, 586 Alexander, King, of Yugoslavia, 609, 618, 619, 624, 625, 627-629, 653, 744 assassination of, 624, 629, 653, 735, 740741 Alexander, Prince, of Bulgaria, 427-434, 516 abdication of, 433-434 Alexander I, Tsar, 210, 227-228 Bucharest T reaty signed by, 248 E rfurt Agreem ent, 209 Greek W ar of Independence and, 287288 Serbian Revolution and, 246, 247 Tilsit Treaty, 206, 207-209, 247 A lexander II, Tsar, 333, 336, 395, 425, 426, 428 assassination of, 429 A lexander III, Tsar, Bulgaria and, 429-430, 432, 434, 435, 437 death of, 440 A le x an d e r the G re at, 14, 19 Alexandrov, Todor, 650 A lexis, T sar, 151, 169 Alfieri, D ino, 752 A lgeria, overrun by France, 305 Ali Pasha, 156, 201, 205, 218-219, 283, 285, 301 A liakm on Line, 755, 757, 759 Alliance system, Balkan, first, 394-396, 402 French (1920-1927), 733-734, 741 Italian (1926-1930), 734-736 Alsace-Lorraine, 235, 394 A rnbelakia enterprise, 276, 298-299 Amiens, Peace of, 202 A natolia, 29, 34, 36, 44 Andrassy, Count, 399, 400, 404-405, 409, 449 Andrassy Note, 400 A ndrussovo, T reaty of, 170 A ngelus dynasty, 27 Angles, 23 A nkara, battle of, 45, 49 A nne, Em press, 184, 186 A nthim os, Archb.ishop o f Jerusalem , 152 Anti-Fascist Council for the N ational Lib eration of Yugoslavia, 783-784 A ntigonids, 19 Antonescu, Ion, 749, 762, 765-766, 770, 811, 830 Antonescu, Victor, 743 A paffy, M ichael, 168 Apponyi, Geraldine, 725, 726 A prilov, Vasili, 371 A rbuthnot, Charles, 204 A ristotle, 111 Arm ansperg, Count von, 293 Arm enia, 46
nationalism in, 525 Arsenije III, 240 Asen, John, 27 Asen, John, II, 28 Asen, Peter, 27
Assault and Defense of Fortified Positions, The (V au b an ), 220 A tatu rk (see K em al, M ustafa) A thens, Battle of (1944-1945), 826-828 c ap tu red by V enetians, 173 du rin g O ttom an period, 101 A ttila, 36 A ugustus III, K ing, o f P oland, 187 A urelian, E m peror, 21, 22 Ausgleich, 267, 268, 362, 378, 461, 492 A ustralia, W orld W ar I, 559, 569 A ustria, annexed by Germ any, 631, 725, 745 Bosnia-H erzegovina annexed by, 530531 breakup of the H apsburg Empire, 572573 Crimean W ar and, 332-333, 335-336 D a lm a tia obtained by, 199 intervention in the Balkans, 226, 228229 M unchengratz Agreem ent, 308 Pig W ar, 448, 455, 458, 524 Saint-G erm ain Treaty, 571, 572, 574576 S erbia’s subervience to, 4 4 9 -4 5 0 su rren d ers to T u rk s, 185 T u rk s d efeated by, 154-177, 182 w ar w ith O tto m an E m pire, 184 W orld W ar I, 556-557, 560, 562-565, 569 A ustro-G erm an alliance (1879), 426 A vars, 23, 231 Averescu, Alexander, 489, 690, 692-693 A zerbaijan, 162 A zov, 184, 185, 191 Russian conquest of, 174, 177, 178, 179 A zov, Sea of, 185
Babylonian Captivity, 40 B acon, R oger, 131 B aden, M arquis of, 154 Baffo, S ultana, 159 Baghdad, surrendered to Turks, 79, 164 Bagrianov, Ivan, 770, 811 Bairaktar, 220-221 Bakhchisarai, captured by Russia, 184 B akhchisarai T rea ty , 171 Bakunin, 465 Balaclava, in C rim ean W ar, 334 Balbo, Italo, 735 Balcescu, Nicholas, 348 Balkan C ham ber of Com merce and In dustry, 737 Balkan Conferences (1930-1933), 736738, 739


Index 951
Balkan culture, 107-112 Balkan Com munist Federation, 614 Balkan Entente, 733, 738-746 destroyed, 747-749 undermined, 740-745 Balkan Historical Institute, 737 B alkan L abor Office, 737 Balkan League, 257-258, 378, 477, 531535, 538, 540, 590, 749 Balkan Pact of Nonaggression, 737-738 Balkan Range, 3 Balkan W ars, area and population of Balkan states before and after, 540 first, 535-537, 571 second, 537-540, 590 B allads, B alkan, 108 B altadji, 180 B andit m ovem ent, growth of, 144 B arbarossa, K haireddin, 80, 125, 129 B arbary States, 217, 305 B arber, S., 823 Barthou, Louis, 629 Bartlett, Vernon, 826 Basil the Bulgar-Slayer, 15, 26, 29 B athory, Sigism und, 160, 161 B athory, Stephen, 160 Bayezid I, 44, 45-49, 50, 51, 55 B ayezid II, 6 8 -6 9 , 70, 121 Belgrade, captured by A ustrians, 173, 182 conquered by Simeon, 26 falls to Turks, 73, 174 during O ttom an period, 99 surrendered to T urks, 185 under Turkish rule, 238-239 B elgrade T rea ty , 178, 185 Benes, Eduard, 733 Benkovski, George, 379 Berchtold, Count Leopold, 531, 534, 542, 552, 553, 554 Beria, Lavrenti, 815 Berlin Congress (1878), 410-412, 426, 502, 513 afterm ath of the,.515-517 Berlin M em orandum , 400-401 Berlin T reaty (1878), 260, 393, 410-412, 426, 431, 432, 459, 502, 513 violation of the, 433 Bessarabia, 185, 340, 358, 362-363 acquired by Rum ania, 565-566, 572 . surrendered to Russia, 748 Bethm ann-H ollw eg, 552,' 554 Bibescu, George, 347 Big Business, 611 Bihach M anifesto, 784 Bilinguism, 110-111 Bismarck, Otto von, 338, 356, 394, 400, 404, 410, 411, 426, 431, 432, 434, 483, 486, 503, 515 alliance “with A ustria, 426 Black D eath, 39 40, 134 Black George ( j < v K a nm eoige, A lexander)
Black H and, 464, 465, 549-551, 625 Black Sea, 183, 185, 186, 197, 334 neutralized by Paris T reaty (1856), 336 Blagoev, D im itar, 646 Blanqui, Jerom e, 377 Blunt, Vice Consul, 384 Bogom ils, 40-41, 62, 106, 235 Bohemia, annexed by G erm any, 726 Bolshevism, 573, 611 Boniface IX, Pope, 47 Boris, K han, 24, 26, 27 Boris III, King, of Bulgaria, 440, 579, 608, 644, 651, 653-654, 735, 762, 768, 812 death of, 769-770 Bosnia-Herzegovina, 21, 62-63, 235-237 Austrian annexation of, 530-531 Bogomilism in, 235 feudalism in, 236 H apsburg occupation of (1878), 268 under H apsburg rule, 462-463 independent statehood, 235 Islam ization of, 106 M oslems in, 235-236, 397 religion in, 396-397 revolt in (1 8 7 5 ), 259, 396-399 su rren d ered to T u rk s, 185 weaknesses, 235 Botev, K hristo, 377, 378-379 Bourchier, Jam es, 438, 532 B ragadin, G eneral, 156 B rancoveanu, C o n stan tin e, 180, 181 Brankovich, G eorge, 53, 54, 61, 62 Bratianu, C onstantin, 697, 766, 830 Bratianu, D im itrie, 349 B ratianu, Ton, 487, 690, 693, 697, 767 Bratianu, lonel, 490, 494, 564 Breslau (G erm an cruiser), 557 Brest-Litovsk T reaty, 565 “ B rotherly In stru c tio n s,” 152 Broughton, Lord, 225 Broz, Josip (T ito ), 768, 773-784, 796, 797, 801-802, 808, 813-817, 820, 828829, 832-833, 843-844 Split between M oscow and, 843 Brunnow, Baron, 311, 312 Brusa, 38 Bubonic plague, 134-135 B ucharest, A cadem y of, 147 occupied by R ussians, 188 Bucharest Treaty (1812), 210, 248, 249, 250, 340; (1886), 433, 516; (1913),' 539, 540, 541, 542, 565 Buchlau A greem ent, 529-530 Buczacz T reaty, 170 Buda, besieged by H apsburg generals, 161, 173 captured by Turks, 76, 77 Budapest Convention (1877), 406, 408 Bub River, 183, 184, 192


952 Index
Bukovina, 340, 358, 362-363 surrendered to Russia, 748 Bulgaria, 27-28, 364-380, 425-447, 516517, 645-660 agriculture in, 441-444, 645, 654-656 Assembly of Notables, 426-428, 430, 434-435 autonomous state established, 425 Communism in, 658-660, 832 compulsory labor service, 647 constitution (1879), 427-430 Coup (1923), 650-651; (1934), 652 cultural development, 370-371, 657-660 dictatorship in, 652-654 economic development, 425, 441-447, 654-657 economic revival, 368 education in, 371, 658 Exarchate Church, 364, 371-375, 396, 468 falls to Turks, 44, 46, 61 Fatherland Front, 769, 770, 811-812, 832, 835 under Ferdinand, 435-441 foreign relations, 425 foreign trade, 656-657 Greek invasion of (1925), 651-652 Greek prelates, 366-368 industry in, 444, 656 Internal Macedonian Revolutionary O r ganization ( I M R O ) , 648-653 irredentist problem, 425, 592 land system in, 441-443, 647, 655 legal system, 648 Macedonia occupied by, 768, 771, 778 M ilitary League, 653 nationalism in, 368-370 N eu illy Treaty, 571, 578-580, 590, 646, 647, 649, 655, 738 Nish Treaty (1923), 649 peace treaty with (1947), 836 peasants in, 376, 441-443, 446, 647-648, 656, 657, 659-660 political parties, 646 politics in, 426-428, 439 population growth in, 442, 655 public finance, 445, 655 railroads in, 445 refugee problem, 655 revolution (1903), 454 revolutionary movement, 375-380, 401 Russia fails in, 428-430 Russian army in, 810-813 satellite of Russia, 762, 768-770, 810-813 under Simeon, 26 social development, 657-660 spoils system in, 439 Stambuliski’s regime, 646-649 territorial changes following W orld W a r I, 592
Turkish rule, 364-366 unemployment in, 658 unification of, 430-433 vassal to Serbia, 28 W orld W a r I, 557, 560-569, 578-579 after W orld W a r I, 645-660 W orld W a r II , 768-770 Zveno, 653, 769 “ Bulgarian Horrors,” 380, 401, 403, 408 Bulgarians, 24, 27 as an ethnic group, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13 Bulwer, Sir H enry, 373 Buol, Count, 333 “ Buol project,” 329 Bureaucracies, Balkan, 607 Burke, Edmund, 196 Busbecq, Ogier Ghiselin de, 81, 85, 155 Byford-Jones, W . 823 Byrnes, James F . 831, 834, 835 Byzantines, 26 Byzantium, 18, 22, 26-27 decline of, 29-32, 40 significance of, 32
Calvert, Charles J., 383 Camarda, Demeario, 502 Campo Form io Treaty, 198, 199. 206 Candia, Crete, 166, 168 Canea, Crete, captured by Turks, 165 Canning, George, 288, 289, 326 Canning, Stratford, 210, 326-331, 350 Cantacuzenus, John, 41, 43 Cantacuzenus, Theodora, 41 Cantemir, Demetrius, 180, 181, 271 Capistrano, John of, 62 Capitalism, Age of, 413-543 new, 419-424 Capodistrias, Count John, 202, 282, 291 Caratheodory Pasha, 410 C arlyle, Thomas, 331 C arol I, King, of Rum ania, 490 Carol II, King, of Rumania, 609, 612, 613, 688, 692, 693, 695-699, 706, 746, 748, 765 Carpathian Mountains, 22 Caserta Agreement, 817, 822 Caspian Sea, 183 Castlereagh, Robert S., 210, 288 Catargiu, Lascar, 487-488 Cathcart, A ., 383 Catherine the Great, Empress, 180, 184, 186, 226-227, 414 accession of, 178 Grand Plan of, 193, 197 intervention in Poland, 187 Turkish W ars (1768-1774), 187-192; (1787-1792),192-194, 198 Caulaincourt, 208-209 Cavour, Cam illo, 338 Cetinje, Montenegro, 63


Index 953
C habrinovich, N edeljko, 547, 548, 551 Charles, Em peror, 573 Charles, King, of Rum ania, 356-357, 378, 435, 483, 485, 486-488 Charles V, Holy Rom an Em peror, 74, 75, 77, 78-79, 125, 156, 160, 226 C harles V I, E m p ero r, 183 C harles X II, King, of Sweden, 179, 180 "C h au sseu rs d ’O rien t,” 213 Chelebi, Evliya, 93, 94-95, 129, 159, 163164, 165 Chelebi, Katib, 132-133 Chernishevsky, 465 Chcrnomen, 44 C hesm é, 189 C hesterton, G. K., 611 Chetniks, 773-774, 778-782 Chifük system, 138, 140-141, 142, 144, 236, 244, 366, 376, 478, 677 C hoiseul, French Foreign M inister, 190 Chosrew, G rand Vizar, 311, 312 Chotek, Countess Sophie, 546-548 C hristendom , conditions in, at end of Middle Ages, 39-41 Christianity, Balkan, during Ottom an period, 105-107 Christians, tolerated by Islam, 89-90 C hurch, Sir Richard, 213 Churchill, W inston, 558, 572, 752, 753, 755, 780, 781, 782, 801-802, 805, 807810, 813, 814-815, 817-821, 824, 825, 827-828, 831, 833, 837 Moscow Conference (1944), 818-820 Potsdam Conference, 8 33-834 Quebec Conference, 819 Y alta Conference, 829 Ciano, Count, 725-726, 744, 750, 751, 771, 786 C iano, Countess, 751 Circassians, 97 C ity-states, 17 atro p h y of, 19 C larendon, L ord, 33'4, 336, 349 C lassical Age, 17 C laudius, 21 Clemenceau, Georges, 475, 712 C lem ent, 111 Clem ent, M etropolitan, 434 Clim ate, im portance of, 6-7 C live, R obert, 188 Code Napoléon, 206, 263, 357, 486, 724 Codreanu, Corneliu, 698, 699, 765 C ognac, League of, 75 Cold W ar, 801, 828, 834 C olum bus, C hristopher, 132 Com m erce, growth of, in Balkans, 142-143 Com munism, 577, 611, 613-615 outlaw ed in Balkans, 609 See also names of countries C o m m un ist Inform atio n liurciiu, 841
Concert of Europe, 332, 336 Conciliar M ovem ent, 40 C on fed eratio n o f Bar, 187 Congress of Oppressed Nationalities, 575 Congress of Vienna, 210, 227 C onstantine, 193 C onstantine, Em peror, 22, 56, 64 C onstantine, King, of Greece, 471, 473, 542, 562, 566-568, 586-587, 609, 661 abdication of, 588, 662 C onstantinople, 6, 22 besieged by Bulgarians, 24 , besieged by Turks, 47, 52 captured by Turks, 49, 50, 56-59 D u s h a n ’s m arch on, 28 following capture by Turks, 60-61 Latin occupation of, 29-30, 34 M oham m ed I I ’s p re p ara tio n to seize, 5 5 56 Constantinople Conference (1876), 403406, 408 Constantinople T reaty (1700), 177; (1783), , 194; (1 7 9 9 ), 201; (1 9 1 5 ), 580 Convention for the Pacification of the Levant, 313 C opernicus, 132 C o rfu , 182 D eclaration of, 575 un d e r F rench rule, 199 C orfu Pact, 618 C o rin th , falls to T urks, 181 Corinth Canal, 477 Corn Law (E ngland), 227 ■Coron, 173 C o rru p tio n , in governm ent, 607-608 Corti, Count, 503 Cossacks, 169-171, 194 Council of Foreign Ministers, 834-836 C ovel, Jo h n , 141 C rete, 16, 69, 165-166, 469-471 captured by G erm any, 759-760 captured by T urks, 106, 117, 158, 168 C rim ean Peninsula, 169, 183, 184, 187 ceded to Russia, 184 Crim ean T atars, 169, 170, 177, 179, 194 Crim ean W ar, 255, 309, 310, 319-338, 343, 377 background of the, 319-320 diplom atic prelim inaries, 321-331 Greece and the, 294-295 repercussions, 337-338 Rum ania created as a result of, 339 · “Crim ean W inter,” 334 Crispi, Franceso, 497 C rnojevich, S tephen, 63 C roatia, 26, 65, 175, 232-234, 267-268, 461-464 autonomy given to, 632 Hupsburg sovereignty over, 233


954 Index
Croatia— cont. Hungarian rule, 232-233 language, 232 peasant revolts, 233 under Turkish rule, 233 World War II, 771, 772, 778 Croatians, 8, 9, 11, 12, 24, 26 historical background, 232 Crusades, 29, 40, 56, 74, 414 Culture, Balkan, 107-112, 602-608 Byzantine, 26 Cretan, 16 Greek, 16, 19, 21 Mycenaean, 16 Ottoman, 91-93 Roman, 21 Serbian, 28, 235 Slovenian, 231 Cumans, 27 Curzon, Lord, 589 Cuza, Alexander, 351-357, 378, 487-490, 698 Cyprus, 69, 157, 158 captured by Turks, 155-156 Sèvres Treaty provisions concerning, 581 Cyprus Convention, 411 Cyril, Prince, of Bulgaria, 770 Cyril V, Patriarch, 272 Czechoslovakia, 631 annexed by Germany, 745, 746 Trianon Treaty acquisitions, 577-578 World War I, 577 Czernin, Count Ottokar, 573
Dacia, 21-22 Dacians, 8, 21-22, 24, 339, 340 Dalmatia, annexed by Italy, 771 decline of, 207 Francis Joseph’s tour in, 399 French in, 206-207 obtained by Austria, 199, 228 Venetian possession, 233 Damad Ali, 181-182 Damaskinos, Archbishop, 828 Dandolo, V., 206 Danev, Stoyan, 439-440, 539 Danilevski, Nicholas, 398 Danilo I, Prince, 237 D’Annunzio, Gabrielle, 576 Danube River, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 185 Dardanelles, World War I, 557-560 Dardanelles Treaty, 209 Darwinism, social, 415 Davidovich, Ljuba, 623 Davison, R. H., 384, 388 Deakin, F. W., 801, 825 “Death of the Klepht, The,” 108 Declaration of Corfu, 575 Declaration on Liberated Europe, 829, 833 834
Dedijer, Vladimir, 773 De Gaulle, Charles, 750 Deism, 146 Deligiannes, Theodore, 467-470, 472 De Meneval, 208 Demerdjes, Constantine, 670-671, 676 Demetrius, 64 Derby, Lord, 406, 408 Descartes, René, 146 Diakos, Athanasios, 281 Dictatorships, 612-613 Diebeitsch, General, 290 Dielli (newspaper), 718 Dimitrijevich, Dragutin, 550, 551, 552, 625 Dimitrov, Georgi, 769 Dinaric Alps, 3 Diocletian, Emperor, 1, 21 Diplomatic Revolution, 186 Disraeli, 196, 401, 404-412, 426, 427, 469 Dissenters, 187, 188 Divan, 88-89 Dnieper River, 183 Dniester River, 183, 188 Dodecanese Islands, 581, 589, 592, 665666
Don River, 183 Dondukov-Korsakov, Prince Alexander, 426-427 Doria, Andrea, 79 Dorians, 16-17 Doroshenko, Peter, 170 Dositheus, Patriarch, 112 Draga, Queen, 452-454 Dragiev, Dimitar, 647 Drama, Macedonia, 44
Dreikaiserbund (see Three Emperors’ League) Drin River, 5 Dubrovnik (see Ragusa) Duckworth, Sir John, 204 Duke of York’s Greek Light Infantry, 213 Dupleix, Marquis, 188 Durazzo, 29 Dushan, Stephen, 15, 28, 41, 43, 44, 63, 96, 104, 230
East Goths, 23 “Eastern Question,” 287, 300, 322, 398 Eastern Rumelia, 425 insurrection in, 431 Economy Balkan, 14, 419-424 following World War I, 593-601 Ottoman, 124-128 See also names of countries Eden, Anthony, 755, 809, 817, 821 Education, in the Balkans, 146, 147-148, 605-607 See also names of countries Edward III, King, of Fngland, 15


Index 955
Egypt, conquered by Turks, 70, 71 intervention in Greek War of Independ ence, 286, 289 under Mehemet Ali, 303-315 Napoleon’s invasion of, 198, 200-202 Sèvres Treaty provisions concerning, 581 Elizabeth, Queen, of Rumania, 511 Elliot, Sir Henry, 405-406 Elphinstone, Admiral, 189 Eminescu, Michael, 344 Encyclopedists, 345 England, Corn Law, 227 Crimean War, 319-338 Declaration on Liberated Europe, 829 under Gladstone, 393, 394 Greek policy, 816-828 Greek resistance movement and, 802-809 Greek War of Independence and, 288289 Industrial Revolution, 227, 309, 319 intervention in the Balkans, 226-228 Lausanne Treaty, 589 Near Eastern crises and, 306-315 Peasant Revolt in, 40 Sèvres Treaty acquisitions, 581 World War I, 555, 558-560, 562, 567569 World War II, 801 Yugoslav policy, 813-816 Yugoslav resistance movement and, 801802 Enver Bey, 526, 537, 539 Epics, Balkan, 108 Epirus, 30, 31, 185 Erfurt Agreement, 209 Erivan, 183
Erotokritos, 111 Ertoghrul, 35, 36 Essad Pasha Toptani, 511-512 Ethiopia, Mussolini’s conquest of, 741 Ethnic groups, 8-13, 32 Eton, W„ 135 Euboea, 66 Eugene, Prince, of Savoy, 154, 175, 182, 184, 570 Eugénie, Empress, 351 Eugenius, Pope, 53 Euthymius, Bulgarian patriarch, 110
Fadeev, Rotislav, 398 Famagusta, Cyprus, 155-156 Federative Democratic Russian Republic, 565 Ferdinand, of Hapsburg, 75-79, 80, 233 Ferdinand, King, of Bulgaria, 418, 435441, 516-517, 522, 529, 542, 608, 644, 647 abdication of, 439, 579, 609, 645 World War I, 560 562, 564. 578-579 Ferdinand, King of Kumania, 690, 692, 693
Ferid Pasha, 502 Feudalism, in Bosnia, 236 in Slovenia, 232 Western and Ottoman, compared, 100 Finland, peace treaty with (1947), 836 Finno-Tatars, 24 Fiume, 575-576, 578, 581, 712, 713 Fiume Resolutions, 463 Flandin, Pierre-Étienne, 741 Florence, Protocol of, 541 Fodor, M. W., 826 Folk songs, Balkan, 108 Food, in the Balkans, 602-603 Food and Agriculture Organization (U N ), 681-682 Foreign powers, influence of, on the Bal kans, 14 Four Points, Vienna, 333, 335-336 Fourteen Points, Wilson’s 573, 576, 580 France, Algeria overrun by, 305 alliance system (1920-1927), 733-734, 741 Crimean War, 319-338 Dalmatia under rule of, 206 intervention in the Balkans, 228 Jacquerie in, 40 Near Eastern Crisis and, 305-315 Sèvres Treaty acquisitions, 581 World War I, 555, 558-560, 562, 567569 Franchet d’Esperey, 568-569 Francis I, King, of France, 74, 77, 78 Francis Ferdinand, Archduke, conspiracy against, 548-552, 625 'm urder of, 412, 464, 465, 495, 545, 546-548, 552, 624 Francis Joseph, Emperor, 338, 399, 493, 546, 552, 573 Frank, Joseph, 461 Franks, 23, 26 Frasca, Visconti, 751 Frazer, Mackenzie, 204-205 Frederick, German Crown Prince, 431 Frederick the Great, 178, 186-190 Frederick William, King, of Prussia, 332, . 336 French Revolution, attitude of Ottoman officials toward, 198 ■ effect on Rumanians, 346-347 factor in Greek economic revival, 275 psychological and ideological impact on the Balkans, 211-213 Friedjung, Heinrich, 463-464 Friedland, Napoleon’s victory at, 207 Fuad Pasha, 385
Gachinovich, Vladimir, 465, 550 Gaj, Ljudevit, 264, 266 Oaliloo, 132


956 Index
Gallipoli, seized by Turks, 43 Turkish fleet destroyed at, 51, 129 Gallipoli Peninsula, in World War 1,559-560 Gama, Vasco da, 70, 71, 72 Garashanin, Ilya, 255 Garashanin, Milutin, 449 Garibaldi, 395 Gavril Pasha, 431 Genghis Khan, 35, 36, 49 Gennadius Scholarius, 60, 103, 109, 111 Geography, importance of, 1-6, 12, 13, 132 George, Prince, of Greece, 471 George, St., 78 George I, King, of Greece, 295, 299, 395, 474, 476 George II, King, of Greece, 588, 661, 663, 665, 670, 676, 759, 804-807, 828 Georgia, 46, 162 Georgiev, Kimon, 653-654, 769, 812, 832 Gerlach, Stephen, 85, 114 German-ltalian-Japanese Tripartite Pact (1940), 752-753 German Russian Nonaggression Pact, 746, 747 Germanos, Bishop, 283 Germans, as a Baltic ethnic group, 10, 11 Germany, ascendancy (1938-1939), 745-746 Austria annexed by, 631, 725, 745 Bohemia annexed by, 726 Crete captured by, 759-760 Czechoslovakia annexed by, 745, 746 Greece invaded by, 756-759 Moravia annexed by, 726 North Africa invaded by, 760 Peasant Revolt in, 40 Poland invaded by, 746 Russia invaded by, 760, 766 Slovenia under rule of, 231-232 World War I, 555, 557-559, 561-564, 568-569, 578 Yugoslavia invaded by, 756-759 Ghegs, 497-498 Gheorghiu-Dej, 830 Gichev, Dimiter, 769 Giers, Nicholas, 431 Giovanna, Princess, 735 Giustiniani, Giovanni, 56, 58, 59 Gladstone, William Ewart, 196, 327, 393, 394, 401, 403-404, 446 Goben (German cruiser), 557 Goga, Octavian, 698-699 Golden Horde, 49 Golitsyn, Prince, 188 Goluchowski, Count, 452, 528 Gomulka, Wladislaw, 844 Gonatas, Stylianos, 764 Gorchakov, Prince Alexander, 398, 399, 400, 404-405, 410 Gorky, 465 Goths, 22, 23
Government, state administration in the Balkans, 607-608 Government loans, 418-419 Great powers, influence on Balkan affairs, 14 Great Schism, 40 Greco-Turkish Treaty of Friendship, Neu trality, and Arbitration (1930), 736 Greco-Turkish War (1921-1922), 587-589 Greece, 269-299, 467-482, 661-687 agriculture, 276, 297-298, 477-479, 677679, 682, 786 Athens, Battle of (1944-1945), 826-828 Bulgaria invaded by (1925), 651-652 Chiflik system in, 478-479, 677 Classical Age, 17 Communism in, 670-671, 676, 787-795 conquered by Turks, 64 Crimean War and, 294-295 crisis following World War I, 584-587, 661 crisis in (1944), 820-826 cultural development, 683-687 decline of, 20-21 dictatorship under Metaxas, 672-676 economic crisis in, 471-473 economy, 274-276, 296-299, 477-482, 661, 663, 676-683, 842-843 education in, 673, 674, 684-687 emigration, 480-482 England’s policy toward, 816-818 Epimeletes tou Andarte (ET A ), 792 Ethnike Hetairia (National Society), 520-521 foreign trade, 680, 786 under George II, 663, 670-672 German invasion of, 756-759 handicraft industries, 276, 298 Homeric, 17 imperial, 270-272 independent state, 291 industry, 298-299, 479, 663, 679-680, 682-683, 786, 842 influence of the great powers in, 292, 293 International Financial Commission of Control, 471, 473 irredentism, 292, 467-471, 661 Italian-Greek War (1940-1941), 750752 land distribution, 677 language, 685-686 Megale Idea, 467-468 merchant marine, 275, 282, 480 Military League, 475-476 National Assembly, 285, 295 national awakening in, 277-279 National Democratic League (EDES), 788-792, 803, 806, 807, 816-817, 821, 822 National Liberation Front (EAM ), 787795, 802-808, 816-818, 820-828


Index 957
National Mutual Aid (E A ), 787, 788, 792, 793, 795 National Popular Liberation Army (ELAS), 787-795, 798, 803, 806807, 816-818, 820-828 National Youth Organization (EON), 673-674 natural resources, 681 Neuilly Treaty acquisitions, 579 occupation by Axis powers, 762-763, 785-795 Orthodox prelates, 270 during Ottoman period, 102, 269 peasants in, 272-274, 280, 296-297, 299, 661, 663 Phanariotes, 270-272, 281, 342, 345 Philike Hetairia, 146, 278, 281, 282, 371, 375 Political Committee of National Libera tion (PEEA), 793-794, 806-807, 816 political developments, 292-295, 663 population growth, 677-678 recovery under Venizelos, 474-477 refugee problem, 661, 676-677 repatriates, 482 republic established, 663-665 republic falls, 668-670 Sevres Treaty acquisitions, 581 social development, 683-687 territorial changes following World War I, 592 transportation system, 477 United All-Greece Youth Organization (EPON), 787, 788, 792, 793, 795, 798 Venizelist rule, 665-668 war with Turkey (1921), 587-589 Western financial and technical assist ance, 841 Workers’ National Liberation Front (EEA M ), 788 World War I, 559-560, 562, 566-569, 585-586 after World War I, 661 World War II, 785-795, 802-809 Greek Period, 15-17 Greek War of Independence, 145, 146, 212, 213, 250, 269, 279-292, 301, 375, 467 foreign intervention in, 286-292 Greeks, as an ethnic group, 8, 11, 12, 13, 97-98 “Green International,” 610, 648 Gregory V, Patriarch, of Constantinople, 152 . Gregory VI, Patriarch, 374-375 Grey, Sir Edward, 526, 532, 540, 554, 585 Grosseteste, Robert, 131 Groza, Peter, 831, 834, 835 Gubec, Mathias, 233 234 Guilds, Ottoman, 94 'λ', 127 
Guizot, François, 294, 312, 315 Gulhané decree, 315, 316 Gundulich, Ivan, 111 Güns, besieged by Suleiman, 79 Gusev, F., 809 Gustavus III, King, of Sweden, 195 Gusti, Dimitrie, 706 Gypsies, as an ethnic group, 10-11
Hadith, 82 Hadji Mustafa, 244-246 Hadrian, Emperor, 22 Halepa Pact (1878), 470 Halifax, Lord, 809 Hamadan, 183 Hamid, Abdul, 97 Hamilton, William, 134 Hapsburg Slavs, 264-268, 461-466 Hapsburgs, 9, 65, 154, 155, 160 Bosnia-Herzegovina occupied by, 462 increase in power, 74, 78 partitioning of the Empire, 572-574 struggle between Ottoman Empire and, , 77, 154 Harems, 159, 166 Harriman, Averell, 818 Hartvig, Nicholas, 533 Hatti-Humayun, 336,337,372,381,385,386 Health conditions, in the Balkans, 603-605 Heideck, General von, 293 Helen, Queen, 811 Hellenes, 16, 17 Hellenistic Age, 19 Henry the Navigator, 71 Heracles, 18 Heraclius, Emperor, 23 Herzegovina (see Bosnia-Herzegovina) Herzen, 465 Hindenburg, Paul von, 569 Hirsch, Baron, 417 Historical background, 15-32 Historical tradition, as factor in Balkan affairs, 14, 15 Hitler', Adolf, 11, 631, 639, 650, 726, 727, 738, 740, 741, 745, 746, 749-757, 760, 765, 768, 770, 773, 778, 784, 798, 811, 817 Hodza, Dr. Milan, 610 , Hoja (Hoxha), Enver, 796, 797 Holland, Dr. Henry, 277, 282 Holy League, 173 fleets defeated by Turks, 80 War of the, 173-175 Holy Places dispute, 324-326, 327 Holy Roman Empire, 24, 572 Homer, 16, 17 Homeric Age, 17 Horthy. Admiral, 577 Hotzcndorf, Conrad von, 552, 554


958 Index
Housing, in the Balkans, 603 Hoyos, Count, 552 Hull, Cordell, 738, 809, 810 Hundred Years’ War, 40, 47 Hungarians, as an ethnic group, 11 Hungary, acquired by Austria, 175 Croatia under rule of, 232-233 defeated by Turks, 73, 80, 270 Electoral Law (1874), 492 overrun by Turks, 47, 51, 53, 74 peace treaty with (1947), 836 Peasant Revolt in, 40 Russian intervention (1956), 844 Trianon Treaty, 571, 576-578 under Turkish rule, 159-160 Huns, 9, 23, 24 Hunyadi, John, 53, 54, 61, 62 Hussein the Black, 302
Ibn Battuta, 37 Ibrahim (G reek), 72, 79 Ibrahim, of Egypt, 286, 289, 303, 305-307, 310, 314, 315 Ibrahim I, Sultan, 165, 166 Iconium, 34 Ignatiev, Count Nicholas, 373, 374, 396, 398,405, 406, 535 Iliad, 16
Illyria, 18, 21, 103 Illyrian Provinces, 206-207, 212-213, 264 Illyrians, 8, 9, 13, 16, 17-18, 24, 32, 212, 230 defeated by Philip II, 19 Imperialism, Age of, 413-543 defined, 414 new, 414-419 India, 401 World War I, 569 Industrial Revolution, 227, 309, 319 Industry, Balkan, growth of, 142, 143, 842 after World War I, 599-601 See also under names of countries Innocent XI, Pope, 173 Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organi zation, 519-523, 648-653, 735, 741 International Agrarian Bureau, 610 International Bureau of Peace, 737 Ionian Islands, 69, 156, 181, 198-200, 211 French rule in the, 199-200 under Russian rule, 201 during Venetian rule, 199 Ionians, 18 Ionin, Alexander, 399 lorga, Nicholas, 223, 697, 748, 765 Ipek patriarchate, 104-105, 223, 240, 366, 518 Iron Guard, 697-698, 699, 765 Isidore, Cardinal, 56 Isker River, 5
Islam, 9 adopted by Turks, 34 conversions to, 106 Sacred Law of, 82 Ismail, Shah, 70 Ismet Pasha, 589, 591 Italian-Austrian War (1859), 295 Italian-Greek War (1940-1941), 750-752 Italo-Turkish War (1911), 532, 535 Italo-Yugoslav Treaty (1924), 576 Italy, Albania occupied by, 725-726, 746, 795 alliance system (1926-1930), 734-736 Dalmatia annexed by, 771 Montenegro occupied by, 771 peace treaty with (1947), 836 Saint-Germain Treaty, 574-576 Sèvres Treaty acquisitions, 581 Tirana Pact, 723 World War I, 568, 569 after World War I, 734 Ivan the Black, 63 Ivan the Terrible, 160 Izvolsky, Alexander, 529-532
Jacquerie, in France, 40 Janissaries, 39, 46, 59, 69, 74, 77-78, 87, 128, 134, 139, 159, 163, 221 deterioration of the, 121-122, 123, 130, 162, 219-220 exterminated by Mahmud II, 300-304 Serbian revolt against, 203, 244-247 Jassy, 185 occupied by Russians, 188 Jassy Treaty, 178, 196-197, 275, 340 Jaszi, Oscar, 574 Jellachich, Baron Joseph, 266, 267 Jem, 69 Jesuits, 234, 346, 359 Jews, as an ethnic group, 10, 11, 12, 97 in Ottoman Empire, 90 in Rumania, 484-485, 698, 705 tolerated by Islam, 89, 90 Joachim, Patriarch, 373 John, Don, of Austria, 156-158 John V, Emperor, 47 John VIII, Emperor, 31, 52 John XXII, Pope, 62 Joseph II, Emperor, 193, 194, 195, 197 Croatians under, 234 Transylvania under, 360 Justinian, 23, 32
Kaiser (see William II, Kaiser) Kallay, Baron von, 397 Kallerges, Colonel, 293 Kaloyan, 27, 28 Kameniec, Poland, captured by Turks, 170 Kansuh, Sultan, 70


Index 959
Kanuns, 83 Karageorge, Alexander, 203, 205, 212, 238, 246-250, 375 Karageorgevich, Alexander, 253-256, 258 Karageorgevich, Peter, 440, 450, 454-455, 464, 523 Karagioz (marionette show), 93-94 Karajich, Vuk, 241, 242-243, 244, 252-253, 264, 360, 361 Karamania, 46, 49, 50 Karavelov, Lyuben, 377, 378 Kardelj, Edward, 778 Karkal, 190 Karlowitz, 235 Karlowitz Treaty, 103, 106, 142, 154, 175, 177, 181, 182, 191, 206, 226, 228, 233, 271, 274, 340, 359 Karolyi, Count Michael, 573, 576-577 Kartales, G., 805 Kastriotis, George (see Skanderbeg, George) Katharevousa, 110, 111 Kaulbars, Nicholas, 434 Kaunitz, Prince, 178, 186 Kavalla, 44 Keitel, Wilhelm, 752 Kemal, Mustafa, 134, 525, 582-583, 587588 Kemal, Namik. 389 Kemal Bey, Ismail, 498, 499, 508 Kepler, 132 Kerch, 177 Kerestes, Hungary, 161 Khalil, Grand Vizir, 182 Khalil Pasha, 58 Kherson, 197 Khmelnitsky, Bogdan, 169 Khuen-Hedervary, 462, 494 Khotin, 185 Khrushchev, Nikita S., 816 . Kiamil Pasha, Premier, 537 Kibrisli Pasha, Mehmet, 386 Kidrich, Boris, 778 Kiev, 170, 173 Kiosseivanov, George, 654 Kisselev, General, 341, 344 Kiuprili, Ahmed, 167-168, 170, 171 Kiuprili, Mohammed, 123-124, 167 Klein, Samuel, 360 Klephtika, 108 Knights of St. John, 66, 73, 74, 80 Kogalniceanu, Michael, 351, 353-354, 356 Kolettes, 292, 294 Kolokotrones, Theodore, 212, 285, 292 Komhi, 506
Konaros, Vincenzo, 111 Kondylcs, General, 669 670, 676 Konigimark, Count, 173 Konstantinovich, Mirlmcl, 112-113, 123
Konya, 34, 35 Kopitar, Bartolomeus, 242, 264 Kora'is, Adamantios, 148, 152-153, 278, 279, 287 Koran, 38, 82, 84, 87 Koron, 69. 72, 79 Koroshetz, Father, 618-619, 623, 627, 630 Koryzes, Alexander, 758 Kosovo, 40, 45, 54 Kossuth, Louis, 265, 361 Kostliji, 191 Koundouriotes, George, 285 Kraljevich, Marko, 108-109 Kropotkin, 465 Krousseref Mehemet, 205 Krum, Khan, 24 Kuchuk Kainarji Treaty, 191-192, 202, 275, 328, 330, 340 Kupi, Abas, 763 Kutahia Convention, 306-307
Ladislaus I, of Hungary, 232 Lamartine, Alphonse, 251 Land, 2-4 distribution following World War I, 593594 See also names of countries Langer, William, 471 Language, Albanian, 496-497, 501, 505, 715 Greek, 685-686 Serbo-Croatian, 232 Slovenian, 231 Lascaris, Theodore, 30 Lausanne Conference, 589 Lausanne Treaty, 571, 589-591, 661, 742 Layard, Sir Henry, 410 Lazar, Prince, 44 League of Albanian Princes, 64 League of Cognac, 75 League of Mohammed, 527 League of Nations, 652, 655, 663-664, 676, 707, 709, 714-716, 721, 737, 741, ■ 742, 748 Commission of Inquiry for European Union, 737 League of the Archangel Michael, 698 Ledouix, 212 Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 146 Leiningen, Count, 325 Leka, Prince, 726 Lemnos Islands, 66, 166, 167 Lenin, Nikolai, 646 Leopold, Prince, of Saxe-Coburg, 291 Leopold I, Emperor, 154, 168, 171, 172, 173, 175 Serbians under, 234-235, 265 Leopold II, Emperor, 195 "l.copoldinc Diploma," 359


960 Index
Lepanto, 72 battle of, 69, 156-157, 158, 166 Levant, 20, 23, 40, 52, 69, 157 Levski, Vasil, 377, 378, 379 Liapchev, Andrew, 652 Liberal Union, 527 List, Siegmund von, General, 785 Literature, Balkan, 108-109, 111 Nasibat, 133 Ottoman, 92 Little Entente, 733, 734, 740, 741, 743-745 Lloyd George, David, 712 Loans, government, 418-419 Location, importance of, 1-2, 12 Locke, John, 146 Logothetopoulos, Constantine, 785 London Conference of Ambassadors, 541 London Convention (1877), 406 London Protocol (1830), 291 London Treaty (1827), 289, 291; (1913), 537; (1915), 574, 575, 580, 710, 711, 734 Lorecchio, A., 507 Lorraine, Duke of, 154, 172, 173 Louis, King, of Hungary, 44 Louis II, King, of Hungary, 73, 75, 76 Louis XIV, King, of France, 72, 167, 168, 171, 172, 175, 177, 226 Louis XV, King, of France, 178 Louis XVI, King, of France, 178 Louis Philippe, King, of France, 314 Low, Herbert, 670 Ludendorff, Erich Friedrich Wilhelm von, 569 Liiders, General, 361 Lupescu, Magda Wolff, 693, 695, 699 Luther, Martin, 75, 77, 125 Lutherans, 75, 78, 160
Macedonia, 425, 437, 441, 468 conquered by Simeon, 26 External Organization, 520 Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Or ganization (IM RO), 519-523, 648653, 735 location, 517 occupied by Bulgaria, 768, 771, 778 overrun by Turks, 44 problem of, 517-523 Macedonians, 18-20 influenced by Greek culture, 19, 518 Machek, Vladimir, 627, 629, 630, 631, 632, 767, 772, 778 Mackensen, General, 562-564 Maclean, Fitzroy, 775-776, 781, 784, 797, 801-802, 807, 825 Macmichael, William, 134 Madgearu, Virgil, 765 Magyars, 26, 234, 265-268, 358, 362
Mahmud Nedim, 390 Mahmud, Sultan, 186 Mahmud II, Sultan, 220-221, 237, 288, 300304, 306-307, 310, 316, 382 Janissaries exterminated by, 300-304 Maior, Peter, 360 Malenkov, Georgi, 815 Malinov, Alexander, 579, 652 Malnutrition, in the Balkans, 602 Malta, 80, 165 Knights of, 173 Mamelukes, 70, 304-305 Mangin, Colonel, 212 Maniadakes, Constantine, 674 Maniu, Iuliu, 608-609, 612, 693, 694-697, 748, 762, 763, 766-767, 811, 830, 841 Manuel, Emperor, 47 Manuel II, Emperor, 52 Manzikert, battle of, 34 Marghiloman, Alexander, 690 Maria Theresa, Empress, 178, 186, 190, 193 Croatians under, 234 Marie Louise, Princess, 437 Maritsa River, 3, 5, 43-44 Maritsa Valley, 3, 5 Marj-Dabik, battle of, 70 Markovich, Sima, 615 Marlborough, Duke of, 182 Marmont, Marshal, 206 Mashin, Madame Draga, 452-453 Maurer, Dr., 293 Mavrokordatos, Alexander, 271, 285, 292, 294 Mavrokordatos, Constantine, 343 Mavromichales, Kyriakoules, 473, 475 Maximilian II, Emperor, 80, 160 Megale Idea, 467-468 Mehemet Ali, 200-201, 204, 228, 229, 286, 290, 302, 303-315, 319, 322, 469 dismissal of Chosrew demanded by, 311 Syrian invasion, 305 Turkish fleet surrenders to, 310 Mehmed Pasha, 120, 123 Menshikov, Prince, 325, 326, 327, 331, 334 Merchant marine, Balkan, growth of, 142, 143 Greek, 275, 282, 480 Mertens, General, 558 Mesopotamia, lower, conquered by Turks, 79 Sèvres Treaty provisions concerning, 581 World War I, 569 Metaxas, John, 294, 585-588, 609, 612, 613, 664, 667-669, 671-676, 742, 750, 758 Metaxas Line, 755, 757, 758, 759 Metsovo, battle of, 751 Metternich, Prince, 288, 308, 322


Index 961
Michael, King, of Rumania, 694, 749, 765, 811, 830, 831, 834 Michael, Prince, of Serbia (see Obrenovich, Michael) Michael the Brave, 160-161, 340, 344, 365, 564, 570 Michelet, Jules, 347 Mickiewicz, Adam, 347 Micu, Bishop John Innocent, 359 Midhat Pasha, 376, 387-388, 391-392, 401 Migration, during Ottoman period, 97-99 after World War I, 605 Mihailov, Ivan, 650, 651 Mihailovich, Drazha, 763, 773-774, 778782, 801, 813 Mihailovsky, Stoyan, 446 Mihalache, Ion, 690, 691, 692 Milan, of Serbia (see Obrenovich, Milan) Mill, John Stuart, 369, 455 Millet reform, 384-388 Milosh, Prince (see Obrenovich, Milosh) Milovanovich, 530 Mircea, Prince, 46, 47, 64 Mlada Bosna, 464-465, 550 Modon, 69, 72, 157-158 Moesia, 22 Mohacs, Austrians victorious at, 173 Hungarian defeat at, 40, 75-76, 233, 358 Mohammed, 23, 34, 82 Mohammed 1, 51 Mohammed II, 49, 50, 55-69, 90, 103-104, 121, 149 Balkans subjugated by, 61-65 Constantinople captured by, 56-59 death, 66 fratricide decree, 118 intellectual interests, 131 navy under, 129 preparations to seize Constantinople, 5556 tax system under, 120 war with Venice, 65-66 Mohammed III, 159, 161 Mohammed IV, 166, 174 Mohammed V, Sultan, 528, 582 Mohammed VI, Sultan, 582 Moldavia, 32, 46, 64, 65, 185, 340 during Ottoman period, 102, 160, 340 . invaded by Russia, 190 Moldavian Republic, 565 Molotov, Viacheslav M., 747, 748, 752-754, 814, 815, 834 Council of Foreign Ministers, 835 Moltke, Helmuth von, 310, 554 Mondain, Lieutenant-Colonel, 257 Mongols, 34, 35, 43, 45, 46, 60 M oniteur OUomtine, 303
Montagu, Lady Mary Worlhey, 90 Monlecuculi, Count, 168
Montenegro, 63, 65, 231, 235, 237 occupied by Italy, 771 during Ottoman period, 101-102 relations with Russia, 181 Montreux Convention, 590, 742 Morava River, 4, 5 Moravia, annexed by Germany, 726 Morea, 30 Morgan Line, 833 Morgenthau, Henry, 559 Morosini, Francesco, 168, 173 Moscow Conference (1944), 818-820, 825, 829 Mosely, Philip E., 238, 837 Moslem Institution (Ottoman Empire), 84, 87-88 Moslem Tatars, 10, 97, 169-171 Moslems, as an ethnic group, 9, 11, 12 Motraye, 106 Mount Kahlenberg, 172 Mt. Olympus Line, 759 Mudanya Armistice, 589 Muftis (jurists), 88 Miinchengriitz Agreement, 308 Munn'ich, Marshal, 184 Murad I, 39, 43-45, 54, 83 Murad II, 51-55, 63 Murad III, 107, 159 Murad IV, 158, 159, 163-164, 165 Murad V, 391, 401 Muraviev, General, 306 Muraviev, Kosta, 811-812 Miirzteg reform program, 523 Mushanov, Nichola, 652, 769 Mnshbir (newspaper), 389 Mussolini, Benito, 663, 709, 725-726, 734736, 746, 750-752 conquest of Ethiopia, 741 Mustafa, 159 Mustafa, Kara, 171-172, 174 Mustafa II, Sultan, 175 Mustafa III, Sultan, 219-220 Mustafa IV, Sultan, 220, 221 Mustafa Kiuprili, 174 Mycenae, 16 Mycenaeans, 16 Myers, Edward, 802-807
Nadir Kuli, 183, 184, 186 ; Napier, Sir Charles, 314, 315 Naples, 66 Napoleon, Louis, 324, 330, 331, 335-336 founder of Rumania, 349-351 Napoleon Bonaparte, 1, 103, 133, 199, 211, 212, 213, 333, 346 defeat at Waterloo, 249 Erfurt Agreement, 209 Illyria Provinces acquired by, 206 invasion of Egypt, 198, 200-202 removed lo S(. Helena, 249


962 Index
Napoleon Bonaparte—cont. Selim III joins, 202-206, 207, 247 Syria invaded by, 200 Third Coalition against, 202 Tilsit Treaty, 206, 207-209, 247 victory at Friedland, 207 Narodna Odbrana, 549, 550, 551, 553 Nasi, Joseph, 90 Nasibat literature, 133 Nathalia, Queen, 450, 451 Nationalism, age of, 216-412 in the Balkans, 137, 145-146, 149, 215412, 413 rise of, in Western Europe, 130 See also names of countries Nauplion, 69 Navarino, 189, 286, 289, 304 Near Eastern crises, 304-315 Nedich, General Milan, 771-772 Negroponte, 66 Nelson, Horatio, 200 Nemanja, Stephen, 27 Nemanja, Stephen, II, 27 Neplinev, Ivan, 183 Neretva (Narenta) River, 5 Nesselrode, Russian foreign minister, 307, 311, 312, 322, 327, 329, 330 Neuhausel, 168 Neuilly Treaty, 571, 578-580, 590, 646, 647, 649, 655, 738 New Rome (see Constantinople) New Zealand, 559, 569 Newspapers, Balkan, 146 Greek, 147 Nicaea, 30, 38 Nicholas, King, of Montenegro, 259, 400402, 450, 455, 509, 619 Nicholas I, Tsar, 81, 250, 288, 290, 306, 308, 311, 322-325, 331, 333, 337338, 361, 363 Nicholas II, Tsar, 439, 440 Nicomedia, 38, 40 Nicopolis, 45, 47, 49, 50 Nicosia, Cyprus, 155 Nikolaev, 194, 197 Nikoloudes, Theologos, 672 Nikotsaras, 144 Nikousis, Panayiotakis, 271 Nish, captured by Hunyadi, 53 captured by Turks, 44, 174 conquered by Simeon, 26 Nish Treaty (1923), 649 Nissa Treaty, 185 Nitti, 712
Nizamidjedid, 220
Noli, Bishop Fan S., 506, 717-721 Normans, 29 North Africa, German invasion of, 760 Nutrition standards, in the Balkans, 602603
Obbov, Alexander, 832 Obradovich, Dimitrije, 148, 241-242, 243, 244, 360, 361 Obrenovich, Alexander, 357, 440, 448, 451454, 551 Obrenovich, Michael, 253, 256-258, 259, 378, 394-396, 397, 402, 521, 532 Obrenovich, Milan, 253, 258-259, 396, 397, 400-402, 432-433, 448-452, 516 Obrenovich, Milosh, 205, 238, 248-253, 256, 260-262, 375, 394 Ochakov, 194 captured by Russia, 184 Odoacer, 23 Odyssey, 16
Olga, Princess, 395 Orient Express, 6, 459, 633 Orkhan, 38-39, 40, 41, 43 Orlando, Vittorio, 576, 581 Oriov, Alexei, 189-190, 195, 307 Orthodox Church, 149-153 Osman, 35-38 Osman (epic poem ), 111 Osman II, 159 Osmanli Empire (see Ottoman Empire) Osmanlis, compared with Turks, 93-94 Ostrogoths, 23 Othman III, 186 Otho, King, of Greece, 291, 293-296, 299 Otranto, Italy, 66 Otranto Strait, 52 Ottoman Empire, administration, 86-87, 99-101 administrative corruption, 119-120 anarchy in, 209 area of, in early nineteenth century, 216 armed forces, 83, 84, 86-87, 113, 120123,128-130 Austria at war with, 184-186 autonomous regions, 101-103, 137 Balkan Peninsula during decline of, 137153 Balkans under, 96-115, 217-222 bribery, 120 bubonic plague in, 134-135 class distinction, 93-94, 217 colleges (medressehs), 131, 133-134 Constantinople captured by, 56-59 Crimean War, 319-338 culture, 91-93 decline, 81, 117-213, 215, 217 degeneration of the dynasty, 118-119 Divan, 88-89 economy, 124-128, 382, 390 at end of Crimean War, 393 expansion, 36-80, 81, 96, 158 foreign policy, 155 guilds, 94-95, 127 industry, 127, 129 institutions, 81-95


Index 963
intellectual sterility, 131-134 Jews in, 89, 90 judicial system, 88 kazes (judges), 88 lands, 82 literature, 92 Mediterranean expeditions, 80 merchant marine, 129 military decline, 128-130 millets (communities), 89-90 Moslem Institution, 84, 87-88 nationalism, absence of, 130-131, 222 navy, 129-130 Nicopolis crusade, 47-48 non-Moslems, status of, 89-90, 105 origins, 33-35 Palace School, 84, 119, 131 patriarchate, 103-105 peoples, 82 Persian expedition, 79 political evolution, 130-131 population, 82 prosperity, 125 reform movement, 300, 315-318, 381388 religious tolerance, 89-90, 105-107 restoration following Timur’s triumph over, 50-51 revolution in, 388-392 Ruling Institution, 83, 84, 118, 119 schools, 87 science neglected in, 131 sea power, 80, 129 slavery, 83-85, 87, 119 struggle between Hapsburgs and, 76, 154 under Suleiman the Magnificent, 72-80 sultanas, rule by the, 159 sultans, status of, 82-83, 87, 118 system of succession, 118-119 tax collection system, 120 three decades of peace (1739-1768), 186187 troops first enter Europe, 41, 43-44 Outlaws, 144
Pact of Rome (1918), 575 Paisi, Father, 370 Palaeologus, Michael, 31 Paléologue, Maurice, 436, 555 Palestine, Sèvres Treaty provisions concern ing, 581 World War I, 569 Palgrave, William, 427 Palmerston, Lord, 294-295, 306, 307-315, 319,321-325,327,350 Paris Peace Conference (1856), 336 Prime Minister, 335 resignation of, 331 Pangalos, Theodore, 664 665 Pan-Serbism, 397
Pan-Slavism, 397-398 Papagos, Alexander, 755 Papanastassiou, Alexander, 664, 737 Papandreou, George, 816, 821-824, 828 Papoulias, D., 673 Paracelsus, 132 Parensov, Peter, 428-429 Pariani, General, 723 Paris Treaty (1856), 255, 335-337, 339, 350, 381 provisions of the, 336-337, 352, 393 provisions violated, 337, 406 Parthenon, 64, 173 Pashich, Nikola, 455, 510, 535, 550-551, 560, 574-575, 609, 617-621, 623, 626-627 Passarowitz Treaty, 183, 233, 340 Past, obsession with the, in the Balkans, 13-14 Pasvan-Oglu, Osman, 205, 218, 245, 366 “Paternal Instructions,” 152 Patras, 173 Patriarchal Academy, 109 Patriarchate, 150 Constantinople, 151 during Ottoman period, 103-105 Paul, Prince, of Greece, 586 Paul, Prince, of Yugoslavia, 629-631, 632, 756 Pavelich, Ante, 629, 735, 771, 772, 778 Pavia, battle of, 74 Peace of Sitva-Torok, 161 Peartree Pass, 5 Peasants, Balkan, awakening of, 798 • money economy and, 419-423 under Ottoman rule, 96-115 after World War I, 593-599, 609, 610612 Pechenegs, 26 Peel, Sir Robert, 322 •Peloponnesus, conquered by the Turks, 181 Peoples, Balkan, under Ottoman rule, 96115 Pepelasis, Adam, 682 Perekop, Isthmus of, 184 Pericles, 672 Persia, relations with Ottoman Empire, 161162 . wars with Russia, 183 wars with Turks, 79, 158, 164, 183 Perted Pasha, 156 Peter II, King, of Yugoslavia, 629, 756, 758, 772, 779,813-817, 829 Peter III, Tsar, 186 Peter the Great, 112, 134, 163, .165, 174175, 177, 183, 221, 271 defeated by Turks, 179-181 Peterwardein, 75, 182 Pctkov, Nikola, 763, 769, 832, 834, 841 Petrovich, Daniel, 180, 237


964 Index
Petrovich, George (see Karageorge, Alex ander) Phanariotes, 105, 150, 181, 270-272, 281, 342, 345 Philike Hetairia (revolutionary society), 146, 278, 281, 282, 371, 375 Philip II (395-336 B .C .), 19 Philip II, King, of Spain, 155, 156, 158 Philippopolis, during Ottoman period, 99 Pig War, 448, 455, 458, 524 Pindus Mountains, 3 Pirates, North African, 157 Pirochanats, Milan, 449, 450 Pitt, William, Jr., 196 Pius II, Pope, 61, 63, 226 Pius V, Pope, 155, 157 Plague, bubonic, 134-135 Plastiras, Nicholas, 588, 663, 668, 828 Plato, 111 Plekhanov, 465 Podolia, 158, 170, 175, 185 Poetry, Balkan, 108-109 Ottoman, 92, 93 Poincare, Raymond, 418, 535, 554 Poland, decline of, 187, 190 end of, as an independent state, 197 invaded by Germany, 746 intervention in, by Catherine and Fred erick, 187 revolt of 1830, 308 Polignac, Count, 290 Polish-German Nonaggression Pact, 743 Polish-Russian War, 169 Political leaders, Balkan, traditional, dis crediting of, 799 Politics, Balkan, 382-385 development of, 144-146 dynamics, 413-424, 593-615 trends following World War I, 608-615 Politics, Bulgarian, 426-428, 439 Poltava, battle of, 179 Pomaks, 9, 106, 368 Poniatowski, Stanislas, 187 Ponsonby, Viscount, 310, 315 Population. Balkan, growth of, 420 problem following World War I, 594-597 shifts in, 590-591 Potemkin, Prince, 192, 194 Potiorek, General, 547-548, 556-557 Potsdam Conference, 829, 833-834 Pouliopoulos, 615 Preslav, Bulgaria, 26 Pressburg, Treaty of, 203, 206 Pribichevich, Svetozar, 623, 627 Priggos, John, 145 Primates, 224-225 Princip, Gavrilo, 464, 547, 548, 551, 556 Prosveta, 464 Protestant Reformation, 74 Protich, Stojan, 619
Protocol of Florence, 541 Prussia, Crimean War, 332 in the 1750’s, 186 Pruth, Treaty of, 180, 181 Ptolemies, 19 Putnik, General, 556-557 Pyramids, Battle of the, 200
Quebec Conference (1944), 819 Quinet, Edgar, 347
Rada, Girolamo de, 502 Radescu, Nicholas, 830-831 Radich, Antun, 463, 621 Radich, Stjepan, 463, 609, 619, 621-623, 625-627, 628 Radoslavov, Vasil, 439, 561, 578-579 Radzin, Treaty of, 171 Ragusa (Dubrovnik), 65, 103,231 existence ended by French decree, 207 during Ottoman period, 102, 103, 206 ties with the West, 111 Railways, Balkan, 417-418 Rajachich, Patriarch, 266, 267 Rakoczy, George, 168 Rakovski, George, 377, 378 Rapallo Treaty, 576 al-Rashid, Harun, 386 Rashka, 27 Rauch, Baron Paul, 463 Razin, Stenka, 170 “Red International,” 610 Re’is, Kemal, 69 Reis, Piri, 132, 133 Reichstadt Agreement, 404 Religion, in the Balkans, 149-153 tolerance of, in Ottoman Empire, 89-90, 105-107 Renaissance, 111, 136 Reshid Mustafa Pasha, 286, 300, 315-317 Resources, Balkan, 7-8 Retimo, Crete, captured by Turks, 166 Rhalles, Demetrios, 473-475 Rhalles, John, 785 Rhigas Pheraios, 148, 151, 153, 278-279, 345 Rhodes, 66 falls to Turks, 73 during Ottoman period, 101 Rhodope Mountains, 3 Ribar, Ivan, 783-784 Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 747 Ristich, Jovan, 259, 260, 402, 449 Rivers, importance of, 4-5 See also names of rivers Riza, Ahmet, 525, 527 Roads, Roman, 20 Roberts, Henry, 705 Roe, Sir Thomas, 117, 121, 162-163 Romans, Balkans united under the, 20-22


Rome, Balkans united by, 20-22 sack of, by Alaric, 23 Rommel, Erwin, 760, 802 Romulus Augustulus, 23 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 801, 808-810, 831 Moscow Conference (1944), 818 Quebec Conference, 819 Rousseau, 146, 345 Royal Serbian Shipping Company, 459 Rudolf IF, Emperor, 154, 161 Ruling Institution (Ottoman Empire), 83, 84, 118, 119 Rum, sultanate of, 34, 35 Rumania, 339-363, 483-495, 688-708 Agrarian Reform Law (1864), 353, 355 agriculture, 343-344, 353-354, 488-490, 691, 694, 700-705 Bessarabia acquired by, 565-566, 572 under Carol, 696-699 class stratification in, 706 constitution, 692 cultural development, 705-708 “Dedicated Monasteries,” 352 economy, 343-344, 351-355, 490-492, 688, 694-695, 698, 700-705 education in, 355-356, 493, 707 emigralion, 491 ethnic groups in, 11 foreign domination of, 344 foreign policy, 492-495 Fratia (Brotherhood), 347 Front of National Rebirth, 699 Greater, formation of, 572, 573 historical background, 339-341 industry, 490-491, 688, 700, 702-705 Iron Guard, 697-698, 699, 765 irredentism, 492 Jews in, 484-485, 698, 705 joins Axis Powers, 749, 765 land reform, 688, 689-691, 700-701 Liberal rule, 692-694 “Memorandum Trial,” 493 National party, 493 nationalism in, 341, 344-349 Neuilly Treaty acquisitions, 579 Organic Statutes, 343-344, 354 Patriotic Front, 767, 769 peace treaty with (1947), 836 ·, Peasant Revolt (1907), 488-490 peasant rule, 694-696 peasants, 341-344, 348, 352, 353-355,' 483, 488-490 Philharmonic Society, 347 political developments, 355-357, 486488, 692-699 political parties, 692 population pressure, 700 railroads, 483, 491, 700 revolutions of 1848, 347 349 Russian army ill, 810 813
Index
satellite of Russia, 762, 765-768, 810813 secret alliance (1883), 483-488 social development, 705-708 territorial changes following World War I, 592 Trianon Treaty acquisitions, 577-578 World War I, 561, 564-566, 569, 577 after World War I, 591, 689 World War II, 764-766 Yalta terms violated in, 830-832 Rumanian Cultural League, 494 Rumanians, 22, 24, 32, 64, 339-340 as an ethnic group, 8-9, 11-12, 13 in Bessarabia, 362-363 in Bukovina, 362-363 “cisalpine,” 339 Nationalist Movement among, 341, 344349 “transalpine,” 339 in Transylvania, 358-362 under Turkish rule, 64-65, 340 in Wallachia, 46 Rumeli Hissar, 55 Ruschuk Friends, 220-221 Russell, Lord John, 325-326, 327 Russia, 169-170 Bessarabia surrendered to, 748 Bukovina surrendered to, 748 Crimean Peninsula ceded to, 194 Crimean War, 319-338 Declaration on Liberated Europe, 829 expansion to the Black Sea, 142 fleet attacks Turks, 133 German invasion of, 760, 766 Greek War of Independence and, 289290 intervention in the Balkans, 226-228 Munchengratz Agreement, 308 Near Eastern crises and, 306-315 Polish revolt suppressed by (1830), 308 satellite countries, 762-770 Slavonic Benevolent Committee, 369 wars with Persia, 183 wars with the Turks, 170-171,'l84, 187194, 198, 406-408 World War I, 555, 557-562, 564-567 Russian Revolution (1905), 465; (1917), 565, 580 Russians, 26 Russo-Turkish War (1736-1739), 184; (1877-1878), 406-408 Rustem, Avni, 719 Rycaut, Sir Paul, 121, 136, 166 Ryswick, Treaty of, 175
Sabaheddin, Prince, 525, 527 "Sacred Battalion,” 283 Saint-Germain Treaty, 571, 572, 574-576 SI. Gottlmrd, hallle of,-168
965


966 Index
Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne Treaty (1917), 580, 581, 583 St. Petersburg Protocol (1826), 288, 289 St. Sava, 27 Sakuzov, Yanko, 646 Salem Kemen, battle of, 174 Salisbury, Lord, 404-406, 409, 410 Salm, Nicholas von, 77 Saloniki, 6, 30, 31, 41, 51, 52 captured by Turks, 52 “Saloniki Affair,” 625 Saloniki Free Zone dispute, 666 Samariniotes, Vasiles, 790 Samuel, Tsar, 96 San Stefano Treaty (1878), 408-410, 468, 502 Sanatescu, Constantin, 830 Sandburg, Carl, 91 Sarajevo crime (see Francis Ferdinand, Archduke) Saraphis, Stephanos, 790 Sardinia, Spanish attack on, 183 Sarrail, General, 563, 711 Saseno Island, 714 Sava River, 3, 4 Savov, General, 539 Saxons, 23 Sazonov, Sergei, 539, 542, 554, 555, 559560 Schiller, 146 Schlieffen, Count, 555 Schoenbrunn Treaty, 206 Schools, “Greco-Slav,” 147 Greek, 147-148 Schuyler, Eugene, 403 Science, Western, 131 Scobie, General, 818, 821-822, 824-827 Sebastiani, General, 203, 204, 209 Sebastopol, 194, 197 in Crimean War, 335 Sederholm, J. J., 716-717, 719 Seleucids, 19 Selim I, 67, 70-71, 72, 79, 107 Selim II, 80, 155, 159 Selim III, Sultan, 134, 200, 219-221, 300, 301 deposed, 206 independence of Montenegro, 237 the janissaries, at odds with, 244-245, 302 joins Napoleon, 202-206, 207, 247 Seljuk Empire, 34, 36 Seljuk Turks, 27, 29, 34-36, 92 Senta, 175 Septinsular Republic, 201 Serbia, 26, 27, 237-264, 448-461 administrative innovations in, 254 agriculture, 457-458 autonomy won by, 248-250 boundaries, 250 Bulgaria becomes vassal to, 28
captured by Turks, 61-62 church in, 240-241 collapse of, 28-29 commerce, 262-263, 449, 456-457 culture of, 28, 235 economic development, 254, 260-264, 457-461 independent state, 260 industry, 263, 449, 457, 458-459 intellectual awakening in, 240-243 under Karageorgevich, 253-256 land tenure system, 260-262 location, 237-238 under Obrenoviches, 251-253, 256-260 overrun by Turks, 44, 53 Pig War, 448, 455, 458, 524 politics, 448, 450-451 population growth, 457 railroads in, 459 reoccupied by Turks, 248 revolt against janissaries in, 203 social development, 460 social organization in, 238, 263 subservience to Austria-Hungary, 449450 under Turkish rule, 238-239 surrendered to Turks, 185 terms demanded by Turks, 45 World War I, 556-557, 560-564, 566-569 after World War I, 632 World War II, 771-774, 781-782 Serbian-Bulgarian War (1885), 412 Serbian Revolution, 244-250, 269 Serbian State Guard, 772 Serbians, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 24, 27 converted to Orthodoxy, 26 defeated by Turks, 44 migrations, 98 of southern Hungary, 234 Serbo-Croat Coalition, 463, 464 Serres, Macedonia, 44 Seton-Watson, R. W., 439 Seven Years’ War, 178, 186 Sèvres Treaty, 571, 580-582 Seymour, Sir Hamilton, 325-326 Shaftesbury, Lord, 146 Shaguna, Andrew, 492-493 Sheri, 82-83 Sherley, Anthony, 162 Sherley, Robert, 162 Shinassi, Ibrahim, 389 Shkumbi River, 5 Shubashich, Ivan, 813, 829, 832-833, 841 Shumla, 191 Siegfried Line, 741 Sigismund, King, of Hungary, 47, 48, 54 Silistria, 47, 191 Sima, Horia, 765 Simeon, King, of Bulgaria, 770


Index 967
Simeon, Tsar, 15, 26, 27, 96, 104 Simony, 150 Simovich. Dushan, 756, 758 Sinan Pasha, 91 Sincai, George, 360 Sinope, 34 “Sinope massacre,” 330 Sistova Treaty, 195, 244 Sitva-Torok, Peace of, 161 Skanderbeg, George, 13, 54, 64, 496, 497 Slavery, in Ottoman Empire, 83-85, 87, 119 Slavonia, 175 Slavonic Benevolent Committee, 369 Slavophilism, 398 Slavs, 8, 9, 11, 23-24, 26, 32 Hapsburg, 264-268, 461-466 South, 8, 9, 11, 26, 32, 43-45, 230-268, 461-466 Slovenes, 8, 11, 12, 24, 26, 267 Slovenia, 26, 65, 231-232 culture, 231 feudalism in, 232 Germanization of, 231-232 land, 232 location, 231 occupation by Axis powers, 771 peasant revolts in, 232 religion in, 231 social structure in, 232 Slovenian language, 231 Smederevo, 174 Smolensk, 173 Smyrna, Sevres Treaty provisions concern ing, 581 Sobieski, John, 170, 172, 173 Social trends, Balkan, after World War I, 602-608 “Society for the Development of the Al banian Language,” 505 Society of Liberty, 525-526 Society of Saint Sava, 520 Sofia, during Ottoman period, 99 captured by Turks, 44 Sofronii, Bishop, 370 Sokolli (Sokolovich), Mohammed, 72, 104,’ 157, 158, 159, 240, 270 Sophoules, Themistocles, 664, 671, 672 South Slavs, 8, 9, 11, 26, 32, 230-268, 46.1466 defeated by Murad I, 43-45 disunity among, 230 under foreign rule, 231-238 Spahis, 86-87, 100 Spaho, 630 Spalato (Split), I Spanish Netherland.s, 172 Split (Spalato). I Spoleto, Duke of. 7 7 1 Stahremberg, Count, 172
Stalin, Joseph, 615, 746, 799, 808, 810, 811, 814-816, 820, 833 death of, 843 Moscow Conference (1944), 818-820 Potsdam Conference, 829, 833-834 Yalta Conference, 829 Stambul effendis, 382 Stambuliski, Alexander, 446, 561-562, 579, 608, 610, 645-652 Stambulov, Stephen, 378-379, 431-432, 434-441, 519, 521-522 Starchevich, Ante, 461 Stephen, Prince, 45, 48, 62 Stephen the Great, 65 Stepniak, 465 Stirbei, Prince Barbu, 831 Stoilov, Constantine, 439 Slopford, Admiral, 314 Stoyadinovich, Milan, 613, 629-632, 743, 744 Stoyanovich, Ilarion, 372, 373 Straits Commission, 590 Straits Convention (1841), 209, 315 Streltzi, 134 Strossmayer, Joseph George, 461, 493 Struma (Stryman) River, 5, 18 Stiirgkh, Count, 552 Sturza, Demeter, 488, 489 Styria, 51 Suez Canal, 388, 401 Suleiman, 51 Suleiman II, 174 Suleiman the Magnificent, 67, 70, 71, 7281, 85, 97, 117, 119, 129, 155 . death, 80 defeat at Vienna, 77 Divan under, 88 Hungary conquered by, 80, 358 janissaries in time of, 87 Mediterranean expeditions, 80 Persia invaded by, 79 revenue collected by, 125 truce on the Danube, 78 Sultanas, 159 Sultans, status of, 82-83, 87, 118Susak, 576 Suv.orov, Alexander, 178, 191, 194, 195, 570 Sviatoslav, Prince, 180 Sykes-Picot Treaty (1916), 580 Syria, conquered by Turks, 70, 71 invasion by Mehemet Ali, 305 Napoleon’s invasion of, 200 System of the Elders, 272 Szigeth, 80
Tabriz, 183 occupied by Turks, 79 Taman Peninsula, 194 Tanzlmul, 3 15-316
THtnrciCU, George, 697


968 Index
Tatars, Moslem, 10, 97, 169-171 Teheran Conference, 801, 808, 809, 810, 812 Tekeli, Count Emeric, 171 Temesvar, 182 Temperley, Harold, 322 Tenedos, 166, 167 Terrain, importance of, 2-6, 12 Tewfick Pasha, 582 Theocratic Age, passing of the, 146-149, 153 Theodosius II, Emperor, 56 Theotokes, George, 473, 474 Theotokes, John, 671-672 Thermopylae Line, 759 Thessaly, 51, 185 Thiers, Adolphe, 312-314 Thirty Days’ War, 471 Thirty Years’ War, 154, 167 Thomas, 64 “Thourios,” 148, 279 Thouvenel, French ambassador, 350 Thrace, 18 conquered by Simeon, 26 overrun by Murad I, 43 Thracians, 8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24 Three Emperors’ League (Dreikaiserbund) , 259, 393, 394, 400, 401 dissolution of, 412, 515 revived, 426, 515 Thugutt, Baron, 192 Tilsit Treaty, 206, 207-209, 220, 247 Timar landholding system, 100, 138-140 Timariots, 38, 39, 99 Timok area, during Ottoman period, 101 Timur the Lame, 46, 47, 48-49, 50, 51 Tirana Pact, 723 Tirnovo, Bulgaria, captured by Turks, 46, 110
cultural center, 110 Tisza, Count Stephen, 552, 573 Tisza, Koloman, 492 Tito (see Broz, Josip) Titulescu, Nicholas, 733, 742-743 Todleben, Colonel von, 334, 407 Tomasevich, Jozo, 604 Topography, importance of, 2-6 Toshev, Andrew, 654 Tosk, 497 Toynbee, Arnold, 272, 482 Trade routes, to the Orient, 70-72 Trajan, Emperor, 22, 358 Transylvania, 22, 175, 339, 340, 358-362, 578 during Ottoman period, 102-103, 160, 161, 167, 168, 340 Uniate Church, 359, 360 Treaties (see under names of treaties) Trebizond, 30, 46 Trianon Treaty, 571, 572, 733
Trieste, 6, 576, 833 Trikoupes, Charilaos, 467, 468, 471-473, 477, 479 Triple Alliance (1571), 155 Tripoli, Italian invasion of, 532 Truman, Harry S., 834 Truman Doctrine, 841 Trumbich, Ante, 574, 618, 619 Tsaldares, Panayiotes, 664, 667, 669, 676 Tsankov, Alexander, 650-653 Tsintsar-Markovich, Yugoslav Foreign Minister, 755 Tsolakoglou, George, 758-759, 785 Tsouderos, Emmanuel, 758, 804, 807 Tsvetkovich, Dragisha, 631, 632, 755 Tukich, 464 Tunis, 158 Turkestan, 34 Turkey, Crimean War, 319-338 Lausanne Treaty, 571, 589-591 National Pact, 583, 589 nationalism in, 582-583 revival in, 582-584 Sèvres Treaty, 571, 580-582 territorial changes following World War I, 592 war with Greece (1921), 587-589 wars with Persia, 183 World War I, 557-561, 564 Turkish Ultimatum, 328-329 Turks, 9, 10 Albania under the, 496-502 attacked by Russian fleet, 133 attitude toward French Revolution, 198 Austria surrenders to, 185 in the Balkans, 15, 29, 33, 97, 100 Croatia under rule of, 233 as an ethnic group, 9, 10, 11 intellectual awakening of the, 388-389 Osmanlis compared with, 93-95 pre-Ottoman, 33—35 Seljuk, 27, 29, 34-36, 92 Serbia reoccupied by, 248 Vienna besieged by, 40 wars with Russia, 170-171, 184, 187-194, 198, 406-408 See also Ottoman Empire Tuscany, Duke of, 173
Ukraine, 169-171, 184-187 Ukrainian Orthodox Church, 170 Ukrainian Republic, 565 Ulema, 83, 88 Uluch, 156-158 Uniate Church, 359, 360 Union or Death, 465, 549 Union of Young Albanians, 719 United Nations, 681 United States, Declaration on Liberated Europe, 829


Index 969
World War I, 568 World War II, 801 United States of the Ionian Island, 211 Unkiar-Skelessi Treaty, 307, 308, 311, 315 Urban V, Pope, 43 Urquhart, David, 308 Uzbeks, 158, 162
Vaida-Voevod, Alexander, 690, 692, 697 Vakf land, 100 Vandals, 23 Vardar (Axios) River, 5, 18 Vareshanin, General, 465 Varkiza Peace Agreement, 828 Varna, 191 battle of, 54 Vassa Pasha, 501 Vasvar, Treaty of, 168, 171 Vatan, 525 Vatra, 506, 718 Vauban, 220 Velchev, Colonel Damian, 650, 652-654 Velouchiotes, Ares, 790 Venelin, Yurii, 371 Venetians, Greek islands under rule of, 113-114 wars with Turks, 51, 52, 53, 65-66, 69, 129, 165-166, 173, 181-183 Venezia Giulia, 833 Venice, Dalmatia under rule of, 233 Ionian Islands under rule of, 199 Venizelos, Eleutherios, 467, 474-477, 533, 538, 586-587, 609-610, 612, 661, 664-671, 739 attempt to assassinate, 586 death, 676 Paris Peace Conference, 581 resigns, 567 World War I, 559, 562, 566-568, 584585 Venizelos-Tittoni agreement, 712 Vergennes, foreign minister, 190, 195 Verlazi, Shevket, 717, 719 Versailles Treaty, 545, 571, 614 Vesalius, 132 Via Egnatia, 20 Victor Emmanuel III, King, 726, 795 Victoria, Princess, of Germany, 431 Victoria, Queen, 322, 351, 401, 408 Vidin, 47, 174 Vienna, besieged by Turks, 40, 171, 172 Turks defeated at, 77, 136 Vienna, Congress of, 210, 227 Vienna Award, 748, 749, 750 Vienna Four Points, 333, 335-336 Vienna Note, 328-330 Vilayet law (1864). 387 388 Villcneuvc, Marquis de, 184, 185 Vincha (Greek colony), 18
Vinogradov, General, 830 Visigoths, 23 Viviani, Premier, 554 Vlachs, 8, 21, 24, 27, 32, 494 Vlad, Prince, 53 Vlad IV, Prince, 65 Vladimirescu, Tudor, 213, 345-346 Vladislav, King, of Hungary and Poland, 53, 54 Voivodina, 234-235, 577 occupation by Axis powers, 771 Volkov, General, 650, 651, 653 Voltaire, 146, 345 Voronezh, 174 Vukmanovich, Svetozar, 77C Vyshinsky, Andrei, 831
Waldemar, of Denmark, 434-435 Walewski, Count, 336 Wallachia, 32, 47, 53, 64, 65, 340 during Ottoman period, 102, 160, 340 overrun by Turks, 46 surrendered to Turks, 185 “War Hymn,” 279 War of Devolution, 168 War of the Austrian Succession, 178, 186 War of the League of Augsburg, 174-175 War of the Polish Succession, 184 Washburn, George, 403 Wavell, Sir Archibald, 754, 757, 759, 760 Wellington, Duke of, 288, 289, 291, 305, 322 Wereloe Treaty, 195 West Goths, 22 White Hand, 625 “White International,” 610 William II, Kaiser, 552, 555, 566 William of Wied, 511-512, 709, 713 Williams, Fenwick, 335 Wilson, Field Marshal Lord, 759, 805, 817, 825, 828 Wilson, Woodrow, 712-713, 734 Fourteen Points, 573, 576, 580 Women, Balkan, status of, 798 Woodhouse, C. M., 789, 794, 799, 805, 807 World War I, 552-570 Allied victory, 568-570 attempts to prevent, 554 Balkan States on eve of, 540-543 Bulgaria’s intervention, 557, 560-562 Dardanelles expedition, 557-560, 566567 end of, 571 Gallipoli expedition, 557-560 Greek intervention, 566-568 occupation of Serbia, 562-564 outbreak of, 552 peace settlement, 571-592 Rumanian intervention, 564-566 Serbia's triumph, 556-557


970 K
Index
World War II, 632, 745-839 peace settlement, 834-837 See also names of countries Wrangel, General, 720
Yakub, 45 Yalta Conference, 828-830 Yanina, during Ottoman period, 101 Yenishehir, 36 Young Bosnia, 464-465, 550 Young Turk revolt, 474, 508, 524-528, 582 Youth, Balkan, role of, 799 Ypsilantis, Alexander, 282-283, 345 Yugoslav Committee, 574-575, 577, 618, 619 Yugoslav National Council, 618, 619 Yugoslavia, 616-643 agriculture, 633-636 Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of (AVNOJ), 783-784 Bihach Manifesto, 784 centralism versus federalism, 617-619 Chetniks, 773-774, 778-782 Communist Partisans, 774-784, 801-802, 832-833 composition of, 616 constitution (1921), 624, 626; (1931), 628 creation of, 231, 268, 570, 572, 573, 575, 619 cultural development, 639-643 dictatorship under Alexander, 627-629 economic development, 632-639 education in, 641-643 England’s policy toward (1940), 813816 ethnic groups in, 11 on eve of World War II, 631-632 foreign trade, 638-639 German invasion of, 632, 639, 756-759 industry, 637-638
land reform; 619-620 National Assembly, 619 National Liberation Committees, 777, 783-784, 832 nationalism, 628-629 Neuilly Treaty acquisitions, 579 Nish Treaty (1923), 649 occupation by Axis powers, 762-763, 771-784 peasants in, 633-636 political parties, 620-623, 626-627, 631 politics in, 619-627 population growth in, 634 social development, 639-643 territorial changes following World War I, 592 Trianon Treaty acquisitions, 577-578 World War II, 771-784, 801
Zagan Pasha, 58 Zaimes, Alexander, 475 Zai'mes, Andrew, 285 Zapolya, John, 73, 76, 77, 78, 80 Zealots, 31 Zerajich, Bogdan, 465 Zervas, Napoleon, 788-789, 807, 822 Zeta, 27 Zevgos, lohn, 763 Zhdanov, Andrei, 815 Ziams, 39, 99 Zivanovich, Milan, 552 Ziya, Abdul Hamid, 389 Zlatev, Petko, 654 Zog, Ahmed, 716-727, 797 King, 717, 723-725, 795 President, 721-723 reforms introduced by, 723-724 Zographos, G. Ch., 541 Zoravno, Treaty of, 170, 171 Zorbas, N. K., 475 Zvonimir, King, 232


Valuable Bibliography, Maps, and Illustration»
Scholars and students will also highly value the up-to-date annotated bibliography. The most comprehensive bibliography ever published in a book on the Balkans, this is in itself an im portant feature of this volume.
Two 8-page inserts of unusually tine pictures illustrate the text; and there are 17 m aps, espe cially drawn for this book by the expert carto grapher, Vincent Kotschar.
L. S. Stavrianos
T he author of t h e B a l k a n s s i n c e 1453 is one of the country's leading authorities on the Bal kans. His previous books on this area include
THE BALKAN FEDERATION, M O V E M E N T TOWARDS
BA LKA N U N IT Y IN M O D E R N ' T IM E S , G R E E C E :
A M E R I C A N D I L E M M A A N D O P P O R T U N I T Y . He IS
also the author of the recently published and highly praised p a m p h le t,t h e o t t o m a n e m p i r e —one of th e series of s o u r c e p r o b l e m s i n w o r l d c i v i l i z a t i o n (see back of jacket).
Professor Stavrianos, now a member of the his tory faculty at Northwestern University, has been awarded at various times a Royal Society of .Canada Fellowship, Ford Foundation Fac ulty Fellowship, and Guggenheim Fellowship to further his extensive researches. Before coming to Northwestern he lectured at Queens Univer sity in C anada and taught for a num ber of years at Smith College.
J A C K E T D E S I G N BY BI N E I D E R I NC .


For Students of World History
SOURCE PROBLEMS IN WORLD CIVILIZATION
In each of these inexpensive pamphlets a noted historian pre sents key source materials and a brief discussion of a significant question on the interpretation of history. Providing materials hard to find elsewhere, this series is proving an exciting adventure into history for thousands
11AM M l) К A P I’S C O D E
Quaint or Forward-Looking ? b y C y r u s H . G o r d o n , Brandeis University
TH E OTTOM AN EM PIRE
Was It the Sick Man of Europe? b y L . S. S t a v r i a n o s , Northwestern University
RENAISSANCE ITALY
Was It the Birthplace of the Modern World?
b y G e n e A . B r u c k e r , University of California
NAPOLEON
Was He the Heir of the Revolution? b y D a v id D o w d , University of Florida
CALVINISM
Authoritarian or Democratic? b y G e o r g e M o s s e , University of Wisconsin
of students. Already available:
DARW INISM
Reaction or Reform?
by B e r t J a m e s L o e w e n b e r g , Sarah Lawrence College
CH INA’S C U LTU R A L T R A D IT IO N
What and Whither? by D e r k B o d d e , University of Pennsylvania
SO V IET ECONOMIC PR O G R ESS
Because of or in Spite of the Government?
by E l l s w o r t h R a y m o n d , N ew York University
AMERICA AND TIIK MIDDLE EAST
Open Door Imperialism or Enlightened Leadership ?
by W i l l i a m A. W i l l i a m s , University of Wisconsin
M ore in preparation
For Students of European History
M O D E R N E U R O P E IN W ORLD PERSPECTIVE 1914 to the Present
Skillful organization of turbulent 20th-century history brings into clear focus the major national and international problems, the parallel and con trasting developments in the various nations, and the changing pattern of Europe’s world relations.
E U R O P E A N ISSU E S IN TIIK 20th CENTURY
A superb collection of source materials, many appearing here for the first time in English translation, which present the crucial national and international problems faced by Europear statesmen in the last 50 years and the various courses of action open to them.
both by EU G E N E N. ANDERSON University of California at Los Angeles
KINEHAKT & COMPANY, INC. · 2 3 2 M adison Ave., New York К