All views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the Hellenic Observatory or the LSE © Stavros Thomadakis, Dimitrios Gounopoulos Christos Nounis, Michalis Riginos
Financial Innovation and Growth:
Listings and IPOs from 1880 to World
War II in the Athens Stock Exchange
Stavros Thomadakis, Dimitrios Gounopoulos, Christos Nounis and Michalis Riginos
GreeSE Paper No.86 Hellenic Observatory Papers on Greece and Southeast Europe
SEPTEMBER 2014


ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT __________________________________________________________ iii
1. Introduction _____________________________________________________1
2. Exchange Foundation and Governance________________________________7
2.1 Unregulated Public Offers, Bubbles and the Genesis of an Organized Market.............................................................................................................. 7
2.2 Exchange Governance and its Successive Reforms .................................12
2.3 Listing Requirements.............................................................................16
3. Exchange Listings and IPOs 1880 to 1940: The Impact of the Environment __19
3.1 The Sample ...........................................................................................19
3.2 From development to official bankruptcy and international control: 18801898 23
3.3 Recovery, War and Expansion: 1899-1922 .............................................25
3.4 New development, the ‘roaring twenties’, world crisis: 1923-1940 ........28
4. Listings and IPOs: Frequency, Size and Quasi-IPOs______________________31
4.1 The size and age of listed companies .....................................................31
4.2 IPOs and Quasi-IPOs..............................................................................34
5. The Double Face of IPO Pricing: Overpricing or Underpricing? ____________36
5.1 The Overall Picture of Public Offerings ..................................................36
5.2 A Simple Statistical Model of Underpricing ............................................38
6. Conclusion _____________________________________________________42
Appendix A: Listings, IPOs, Annual Volume, Mean First Day Prices and Returns, First Trading Day IPO Returns, Proceeds and Money Left on the Table, 1880-1940 ........................................................................................................45 Appendix B: Tables.........................................................................................................49
References .......................................................................................................58


iii
Financial Innovation and Growth:
Listings and IPOs from 1880 to World War II
in the Athens Stock Exchange
Stavros Thomadakis#, Dimitrios Gounopoulos,
Christos Nounis†and Michalis Riginos‡
ABSTRACT
The study explores the growth of the Athens Stock Exchange through new listings and IPOs over the period 1880-1940. We examine institutional changes in exchange governance and listing requirements. On a theme that has not been addressed before, we find that simple listings were far more numerous than actual IPOs, while even during ‘hot’ listing periods IPO activity was relatively limited. IPOs in Greece remained unregulated throughout the period and there is only sparse evidence on the involvement of professional investment banking services. IPOs over-pricing in the early decades gives way to underpricing in the 1920s. The growth of the Greek stock market was coincident with development episodes in the economy, as well as phases of protectionism. It has been driven by a demand for listings basically serving the liquidity needs of company owners. Finally, the study presents data on "quasi-IPOs" (i.e. capital increases shortly after listing) and shows that they offer a more accurate assessment of the demand for the financing of listing firms.
Keywords: Listings, Initial public offerings; financial history; financial innovation
JEL classification: N23, N43, G18
# University of Athens, School of Economics, Athens, Greece, thomadakis@econ.uoa.gr School of Business, Management and Economics, University of Sussex d.gounopoulos@sussex.ac.uk † University of Athens, School of Economics, Athens, Greece, cnounis@econ.uoa.gr ‡ University of Athens, School of Economics, Athens, Greece




1
Financial Innovation and Growth:
Listings and IPOs from 1880 to World War II
in the Athens Stock Exchange
1. Introduction
The object of this paper is the study of listings and public offerings of
securities in the Athens Stock Exchange (ASE) from its inception in 1880
to the outbreak of the second war in 1940. No previous comparable
research exists for the Greek Stock Exchange. This is a first study of
capital raising in an emerging European Exchange to be juxtaposed to
several such studies of developed exchanges (e.g. London, Berlin, New
York) in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Stock exchanges are places of trade but their longer-term significance
lies in their role as institutions for the funding of public and private
ventures and thereby the growth of firms and sectors. The impetus for
the development of exchanges in Europe since the 18th century has
been furnished by the need to amass capital resources. Exchanges
combine the collection of capital by security-issuers with the advantage
of listing of securities for secondary trading. These two fundamental
aspects of growth are not inseparable. Listing can occur with or without
a concurrent public offering of securities. Whereas a public offering of
securities is a direct capital-gathering exercise, listing can make an
indirect contribution to capital growth by increasing the visibility and the
reputation of a potential issuer. In developed liquid markets, public
offers are a very visible activity of capital-raising. In emerging less liquid
markets however, listings without direct public offerings may be a


2
predominant form of market development. Dealing with such an
emerging market, the present study focuses on listings and public
offerings as separable aspects of capital gathering. Our findings
underpin this separation: public offerings in the Athens Exchange were
relatively limited, even during periods when listings were in high
demand. We offer analysis and explanation for this feature.
The creation of the ASE was the second major financial innovation in 19th
century Greece, after the establishment of the National Bank in the
1840s. To place this study in international context, we note that the late
19th century was a period of ‘emergence’ of many peripheral stock
markets both in Europe and the rest of the world. These markets grew
alongside well-established markets in the European centers [Batillosi and
Matias (2012)]. Their ‘emergence’ was correlated with the rise of
international capital flows and demand for foreign finance by new
sovereign states [Bouvier (1977), Eichengreen (1996)]. The ASE was no
exception to this general finding. Officially chartered over the period
1876-78, it started operations in 1880. In 1878 the Greek state had
regained access to foreign finance after an embargo of 45 years. The
ASE, in which both government bonds and private stocks would trade,
was a necessary mechanism for capital gathering and trading, and would
prove to be one of the longest-lived institutions in modern Greece.
Greek political and economic history has been very turbulent over the
period 1880-1940. The country’s area and population practically
doubled. Changes were not gradual but abrupt, mostly outcomes of
wars that were won and wars that were lost; and there was a succession
of periods that ranged from sovereign bankruptcy in 1893 to impressive


3
leaps in development in later periods. Over these sixty years, Greece was
embroiled in six wars, two sovereign bankruptcies and many years of
military antagonisms. The Exchange and its listed firms lived that history
and evolved within a path defined by the needs and economic
conditions of each period. But, arguably, the Exchange offered a fast
reaction mechanism that facilitated recoveries, mobilization of resources
and economic modernization through the recapitalization of older firms
and the emergence of new ventures and new sectors. Recent historical
research on financial markets has been influenced by prevalent
institutional theories: the view of the positive impact of ‘common law’
systems propounded by LaPorta, Lopez-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny
(1998) and the view of the positive impact of capital flow liberalization
argued by Rajan and Zingales (2003). The Greek legal system has been of
the continental variety throughout the life of the sovereign Greek state
but, as we will see, the stock market experienced considerable variation
between periods of development and periods of stagnation. On the
front of economic openness, Greece also remained an economy
nominally open to capital flows throughout the period of this study.
Nevertheless, the actual occurrence and direction of capital flows varied
greatly, especially as a result of sovereign bankruptcies, domestic
politics, wars and the collapse of international monetary systems. Thus,
the variation between stock market development and stagnation cannot
be prima facie attributed to large shifts in the legal system or the
institutional arrangements for international capital flows, in the case of
Greece. We must engage in evaluation of other forces that have
powered this pendulum. We focus on economic conjuncture and the


4
variation of the size and character of the domestic market which evolved
significantly over the period of this study.
Financial theories of capital gathering establish useful propositions that
can inform historical study. It is generally acknowledged that markets for
external finance can only function if there is an adequate level of trust
between investors, issuers and sponsors. In a variety of financial models,
a specific aspect of trust is represented as informational asymmetry. As
Myers and Majluf (1984) have argued, such asymmetry can make the
cost of external finance so high as to be prohibitive. In a theoretical
context more directly applicable to initial public offerings Rock (1986)
has argued that asymmetric information among investors leads to
underpricing of new issues, an effect likened to a ‘winners curse’. A
considerable strand of subsequent literature ((Beatty and Ritter (1986),
Loughran and Ritter (2004), Ljunqgvist (2007)) has upheld the notion
that institutional, regulatory and governance arrangements can mitigate
asymmetries and improve trust. Extensive empirical work in
contemporary markets has verified considerable underpricing of new
equity issues, but with much variation across time and space3.
Taking the cue from contemporary markets, historical researchers have
focused on the major European markets (where transactions and data
are ample) and have examined the underpricing phenomenon in the
3 There are several studies of public offerings in the ASE but all focus on recent periods beginning with
the 1980s3 (see e.g., (Kazantzis and Levis Kazantzis, C., and M. Levis, 1995. Price support and initial public offerings: evidence from Athens Stock Exchange, Journal in International Business and Finance 12, 185-200.; Thomadakis, S., D. Gounopoulos, and C. Nounis, 2012. The long term performance of Initial Public Offerings in the Athens Stock Exchange European Financial Management 17, 117-141.; Thomadakis, S., D. Gounopoulos, C. Nounis, and A. Merikas, 2014. Collateral regulation and IPO specific rebelarization: The case or price limits in the Athens Stock Exchange, European Financial Management, Forthcoming.). There are also few, mostly official, histories of the Exchange which do not illuminate sufficiently its fundamental function of capital gathering and company finance. See Platanopoulos M., History of the Athens Stock Exchange, 1876-1976, Athens 1976


5
late 19th or early 20th centuries. Chambers and Dimson (2009), examining
the track record of the London Exchange, make a remarkable
observation: a long-term rise in underpricing appears to have occurred
over time, in spite of improvements in regulation, disclosure, and the
prestige of IPO underwriters. Working on the Berlin Exchange, Fohlin
(2010) shows that investors in new stock issues in Germany in the 1880s
experienced, on the contrary, low spreads between the price they paid
for stock and the price at which they could sell the stock in the market.
Burhop et al. (2012) observe that during the early 20th century IPOs
were regulated more heavily in Germany than in Britain and as a result
the failure rate of IPOs on the Berlin Stock Exchange was lower than it
was in London. Lehmann (2014) reports that even though German IPO
business was in the hands of a small oligopoly, the terms of IPOs has
been a result of the tight regulation of underwriting, which ensured the
quality of all firms on the German market.
A peripheral and emerging stock exchange, as the Athens Exchange was
in the late 19th century, cannot be approached however on the same
footing and with the same analytical agenda as developed central
markets in Europe. Its institutional reputation had to be established and
its liquidity (i.e. the willingness of savers to place their funds in
Exchange-traded securities) had to be secured in an environment where
liquidity was generally scarce and monetary values exhibited great
fluctuation. It follows that when we examine matters such as listing
requirements and the growth of the Exchange in terms of listings and
primary offerings, we must be cognizant of these environmental factors
and a more general correlation of the path of the Exchange to economic
and political conditions. Thus, we pay a lot of attention to historical


6
circumstance and the phases followed by the Greek economy over the
sixty years.
Differing from studies focusing on developed markets, we have
expanded the meaning of IPOs to capital increases occurring in the two
years following listing. We have collected data on these capital increases
and compare them to actual primary offerings. The view of listings as a
first step towards the raising of external capital finds support from these
comparisons. We also undertake analysis of IPO underpricing itself,
within the confines of our narrow sample of actual IPOs, and find
significant change over time.
Besides listing requirements that held for all introductions of new
shares, IPOs remained unregulated throughout the period and there is
little evidence about the involvement and role of professional
investment banking in primary security issues and their pricing. This is a
major difference from what has been documented in developed markets
of that period, where IPOs were regulated and investment banking was
formalised. It does not appear that standardised arrangements of
investment banking emerged in Greece, although some services of
investment bankers were provided. This implies that disclosure quality
remained uneven and low. The population of IPOs was also low. It is
noteworthy nonetheless that even in this small population both over
and under-pricing made an appearance over time. We present historical
conjectures for the timid growth of IPOs and look at possible factors to
explain IPO pricing in line with the empirical literature.
The early enlargement of the Greek stock market was clearly driven
more by a demand for listings than by discreet large offers of new issues


7
for the direct enlargement of company capital. This implies that,
contrary to what we know of developed markets, the study of listings is
a major pillar for understanding the evolution of peripheral markets. In
the Greek case, we document a decisive shift in the character, the size
and sector of listings and IPOs between the first decades of ASE
operation and the boom decade of the 1920s. This shift was related to a
reorientation of economic activity, with emphasis on light domestic
industry. It also correlated to stock market entries by smaller firms, a
phenomenon that may be described as a ‘democratisation of market
finance’. Interestingly, this democratization was evident in the
population of listings but also implied very visible changes in pricing of
primary offerings. We provide analysis of these changes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the
background to the creation of the ASE, the evolution of its governance
and listing requirements. Section III presents the periodization of our
study, the historical features of each sub-period and associated the
sample of listings and IPOs. In Section IV we present the main statistical
features of our sample, including the discussion of quasi IPOs. In Section
V we undertake an analysis of IPO pricing and test a regression model of
underpricing. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
2. Exchange Foundation and Governance
2.1 Unregulated Public Offers, Bubbles and the Genesis of an Organized Market
The birth of the Athens Stock Exchange was doubtlessly conditioned by a
dramatic precedent: a ferocious cycle of mania and panic that grew out


8
of unregulated public offers of shares in the early 1870s. The mania
coincided with the first attempts at Greek industrialization, [Agriantoni
(2014)], focused on mining and metalworking shares primarily, but
encompassed banking shares as well. This was a time of speculative
frenzy in other European exchanges. The link of the Athenian
transactions with those of Europe was forged through the activities of
Greek ‘diaspora’ financiers, who, during the 1870s were increasingly
active in Athens along with the Ottoman Empire and other European
capitals, [Syngros (2012)].
Citizens of the independent Kingdom of Greece thus had their first
serious brush with a speculative bubble in 1873. The public offer that
sparked the mania was of shares in a company running the metal
processing plant around the mine of Lavrion, a rich silver source in
ancient times. Rumors and reckless political rhetoric about endless
riches led to spectacular high prices, succeeded by rapid decline in early
1874. The buyers of shares were not only the wealthy Athenian elite.
Small savers and shopkeepers, simple folk from all strata, lured by the
dream of quick enrichment, were embroiled in the buying mania only to
experience ultimate loss. Thus, the ‘investor base’ was greatly expanded
during the mania. The ‘Lavreotika’, as the events were called, would
remain etched in collective memory for a long time. The inauguration of
public offers of equity shares in Greece became an occasion of loss, pain
and social suspicion against financial tycoons. The social mistrust would
influence proceedings at the stock exchange for at least the early years
of its operation.


9
The drama of boom and bust of 1873-74 played out in an informal
market which was operating in and around a popular Athenian coffee
house. Share sales were conducted literally ‘over the counter’ in coffee
shops, grocery stores and merchant establishments. The organization of
new issues, the pricing of the offers, and the details of distribution were
managed primarily by the issuers and two newly founded merchant
banks, the Credit Bank established in 1872 and the Industrial Credit Bank
established in early 1873. The two banks had been launched by
competing groups of recently arrived Greek ‘diaspora’ financiers and had
also offered shares to the public. Merchant banking was surely a
significant innovation in the economy of Greece at the time. The prime
mover of innovation was Andreas Syngros, a famous financier-tycoon
who had made a fortune in the Ottoman Empire, trading commodities
and Ottoman public bonds. As a recent entrant in Greek economic
affairs, he had acquired earlier in 1873 the ‘Lavrion Metalworks’ after a
bitter dispute between the Greek government and a Franco-Italian
group who were the original owners of the Metalworks, [Syngros
(2008)]. One of the conditions of the purchase was that he put up a
portion of the shares for public sale.
In the aftermath of the bust and the political outcry that ensued, the
creation of an organized market was announced in 1876 with the
publication of a royal decree that contained the first charter and a body
of rudimentary rules of the Exchange. The rulebook would be revised in
1879 and actual operation would be inaugurated in 1880. Operation has
continued to this day, with several interruptions during wars and crises
of course, making the Athens Stock Exchange the second longest-lived
financial institution in the country.


10
Shortly before the official launch of the Exchange, a landmark
development that would change the course of the Greek market for
capital had taken place: the government of Greece, which had been
embargoed for several decades from international markets due to
sovereign defaults in the 1830s, regained access to international
borrowing, [Dertilis (2008)]. This was a time in which the international
markets for bonds were expanding, strong capital exports from the
developed European economies were directed to the world periphery
and the role of exchanges was prominent in the process. In that context,
the prospect of capital inflows to Greece hastened the inauguration of
the organized Exchange as an official trading venue for government
paper, company equities or bonds.
A remarkable aspect of the Exchange as a public market for securities is
that its charter included no regulation of public offers of shares, nor was
a public offer required for listing. The absence of such provision appears
all the more conspicuous considering the traumatic events of 1873-74,
when the unregulated public offer of shares had been at the centre of a
big crisis. The continuation of the unregulated status of public offers
testified to the power of issuers and financiers, especially at a time when
Greece was reconnecting to the international financial market in which
entrepreneurs belonging to the Greek Diaspora were already active. In
our view, the memory of the crisis of the 1870s entrenched an ‘IPO
aversion’ among the broad investing public, as an initial condition that
would affect the evolutionary path of the Exchange. It is generally true
that investors in stock exchanges have short memories and their
behaviour is determined by the micro and macro-economic conditions


11
that prevail in a given market and by profit considerations, (Eichengreen
and Linbert (1989)).
Nevertheless, shocks and crises may shape initial conditions that affect
later evolution. The only policy that could hope to facilitate IPO growth
would have been quality regulation of IPOs and especially mandatory
disclosure rules. Such regulation existed already in developed markets.
In Greece however it would not be forthcoming for decades. This is a
puzzling finding, considering that regulation of both listing requirements
and transaction rules was undertaken during the period. The Exchange
was not a government operation. It was a self-regulated entity governed
by its members. It had basic rules of transaction and settlement as well
as minimum listing requirements. On its first bulletin issued on May 12,
1880, the 17 securities listed for trading included six government bonds,
one corporate bond and ten company equities. As we document below,
listings were far more numerous than initial public offerings. Most
companies would acquire their first capital before listing by placement
of shares among narrow groups or even a public offer. They would also
engage in capital increases after listing. In following sections of the
paper we will come back to a closer look at governance reforms and the
analysis of listings and public offerings of private shares.
The inauguration of organized exchange operation did not subjugate
legally (or in practice) the pre-existing ‘free market’ for shares, as the
over-the-counter market was called in 19th century Athens. The two
coexisted and operated in parallel. Shares listed on the Exchange would
trade in both markets, but of course many non-listed shares were also
traded over the counter. In fact, it appears that the ‘free market’ was a


12
very lively one. In the early years, trading on the Exchange would last for
a half to three quarters of an hour and then the ‘free market’ would
operate with some exchange members participating. A contemporary
newspaper reports that the more important transactions were
conducted in the ‘free market’. In 1884 there was trading in the shares
of 26 companies (including a few foreign ones) in the ‘free market’, more
than twice the number of shares listed on the Exchange. Some of the
shares traded off- market would go on to become listed, having
presumably proved their tradability, but many never acquired that
status. It is notable that no foreign company issues were traded on the
Exchange.
An early historian of the Athens exchange wrote: “this [‘free market’]
operated in the streets around the Stock Exchange. It functioned from
morning till night, often to midnight. It was not organized. Some dealers
had offices others not. The trading customs followed those of the official
exchange. Guarantees and sureties required were, as a rule, lower than
the normal ones” [Keramidas (2013)]. The ‘free market’ was to be
officially sidelined by the grant of monopoly status to the Exchange in
1918, 38 whole years after its founding; however evidence of free
market operations persists in press reports throughout the 1920s.
2.2 Exchange Governance and its Successive Reforms
From a governance standpoint, the Exchange remained a self-regulated
organization until 1918, when a landmark law imposed government
interventions, additional rules on its operation and a government
appointed inspector who would oversee their application. Law 1308 of


13
1918 was inspired from analogous legislation of the 1890s and 1900s in
civil law jurisdictions, mainly Germany, France and Italy; its timing was
clearly related to the occurrence of a very large Stock Exchange bubble
in 1918 and the rapid increase in speculation that followed the end of
the war. The new law brought about an overhaul both of legal status
and operating procedures. The Exchange became a public legal entity
and was granted a monopoly on legal transactions of shares, following
earlier French and German arrangements. Other provisions covered the
areas of brokers’ duties, clearing and settlement and types of
transactions, including cash, forward, option and repo-type transactions.
The law additionally introduced, for the first time, penal sanctions for
misinformation, frauds and abuse of investors’ trust.
Law 1308 converted the Exchange to a public legal entity and
established areas of direct government intervention in Exchange affairs;
the government retained major powers not only in oversight but also in
decision-making, as compared to earlier arrangements. A government
inspector’s office was installed with a duty of general supervision of the
rules of operation, the power to suspend Exchange operation for up to
five days and the responsibility of proposing to the Minister of Finance
longer interruptions. An ‘Exchange Council’, separate from the
Exchange’s governing board, was constituted; its composition included
public servants, bank representatives and brokers, the latter being a
minority. The Council wielded powers over policy, broker licensing,
listing and delisting proposals (to which we return below). It was chaired
by the Secretary General of the Ministry of Economy. The creation of the
Council represented a severe curtailment in the power of brokers,


14
especially as it removed from their control two decisions of strategic
importance: broker licensing and securities’ listing.
Ten years later, a new law - Law 3632 of 1928 - was passed revising the
governance structures, rules and operations. As was true at the time of
the Exchange’s original founding in 1878, this was also a period of major
change in financial architecture in Greece and in the country’s
adherence to international monetary arrangements. In May 1928,
Greece established a new central bank, the Bank of Greece, which took
over responsibility for monetary management; Greece committed to the
gold - exchange standard at the same time, [Bank of Greece (2013)]. The
prospect of regaining full participation in the international monetary
system and a new opening to the international economy provided
significant impetus for modernization of the Exchange.
The 1928 law maintained the role of a government inspector clarifying
his responsibilities vis-à-vis the governing board of the Exchange which
was again a committee of broker-members. Importantly, the Exchange
Council that had been established in 1918 now assumed powers of final
decision in matters that had earlier required either Ministerial or Cabinet
approval. In that sense, the new legislation ‘depoliticized’ the decision
process and allowed speedier decision-making. In the same spirit, a
special ‘Exchange Court’ was established which would rapidly adjudicate
differences, claims and frauds arising from transactions both among
brokers and between brokers and clients. The explicit justification for
instituting a special court was the need for speedy resolution of
disputes, which was impossible to achieve in the regular courts. The
penal sanctions for market abuse would also come under the jurisdiction


15
of the special court, and this meant a considerable strengthening in
speed of enforcement. The law rebalanced the earlier regime of
governance by re-expanding Exchange autonomy in specific areas that
had been relegated to government decision in 1918, such as licensing,
listing and brokers’ disputes.
Furthermore, rules for clearing and settlement were revised, the criteria
for licensing of brokers, disciplinarian measures for members and
brokers’ fees were clearly specified. A brokers’ Guarantee Fund, whose
primary form had been already established in August 1923, was now
fully organized as a collectively financed self-insurance fund for brokers.
Its express purpose was to cover obligations to other brokers if one of
their members defaulted and to compensate investors if the broker - in 
default left unfulfilled claims. The Guarantee Fund has proved to be a
very useful and stable arrangement that survives to this day.
The reform of 1928 sought to improve both the efficiency and the
credibility of Exchange operation. The provisions on speedier
enforcement of market abuse prohibitions and of the compensation
scheme for investor losses due to broker failures formed the first
cohesive framework for investor protection in Greece.
Social justice is a powerful but elusive term for social policy analysis, and
is concerned with the extent to which social arrangements may be
regarded as fair (e.g. Alcock et al. 2002, Lister 2007) –i.e. who should get
what, and under what terms- and implies a distributional element. Social
policies produce vertical and/or horizontal redistribution (Culyer 1980).
The extent to which such redistribution is justified and which form
should be given priority, depends on the way of understanding the


16
principle of equality. It particularly reflects the potential belief that
certain specific scarce commodities –such as healthcare or education
should be distributed less unequally than the ability to pay for them.
Social justice legitimizes a principle of ‘redistributive equality’ (e.g. Tobin
1970) –a fair reallocation of income and wealth. This principle leads to a
range of equalising policies, which modify initial distribution by the
provision of welfare benefits. In every respect, a socially just distribution
is primarily concerned with the provision of adequate material resources
to live with dignity, to overcome disadvantage and to flourish. The
principle of equality lies at the root of conflict in politics (Brittan 1968).
Different meanings of equality reflect equally different understandings
of social policy (e.g. Weale 1993). The ‘thick’ version of equality has been
variously called ‘social equality’, ‘equality of status’ or ‘equality of
regard’ (Alcock et al 2002: 77). It reflects the recognition of the
fundamental equality of each individual in social relationships, and an
opposition to social privilege or inequality (e.g. Tawney 1931).
2.3 Listing Requirements
At the beginning of its operation the Exchange instituted and followed
two basic listing conditions for shares of private companies. The first was
very specific: at least one third of the company capital had to be paid
up. This was a condition that ensured credibility for the original owners
but also constituted a rudimentary anti-speculative device against the
sale of empty shells on the Exchange floor. It was not required to
conduct a public offer of shares to obtain listing. There was however a
second condition for listing: a general provision that shares must show


17
potential for trading activity4. The determination of this potential was
left to the governing board of the Exchange, based on evidence
furnished by the candidate company. Besides papers certifying its legal
status and some form of financial statements, tradability would logically
be established on only two grounds: (a) evidence of the actual dispersion
of ownership before listing; (b) actual trading in the lively informal
market which was in operation at least until the 1920s. It is highly
probable that evidence of off-market trading was acceptable in the early
years since the ‘free market’ was legitimate until 1918, when the
Exchange was granted the monopoly of legal transactions in shares.
One of the far reaching innovations of Law 1308 of 1918 was the change
in listing requirements and procedures. As compared to the previous
constraint of a minimum percent of paid up capital, the size of capital
now became a prerequisite for listing. In addition, companies were
required to have published at least two annual financial statements prior
to the time of listing if their capital exceeded 2 million drachmas, but
only one set of annual financial accounts if their capital exceeded 5
million5. Thus, larger capital size was taken as a criterion of quality. With
regard to financial statements, the law made no mention of either
accounting standards or audits. Nevertheless, the fact itself that financial
reporting was elevated to a legal prerequisite for listing must have
boosted both the accounting process and the accounting profession.
More generally, the criterion of size acted as a double edged instrument:
it encouraged large firms, even if they were newly formed ventures, to
seek listing. The earlier requirement of evidence of tradability did not
4 Stock Exchange Organizational Charter (1879) , article 12, Platanopoulos M., ibid, p.37
5 Art 18, Law 1308/1918, Papadimos A., ibid, p. 74


18
reappear in Law 1308 of 1918. It would be inconsistent for a law that
instituted a legal monopoly of Exchange transactions to require evidence
that implicitly admitted the function of the informal market.
The law of 1918 took the power of listing (and delisting) decisions away
from the governing board of the Exchange, i.e. the brokers. The
Exchange Council (constituted as described in the previous section)
assumed the responsibility to evaluate applications for listing and make
proposals to the Minister of Economy who was the final decision-maker.
This represented a politicization of the process of listing that would be
severely criticized both in terms of slowness of process and for
governmental meddling in listings6. In the long parliamentary proposal
that the Minister had drafted to support this law, it was generally
accepted that the direct involvement of government would assure
normal function and the elimination of speculative excess7. This
presumption was probably related to the serious omissions that we
noted earlier. It was implied that government’s active involvement and
the reduction in the power of brokers were deemed sufficient to
reestablish market credibility, after the speculative excess of 1918.
Ten years later, law 3632 of 1928 revised again listing requirements for
shares. The size of capital required for listing was raised to 5 million
drachmas and published annual financial statements over at least three
years prior to listing; however it sufficed for companies whose capital
exceeded 10 million to present only one year’s financial accounts. In
addition, candidate companies had to provide information about their
6 See Parliamentary introduction to the later Law 3632/1928
7 Parliamentary introduction to Law 1308/1918, Papadimos A., ibid


19
shareholdings and their history of capital increases prior to listing8. Thus,
evidence of dispersion of ownership and tradability made its way back
onto the complement of listing requirements. The increase in capital size
did not necessarily represent a tightening of listing requirements.
Increases in nominal drachma amounts may have simply been an
adjustment to inflation of the decade since 1918. If we consider the gold
parity of the drachma (see Figure 1) the change in nominal size actually
represented a reduction in gold value terms.
Law 3632 of 1928 rebalanced the power of decision over listings. It
vested the Exchange Council with decision-making authority for listings
thus distancing the arrangement from the politicization of direct
ministerial involvement of 1918, but maintaining at the same time the
limits on brokers’ influence. The Council became a ‘listing authority’ that
could act speedily and with adequate expertise on admissions to trading.
It is worth repeating that, like its predecessors, this more sophisticated
law included no explicit regulation of public offers of shares. The
conduct of public offers continued to be unregulated until after the
Second World War.
3. Exchange Listings and IPOs 1880 to 1940: The Impact of the Environment
3.1 The Sample
Using archival data from the files of the Stock Exchange and the National
Bank of Greece, press reports and Exchange bulletins we have put
together Table 1 (in Appendix) which shows new listings and initial
8 Art. 19 of Law 3632/1928 see, Keramidas T., Stock exchanges, Athens 1929, p.36


20
public offerings of equity shares in the years 1880-1940. Figure 1 shows
diagrammatically listings and IPOs for the entire period 1880-1940.
The data in the Figure show two general characteristics. The first is that
listings by far exceeded IPOs throughout the period. Over the 60 years
(1880-1940) there are 165 new company listings and of those only 21
companies conducted concurrent IPOs. Thus, market development was
based on listings, primarily. The second characteristic is that there is a
strong movement of ebb and flow over the years in the process of
gaining access to the Exchange. There are periods of little or no listing
activity and other periods in which new listings occurred at a rapid pace.
Figure 1. No of Listings, No of IPOs & Total no of firms launchd on the ASE during the period 1880-1940
2
111
2
11 1
33
2 1
2
3 1
3
4
2 1
3
4
33
4 2
44
8
10
8 7 5
9
1
22
6
2
5
6
8
3
13
11 1
1
1 1
7
2
1
1
3
4
11
2
11 11
3
1
3 2
11
2
4
1
3
4
2 1
3
5 4 3
4
2
44
8
17
10
8
5
9
22 2
6
2
5
6
8
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
1912
1913
1914
1915
1916
1917
1918
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
Year
No of listings, IPOs & totals
No of listings No IPOs No of listings & IPOs
In order to separate out those periods more clearly we have constructed
Figure 2. We show periods in which, in at least two consecutive years,
the number of new listings exceeded the annual average of the whole
period 1880-1940 (hot periods of listing activity). That average is 2.70
per annum and the hot periods are 1911-12, 1916-20, 1922-29, and
1937-40. Hot periods encompass 21 years. New listings in those years


21
represented 61 percent of all listings in the long 60-year period
examined here.
It is important to note that the visible jumps in listing activity did not
follow but rather preceded the changes in listing requirements in 1918
and 1928. This is an expected characteristic of the political process as
decision-makers, business lobbies, the press and the public are not
prescient about market developments but become energized after
market activity develops sufficiently to capture attention and to exert
visible impacts on the economy. So it is significant that legal changes
occurred in the midst (or towards the end) of periods when listing
activity was strong and continuous.
Thus, it appears that the process was not driven by legal change but
rather by demand for listings. In turn, demand for listings was linked to
economic conditions and the state of expectations in the Greek
environment. In fact, the economic and political environment was in
constant turmoil. Over the sixty years from 1880 to 1940, Greece was
embroiled in two world wars, four local wars and two sovereign
bankruptcies. The Exchange and its listed firms lived that history and
responded to the needs and the conditions of each period. It is
impossible to gain an understanding of the movement of listings and
IPOs without a background ‘history tour’, since shifts were not random
but, to a large extent, historically conditioned.


22
Figure 2. No of companie s liste d in  ̈hot ̈ ye ars whe re the listing activity e xce e d the annual ave rage of 2.70
3
4 3
5 4 3
4 44
8
10
8
5
9
5
6
8
3
17
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1884
1889
1892
1894
1898
1900
1905
1907
1909
1911
1913
1916
1918
1920
1922
1924
1926
1928
1930
1934
1936
1938
1940
No of Listings in  ̈hot ̈ years
Before embarking on our brief ‘history tour’ however, we must ponder
the conceptual distinction between listing with and without a public
offering of shares, as this is a dominant characteristic of the data in
Table 1. The question is what incentive was there to list, if immediate
access to external equity finance was not sought simultaneously. The
question becomes even sharper if we recall that the Exchange was not a
monopolistic trading venue but coexisted and competed with the ‘free
market’ for more than half the period. If listing simply meant access to
trading liquidity for company owners, the ‘free market’ was available
and apparently quite active. So what would a firm gain by listing (but not
raising capital concurrently) on the Exchange?
Two simple conjectures fit the qualitative evidence. First, the attainment
of listing requirement was a reputational signal for the company being
listed, since successful examination by Exchange authorities offered
‘certification’, something that could not exist for the ‘free market’9.
Second, companies that obtained listing could exploit their new visibility
9 The certification function is normally attributed to underwriters in the modern literature. In the context of the Greek market no formal underwriting arrangements have been recorded. Listing and tradability of shares could also increase their value as collateral for borrowing from banks


23
to proceed to later capital increases by secondary offers, after
establishing a track record on the Exchange. This implies that listings
were not ‘stand alone’ decisions but part of a process at the end of
which external equity capital was indeed raised10. Contemporaries also
noted that listings at times of high inflation enabled inflation adjustment
to company capital. Indeed, for a large portion of the period under study
inflation was high. In any case, although listing was not
contemporaneous to an offer of new shares, it could act as a
precondition to one. In addition, in a historical context where early
mistrust for IPOs was high due to the events of the 1870s, the low
liquidity in the overall economy must have also contributed to this
result.
In the next several paragraphs we describe briefly the unfolding
historical conditions and aim to connect them to the evolution of
listings. We organize this discussion into three sub-periods which are
historically cogent11: 1880-1898, 1899-1922 and 1923-1940.
3.2 From development to official bankruptcy and international control: 1880-1898
The last twenty years of the 19th century witnessed a great cycle in
Greek economic fortunes. In 1878 Greece had, as already said, regained
access to international markets and a large inflow of borrowed funds
occurred, giving a visible boost to liquidity, investment planning and
10 See section E below for data on capital increases that took place soon after listing
11 For general historical references see G. Dertilis, History of the Modern Greek State 1830-1920 (in Greek), Athens 2005 and C. Costis, Les enfants gâtés de l'histoire: The formation of neo-hellenic state (in Greek), Athens 2013, Critical dates are 1898 (the year of Greece’s defeat in war with Turkey and the initiation of International Financial Control), 1922 (the year of the disastrous end to the Asia Minor war with Turkey), 1940 (the beginning of WW2). See below more details in the ‘history tour’


24
general economic activity. The 1880s saw the launching of major
infrastructural projects, railroads, roads and the Corinth Canal, leading
to feverish activity of building and construction of public infrastructure.
Many of these works had long incubation periods and could not help
service loans in the short term. A worsening balance of payments, the
increasing burden of public debt and the intensification of military
spending produced a fiscal crisis in the late 1880s. International lending
became much restricted after the Baring Crisis and the Argentine default
in 1892. Greece itself followed with sovereign default in 1893. In the
ensuing years the drachma devalued substantially and new import tariffs
were imposed which eventually boosted domestic production and
exports. However, war with Turkey broke out in 1897 with disastrous
consequences for Greece: besides the waste and demoralization of
defeat, Greece was burdened with heavy reparation payments to
Turkey. The country’s public finances were placed under International
Financial Control in 189812.
From being a confident new entrant into international markets in the
late 1870s, Greece was reduced to the status of a fiscal mendicant
within twenty years. The cycle of over-indebtedness of the government
was assisted both by all too-willing lenders and domestic
mismanagement. The growing share of military expenditures was a
major reason for over-borrowing and was either directly unproductive
or, even if interpreted as an ‘investment’ in territorial protection and
expansion, was heavily damaged in the war of 1897. Practically, this
entire cycle could also be read as a swing of the pendulum from a stance
of international economic openness to one of protection and relative
12 On the IFC see G. Dertilis, ibid


25
isolation. In the latter phase, which set in after the sovereign default,
protection had a positive impact on domestic production. The reflection
of these movements is directly observable on the Stock Exchange and
the evolution of listings in the early years of the twentieth century.
Admissions onto listing on the Exchange were relatively numerous in the
1880s and the 1890s with eight listings in the first and ten in the second
decade. The composition of the companies listed varied considerably
between the two decades. In the 1880s, it was dominated by the
quickening pace of infrastructure investments and military production:
of the eight companies listed, three were railroads two were
construction firms and one was a powder and explosives company. In
the 1890s listings were more diversified reflecting the acceleration of
domestic production under protective tariffs and devaluation: listed
companies were active in energy, steam-shipping, textiles, machine
tools. Thus, we observe the first appearance of ‘industrial stocks’ on the
Exchange. The largest company listed however a bank, the Bank of
Athens was. Please see Appendix B for Table 1
In this sub-period, and compared to 15 new listings, there were 5 IPOs.
They reflected the trends of the time: a munitions manufacturer, two
railroad companies, a bank and a company managing public land rents.
3.3 Recovery, War and Expansion: 1899-1922
The quarter century following Greece’s fiscal subjection to international
financial control is one of the most dense and turbulent periods in the
country’s economic history. Fiscal adjustment was gradually achieved
and the drachma followed a path of revaluation in the early years of the


26
new century, reaching its pre-1893 levels in 1909. The balance of
payments improved especially with the emergence of remittances from
emigrants and shipping, which constituted a fresh source of domestic
liquidity [Repoulis (2010)]. The country regained confidence and
although traditional industries were hurt by the currency revaluation,
new and more technologically advanced firms made their appearance,
with several showing up in Exchange listings, as we explain below. Amid
this climate, political change was spearheaded by an officers’ revolt, a
new government with plans for broad modernization was instituted and
the country’s geographic expansion started with the union of Crete with
Greece in 1913. Crete was officially annexed to Greece in December
1913, after the end of the Balkan Wars. It would be fair to characterize
the first decade of the twentieth century as a period of peace and
recovery with fiscal and monetary stability. This would soon change
however.
With new confidence vis-à-vis the Ottoman Empire which was
disintegrating, Greece went to war in 1912-13 and the victorious
outcome saw a doubling of its territory to the north and a near-doubling
of its population. Greece joined the Entente in World War I and obtained
further territorial gains. The period of 1916-19 was, despite the war, one
of economic optimism for the future of an enlarged nation. However,
the war for Greece did not end in 1918. The country became embroiled
in war with Turkey in Asia Minor in 1920 ending in defeat for Greece in
1922. That defeat brought another kind of expansion: almost a million
and a half of Asia Minor Greeks were uprooted and forced to move to
Greece as refugees. This huge and sudden ‘population shock’ was
initially debilitating and had dire fiscal consequences since the country


27
had to cope with a huge resettlement effort. The ten years of almost
continuous war had, as expected, forced new fiscal imbalances and
monetary financing of budgets. The resettlement effort made things
even worse. The period of wars was one of rapid inflation of the order of
25-55 percent annually.
The Stock Exchange experienced two distinct booms during this period,
with new listings and public offerings apparently coalescing around
these booms. The first occurred in 1904-6, a period when recovery and
monetary stabilization had entrenched themselves; the second occurred
in 1916-19, a period when, despite the war, optimism about the
enlarged Greece was running high but also a time of inflation and large
business profits. Leading sectors in the listings of these periods were
banks, steamship companies, cement companies, the first Greek electric
utility company, foods, chemicals and textiles. Steamship companies
represented the most export-oriented sector of the time whereas most
others were oriented to the internal market which, especially during the
war and with territorial expansion was both protected and considerably
enlarged. In the first decade of stability (1900-10) larger companies were
founded that undertook large new investments and sought greater
efficiency of production. In the second decade, inflation and domestic
demand dominated the motives for company formations and listings,
[Agriantoni (2014)]. As noted with regard to the previous period (1880
98) conditions of trade protectionism boosted the emergence of
enterprises that catered to the domestic market and this happened
inevitably during the ten-year period of Greek engagement in wars.


28
One notable feature is that, in every period of quickened listing activity,
new banks were systematically emerging, both at times of monetary
stability and at times of inflation. One factor that must have played a
role in this was the large increase in inflows of foreign exchange in the
form of remittances from recent Greek emigrants and from shipping.
These provided a source of liquidity independent of official borrowings
and were quite dispersed in the population. Furthermore, foreign
private investments made their appearance during the first decade of
the twentieth century, directed especially to new banking ventures,
(Costis (2013)). Arguably, the listing of banks was an indicator of the
broader entrepreneurial climate in the Exchange and the economy.
Please see Appendix B for Table 2
As compared to 54 new listings in this sub-period, only 5 IPOs were
conducted contemporaneously to listing. Three of these were conducted
by new banks and occurred before 1910. The remaining two took place
during the boom years 1917-8 and were conducted by private industrial
firms. This was the harbinger of the rise of industrial IPOs that would
bloom in the ensuing decade. On the whole for this sub-period the
relative role of IPOs in market development was limited.
3.4 New development, the ‘roaring twenties’, world crisis: 1923-1940
The ‘population shock’ of 1922 was experienced as a disaster by those
who were uprooted but became a sort of growth engine for the Greek
economy. Asia Minor Greeks were skilled and enterprising, and they
soon sought new ventures in their new home. Furthermore, public
spending (including foreign aid) on refugee assistance created large


29
domestic demands for food, clothing and housing. The pace of growth
picked up; 1923-29 was a distinct episode of rapid development in
recent Greek history. Inflation also continued but was on the whole
much lower than the earlier decade, averaging an annual rate of 13
percent in the years 1924-27 . In 1928 Greece, under pressure from
international donors, undertook monetary stabilization, pegged the
drachma to the British pound sterling (which adhered to the Gold
Exchange Standard) and created a central bank, the Bank of Greece, to
oversee and execute monetary policy . Once again Greece became a full
participant in the international monetary system, except that the system
itself proved short-lived.
The 1929 crash in the New York market ushered in a period of general
financial crisis and depression. On September 21, 1931 the pound
sterling went off the gold standard and the Greek government closed
down the Exchange and all trading in foreign exchange. In April 1932,
Greece itself abandoned the gold exchange standard and declared
official default on its public debt. The Exchange did not reopen until
December of that year. Following most advanced countries Greece
instituted protectionist measures. The crisis was not as harsh in Greece
as in most advanced industrial economies. Under the protectionist
regime, the economy picked up and local manufacturing was once again
energized, Costis (2013). This moderate but upward economic trend
would be finally interrupted with the eruption of the Second World War
in 1939.
In the 1920s, especially after 1924, the Exchange experienced another
boom and an unprecedented record in new listings. 71 companies were


30
admitted to trading in this period, of which most prominent were
banking firms with 15 listings, textiles with 12, construction with 8,
chemicals and food each with 7 new listings. This listing activity
represented about 50 percent of all listings since the Exchange’s
inception and would not be encountered again until postwar booms in
the 1970s and the 1990s. In the ensuing decade of the 1930s, new
listings would continue but at a reduced pace, with 33 new admissions
to trading, with textile firms covering about one third of that number. A
very interesting feature of the 1930s was that the financial stabilization
of the late twenties and the financial crisis of the thirties led to the
failure or merger of many of the new banks that had emerged during the
boom of the 1920s. Please see Appendix 2 for Table 3.
As compared to the record 104 new listings in this sub-period, 11 IPOs
were conducted. All of those took place until 1930 and a long stoppage
in IPO activity ensued that covered the whole decade of the 1930s. Nine
IPOs represented offers of industrial stocks, one was conducted by a
construction company and one by the newly established central bank.
This is clearly the period of the rise of industrial finance through the
stock exchange. Aside from this significant sectoral shift however, the
number of IPOs as a proportion of total listings actually declined as
compared to earlier periods. The need for visibility and reputation
during the ‘hot market’ of the 1920s was probably running ahead of
actual capital needs for new firms seeking to be admitted to Exchange
trading.


31
4. Listings and IPOs: Frequency, Size and Quasi-IPOs
In this section we present in more rigorous fashion the features of
listings and IPOs as they evolved over the long 60-year period under
study. We address several related research questions. A first one relates
to size and age of the firms admitted to listing. Whether larger or
smaller, older or younger companies sought access to the exchange is
important in itself, as it indicates whether the exchange was, or became
over time, a trading venue for small and/or young firms. Within a
broader perspective this is very relevant to the contribution of the
Exchange to enterprise development and economic change.
The second question relates to whether simple listings were actually
‘IPOs in waiting’, i.e. listings that were quickly followed by a capital
increase. We collect data on all cases where a listing was followed,
within a period of two years, by an issue of new shares. We consider
these as “quasi IPOs” and compare them to actual IPOs and their
features. The inclusion of ‘quasi-IPOs’ offers a more accurate assessment
of the role of the Exchange in the financing of listed firms, considering
that pure IPOs may have been avoided due to historical reasons, the
persistent lack of IPO regulation, or the implied low quality of
disclosure.
4.1 The size and age of listed companies
Given the length of time and the multi-faceted economic conditions
during the long sixty years that we described, the examination of these
simple features acquires significance since it allows an evolutionary
perspective. We saw that in the early decades there was emphasis on


32
infra-structural projects which were necessarily large. Manufacturing
came later and its growth was largely spurred by expanding domestic
market potential. This would imply that the size of listed undertakings
would change over time as the type and scale of undertakings by firms
also changed.
In the case of simple listings, size is measured by the nominal value of
the stock at the time of listing. In the case of IPOs we measure the
magnitude of the actual offer, which is defined as the number of shares
offered times the offer price, and indicates the amount of capital raised
by the IPO. Age is uniformly measured as the number of years between
the founding of a company and the time of listing.
Table 4 shows the means of size and age for both simple listings and
IPOs. In panel A, the estimates are shown for the whole period. In panels
B-D the estimates are shown for each sub-period discussed in the
previous section. In panels E-F the sample is decomposed into ‘hot’ and
‘cold’ listing periods. Please see Appendix B for Table 4
We first note that the average size of IPO offerings exceeds by far the
average size of firms that obtain simple listing. This is easy to interpret:
IPOs were necessarily used when capital needs were high and could not
be satisfied by recourse to narrow networks of capital providers or
private resources of original owners. Thus, within the IPO sample there
are a few very large placements. Yet, as already noted, listings by far
exceeded IPOs in number, the latter being a small minority. Looking at
the sub-periods, we note that whereas in the early period 1880-98, IPOs
represented 33 percent of all new listings, in the subsequent periods the
share of IPOs fell to only 10 percent of all listings. We conclude that the


33
growth of the primary market was stunted and did not keep pace with
the general and considerable expansion of the market as a whole.
It is telling that total capital raised in IPOs throughout this period
amounted to about 3.5 million gold sovereigns. The aggregate
capitalization of (non-IPO) listed firms estimated at the time of their first
trading amounted to about 24 million. The comparison gives a fair idea
of relative magnitudes and the limited role of IPOs. It also suggests that
private offerings that occurred before listing were a primary form of
capital gathering off the Exchange.
The estimates in Panels B-D show a clear tendency of reduction in size
over time, both for simple listing and IPOs. This is consistent with the
conjecture that new sectors and smaller undertakings were gaining
access to the Exchange over time. At the same time the average and
especially the median age of listed firms were relatively low (3-5 years)
and did not show considerable change over time. Thus, we conclude that
the Exchange was a venue for trading shares of relatively young firms,
which makes sense in a small and relatively young country which was
still in an early stage of development.
In panels E-F we decompose the sample in two segments according to
our prior definition of ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ periods as shown in Figure 2. We
recall that we characterized as ‘hot listing periods’ those in which the
number of listings, for at least two consecutive years, surpassed the
average for the overall sample. In these panels we show the breakdown
for simple listings and for IPOs.


34
The estimations in panels E and F reveal that the size of listings during
the ‘hot’ period was much lower than in the ‘cold’ period: an average of
66.4 thousand gold sovereigns in the ‘hot period’ versus 110.6 thousand
in the ‘cold period’. This implies that the ‘hot’ periods were times during
which a rush for listing took place energizing the supply of shares by
smaller firms. This is not an unexpected result.
The comparison is more telling in the case of IPOs. The difference in size
between the two types of market condition is far more dramatic: the
average offer was 25.8 thousand gold sovereigns in the ‘hot period’ as
compared to 352.9 thousand in the ‘cold period’. The total number of
IPOs, contrary to simple listings, was about evenly divided between the
two types of periods, so that total capital raised during the ‘cold period’
(3.2 million) was about 7 times the amount of capital raised in the ‘hot
period’ (459 thousand). This is a clear indication of a break in the pattern
of the firms undertaking an IPO in the two periods. An element of
market timing might have been present with firms preferring to engage
in IPOs only during times when the supply of shares for new listing was
restricted, as opposed to ‘hot’ listing periods when both investor and
entrepreneur sentiment was presumably higher and many
entrepreneurs preferred simple listing.
4.2 IPOs and Quasi-IPOs
We characterize as a ‘quasi-IPO’ the case where a firm announces a
capital increase soon after listing, offering sale of new shares for cash. If
the time of the capital increase is indeed close to that of listing, the
strategy comes close to this being a delayed IPO, rather than a truly


35
‘seasoned’ offering. We must recall that in the Greek context
underwriting was not a developed institutional arrangement with all the
regulatory requirements of the present day. The primary sale of shares
was unregulated and issuers were the main decision-makers. Disclosure
quality at the time of listing was probably low. The function of
certification, which in the modern literature is attributed to
underwriters, was vested in the seal of approval offered by the listing
authority itself. Thus a quasi-IPO would benefit from both the
certification of the listing decision and the acquisition of visibility
through trading. Unfortunately, there is little or no evidence of trading
activity, so it is not possible to distinguish firms which acquired a trading
track record quickly after being listed. Instead, we have imposed a
reasonable time limit of two years as a period during which some trading
record is acquired but also in which the listing certification retains
validity as a reputational asset. Listed firms which engaged in capital
increases within two years of listing are here considered as quasi-IPOs.
In Table 5 we show a list of quasi-IPOs that took place over the entire
period. Please see Appendix B for Table 5.
In Table 6 we show descriptive statistics for quasi-IPOs and IPOs for the
whole period and by ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ listing period. Size now describes
the size of the offer in all cases. Data are classified by the date of listing,
not by the date of the ensuing capital increase in the case of quasi-IPOs.
Please see Appendix B for Table 6.
As shown in Table 6, 41‘quasi-IPOs’ were performed over the period,
almost double the number of IPOs. However, total capital raised through
these ‘quasi-IPOs’ amounted to about 1.5 million gold sovereigns, less


36
than half the aggregate amount raised by IPOs (3.7 million gold
sovereigns). Thus, it appears that ‘quasi-IPOs’ were chosen by smaller
firms and for smaller under-takings; these cases were probably more
needful of the certification and the visibility provided by an Exchange
listing, before attempting to raise funds.
As expected, when we look at the decomposition of the sample between
‘hot’ and ‘cold’ listing periods, quasi- IPOs far exceed IPOs both in
number and in capital raised during the ‘hot listing’ periods. The reverse
holds in the ‘cold’ period.
The basic conclusion is that especially smaller firms used Exchange listing
as a precondition for raising funds after having gained access to market
trading. This implies that the supply of securities in actual IPOs
understated the true demand for capital by new firms and that this
demand became manifest shortly after listing, for smaller firms. These
used listing itself as a ‘certification’ signal that facilitated the supply of
new capital in an environment in which mandatory and uniform
disclosure requirements were not enforced.
5. The Double Face of IPO Pricing: Overpricing or Underpricing?
5.1 The Overall Picture of Public Offerings
The modern literature is replete with evidence on IPO under-pricing. This
appears to be a phenomenon of recent times however. Several historical
studies of large markets in the 19th or early 20th centuries show that IPO
under-pricing was either absent or very small in magnitude (Chambers
and Dimson (2003), Dimson (2007), Fohlin (2000), Biais (2002), Jovanovic


37
and Rousseau (2005), Chambers (2005), Schlag and Wodrich (2005),
Champers and Dimson (2009), Champers (2009), Marsh (2010), Marsh
(2011), Burhop (2011), Chambers (2011 ), Burhop et al. (2011))13.
We use our database to pose the question of pricing to Greek historical
data for 1880-1940. We measure initial returns (RIR) by observing the
difference of the first trading price and the offer price of the new shares,
as a percentage of the offer price. RIR is calculated as follows:
,0
,1 ,0
i
ii
i OP
CP OP
RIR 
 (1)
where, CPi,1 is the price on the first trading day of the newly listed shares
and OPi,0 is the offering price.
In Table 7 we show all the IPOs conducted over the period and the
calculation of associated initial returns. Please see Appendix B for Table
7. The Table’s basic finding is stark and impressive: a visible and large
shift in the pricing of IPOs took place during the period of our study.
Specifically, panel A presents the initial returns for each IPO that took
place in the Athens Stock Exchange over the period 1880-1940, while in
Panel B we estimate that the average of initial returns of Greek IPOs was
114.91%. i.e. offer prices understated prices at first trading by this
percentage. This high average masks however a very large swing across
time periods.
During the period from 1880 to 1898, public offers were overpriced by
an average of 29.75%, with all five IPOs undertaken being over-priced.
Overpricing persisted at an average level of 12.20% in the period from
13 See especially Elroy-Dimson, Burhop [2011], Chambers [2011]


38
1899 to 1922. This meant that the average buyer of shares at these
primary offerings would experience a loss had they sold at first trading
prices as compared to the offer price they paid. This picture accords with
evidence in other European markets for the equivalent period.
However, the finding is radically reversed in the 1920s. More specifically
in the period after 1922, IPOs experienced severe underpricing, (i.e.
severe understatement of trading price by the offer price) with a mean
value of 238.44%. Especially during 1925 – a boom year in the ‘roaring
twenties’ – a record annual number of seven IPOs were performed; their
under-pricing averaged 330 percent. Even the shares of the Bank of
Greece, Greece’s new Central Bank which were issued in 1927, were
underpriced by 52%.
5.2 A Simple Statistical Model of Underpricing
We formulate a statistical model of underpricing in order to study the
role of various factors that may have contributed to the phenomenon.
We undertake regression analysis despite the small size of our IPO
sample to explore if any significant additional indications can be gained.
The regression model is specified as follows:
RIR = a0 + β1 LnSIZE + β2 Ln(1+AGE) + β3 GO + β4 Y + β5 D1925 +εi (2)
The dependent variable is as defined in (1). The independent variables
are defined as follows:
LnSIZE measures (the logarithm of) the size of the offer, i.e. the number
of issued shares times the offer price. Offer prices are expressed in gold
sovereigns throughout. This variable is available in our collected data.


39
Extensive prior literature from contemporary markets indicates that
large companies are associated with a lower level of underpricing
(Maksimovic and Ural (1993); Brennan and Franks (1997); Heeley,
Matusik and Jain (2007)). We therefore expect a negative relationship
between the size of the offering across time and returns.
Ln (1+AGE) measures (the logarithm of) the age of the company at the
time of the public offering. This is the difference in years between the
date of company establishment and the date of the public offering. This
variable is also available in our collected data. Empirical literature
indicatew that higher age contributes to lower underpricing (i.e
Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1989); Loughran and Ritter (2004)). Thus,
we hypothesize a negative relationship between the age of the offering
and returns.
GO measures the percentage of equity ownership offered to the public
at the time of the public offering. This variable is also available in our
collected data. Chambers and Dimson (2009) in their historical study on
LSE indicate that underpricing systematically decreases as the
proportion of shares sold increases; Contemporary studies and evidence
(Habib and Ljungqvist (2001), Sherman and Titman (2002)), highlight a
trade-off between the proportion of post-issue voting equity sold in the
offering and the extent to which shares are underpriced. Thus we
hypothesize a positive relationship between given ownership and
underpricing. This effect may in fact be stronger in the Greek historical
context of low disclosure. It is likely that a higher percentage of given
ownership may require the attraction of a broader pool of initial


40
investors who are less informed, and therefore be positively associated
with stronger under-pricing.
Y is the number of non-IPO listings during the year of the IPO, measured
as a percentage of total listings. This variable serves to indicate the
pressure of supply of listings and capture the impact of ‘hot’ listing
periods.
D1925 is a dummy variable taking the value of 1 only for year 1925 when
the number of IPOs reached an all-time high (7 IPOs within that year). By
this variable we seek to single out effects of extreme supply pressure
which was specifically observed in that particular year.
In Table 8 we show the results of estimation of the regression model (2).
Please see Appendix B for Table 8.
We estimate regression (2) in three ways: first, we include both variables
Y and D1925 (column 1) and then we use them as alternatives (columns
(2) and (3)).
Looking first at the results with firm-level variables we note in Table 8
that the effect of size is strongly negative and significant, whereas the
measure of age is not. The latter result is probably due to the fact that
intra-sample variation of the age variable is small. The percent of given
ownership is strongly and positively associated with under-pricing. These
findings are consistent with international evidence from more developed
markets but also reflect characteristically the low disclosure regime of
the Greek market. In our view, variables such as size and given
ownership served as signals to investors who, at the time, could not
easily assess a company’s prospects because of uneven disclosure


41
requirements. Hence, the effects of size and given ownership are so
clearly discernible even in a small sample.
Coming now to market-level variables, the supply of non-IPO listings (Y)
appears to exercise a positive and significant effect on underpricing. This
implies that during ‘hot’ listing periods IPOs were more severely
underpriced, as theory and empirical evidence from other markets also
indicate.
When the dummy variable for year 1925 is used, it appears to be also a
significant, strong and positive influence on underpricing. In fact, when it
is used jointly with the supply variable Y, the latter loses all significance.
Thus, during 1925 we note not only the largest number of IPOs in any
single year for our sample, but also the highest level of underpricing.
Whereas, the intensity of underpricing can be explained by supply
pressure, it is also necessary to ask what was so special about 1925, so
as to have such a high supply of IPOs.
In our sample, we note that 1925 was the first year of IPO activity after a
long pause. It was also a year in which stock prices peaked. The last IPO
had taken place 7 years before, in a year (1918) when the Stock market
had also boomed. Several historical sources indicate that the post 1922
period was one of inflation which led to decreases in both the real wage
and the real interest rate, thus enabling higher profitability
(Christodoulaki (2001). Increasing profitability was one of the causes of
the IPO boom of 1925. Furthermore, 1926 marked a sharp turn towards
restrictive monetary and fiscal policies. As Christodoulaki (2001) notes
“The timing of this change in economic performance is located in late
1925 and early 1926 when pressure to improve the fiscal performance of


42
the government and to follow contractionary monetary policies in order
to stabilize the drachma was increased”14. The peak in IPO activity
observed in 1925 was therefore attributable to a confluence of factors:
long pent up demand, high stock market valuations and expansionary
monetary and fiscal policy.
6. Conclusion
The development of the Athens Stock Exchange from its inception (1880)
to the outbreak of the Second World War (1940) was an active process.
It came to include 166 new listings of private companies, besides the
mandatory listing of government bonds. The Stock market experienced
several ‘hot’ periods of listing activity and peaking prices. In the first
three decades of its operation as a trading venue, the Exchange
competed with a free market which operated informally alongside the
official function.
However, the Exchange’s role as a primary market for capital-rising
through IPOs was limited. Only 13 percent of the firms that attained
listing over this long period actually performed IPOs. Another 25 percent
however chose to increase their capital by public offers shortly after
acquiring the status of listed firms. In part, the explanation of low IPO
activity, especially in the early period of Stock Exchange operations,
must be sought in the traumatic effects of a bubble in the 1870s, before
a formal Exchange had been organized. In later times, when the effects
of the early bubble had been forgotten, IPO activity would still remain
sparse. This could be the result of insufficient liquidity in an emerging
14 Christodoulaki, O. “Industrial growth in Greece between the wars: A new perspective” European Review of Economic History, 5, p. 80


43
economy but could also be related to the lack of regulation, especially
adequate provisions for disclosure and IPO quality that could inspire
trust to investors.
Our analysis shows that the parallel activity of quasi-IPOs (capital raising
performed within two years of listing) was much more fervent, especially
in the 1920s, and during ‘hot’ periods, generally. The difference between
IPOs and quasi-IPOs was that the latter had already obtained the
certification of the listing authority and had established a track record of
trading. Hence, whereas the same amount of capital raised in an IPO or a
quasi-IPO made the same demands on liquidity, they offered differential
levels of information about the issuer and met with different levels of
investor trust.
It is notable that despite several public interventions in the early
twentieth century on the governance structure of the Exchange, IPOs
remained unregulated, investment banking services were not
standardized and the quality of disclosure was low and uneven. This is
probably the longer-term explanation of the relative weakness of the
primary market. It must be clarified that there was no general absence
of regulatory activity. Significant regulatory changes did take place from
1918 to 1928, but they were focused on listing requirements, secondary
trading and the duties of brokers, but not on IPOs and investment
banking.
Examining the sample of 21 IPOs that did take place over the period
1880-1940, we note a significant change in character and composition.
Whereas banking IPOs appeared throughout the period, non-financial
issues shifted from infrastructure-related projects and few heavy


44
industry undertakings to light industry ventures mainly oriented to the
satisfaction of domestic demand. A notable reduction in the average size
over time and a visible shift from over- to under-pricing around the
second decade of the twentieth century are evident trends. Analysis of
pricing revealed that size, the percent of given ownership and the
pressure of supply of securities were associated with under-pricing.
In a more general historical assessment it appears that the Athens Stock
Exchange responded to two major aspects of economic developments in
Greece. The first was the large expansion of the domestic market that
resulted from substantial changes both in the country’s area and
population. This eventually shifted the focus of listing activity to firms
catering to the domestic market. This was also a response to protracted
war conditions which created a de facto protectionism of the enlarged
domestic market. The second aspect was the emergence of inflation and
monetary instabilities, especially in the period after the decade of wars
(1912-1922). Our evidence shows a large increase in listing activity and
IPOs in the 1920s when inflationary profits were making an appearance.
These phenomena would come to an abrupt stop with restrictive policies
enacted from 1926.


45
Appendix A: Listings, IPOs, Annual Volume, Mean First Day Prices and Returns, First Trading Day IPO Returns, Proceeds and Money Left on the Table, 1880-1940
The study starts from 1880 when Athens Stock Exchange officially started
its operations. Both IPOs and listings are included in the table. Listing
price is the nominal stock price of listings or the offer price of IPOs’ new
stocks offered during the public offering procedure. First trading price is
the first closing price of IPOs or listing in the A.S.E. on the first trading
day. First day returns for IPOs are the change from the offer (or listing)
price to the closing price on the first day of trading and are equally
weighted (EW). First day returns for listings are the change from the
nominal price to the first closing price on the first or following day of
trading and are equally weighted (EW). Raised Funds and money left on
the table are in Gold Sovereign prices. The amount of money left on the
table by IPOs is defined as the difference between the closing price on
the first day and the listing price, multiplied by the number of shares sold
to the public (new investors). In other words, this is the first-day profit
received by investors who were allocated IPO shares at the offer price. It
represents a wealth transfer from the shareholders of the issuing firm to
these investors.


46
Panel A: No of Listings, No of IPOs & Mean Prices (Trading, Listing, Offer) Period15 Number of IPOs + Listings
Number of Listings
Mean Listing Price
Mean First Trading Price
Number of IPOs16,17
Mean Offer Price
Mean First Trading Price
1884 3 2 3.91 3.07 1 3.82 3.06 1887 4 1 3.00 2.97 3 8.66 4.76 1889 1 1 6.52 9.13 0 - 1891 1 1 6.23 6.69 0 - 1892 2 2 5.74 5.51 0 - 1893 1 1 14.64 12.24 0 - 1894 1 1 2.26 3.05 0 - 1897 1 1 5.89 2.47 0 - 1898 1 0 - - 1 3.48 2.28 1899 3 3 6.01 4.51 0 - 1900 1 0 - - 1 4.88 4.90 1903 3 3 5.67 5.04 0 - 1905 2 2 6.90 7.35 0 - 1906 1 0 - - 1 5.58 5.65 1907 1 1 3.69 3.98 0 - 1908 2 2 3.68 3.25 0 - 1909 4 3 1.95 2.20 1 3.82 3.82 1910 1 1 16.12 17.74 0 - 1911 3 3 4.03 4.83 0 - 1912 4 4 3.97 4.35 0 - 1913 2 2 3.97 4.37 0 - 1914 1 1 3.97 4.13 0 - 1916 3 3 4.04 5.11 0 - 1917 5 4 4.06 5.72 1 4.07 5.29 1918 4 3 4.00 6.23 1 5.27 5.68 1919 3 3 4.06 4.96 0 - 1920 4 4 4.38 5.40 0 - 1921 2 2 2.94 5.30 0 - 1922 4 4 0.52 1.09 0 - 1923 4 4 0.31 0.69 0 - 1924 8 8 0.44 1.10 0 - 1925 17 10 0.54 1.49 7 0.30 1.31 1926 10 8 0.68 1.72 2 0.51 0.67 1927 8 7 0.40 0.63 1 0.26 0.69 1928 5 5 0.53 1.06 0 - 1929 9 9 1.28 2.59 0 - 1930 2 1 0.26 0.29 1 13.33 20.26 1931 2 2 0.8 1.23 0 - 
15 No listing or IPO launched on the ASE in years not included in the table
16 The annual distribution of the new issues of common stocks in this table became according to the first date of entrance of a firm in the A.S.E. and not according to the time period of public offerings
17 The IPOs concern listings of only common stocks in the Greek stock market


47
1934 2 2 0.11 0.38 0 - 1935 6 6 0.40 0.62 0 - 1936 2 2 0.34 0.47 0 - 1937 5 5 0.39 1.06 0 - 1938 6 6 0.44 1.58 0 - 1939 8 8 0.70 1.81 0 - 1940 3 3 0.88 1.11 0 - Total 165 144 21 Panel B: First Day IPO Returns, Raising Funds and Money Left on the Table for IPOs, 1880 to 1940
Period18 Number of IPOs19,20
Mean Rate of 1st Day Returns (%)
Raised Funds (in Gold Sov.)
Money left on the Table (in Gold Sov.) 1884 1 -0.20 61.255 306.28 1887 3 -0.38 625.104 0 1898 1 -0.34 111.451 0 1900 1 0.49 195.333 0 1906 1 0.01 223.357 2.919 1909 1 0.00 133.740 0 1917 1 0.30 56.980 17.094 1918 1 0.77 158.279 12.175 1925 7 331.42 123.455 439.602 1926 2 0.45 83.715 31.790 1927 1 1.60 39.966 63.947 1930 1 0.52 1.066.666 554.666
18 No IPO took place in years not included in the table
19 The annual distribution of the new issues of common stocks in this table became according to the first date of entrance of a firm in the A.S.E. and not according to the time period of public offerings
20 The IPOs concern listings of only common stocks in the Greek stock market


48
Parity of gold sovereign-drachma in 1880-1940 period
1,0
10,0
100,0
1000,0
10000,0
100000,0
1000000,0
1880
1883
1886
1889
1892
1895
1898
1901
1904
1907
1910
1913
1916
1919
1922
1925
1928
1931
1934
1937
1940
Year
Parity in drachmas
(Logarithmic scale)
Parity of gold sovereign -drachma
Sources: For 1880-1912 see Μ. Riginos, The movement of foreign exchange and monetary values in Greek Markets (in Greek) Athens 1997 For 1913-1940: The Stock Exchange Yearbook 1974, Athens 1974


49
Appendix B: Tables
Table 1: Listings and IPOs by Sector during the sub-period 1880-1898
Year Number of Listings & IPOs
Banks Railways Construction Firms
Chemicals Textiles Beverages
Other
1884 3 1 1 11
1887 4 1 2 1
1889 1 1
1891 1 11
1892 2 1 1
1893 1 1
1894 1 1
1897 1 1
1898 1 1
Total 15 2 4 2 1 6


50
Table 2: Listings and IPOs by Sector during the sub-period 1899-1922
Year Number of Listings & IPOs
Banks Railways Construction Firms
Chemicals Textiles Beverages Other
1899 3 1 2
1900 1 1
1903 3 1 1 1
1905 2 2
1906 1 1
1907 1 1
1908 2 1 1
1909 4 1 2 1
1910 1 1
1911 3 1 2
1912 4 1 3
1913 2 1 1
1914 1 1
1916 3 1 2
1917 5 1 4
1918 4 1 1 1 1
1919 3 1 1 1
1920 4 2 1 1
1921 2 1 1
1922 4 1 1 2
Total 53 10 3 1 3 4 7 25


51
Table 3: Listings and IPOs by Sector during the sub-period 1923-1940
Year Number of Listings & IPOs
Banks Railways Construction Firms
Chemicals Textiles Beverages Other
1923 4 1 1 1 1
1924 8 3 3 1 1
1925 17 2 2 4 2 7
1926 10 2 2 1 1 4
1927 8 2 3
1928 5 1 1 3 1
1929 9 2 2 4 1 2
1930 2 1 1
1931 2 1 1
1934 2 1 1
1935 6 2 1 3
1936 2 1 1
1937 5 4 1
1938 6 3 1 2
1939 8 3 1 4
1940 3 1 2
Total 97 13 1 9 11 21 9 33


52
Table 4: Descriptive statistics for Listings and IPOs
Simple Listings IPOs Panel A: Whole Period, 1880-1940 Variable Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO (%) Mean 6.72 82,916 6 166,061 38 Median 3.5 34,578 3 16,634 33 Sample 144 144 21 21 21 Panel B: Sub-Period, 1880-1898 Variable Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO (%) Mean 3.8 70,214 5.6 509,206 63 Median 3 56,678 5 103,734 50 Sample 10 10 5 5 5 Panel C: Sub-Period, 1899-1922 Variable Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO (%) Mean 6.79 169,374 2.2 67,942 24 Median 2.5 80,988 2 40,273 25 Sample 48 48 5 5 5
Panel D: Sub-Period, 1923-1940 Variable Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO (%) Mean 7.03 36,676 7.27 54,684 33 Median 4 19,094 3 6,574 29 Sample 86 86 11 11 11
Panel E: Division by ‘Hot’ and ‘Cold’ Listings ‘Hot’ Period Variable Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO (%) Mean 7.48 110,681 6.8 25,888 30 Median 3 59,665 2.5 6,618 23 Sample 54 54 12 12 12
‘Cold’ Period Variable Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO (%) Mean 6.27 66,441 4.1 352,957 48 Median 4 24,229 5 48,833 38 Sample 90 90 9 9 9
Panel F: t-stat for difference on mean
0.465 1.785 0.880 -1.717 -0.909 (0.725) (0.090)* (0.408) (0.094)* (0.390)


53
Table 5: List of Quasi IPOs
Panel A: All Quasi IPOs case by case Quasi IPO Year Offer Price Trading Price Raising Funds (in Gold Sov.) Public and Municipal Workings 1880 3.01 2.98 34482
Hellenic Metal Company 1887 3.21 3.30 112179
Company of Wine and Alcohol 1905 3.96 4.26 226415
Company of Chemicals 1909 3.97 4.64 79365
Gr National Stream Navigation 1911 4.17 5.67 79365 Titan 1911 3.97 4.85 79365 Aliveri Mining 1912 4.04 4.81 121163 Agyra General Commerce 1917 4.10 4.42 81900 Piraeus Bank 1917 3.90 6.09 117050 Hellenic Mining Company 1918 4.06 5.72 66152 Piraeus Business Company 1918 4.06 6.90 81168 Industrial Company 1918 2.96 4.43 103427 General Bank of Greece 1920 4.88 8.79 88652.48 Hellenic Tobacco Company 1921 1.02 1.83 71058 Central Bank of Greece 1921 0.78 1.44 27273 Oropos Mining 1922 0.30 0.65 9047 Hellenic Olive Oil 1922 0.70 1.09 28085 Kosmadopoulos Bank 1922 0.34 0.85 10208 Tekton Construction 1923 0.34 0.61 17013 Avezap 1923 0.34 0.88 6805 Agricultural Industry 1923 0.45 0.91 1360 Bank of Thessaly 1924 0.46 1.23 190114 Bank of Hellenic Securities 1924 0.40 0.70 30173 Maritime Bank 1924 0.60 0.68 34398 Vermion 1924 0.40 2.04 11988 Hellenic Silk 1924 0.39 1.55 50303 Naoussa Fabrics 1924 0.39 0.87 38695 Atlas Construction 1924 0.32 3.24 38834 Hlios Sugar Company 1925 0.33 0.48 16435 Ergon Technical Construction 1925 0.33 0.66 16435 Pharmaceutical Union 1925 0.30 0.82 15105 Piraeus Refridgerators 1925 0.28 0.72 5849 Anatoli 1926 0.26 0.58 13157 Olympos Concrete 1926 0.66 1.07 65866 Akte Technical Company 1927 0.27 0.50 27322 Ertha Sea Construction 1927 0.83 1.20 25874 Electric Lamp 1928 0.57 0.69 8600 Trikala Fabrics 1935 0.11 0.14 9174 Naoussa Lanara Oil 1935 0.11 1.98 10989 Etma Silk 1937 0.60 0.91 93475 Iris Chocolate 1938 0 - 6578


54
Table 6: Descriptive statistics for Quasi IPOs and IPOs
Descriptive statistics for Quasi IPOs vis a vis IPOs are included in this Table. Quasi IPOs or ‘Delayed’ IPOs are characterized those cases of listings where firms obtain listing for trading and soon afterwards (in time close to that of listing day) announce a capital increase, offering sale of new shares for cash. AGE, Ln (1+AGE) the log of the total of one plus the age of the company in years on the listing date, Size counts the number of new issued shares offered to the public during the IPO or the Right Offering procedure multiplied with their offer price.
Panel A: Comparison Quasi IPOs with IPOs (The Whole Period) Quasi IPOs IPOs Variable Quasi IPOs
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO
Mean 6.90 38,472 38.34 6 166,061 38 Median 3 20,325 34.74 3 16,634 33 Min 0 517 0.63 1 1,697 6 Max 64 208,501 87.42 46 1,564,661 100
Sample 41 41 41 21 21 21 Panel B: Sub-Period, 1880-1898
Quasi IPOs IPOs Variable Quasi IPOs
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO
Mean 5 49,158 83.10 5.6 509,206 62.5 Median - - 5 103,734 50 Min - - 2 22,667 100 Max - - 11 1,564,661 25
Sample 2 2 2 5 5 5 Panel C: Sub-Period, 1899-1922
Quasi IPOs IPOs Variable Quasi IPOs
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO
Mean 5.64 59,592 59.51 2.2 67,942 23.8 Median 3 44,271 62.07 2 40,273 25 Min 0 6,746 18.36 1 8,140 33 Max 48 208,501 87.42 5 223,357 14
Sample 16 16 16 5 5 5 Panel D: Sub-Period, 1923-1940
Quasi IPOs IPOs Variable Quasi IPOs
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO
Mean 5.46 23,947 23.26 7.27 54,684 33 Median 4 15,086 21.60 3 6,574 29 Min 2 517,45 0.64 2 1,697 6 Max 14 95,963 48.12 46 533,333 63
Sample 24 24 24 11 11 11
Panel E: Comparison of Quasi IPOs with IPOs (Hot Listing Periods) Quasi IPOs IPOs


55
Variable Quasi IPOs
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO
Mean 5.76 33,381 34.86 7.27 25,888 30 Median 3 17,210 33.33 3 6,618 23 Min 0 517 1.02 2 1,697 6 Max 48 208,501 85.39 46 223,358 63
Sample 30 30 30 12 12 12 Panel F: Comparison Quasi IPOs with IPOs (Cold Listing Periods) Quasi IPOs IPOs Variable Quasi IPOs
Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO Age (years)
Size (Gold Sov.)
GO
Mean 4.81 52,357 43.07 4.11 352,957 48 Median 3 44,515 40.29 5 48,833 38 Min 2 3,158 0.64 1 8,140 14 Max 10 131,181 87.42 11 1,564,661 100
Sample 11 11 11 9 9 5 Panel G: Panel F: t-stat for difference on mean
Quasi IPOs IPOs 0.350 0.364 0.519 0.880 -1.717 0.909
(0.734) (0.724) (0.611) (0.408) (0.094)* (0.390)


56
Table 7: List of IPOs
Panel A: All IPOs case by case IPO Year Offer Price Trading Price Mean Rate of Initial Returns (%)
Raising Funds (in Gold Sov.)
Money left on the Table (in Gold Sov.)
Powder Co. 1884 3.78 3.02 -20 22,667 0 Hpiro-Thessaly Bank 1887 10.37 9.00 -13.33 103,734 0 Thessaly Railways 1887 9.00 5.01 -44.23 827,109 0 S. P.A.P. Railways 1887 8.64 5.46 -36.8 1,564,661 0
Public Mortgage Mgt. Co. 1898 3.48 2.28 -34.4 27,862 0 Bank of Crete 1900 4.88 4.21 -13.79 48,833 0 Bank of Anatolia 1906 5.58 5.66 1.30 223,357 2.919
Commercial Bank 1909 3.82 3.82 0 19,105 0 Ermis Industrial 1917 4.07 5.29 30 8,140 2,442 Isaias – Megaris 1918 5.24 5.64 7.69 40,273 3,097
United Distilleres Corp. 1925 0.33 1.31 300 6,574 19,722 Kekrops Construction 1925 0.33 2.01 510 2,794 14,249 Athena Car Company 1925 0.32 1.75 450 9,547 42,963 Sanitas 1925 0.30 0.91 200 2,113 4,227 Georgiadis – Sekeris 1925 0.28 0.95 240 4,212 10,110 Commericial Credit Bank 1925 0.28 1.25 350 16,634 58,220 Kyklops Pottery 1925 0.28 1.03 270 2,356 6,362 Hellenic Carpet Factory 1926 0.78 0.94 20.91 15,605 3,263 Chemical Industries 1926 0.24 0.41 70 1,697 1,188 Diamantopoulos Constr. 1927 0.27 0.69 160 6,661 10,657 Bank of Greece 1930 13.33 20.27 52 533,333 277,333 Panel B: Initial Returns (IR) of IPOs
Period Whole (1880-1940) 1880-1898 1899-1922 1923-1940
Mean 114.91 -29.75 -12.20 238.44 Median 30 -34.4 1.30 240 Min -44.23 -44.23 -100 20.91 Max 510 -20 7.69 510
Sample 21 5 5 11


57
Table 8: Results of multiple regressions for IPOs of period 1880-1940
This table reports the results of multiple regressions using a sample of 21 IPOs listed in Athens Stock Exchange in the period 1880-1940. IR is IPOs initial returns in the end of first days of trading defined as IR= (EPi,t- OPi,0)/OPi AGE, Ln (1+AGE) the log of the total of one plus the age of the company in years on the listing date, Size is the number of new issued shares offered to the public during the IPO, multiplied with their offer price (measured by the natural logarithm), GO identifies the rate of stocks offered by listing firms to new shareholders during the public offering procedure. Y identifies the number of listings that were launched on ASE without public offering procedure. Dum 1925 is a dummy variable that counts all IPOs listed in ASE on 1925. We insert the value ‘1’ for IPOs listed in 1925 and ‘0’ for the rest IPOs.
***Significance at the one per cent level. **Significance at the five per cent level *Significance at the ten per cent level.
Variables IR IR IR
Constant 427.7** 422.7*** 349.3
(0.0230) (0.006) (0.125)
AGE 1.680 1.662 1.785
(0.140) (0.110) (0.120)
SIZE -46.45** -46.06*** -44.28*
(0.016) (0.006) (0.054)
GO 1.887** 1.878** 2.091**
(0.028) (0.018) (0.029)
Y -1.061 - 46.10**
(0.960) - (0.031)
Dum1925 187.0** 184.4*** 
(0.025) (0.007) 
Obs. 21 21 21
Adj R-squared 0.843 0.852 0.808


58
References
Allen, F., F. Capie, C. Fohlin, H. Miyajima, R. Sylla, G. Wood, and Y. Yafeh, 2010. How Important Historically Were Financial Systems for Growth in the U.K., U.S., Germany, and Japan?, Working Paper.
Beatty, R., and J. Ritter, 1986. Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing of initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 213-232.
Belousova, J., and G. Dorfleitner, 2012. On the diversification benefits of commodities from the perspective of euro investors, Journal of Banking & Finance 36, 2455-2472.
Biais, B., and E. Perotti, 2002. Machiavellian Privatization, American Economic Review 92, 240-258.
Boulton, T. J., S. B. Smart, and C. J. Zutter, 2011. Earnings quality and international IPO underpricing, The Accounting Review 86, 483-505.
Bouvier, J., 1977. Iinitiation au vocabulaire et aux mécanismes économiques contemporains(Paris).
Brennan, M., and J. Franks, 1997. Underpricing, ownership and control in initial public offerings of equity securities in the UK, Journal of Financial Economics 45, 391-413.
Burhop, C., 2008. Initial public offerings during Germany’s first capital market boom, 1870–79, Working paper, Max Planck Institute for Research of Collective Goods.
Burhop, C., 2011. The underpricing of Initial Public Offerings at the Berlin Stock Exchange, 1870–96, German Economic Review 12 11-32.
Burhop, C., D. Chambers, and B. Cheffins, 2012. Is regulation essential to stock market development? Going public in London and Berlin, 1900-1913, University of Cambridge Faculty of Law Research Paper No. 2/2012.
Chambers, D., 2009. Gentlemanly capitalism revisited: A case study of underpricing of initial public offerings on the London Stock Exchange, 19461986, Economic History Review, 62, 31-56.
Chambers, D., 2010. Going public in Interwar Britain, Financial History Review 17, 51-71.


59
Chambers, D., 2011. IPOs on the London Stock Exchange since 1900 Working Paper.
Chambers, D., and E. Dimson, 2009. IPO underpricing over the very long run, Journal of Finance 64, 1407-1443.
Christodoulaki, O., 2001. Industrial growth in Greece between the wars: A new perspective, European Review of Economic History 5, 61-89.
Eichengreen, B., 1996. On the links between monetary and political integration Working Paper, University of Berkley.
Eichengreen, B., and P. H. Lindert, 1989. Overview(MIT Press).
Fohlin, C., 2000. IPO Underpricing in Two Universes: Berlin 1882-1892, and New York, 1998-2000, Social Science Working Paper 1088, California Institute of Technology.
Fohlin, C., 2001. The balancing act of German universal banks and english deposit banks, 1880-1913, Business History 43, 1-24.
Fohlin, C., 2010. Asymmetric information, market power, and the underpricing of new stock issues in Germany, 1882-1892, Journal of Economic History 70, 630-656.
Fohlin, C., 2013. Creating modern venture capital: Institutional design and performance in the early years, Working Paper.
Fohlin, C., and T. Gehrig, 2006. Trading costs in early securities markets: The case of the Berlin Stock Exchange, 1880-1910, Review of Finance 10, 585610.
Gerber, A., T. Hens, and B. Vogt, 2010. Rational investor sentiment in a repeated stochastic game with imperfect monitoring, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 76, 669-704.
Habib, M., and A. Ljungqvist, 2001. Underpricing and entrepreneurial wealth losses in IPOs: theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies 14, 433458.
Harris, R. A., 1933. A re-analysis of the 1928 new issue boom, Economic Journal 43, 453–459.
Heeley, M., S. Matusik, and N. Jain, 2007. Innovation, appropriability, and the underpricing of Initial Public Offerings, Academy of Management Journal 50, 209-225.


60
Issler, J. V., C. Rodrigues, and R. Burjack, 2014. Using common features to understand the behavior of metal-commodity prices and forecast them at different horizons, Journal of International Money and Finance 42, 310-335.
Jovanovic, B., and P. Rousseau, 2001. Why wait? A century of life before IPO, American Economic Review 91, 336-341.
Kahleman, D., and T. A., 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kanatas, G., and J. Qi, 2003. Integration of lending and underwriting: Implication of scope economics, Journal of Finance 58, 1167-1191.
Kazantzis, C., and M. Levis, 1995. Price support and initial public offerings: evidence from Athens Stock Exchange, Journal in International Business and Finance 12, 185-200.
Laporta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998. Law and Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.
Lehmann, S., 2010. Underwriter activity and performance of Initial Public Offerings in Imperial Germany between 1897-1914: The role of reputation, Working Paper.
Lehmann, S., 2014. Taking firms to the stock market: IPOs and the importance of large banks in imperial Germany, 1896–1913, Economic History Review 67, 92-122.
Ljungqvist, A., 2007. IPO underpricing(Elsevier Amsterdam).
Loughran, T., and J. Ritter, 2002. Why don't issuers get upset about leaving money on the table of IPOs?, Review of Financial Studies 15, 413-443.
Loughran, T., and J. Ritter, 2004. Why has IPO underpricing changed over time?, Financial Management 33, 5-37.
Maksimovic, V., and H. Unal, 1993. Issue size choise and underpricing in thrift mutual to stock conversions, Journal of Finance 48, 1659-1692.
Malloy, C., 2005. The geography of equity analysis, Journal of Finance 60, 719755.
Muscarella, C., and M. Vetsuypens, 1989. A simple test of Baron's model of IPO underpricing, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 125-135.


61
Myers, S., and N. Majluf, 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187–221.
Portes, R., and H. Rey, 2005. The determinants of cross-border equity flows, Journal of International Economics 65 269-296.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the twentieth century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.
Rock, K., 1986. Why new issues are underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 187-212.
Schlag, C., and A. Wodrich, 2005. Has there always been underpricing and long-run underperformance? - IPOs in Germany before World War I, Goethe University Center for Financial Studies Working Paper No. 2000/12.
Thomadakis, S., D. Gounopoulos, and C. Nounis, 2012. The long term performance of Initial Public Offerings in the Athens Stock Exchange European Financial Management 17, 117-141.
Thomadakis, S., D. Gounopoulos, C. Nounis, and A. Merikas, 2014. Collateral regulation and IPO specific rebelarization: The case or price limits in the Athens Stock Exchange, European Financial Management, Forthcoming.




Recent Papers in this Series
85. Papandreou, Nick, Life in the First Person and the Art of Political Storytelling: The Rhetoric of Andreas Papandreou, May 2014
84. Kyris, George, Europeanisation and 'Internalised' Conflicts:
The Case of Cyprus, April 2014
83. Christodoulakis, Nicos, The Conflict Trap in the Greek Civil War 19461949: An economic approach, March 2014
82. Simiti, Marilena, Rage and Protest: The case of the Greek Indignant movement, February 2014
81. Knight, Daniel M, A Critical Perspective on Economy, Modernity and Temporality in Contemporary Greece through the Prism of Energy Practice, January 2014
80. Monastiriotis, Vassilis and Martelli, Angelo, Beyond Rising
Unemployment: Unemployment Risk Crisis and Regional Adjustments in Greece, December 2013.
79. Apergis, Nicholas and Cooray, Arusha, New Evidence on the Remedies of the Greek Sovereign Debt Problem, November 2013
78. Dergiades, Theologos, Milas, Costas and Panagiotidis, Theodore, Tweets, Google Trends and Sovereign Spreads in the GIIPS,
October 2013
77. Marangudakis, Manussos, Rontos, Kostas and Xenitidou, Maria,
State Crisis and Civil Consciousness in Greece, October 2013
76. Vlamis, Prodromos, Greek Fiscal Crisis and Repercussions for the Property Market, September 2013
75. Petralias, Athanassios, Petros, Sotirios and Prodromídis, Pródromos, Greece in Recession: Economic predictions, mispredictions and policy implications, September 2013
74. Katsourides, Yiannos, Political Parties and Trade Unions in Cyprus, September 2013
73. Ifantis, Kostas, The US and Turkey in the fog of regional uncertainty, August 2013
72. Mamatzakis, Emmanuel, Are there any Animal Spirits behind the Scenes of the Euro-area Sovereign Debt Crisis?, July 2013
71. Etienne, Julien, Controlled negative reciprocity between the state and


civil society: the Greek case, June 2013
70. Kosmidis, Spyros, Government Constraints and Economic Voting in Greece, May 2013
69. Venieris, Dimitris, Crisis Social Policy and Social Justice: the case for Greece, April 2013
68. Alogoskoufis, George, Macroeconomics and Politics in the Accumulation of Greece’s Debt: An econometric investigation 1974-2009, March 2013
67. Knight, Daniel M., Famine, Suicide and Photovoltaics: Narratives from the Greek crisis, February 2013
66. Chrysoloras, Nikos, Rebuilding Eurozone’s Ground Zero - A review of the Greek economic crisis, January 2013
65. Exadaktylos, Theofanis and Zahariadis, Nikolaos, Policy Implementation and Political Trust: Greece in the age of austerity, December 2012
64. Chalari, Athanasia, The Causal Powers of Social Change: the Case of Modern Greek Society, November 2012
63. Valinakis, Yannis, Greece’s European Policy Making, October 2012
62. Anagnostopoulos, Achilleas and Siebert, Stanley, The impact of Greek labour market regulation on temporary and family employment Evidence from a new survey, September 2012
61. Caraveli, Helen and Tsionas, Efthymios G., Economic Restructuring, Crises and the Regions: The Political Economy of Regional Inequalities in Greece, August 2012
60. Christodoulakis, Nicos, Currency crisis and collapse in interwar Greece: Predicament or Policy Failure?, July 2012
59. Monokroussos, Platon and Thomakos, Dimitrios D., Can Greece be saved? Current Account, fiscal imbalances and competitiveness, June 2012
58. Kechagiaras, Yannis, Why did Greece block the Euro-Atlantic integration of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia? An Analysis of Greek Foreign Policy Behaviour Shifts, May 2012
57. Ladi, Stella, The Eurozone Crisis and Austerity Politics: A Trigger for Administrative Reform in Greece?, April 2012
56. Chardas, Anastassios, Multi-level governance and the application of the partnership principle in times of economic crisis in Greece, March 2012
55. Skouroliakou, Melina, The Communication Factor in Greek Foreign


Policy: An Analysis, February 2012
54. Alogoskoufis, George, Greece's Sovereign Debt Crisis: Retrospect and Prospect, January 2012
53. Prasopoulou, Elpida, In quest for accountability in Greek public administration: The case of the Taxation Information System (TAXIS), December 2011
52. Voskeritsian, Horen and Kornelakis, Andreas, Institutional Change in Greek Industrial Relations in an Era of Fiscal Crisis, November 2011
51. Heraclides, Alexis, The Essence of the Greek-Turkish Rivalry: National Narrative and Identity, October 2011
50. Christodoulaki, Olga; Cho, Haeran; Fryzlewicz, Piotr, A Reflection of History: Fluctuations in Greek Sovereign Risk between 1914 and 1929, September 2011
49. Monastiriotis, Vassilis and Psycharis, Yiannis, Without purpose and strategy? A spatio-functional analysis of the regional allocation of public investment in Greece, August 2011
SPECIAL ISSUE edited by Vassilis Monastiriotis, The Greek crisis in focus: Austerity, Recession and paths to Recovery, July 2011
48. Kaplanoglou, Georgia and Rapanos, Vassilis T., The Greek Fiscal Crisis and the Role of Fiscal Government, June 2011
47. Skouras, Spyros and Christodoulakis, Nicos, Electoral Misgovernance Cycles: Evidence from wildfires and tax evasion in Greece and elsewhere, May 2011
46. Pagoulatos, George and Zahariadis, Nikolaos, Politics, Labor, Regulation, and Performance: Lessons from the Privatization of OTE, April 2011
45. Lyrintzis, Christos, Greek Politics in the Era of Economic Crisis: Reassessing Causes and Effects, March 2011
44. Monastiriotis, Vassilis and Jordaan, Jacob A., Regional Distribution and Spatial Impact of FDI in Greece: evidence from firm-level data, February 2011
43. Apergis, Nicholas, Characteristics of inflation in Greece: mean spillover effects among CPI components, January 2011
42. Kazamias, George, From Pragmatism to Idealism to Failure: Britain in the Cyprus crisis of 1974, December 2010
41. Dimas, Christos, Privatization in the name of ‘Europe’. Analyzing the telecoms privatization in Greece from a ‘discursive institutionalist’


perspective, November 2010
40. Katsikas, Elias and Panagiotidis, Theodore, Student Status and Academic Performance: an approach of the quality determinants of university studies in Greece, October 2010
39. Karagiannis, Stelios, Panagopoulos, Yannis, and Vlamis, Prodromos, Symmetric or Asymmetric Interest Rate Adjustments? Evidence from Greece, Bulgaria and Slovenia, September 2010
38. Pelagidis, Theodore, The Greek Paradox of Falling Competitiveness and Weak Institutions in a High GDP Growth Rate Context (1995-2008), August 2010
37. Vraniali, Efi, Rethinking Public Financial Management and Budgeting in Greece: time to reboot?, July 2010
36. Lyberaki, Antigone, The Record of Gender Policies in Greece 1980-2010: legal form and economic substance, June 2010
35. Markova, Eugenia, Effects of Migration on Sending Countries: lessons from Bulgaria, May 2010
34. Tinios, Platon, Vacillations around a Pension Reform Trajectory: time for a change?, April 2010
33. Bozhilova, Diana, When Foreign Direct Investment is Good for Development: Bulgaria’s accession, industrial restructuring and regional FDI, March 2010
32. Karamessini, Maria, Transition Strategies and Labour Market Integration of Greek University Graduates, February 2010
31. Matsaganis, Manos and Flevotomou, Maria, Distributional implications of tax evasion in Greece, January 2010
Online papers from the Hellenic Observatory
All GreeSE Papers are freely available for download at http://www2.lse.ac.uk/ europeanInstitute/research/hellenicObservatory/pubs/GreeSE.aspx
Papers from past series published by the Hellenic Observatory are available at http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/hellenicObservatory/pubs/DP_oldseries.htm