Coercion, Capital, and
European States,

AD QQO—1990

CHARLES TILLY

Basil Blackwell
SY Nay
AXxTSYHO

IN90
Cia
Harp

Copright © Charles Tilly 1990
First published 1990

Basil Blackwell, Inc.
3 Cambridge Center
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA

Basil Blackwell Ltd
108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JF, UK

All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of
criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any mcans, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher.

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that
it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise
circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other
than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
‘Tilly, Charles
Coercion, capital, and European states, AD ggo—1gg0/Charles ‘Tilly.
p. em. — (Studies in social discontinuity)
“20 May 1989.”
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 1-55786-067-x
1. Europe — Politics and government. 2. Europe — Economic
conditions. 3 Capitalism — Europe — History. 1. ‘Title.
Il. Series: Studies in social discontinuity (Basil Blackwell
Publishers)
JNg4.A2'l'54 1990
940-dc20 = 8g-17730 CIP

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Typeset in 10 on 12 pt Ehrhardt
by Ilope Services (Abingdon) I.td.
Printed in Great Britain by
T. J. Press Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall

UNIVERSITY
OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY

J
4,
To the memory of Stein Rokkan

Intellectual enthusiast, impresario, creator, and friend
Contents

Preface

I

Cities and States in World History

States in History

Available Answers

Logics of Capital and Coercion

War Drives State Formation and Transformation
Long Trends and Interactions

Prospects

European Cities and States
Absent Europe

States and Coercion

Cities and Capital

City—State Interaction

State Physiologies

Liaisons Dangercuses
Alternative Forms of State

How War Made States, and Vice Versa
A Bifurcation of Violence

How States Controlled Coercion

Wars

Transitions

Seizing, Making, or Buying Coercion
Paying the Debts

Yb Noe
8 ala ww

38
38
45
47
51
54
58
62

67
68

70
76
84
viii Contents
The Long, Strong Arm of Empire

4 States and their Citizens
From Wasps to Locomotives
Bargaining, Rights, and Collective Action
The Institution of Direct Rule
The French Revolution: From Indirect to Direct Rule
State Expansion, Direct Rule, and Nationalism
Unintended Burdens
Militarization = Civilianization

5 * Lineages of the National State
China and Europe
States and Cities Reexamined
Coercive Trajectories
Capitalist Trajectories
Trajectories of Capitalized Coercion

6 The European State System
The Connectedness of European States
The Ends of Wars
Members of the System
The Creation of a State-Linked World
How Wars Began

Six Salient Questions

7 Soldiers and States in 1990
Political Misdevelopment
The Impact and Heritage of World War II
The Ascent of Military Men
Today’s Military in Historical Perspective
Military Buildup
Soldiers in Power
How Did the Military Gain Power?
Envoi

References
Index

g!
96
96
99

103

107

114

117

122

127

127

130

137

143

151

161

161

165

170

181

183

187

192
192
197
203
205
209
211
217
224

226
261
Preface

Creative neurosis, I call it: the art of directing one’s compulsions and fears to
productive outcomes. This book illustrates its application to writing. In this
case, my compulsion to discover or invent simple symmetry in complex events
combined with an urge to escape a burdensome responsibility by taking on
another task that was not quite as daunting. Any reader of this book will
recognize the signs of my compulsion to order and simplify. The second urge,
however, takes a little explaining. Many times before I have found myself
plunging into difficult work in order to avoid other work that was proving
painful or difficult. This time, having started to collaborate with Wim
Blockmans in the recruitment of a collection of papers on interactions of cities
and states in Europe, I began an extremely ambitious book comparing the
articulation of particular cities and states in several parts of Europe since
AD 1000.

I meant the book to respond adequately to Perry Anderson’s great challenge:
“Today, when ‘history from below’ has become a watchword in both Marxist
and non-Marxist circles, and has produced major gains in our understanding of
the past, it is nevertheless necessary to recall one of the basic axioms of
historical materialism: that sccular struggle between classes is ultimately
resolved at the political — not at the economic or cultural — level of socicty. In
other words, it is the construction and destruction of States which seal the basic
shifts in the relations of production, so long as classes subsist” (Anderson
1974: 11). The book, I hoped, would merge three of my carcer-long concerns:
the history and dynamics of collective action, the process of urbanization, and
the formation of national states.

Such a book, as I understood it, required a mastery of exotic sources and
languages, not to mention the compilation of large catalogs and statistical series
that would only fall into place an item at a time. I began writing, but soon found
myself digging for new matcrial in obscure places, and testing my ability both to
x Preface

learn new languages and retrieve old ones. Cornell University gave me the
chance to try out some of the book’s organizing ideas as its Messenger Lectures
for 1987; although the discussion in Ithaca proved how ragged those ideas
were, it also convinced me that the topic was important, and worth the long
effort it would demand.

As I was working on that book in February and March 1988, I gave a series of
lectures at the Institut d’Etudes Politiques in Paris. (I am grateful to Alain
Lancelot and Pierre Birnbaum for arranging that opportunity, and to Clemens
Heller for the support of the Maison des Sciences de Homme during my stay
in Paris.) My plan was to work in Parisian archives in between the lectures. But
early in the series I again lectured on European cities and states. As I reflected
on the lively questioning that presentation had provoked, I suddenly realized
that I had another book well underway: a much morc schematic, synthetic,
concise, and feasible book than the one I had already begun. Writing that book
would allow me an honorable, if temporary, exit from the formidable big
project. Instead of going to the archives, I stayed home at my keyboard and
began tapping away excitedly at the new volume. Reworked versions of my
Cornell and Institut lectures fitted into the plan, so that when I returned to New
York at the end of March I had drafted major chunks of the book.

Neglecting other projects for which the Russell Sage Foundation had
graciously sponsored a year’s leave, I rushed to my computer and continued to
write. (During that time, Pauline Rothstein and her assistants at Russell Sage
provided indispensable, intelligent help with library sources, Camille Yezzi
made daily routines easy, Eric Wanner and Peter de Janosi offered genial
support, while Robert Merton and Viviana Zelizer encouraged my efforts to
deal with big structures, large processes, and huge comparisons.) By July 1988 a
complete, if uneven, draft was in circulation. It and successive drafts went the
rounds under the titles States, Coercion, and Capital, Silver, Sword, and Scepter,
and the less mellifluous but more accurate Coercion, Capital, and European States.
(The book’s present version incorporates and adapts material that previously
appeared in “The Geography of European Statemaking and Capitalism Since
1500,” in Eugene Genovese and Leonard Hochberg, (eds), Geographic
Perspecttves in History (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989), “Warmakers and Citizens
in the Contemporary World” (CSSC [Center for Studies of Social Change, New
School for Social Research] Working Paper 41, 1987), “How War Made States
and Vice Versa” (CSSC Working Paper 42, 1987), “States, Coercion, and
Capital” (CSSC Working Paper 75, 1988), and “State and Counterrevolution
in France,” Social Research 56 (1989), 71-98.)

During the ensuing months many friends and colleagues read or heard
various segments of the book; my compulsion to talk about it and to revise
incessantly kept them very busy. Janet Abu-Lughod, Wim Blockmans, Bruce
Carothers, Samuel Clark, Brian Downing, Carmenza Gallo, Thorvald Gran,
Marjolein ’t Hart, Peter Katzenstcin, Andrew Kirby, John Lynn, Perry Mars,
Preface xi

Maarten Prak, Sidney Tarrow, Wayne te Brake, and Bin Wong gave me an
inestimable gift: they criticized early drafts of the whole manuscript thoughtfully,
while Richard Bensel, Robert Jervis, Jo Husbands, and David Laitin added
sharp comments on particular sections. | owe Adele Rotman warm thanks for
suggestions on how to get my ideas across. Nikki Aduba edited the manuscript
with consummate care and intelligence. Louise Tilly was busy finishing her
own books as I worked on this onc, but she generously tolerated my obsession
and offered strategic advice.

Audiences at the Universities of Bergen, California-Irvine, Chicago, Geneva,
Leiden, and Western Ontario, at the City University of New York, Columbia
University, Harvard University, and the Estonian Academy of Sciences asked
pointed questions about parts of the analysis. The New School’s proseminar on
state formation and collective action helped me repeatedly in formulating the
book’s arguments. I am deeply indebted to Harrison White and his co-
conspirators at Columbia University’s Center for the Social Sciences (notably
Lisa Anderson, David Cannadine, Martin Gargiulo, Denise Jackson, Gerald
Marwell, Salvatore Pitruzzello, Kate Roberts, Hector Schamis, Kamal Shehadi,
Jack Snyder, Claire Ullman, and Ronan Van Rossem) for a delightful seminar
they organized to scrutinize draft chapters from this book. None of these
helpful critics has seen a complete draft of the book’s current version, and none
therefore bears responsibility for my mistakes.

Mistakes there surely are. Stretching across a millennium, I have undoubtedly
failed to consider major ideas, missed crucial events, ignored important
contradictions, gotten significant facts wrong, and explained some changes
incorrectly. I hope only that readers will inform me of any crrors or omissions,
and that they will reflect on how greatly my mistakes affect the overall argument
before rejecting it out of hand. In my optimistic moods, I hope that this book
will continue the work begun by the late Stein Rokkan, that it will build on the
strengths and correct the errors of a work on which Stein and I collaborated,
The Formation of National States in Western Europe, that it will exemplify the
program of historically-grounded inquiry into large-scale processes of change |
have advocated in earlier books such as Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge
Comparisons and As Sociology Meets History, and that it will contribute to the
effort to work out theories of historical contingency exemplified by recent
writings of Anthony Giddens, Allan Pred, Arthur Stinchcombe, and Harrison
White. If so, compulsion and phobia will once again have made a constructive
contribution to knowledge. Now, of course, I face a problem: that big book still
awaits me.

CHARLES TILLY
I

Cities and States
in World History

STATES IN HISTORY

Some 3,800 years ago, the ruler of a small Mesopotamian city-state conquered
all the region’s other city-states, and made them subject to Marduk, his own
city’s god. Hammurabi, ruler of Babylon, became the supreme king of
Mesopotamia. By conquering, he gained the right and obligation to establish
laws for all the people. In the introduction to his famous laws, Hammurabi
claimed instruction from the great gods Anu and Enlil:

then did Anu and Enlil call me to afford well-being to the people,
me, Hammurabi, the obedient, godfearing prince, to cause righteousness
to appear in the land
to destroy the evil and the wicked, that the strong harm not the weak
and that I rise like the sun over the black-headed people,
lighting up the land.

(Frankfort 1946: 193)

Wrapped in a divine calling, Hammurabi could confidently call those who
opposed his rule “evil” and “wicked.” Vilifying victims, annihilating allics, and
razing rival cities, he claimed that divine justice stood behind him. Hammurabi
was building the power of his city, and founding a state; his gods and their
particular vision of justice would prevail.

States have been the world’s largest and most powerful organizations for
more than five thousand years. Let us define states as coercion-wielding
organizations that are distinct from households and kinship groups and exercise
clear priority in some respects over all other organizations within substantial
territorics. The term therefore includes city-states, empires, theocracies, and
2 Cities and States in World History

many other forms of government, but excludes tribes, lineages, firms, and
churches as such. Such a definition is, alas, controversial; while many students
of politics use the term in this organizational way, some extend it to whatever
structure of power exists in a large, contiguous population, and others restrict it
to relatively powerful, centralized, and differentiated sovereign organizations —
roughly to what I will call a national state. | will, furthermore, eventually
compromise the definition by including such entities as today’s Monaco and
San Marino, despite their lack of “substantial” territories, on the ground that
other unambiguous states treat them as fellow-states.

For the moment, let us stick with the organizational definition. By such a
standard, archaeological remains first signal the existence of states as of
6000 BC, and written or pictorial records testify to their presence two millennia
later. Through most of the last eight millennia, states have only occupied a
minority of the earth’s inhabited space. But with the passage of millennia their
dominance has grown.

Cities originated in the same era. Some time between 8000 and 7600 BC,
the settlement later called Jericho contained a temple and stone houses; within
the next thousand years, it acquired a thick wall and differentiated buildings. By
that time, one could reasonably call Jericho a city, and other Middle Eastern
settlements were beginning to acquire the signs of urbanization as well. In
Anatolia, Catal Hiiyiik’s remains include rich houses, shrines, and works of art
dating to well before 6000 Bc. Full-fledged cities and recognizable states, then,
appeared at roughly the same point in world history, a moment of great
expansion in human capacity for creativity and for destruction. For a few
millennia, indeed, the states in question were essentially city-states, often
consisting of a priest-ruled capital surrounded by a tribute-paying hinterland.
By 2500 BC, however, some Mesopotamian cities, including Ur and Lagash,
were building empires ruled by warriors and held together by force and tribute;
Hammurabi’s unification of southern Mesopotamia came seven centuries after
the first empires formed there. From that point on, the coexistence of substantial
states and numerous cities has marked the great civilizations, from Mesopotamia,
Egypt, and China to Europe.

Over the eight or ten millennia since the couple first appeared, cities and
states have oscillated between love and hate. Armed conquerors have often
razed cities and slaughtered thcir inhabitants, only to raise new capitals in their
place. City people have bolstered their independence and railed against royal
interference in urban affairs, only to seek their king’s protection against bandits,
pirates, and rival groups of merchants. Over the long run and at a distance,
cities and states have proved indispensable to each other.

Through most of history, natinal states — states governing multiple
contiguous regions and their cities by means of centralized, differentiated, and
autonomous structures — have appcarcd only rarely. Most states have been non-
national: empires, city-states, or something clse. The term national state,
Cities and States in World History 3

regrettably, does not necessarily mean tiation” state state whose pcople share a
strong linguistic, religious, and symDote-tdéntity. Although states such as
Sweden and Ireland now approximate that ideal, very few European national
states have ever qualified as nation-states. Great Britain, Germany, and France
— quintessential national states — certainly have never met the test. With militant
nationalities in Estonia, Armenia, and elsewhere, the Soviet Union now lives
the distinction painfully every single day. China, with nearly three thousand
years’ experience of successive national states (but, given its multiple languages
and nationalities, not one year as a nation-state), constitutes an extraordinary
exception. Only during the last few centuries have national states mapped most
of the world into their own mutually exclusive territories, including colonies.
Only since World War II has almost the entire world come to be occupied by
nominally independent states whose rulers recognize, more or less, each other’s
existence and right to exist.

As this final partitioning of the world into substantial states has proceeded,
two important counter-currents have begun to flow. First, speakers for many
populations that do not form distinct states have made claims to independent
statehood. Not only the inhabitants of former colonies, but also minorities
within old, established Western states, have demanded their own states with
surprising frequency. While I write, groups of Armenians, Basques, Eritreans,
Kanaks, Kurds, Palestinians, Sikhs, Tamils, Tibetans, Western Saharans, and
many more stateless peoples are demanding the right to separate states;
thousands have died for claiming that right. Within a Soviet Union that long
seemed an unbreakable monolith, Lithuanians, Estonians, Azerbaijanis,
Ukrainians, Armenians, Jews, and numerous other “nationalities” are pressing
for varying degrees of distinctness — and even, sometimes, independence.

In the recent past, Bretons, Flemings, French Canadians, Montenegrins,
Scots, and Welsh have also made bids for separate power, either inside or
outside the states that now control them. Minorities claiming their own states
have, furthermore, regularly received sympathetic hearings from third parties, if
not from the states currently governing the territories they have claimed. If all
the peoples on behalf of whom someone has recently made a claim to separate
statehood were actually to acquire their own territories, the world would
splinter from its present 160-odd recognized states to thousands of statelike
entities, most of them tiny and economically unviable.

The second counter-current also runs strong: powerful rivals to states —
blocs of states such as NATO, the European Economic Community or
the Warsaw Pact, world-wide networks of traders in expensive, illicit com-
modities such as drugs and arms, and financial organizations such as giant
international oil companies — have emerged to challenge their sovereignty. In
1992, members of the European Economic Community will dissolve economic
barriers to a degrec that will significantly limit their ability to pursue independent
policies in respect of money, prices, and employment. These signs show that

4 Cities and States in World History

states as we know them will not last forever, and may soon lose their incredible
hegemony.

In one of his sardonic “laws” of organizational behavior, C. Northcote
Parkinson revealed that “a perfection of planned layout is achieved only by
institutions on the point of collapse” (Parkinson 1957: 60). Cases in point
include St Peter’s basilica, and the Vatican Palace (completed during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, after the popes had lost most of their
temporal power), the peacemaking Palace of the League of Nations (completed
in 1937, just in time for the preliminaries to World War II), and the planning of
colonial New Delhi, where “each phase of the [British] retreat was exactly
paralleled with the completion of another triumph in civic design” (Parkinson
1957: 68). Perhaps a similar principle applies here. States may be following the
old routine by which an institution falls into ruin just as it becomes complete. In
the meantime, nevertheless, states remain so dominant that anyone who dreams
of a stateless world seems a heedless visionary.

States form systems to the extent that they interact, and to the degree that
their interaction significantly affects each party’s fate. Since states always grow
out of competition for control of territory and population, they invariably appear
in clusters, and usually OreESSTETD. The system of states that now prevails
almost everywhere on earth too& Shape in Europe after AD ggo, then began
extending its control far outside the continent five centuries later. It eventually
absorbed, eclipsed, or extinguished all its rivals, including the systems of states
that then centered on China, India, Persia, and Turkey. At the Millennium,
however, Europe as such had no coherent existence; it consisted of the territory
north of the Mediterranean once occupied by the Roman Empire, plus a large
northeastern frontier never conquered by Rome, but largely penetrated by
missionaries of the Christian churches which a disintegrating empire left as its
souvenirs. At the same time Muslim empires controlled a significant part of
southern Europe.

The continent we recognize today did have some potential bases of unity. An
uneven network of trading cities connected much of the territory, and provided
links to the more prosperous systems of production and commerce that
extended from the Mediterranean to East Asia. The bulk of the region’s
population were peasants rather than hunters, pastoralists, or mercantile city-
dwellers. Even in areas of urban concentration such as northern Italy, landlords
ruled most of the population, and agriculture predominated among economic
activities( Religion, language, and the residues of Roman occupation probably
made the’European population more culturally homogeneous than any other
comparable world arca outside of China) Within the area previously conquered
by Rome, furthermore, traces of Roman law and political organization
remained amid the splinters of sovereignty.

These features would eventually have a significant impact on Europe’s
history. Let us take AD ggo as an arbitrary point of reference. On the world

Cities and States in World History 5

stage the Europe of a thousand years ago was not a well-defined, unitary,
independent actor. For that reason, any attempt to explain the continent's
subsequent transformation in terms of its distinctive ethos or social structure
runs a great risk of reasoning backwards. What is more, individual countries
such as Germany, Russia and Spain simply did not exist as coherent entities;
they took shape over succeeding centuries as a result of processes this book
traces. Arguments that begin with the distinctive, enduring characteristics of
“Germany” or “Russia” misrepresent the troubled, contingent history of
European states.
“ So natural do the rise of national states, the growth of national armies, and
the long European hegemony appear, indeed, that scholars rarely ask why
plausible alternatives to them — such as the systems of loosely-articulated
regional empires that thrived in Asia, Africa, and the Americas well past AD ggo
— did not prevail in Europe. Surely part of the answer lies in the dialectic of
cities and states that developed within a few hundred years after ggo. For the
coincidence of a dense, uneven urban network with a division into numerous
well-defined and more or less independent states eventually set apart Europe
from the rest of the world. Behind the changing geography of cities and states
operated the dynamics of capital (whose preferred sphere was cities) and of
coercion (which crystallized especially in states). Inquiries into the interplay
between cities and states rapidly become investigations of capital and coercion.
A surprising range of combinations between coercion and capital appeared at
one point or another in European history. Empires, city-states, federations of
cities, networks of landlords, churches, religious orders, leagues of pirates,
warrior bands, and many other forms of governance prevailed in some parts of
Europe at various times over the last thousand years. Most of them qualified as
states of one kind or another: they were organizations that controlled the
principal concentrated means of coercion within delimited territories, and
exercised priority in some respects over all other organizations acting within the
territories. But only late and slowly did the national state become the
predominant form. Hence the critical double question: (What accounts for the
great variation over time and space in the kinds of states that have prevailed in Europe
since AD 990, and why did European states eventually converge on different variants of
the national state? Why were the directions of change so similar and the paths so
different? This book aims to clarify that problem, if not to resolve it entirely.

AVAILABLE ANSWERS

Established replies to the big question leave any serious student of European
history unsatisfied. The alternatives now available differ especially with respect
to their positions on two issues. First, to what extent, and how closely, did state ,
formation depend on the particular form of economic change? The range runs‘
6 Cities and States in World History

from straightforward economic determinism to assertions of the complete
autonomy of politics. Second, how strong an influence did factors exterior to
any particular state have on its path of transformation? Answers vary from
strongly internalist accounts to those which attach overwhelming weight to the
international system. Through no coincidence, theories of war and of
international relations vary in exactly the same manner: from economically
determinist to politically determinist, and from internal to internationalist.

Although very few thinkers station themsclves at the extremes — derive the
state and its changes, for example, entirely from the economy — differences
among available approaches remain impressively large. Figure 1.1 schematizes
available answers to the two questions.

Internal [ |
| Mode of production Statist
| |
| |

Origin | |
of | |
structure | |
| |
| |
World system Geopolitical

External | }

Derivative Independent

«+ ——- Relation to economy ——————_»

Figure 1.1 Alternative conceptions of state formation.

Statist analyses

Thus a statist model & nternational relations, and state formation treats
political change as proce artial independence of economic change, and
presents it chiefly as a consequence ofévents wi parsiculas state9 Many
analysts of international relations have olten adopted a statist perspective,
assuming that individual states_act_on their defined i _that_the
international system 1s anarchic, and that interactions among states ‘ultimatel
reduceto-the-parry-and thrust’ of self-interested actors. e€ most
popular theories of the classic type bear structural realist” or
“rational choice”; they allow for the effects of a hegemonic, bipolar, or
multipolarinternational system, but ground thcir analyses of states’ ior i

the interests and orientations of individual states (e.g. Bueno de Mesquita
1988, Gilpin 1988, Waltz 1988; for explication and criticism, see Holsti 1985,
Jervis 1988a).

Cities and States in World History 7

Among historians, sociologists, and students of comparative politics, statist
accounts of states’ transformations are by far the most popular. They inherit the
now-discredited tradition of political development, searching for clues as to the
conditions produCing strong, effective, stable states, and assuming that only onc
such set of conditions exists. They typically take the individual state as their
point of reference. When they do not reduce to particular histories of single
states, they olten posit a single, central path of European state formation and a
set of deviations ese the path explained by inefficiency, weakness, bad luck,
geopolitical position, or the timing-of-economic prowth and its concomitants;
thus we have a few successful instances such as France or Britain and a great
many failures, partial or total, such as Rumania or Portugal. Bertrand Badic and
Pierre Birnbaum, for example, treat France as the most fully realized European
state: “Prussia, Spain, and Italy followed various related paths, but the process
of differentiation and institutionalization never went so far [as in France].”
Great Britain they treat_as “the model of ynder-statizatian” (Badie and
Birnbaum 1979: 191, 217).

Samuel Huntington is a little more generous; considering Europe and the
United States together, he distinguishes three patterns of modernization in
governmental institutions; a Continental’ rationalization of authority and
Sitferontation of structures within a unified sovereign body under the crown, a
British centralization of power in a representative assembly, and an American
fragmentation of sovereignty (Huntington 1968: 94-8). Soon, however,
Huntington drops the distinction between Britain and the Continent in favor of
a broad European—American comparison. In cither analysis, Huntington singles
out the effect @ bn changes i in state structure, I considers war to have
roughly similar @ffects throughout Europe. His analysis emphasizes internal
causes, and attributes little Sesh to economic Tetarminants a

A second variant of the statist analysis stands closer to thé diagram’s cente
This locates states in an international environment, but still treats them as
acting more or less individually; its answer to questions about the diverse paths
oF pie formation beyine sii sotneulvural jaan among the various parts
of Europe — Protes atholic, Slavic or German, feudal or free, peasant or
pastoral — and derives differences from rulers’ efforts to accomplish the same
objectives in widely varying milieux. Thus in southeastern Europe theorists
have repeatedly claimed to have discovered an indigenous Slavic, Magyar, or
Roman village tradition distinguishing the fate of the region’s states from those
of Russia to the east or of capitalist states to the west (Berend 1988, Hitchins
1988, Roksandic 1988).

In a lucid and widely-read book, Paul Kenned
variant of the statist argument, with significa
and Fall of the Great Powers resembles Mancur“©
Nations (which he does not cite) in more than title; both argue that the very
process of economic and political expansion creates commitments that

a - = a
— —————

proposes a sop histicaree
His Rise

8 = Cities and States in World History

eventually slow it down. Olson, however, concentrates on the contemporary
period, aims at building a general model, and singlcs out the coalitions — cartels,
labor unions, and others — that form mithin a state to capture benefits of growth.
Kennedy, in contrast, looks chiefly at a state’s international position, and marks
out a broad historical pathy a
Uneven economic growth, according to Kennedy, causes the world’s leading
states 10 acquire and lose advantages relative to other states, advantages they
ordinarily seek to secure with the support of military power. States that win out
in such contests, however, find that they have to commit increasing shares of
their resources to armies and navies. “If, however, too large a proportion of the
state’s resources is diverted from wealth creation and allocated instead to
military purposes, then that is likely to lead to a weakening of national power
over the long term” (Kennedy 1987: xvi). Meanwhile, other states are amassing
wealth, reinvesting in the creation of new wealth, and benefiting from their
lesser obligation to pay for military force. Although Kennedy’s initial statement
renders the decline and fall merely possible, all the cases he analyzes — early
imperial China, the Mughal Empire, the Ottoman Empirc, the Habsburgs,
Great Britain, and the United States - make it seem inevitable. In the pursuit of
this argument, Kennedy provides a useful chronology of the European state
system gynce 1519: a Habsburg bid for mastery (1519-1659), a great power
struggle without primacy (1660-1815), a period of uncertain British hegemony
(1815—85), another period of uneasy balance (1885-1918), the rise of the
United States to temporary supremacy (1918-43), a bipolar Soviet-US
system (1943-80), and another period of shifting struggle (1980-?). Whilc
Kennedy’s analysis provides only vague indications of the origins of different
kinds of state organization, its emphasis on the interaction of war, economic
power, and international position points to factors that no treatment of the
subject can afford to neglect.
William McNeill’s Pursuit_of Power brings out even more dramatically the
centrality of changing forms and scales of warfare in the transformation of the
European state system. McNeill’s tour de force presents an overview of warfare —
and especially its technological leading edge — in the world as a whole since
AD 1000. With great clarity he traces the impact of gunpowder, siege artillery,
aptisiege fortiications, and other great technical innovations not only on
warfare itself, but also ogstate nnanESs. the introduction of time-discipline into
civilian life, and much more. McNeill underestimates, I believe, the importance
of such organizational innovations as the commodification of military service as
well as the influence of changes in naval warfare, but he produces insight after
insight into the significance of a given kind of warfare for social life and state
structure. He _does_not, however,attempt a systematic analysis of relationg
between military organization and different types of state formation. ~~~ “,'
With McNeill, we reach the boundary of statist and geopolitical analyses of
state formation; the of war _in his account makes position within,

Cities and States in World History 9

the international. system a critical determinant of any particular state’s
@rganizational history. Most statist treatments of the subject fit the conventional
use of the term much more comfortably, explaining the transformation of the
French, Ottoman, or Swedish state as{an outcome of events and processes
within its own perimeter.

Such statist accounts of state formation — both monographic and synthetic —
provide “much of the raw material from which I have manufactured the
argument of this book. Nevertheless, in themselves they provide no effective
answer to the book’s master theme: Why European states followed such diverse
paths but eventually converged on the national state. They dissolve into
particularisms and teleologies, explaining why the “modern” form of a given
state emerged on the basis of the special character of a national population and
economy. They neglect, furthermore, the hundreds of states that once
flourished but then disappeared - Moravia, Bohemia, Burgundy, Aragon,
Milan, Savoy, and many more. For systematic explanations, we must look
beyond the statist literature.

Geopolitical analyses

If most students of state formation have adopted a statist perspective,
considering the transformation of any particular state to result chiefly from
noneconomic events within its own terfitory, each of the other three per-
spectives has had influential advocates. Geopolitical analyses of state form-
ation attach great importance to the international system as the shaper of
states within it. Geopohti Ordinarily claim that interstate
relations have a logic and influence of their own, and that state formation
therefore responds strongly to the current system of relations among states. In a
characteristic effort, James Rosenau distinguishes four “patterns of national
adaptation” to international politics: acquiescent, intransigent, promotive, and
preservative. The intransigent state, for example, “can seek to render its
environment consistent with its present structures” while the promotive state
“can attempt to shape the demands of its present structures and its present
environment to_each other” (Rosenau 1970: 4). Each of these patterns,
according to(Rosena), has distinctive consequences for the character of the
executive, the character of the party system, the role of the legislature, the role
of the military, and much more (Rosenau 1970: 6-8). Similarly, what William
Thompson calls a~flobal society” perspective on war and international.
relations attribute Tacs, and regards individual
sfates_as responding strongly to the structure of relations among all states; it
therefore falls clearly into the geopolitical quadrant. Unsurprisingly, then, we
find that geopolitical models of state formation, war, and international relations
articulate closely with each other (Thompson 1988: 22-7; sce also Waltz
1979). This body of work, as I read it, provides a valuable corrective to the
internalism of statist_analyses, but gives unclear guidance to the search for

10 — Cities and States in World History

mechanisms that link particular forms of state to specific positions within the
international system.

Mode of production analyses

Mode of production analyses typically spell out the logic of feudalism,
capitalism, or some other organization of production, then derive the state and
its changes almost entirely from that logic, as it operates within the state’s
territory (Brenner 1976, Corrigan 1980). “We conceive of the state,” declare
Gordon Clark and Michael Dear in a characteristic statement, “as deriving
equally from the economic and political imperatives of capitalist commodity
production. T he state is ultimately implicated i in the generation and distribution
of.surplus value as it seeks to sustain its own power and wealth (Clark and

Dear 1984: 4). It follows that explanations of state structure derive largely from
the interests of capitalists who operate within the same state’s jurisdictions.
Marxist and marxisant analysts of war and international relations likewise
generally deploy some version of theories of imperialism, an extension of
national economic interest to the international sphere, which places them
toward the diagram’s mode-of-production corner.

In one of the most comprehensive and persuasive Marxist treatments, Perry
Anderson proposes this formula:

The typical Western constellation in the early modern epoch was an aristocratic
Absolutism raised above the social foundations of a non-servile peasantry and ascendant
towns; the typical Eastern constellation was an aristocratic Absolutism erected over the
foundations of a servile peasantry and subjugated towns. Swedish Absolutism, by
contrast, was built on a base that was unique, because . . . it combined free peasants and
nugatory towns; in other words, a set of two “contradictory” variables running across the

master-division of the continent.
(Anderson 1974: 179-80)

Anderson similarly grounds the absence of well-developed Absolutism in Italy in
the relation of town aristocracies to surrounding tributary territories in which
they acted both as rulers and as pr icates the picture
by insisting that “It was th re of Western Absolutism, the
political apparatus of a more powerful feudal aristocracy, dvanced
societies, which obliged the Eastern nobility to adopt an equivalently centralized
state machine, to survive” (Anderson 1974: 198). Thus on either side of the
Elbe the full-fledged Absolutist state reflected the use of state power to fortify
the positions of great feudal landlords, but military threats impinged on those
positions differently in the East and the West. Anderson concentrates on the
stronger, most centralized states, and aims his attention at the sixteenth to
eighteenth centuries, but his general approach deserves careful attention at a
European and millennial level. In the meantime, it falls far short of a
comprehensive account of European state formation. While the mode-of-
production literature as a whole contributes many insights into struggles for

Cities and States in World History 11

control of states, indeed, it offers only the faintest of clues to reasons for
variations in form and activity among states having similar modes of production.

World system analyses

World system analyses of state formation ground the explanation of diverse
paths of state formation in a characterization of the world economy. Neo-
Marxist theorists such as Immanuel Wallerstein and André Gunder Frank
extend the classic Marxist division between capital and labor to a world scale,
thus pushing their analyses toward the world system quadrant — still deriving
relations among states from economic structure, but regarding the structures of
i s consequences of their positio i

(see Taylor 1981). Wallerstein’s grand survey of European history since 1500
(Wallerstein 1974-88) generally follows a spiral with respect to state formation:
the mode of production in a given region creates a certain class structure, which
emanates in a certain kind of state; the character of that state and the relations
of the region’s producers and merchants to the rest of the world economy
determine the region’s position — core, peripheral, or semiperipheral — in the
world economy, which in turn significantly affects the state’s organization. In
this promising analysis, the state figures chiefly as an instrument of the national
ruling class, an instrument that serves the interest of that class in the world
economy. However, world system analyses have so far failed to produce a well-
articulated theory linking the actual organizational structures of states to their
positions within the world system. Thus Wallerstein’s account of Dutch
hegemony (volume II, chapter 2) in the seventeenth century provides no
explanation of Dutch state structure — in particular, of the nation’s prospering
with a wispy national state at a time when its neighbors were creating massive
civilian staffs and standing armies.

None of the four lines of explanation, much less their combination, yields a
satisfactory set of answers to our pressing questions about European state
formation. Most available explanations fail because they ignore the fact that
many different kinds of states were viable at different stages of European
history, because they locate explanations of state-to-state variation in individual
characteristics of states rather than in relations among them, and because they
assume _implicitly a deliberate effort to construct the sorts of substantial,
centralized states that came to dominate European life during the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. Geopolitical and world-system analyses provide
stronger guidance, but so far they lack convincing accounts of the actual
mechanisms relating position within the world to the organization and practice
of particular states. In particular, they fail to capture the impact of war and
preparation for war on the whole process of state formation; on that score,
statist analyses do much better.

In The Formation of National States in Western Europe, published in 1975, my

12 Cities and States in World History

colleagues and I hoped to remedy these defects of the existing literature. In a
series of historical studies emphasizing the extractive and repressive side of
state formation, we looked self-consciously at war, policing, taxation, control of
food supply, and related processes, and kept our distance from the models of
political development that then prevailed. Our critique worked better, in
retrospect, as a demonstration of the flaws in unilinear models of problem-
solving political development than as an alternative account of European state
formation. In fact, we implicitly substituted a new unilinear story — one runni.
from war to extraction and repression to state formation — for the old ond. We
continued, more or less unthinkingly, to assume that European states followed
one main path, the one marked by Britain, France, and Brandenburg-Prussia,
and that the experiences of other states constituted attenuated or failed versions
of the same processes. That was wrong. This book attempts to repair the errors
of the previous one.)

We have, fortunately, important models for the enterprise. Three great
scholars — Barrington Moorc, Jr, Stein Rokkan, and Lewis Mumford -
escaped some of the standard literature’s theoretical handicaps, even if they
ultimately failed to fashion comprchensive accounts of variation in European
state formation. In Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Barrington
Moore sought to explain (as his title implies) why in the twenticth century some
states sustained more or less viable representative systems while others featured
one form or another of authoritarian rule. Although his accounts of individual
countries were all wide-ranging and nuanced, when it came to differences

among national destinies Moore used as his points of ref he forms of
government that existed in the 1940s and stressed as\“origi the class
coalitions that prevailed when the country’s agriculture an extensive

commercialization. To the extent that great, exploitative landlords survived the
transition to intensive cash-crop farming, according to Moore, authoritarian
government persisted into the contemporary era. To the extent that the
bourgeoisie predominated, some form of democracy existed.

Moore’s insightful analysis left important problems unsolved. It focused on
explaining conditions of government at a single historical moment, and thus
failed to explain the different forms of government experienced by the same
peoples before and after the critical moment. It deliberately ignored smaller
states, dependent statcs, and states that did not survive. It said little about the
actual mechanisms that translated a certain form of class power into a specific
mode of government. But it posed this book’s problems with great force. It
pointed toward solutions taking scrious account of changes and variations in the
class coalitions dominating the states of different European regions.

Early in his career, Stein Rokkan became obsessed with the variability of
European political systems, and with the tendency of adjacent states to develop
similar political arrangements. Eventually he came to represent variation among
European states in schematic maps which included a north-south dimension
Cities and States in World History 13

reflecting the variable influence of the Roman Catholic and Orthodox
churches, an cast—west separation of seaward peripheries, seaward empire-
nations, a city-state band, landward empire-nations, and landward buffers, plus
finer variations within those two dimensions.

Rokkan died before he produced a satisfactory version of his conceptual map.
As he left it, his scheme called attention to marked geographic variation in the
forms of European states, singled out the distinctiveness of state-formation i in
Europe’s central urbanized band, and hinted at the importance of long-term
changes in relations among rulers, neighboring powers, dominant classes and
religious institutions. But it left a muddled idea of the actual social processes
connecting these changes with alternative state trajectories. It is hard to see how
Rokkan could have gotten much farther without laying aside his maps and
concentrating on the analysis of the mechanisms of state formation.

Lewis Mumford made a less obvious contribution. Implicitly, he fashioned a
threshold-and-balance theory of urbanism. For Mumford, two great forces
drive the growth of cities: the concentration of political power, and the
expansion of productive means. Below a threshold combining minimum levels
of power and production, only villages and bands exist. Above that threshold,
the character of cities depends on the levels of power and production, relative
and absolute: modest and balanced levels of power and production gave the
classic polis and the medieval city their coherence; an excessive growth of
political power informed the baroque city; the hypertrophy of production
created the nineteenth century’s industrial Coketowns, and huge concentrations
in both directions have produced the overwhelming cities of today. Figure 1.2
diagrammatically represents the argument.

Mumford pointed to similar effects on a national scale. “There is little
doubt,” he wrote in 1970, “that at least in most industrially developed countries

High [ |
| + Intolerable |
| *) concentration

Concentration + |
of power +
| + civil = + |
| $+ — urbanization* |
| * a |
Primitive * 4 + |
| Poverty + + |

Low | + * J

Low High

+—— Concentration of power ———_—»>

Figure 1.2 Lewis Mumtord’s implicit model of urbanization.
14 Cities and States in World History

the Megatechnic Complex is now at the height of its power and authority, or is
fast approaching it. In objectively measurable physical terms — units of energy,
output of goods, input of ‘bads,’ capabilities for mass coercion and mass
destruction — the system has nearly fulfilled its theoretic dimensions and
possibilities; and if not judged by a more human measure, it is an overwhelming
success” (Mumford 1970: 346). Mumford’s prescriptions followed directly
from that analysis; reduce the scale of both production and political power, he
argued, and a more humane city would result.

Since Mumford never quite explicated the analytic argument, he did not

spell out its implications for the formation of states. Most of the time, he treated
forms of rule as outgrowths of the prevailing technolo e

technology of war. But the logic of his analysis clearly points to alternative
trajectories of state formation depending on the prevailing combination of
production and power.

This book, then, takes up the problem where Barrington Moore, Stein
Rokkan, and Lewis Mumford left it: at the point of recognizing decisive
variations in the paths of change followed by states in different parts of Europe
during successive epochs, with the realization that the class coalitions prevailing
in a region at a given point in time strongly limited the possibilities of action
open to any ruler or would-be ruler, and with the specific hypothesjé that regions
of early urban dominance, with their active capitalists, produced very different
kinds of states from regions in which great landlords and their estates
dominated the landscapeNt goes beyond Moore, Rokkan, and Mumford most
emphatically in two ways: first by placing the organization of coercion and
preparation for war F squarely i in the middle of the analysis, arguing in its rasher
moments that Fare appeared chiefly as a by-product of rulers’ efforts
at; and second by insisting that relations among states,
especially throug atfd preparation for war, strongly affected the entire
process of state formation. Thus in this book I derive alternative histories of
state formation from continuously-varying combinations of concentrated
capital, concentrated coercion, preparation for war, and position within the
international system.

This book’s central argument does not so much synthesize as echo the
analyses of Moore, Rokkan, and Mumford. Even in its simplest form, the
argument is necessarily complex; it says that in European experience:

weapons, and their equivalent) ordinarily tried to use them ¢ to extend the range of
population and resources over which they wielded power. When they encountered no
one with comparable control of coercion, they conquered; when they met rivals, they
made war.

Some conquerors managed to exert stable control over the populations in substantial

territories, and to gain routine access to part of the goods and services produced in the
territory; they became rulers.
Cities and States in World History 15

Every form of rule faced significant limits to its range of effectiveness within a
particular kind of environment. Efforts to exceed that range produced defeats or
fragmentation of control, with the result that most rulers settled for a combination of
c t, protectiqn against powerful rivals, and coexistence with cooperative neighbors.

h

e most powerful rulers in any particular region set the terms of war for all; smaller
rulers faced a choice between accommodating themselves to the demands of powerful
neighbors and putting exceptional efforts into preparations for war.

Fad
“ War and preparation for war involved rulers in extracting the means of war from
others who held the essential resources — men, arms, supplies, or money to buy them -
and who were reluctant to surrender them without strong pressure or compensation.

Within limits set by the demands and rewards of other heen pro anaaeeel

over the means of war created the central organizational s_of states.
TS aes Jur Ve

The organization of major social classes Withm a state’s territory, and their relations to
the state, significantly affected the strategies rulers employed to extract resources, the
resistance they met, the struggle that resulted, the sorts of durable organization that
extraction and struggle laid down, and therefore the efficiency of resource extraction.

The organization of major social classes, and their relations to the state varied
significantly from Europe’s coercion-intensive regions (areas of few cities and
agricultural predominance, where direct coercion played a major part in production) to
its capital-intensive regions (areas of many cities and commercial predominance, where
markets, exchange, and market-oriented production prevailed). The demands major
classes made on the state, and their influence over the state, varied correspondingly.

The relative success of differen s, and the strategies rulers actually
applied, therefore varied significantly~frem—e6erCion-intensive to capital-intensive
regions.

As a consequence, the organizational forms of states followed distinctly different
trajectories in these different parts of Europe.

Which sort of state prevailed in a given era and part of Europe varied greatly. Only late
in the millennium did national states exercise clear superiority over city-states, empires,
and other common European forms of state.

Nevertheless, the increasing scale of war and the knitting together of the European
state system through commercial, military, and diplomatic interaction eventually gave the
war-making advantage to those states that could field standing armies; states having access
to a combination of large rural populations, capitalists, and relatively commercialized
economies won out. They set the terms of war, and their form of state became the

predominant one in Europe. Eventually European states converged on that form: the

national state.
——

Some of these generalizations (for example, the tendency for war to build state
structure) hold through much of-world history. Others (for example, the sharp
contrast between coercion-intensive and capital-intensive regions) distinguish
16 Cities and States in World History

Europe from many other world regions. We are pursuing a history that
oscillates between the somewhat particular and the extremely general. In both
regards, I will try to present enough concrete historical evidence to make the
principles comprehensible and credible, but not so much as to bury them in
detail.

If we explain the various paths taken by European states, we will better
understand today’s non-European states. Not that the states of Africa or Latin
America are now recapitulating the European experience. On the contrary: the
fact that European states formed in a certain way, then imposed their power on
the rest of the world, guarantees that non-European experience will be
different. But if we pinpoint the durable characteristics of the system
Europeans first built, and identify the principles of variation within European
experience, we will be better placed to specify what is distinctive about
contemporary states, under what historically-imposed constraints they are
operating, and what relationships among characteristics of states are likely to
hold in our own time. With exactly that aim in mind, the book’s final chapter
turns from analyses of European experience to an examination of military power
in today’s Third World.

What happened in history? For the first few centuries of their existence,
European states multiplied in the space left them by the large Muslim powers
that ringed the Mediterranean and by the nomadic conquerors who thundered
west from the Eurasian steppe. When they won territory, Muslims, Mongols,
and other outsiders typically set up military rulers and systems of tribute that
produced important revenues; they did not, however, intervene decisively in
local social arrangements. Within their own space, Europeans farmed,

manufactured, traded and, especially, fought cach other. Almost inadvertently,
they thereby created national states. This book tells how and why.
LOGICS OF CAPITAL AND COERCION

The story concerns capital and coercion. It recounts the ways that wielders of
coercion, who played the major part in the creation of national states, drew for
their own purposes.on manipulators of capital, whose activitics generated cities.
Of course the two interacted; figure 1.3 represents the general condition.

Capital |
Cities States

Figure 1.3. How capital and coercion generate cities and states.
Cities and States in World History 17

Although states strongly reflect the organization of coercion, they actually show
the effects of capital as well; as the rest of this book will demonstrate, various
combinations of capital and coercion produced very different kinds of states.
Again, cities respond especially to changes in capital, but the organization of
coercion affects their character as well; Lewis Mumford’s baroque city lived on
capital like its cousins, but showed a clearer imprint of princely power — in
palaces, parade grounds, and barracks — than they did. Over time, furthermore,
the place of capital in the form of states grew ever larger, while the influence of
coercion (in the guise of policing and state intervention) expanded as well.

Capital — Cities — Exploitation

Before entering into these complexities, however, it will help to explore the
capital—cities and coercion-states relationships separately. Let us think of capital
generously, including any tangible mobile resources, and enforceable claims on
such resources. Capitalists, then, are people who specialize in the accumulation,
purchase, and sale of capital. They occupy the realm of exploitation, where the
relati roduction and icld surpluses, and capitalists
capture them. Capitalists have often existed in the absence of capitalism, the
‘system in which wage-workers produce goods by means of materials owned by
capitalists. Through most of history, indeed, capitalists have worked chiefly as
merchants, entrepreneurs, and financiers, rather than as the direct organizers
of production. The system of capitalism itself arrived late in the history of
capital. It grew up in Europe after 1500, as capitalists seized control of
production. It reached its apex — or, depending on your perspective, its nadir —
after 1750, when capital-concentrated manufacturing became the basis of
prosperity in many countries. For millennia before then, capitalists had
flourished without much intervening in production.

The processes that accumulate and concentrate capita! also produce cities.
Cities figure prominently in this book’s analyses, both as favored sites of
capitalists and as organizational forces in their own right. To the extent that the
survival of households depends on the presence of capital through employment,
investment, redistribution or any other strong link, the distribution of
population follows that of capital. (Capital, however, sometimes follows cheap
labor; the relationship is reciprocal.) Trade, warehousing, banking, and
production that depends closely on any of them all benefit from proximity to
each other. Within limits set by the productivity of agriculture, that proximity
promotes the formation of dense, differentiated populations having extensive
outside connections — citics. When capital both accumulates and concentrates
within a territory, urban growth tends to occur throughout the same territory —
morc intensely at the greatest point of concentration, and secondarily elsewhere
(see figure 1.4). The form of urban growth, however, depends on the balance
between concentration and accumulation. Where capital accumulation occurs

18 Cities and States in World History

Capital concentration

Urban growth

a

Figure 1.4 How capital generates urban growth.

Capital accumulation

quite gencrally, but concentration remains rclatively low, many smaller centers
develop. Where a single concentration of capital emerges, urban population
concentrates around that center.

Properly speaking, then, cities represent regional economies; around every
city or urban cluster lies a zone of agriculture and trade (and sometimes of
manufacturing as well) that interacts closely with it. Where accumulation and
concentration occur in tandem, a hierarchy from small centers to large tends to
take shape (see figure 1.5). These tendencies have always operated within
important limits. City people normally depend on others to raise most or all of
their food and fuel; the transportation and preservation of these requisites for
large cities consumes a great deal of energy. Until very recently, most of the
world’s agricultural areas, including those of Europe, were too unproductive to
permit much more than a tenth of the nearby population to live off the land.
Cities that could not reach agricultural areas conveniently by means of low-cost
water transportation, furthermore, faced prohibitively high food costs. Berlin
and Madrid provide good examples: except as their rulers force-fed them, they .
did not grow.

Health mattered as well. Through almost all of the last thousand years,
despite their disproportionate recruitment of vigorous migrants of working age,
cities have had significantly higher death rates than their hinterlands. Only after
1850, with improvements in urban sanitation and nutrition, did the balance
shift in favor of city-dwellers. As a result, cities have only grown rapidly when

High + — —— —— ———————-———— +

+ Primate Mega- +

+ cities lopolis +

+ +

§ + +
= * Urban *
8 + hierarchy Hl
gs ‘
+ Scattered +

+ None centers +

Low +—— ————————--—- - +
Low High

Accumulation

Figure 1.5 Alternative forms of urban growth as functions of capital accumulation and
concentration,
Cities and States in World History 19

agriculture and transportation were becoming relatively efficient_or_when

powerful pressures were driving people off the land.

’ The sheer growth of cities, however, produced a spiral of change in all these
regards. In the vicinity of active cities, people farmed morc intensively and
devoted a higher proportion of their farming to cash crops; in Europe of the
sixteenth century, for example, highly productive agriculture concentrated in
the two most urbanized regions, northern Italy and Flanders. Similarly, urban
growth stimulated the creation and improvement of transportation by water and
land; the Netherlands’ superb system of canals and navigable streams brought
down the cost, and brought up the speed, of communication among its swarm
of cities, thus serving as both cause and effect of urbanization (de Vries 1978).
The pressures that drove people off the land, furthermore, often resulted in
part from urbanization, as when urban landlords drove smallholders from the
hinterland or urban demand fostered the capitalization of the hinterland’s
agriculture. Accumulation and_c ion of capita d urban growth,
while transforming the regions surrounding new clusters of cities.

Coercion — States — Domination

What of coercion? Coercion includes all concerted application, threatened or
actual, of action that commonly causes loss or damage to the persons or
possessions of individuals or groups who are aware of both the action and the
potential damage. (The cumbersome definition excludes inadvertent, indirect,
and secret damage.) Where capital defines a realm of exploitation, coercion
defines a realm of domination. The means of coercion center on armed force,
but extend to facilities for incarceration, expropriation, humiliation, and
publication of threats. Europe created two major overlapping groups of
specialists in coercion: soldicrs and great landlords; where they merged and
received ratification from states in the form of titles and privileges they
crystallized into nobilities, who in turn supplied the principal European rulers
for many centuries. Coercive means, like capital, can both accumulate and
concentrate: some groups (such as monastic orders) have few coercive means,
but those few are concentrated in a small number of hands; others (such as
armed frontiersmen) have many coercive means that are widely dispersed.
Coercive means and capital merge where the same objects (e.g. workhouses)
serve Cglottation a? domination For the most part, however, they remain,
sufficiently distingt xo allow us to analyze them separately.

When the accumulation and concentration of coercive means grow together,
they produce states; they produce distinct organizations that control the chief
concentrated means of coercion within well-defined territories, and exercise
priority in some respects over all other organizations operating within those
territories (see figure 1.6). Efforts to subordinate neighbors and fight off more
distant rivals create state structures in the form not only of armies but also of

20 = Cities and States in World History

Concentration of coercive means

a

Accumulation of coercive means

Growth of states

Figure 1.6 How coercion generates the growth of states.

civilian staffs that gather the means to sustain armies and that organize the
ruler’s day-to-day control over the rest of the civilian population.

WAR DRIVES STATE FORMATION AND TRANSFORMATION

The deployment of coercive means in war and domestic control presents
warriors with two dilemmas. First, to the extent that they are successful in
subduing their rivals outside or inside the territory they claim, the wielders of
coercion find themselves obliged to administer the lands, goods, and people
they acquire; they become involved in extraction of resources, distribution of
goods, services, and income, and adjudication of disputes. But administration
diverts them from war, and creates interests that sometimes tell against war. We
can see the dilemma in the five-century conquest of Muslim Spain by Christian
warriors. Starting with the taking of Coimbra in 1064, standard siege practice
ran like this:

Residents of a town under siege who surrendered promptly could remain with full
freedoms after the conquest. If the Muslims surrendered after having been under siege
for some time, they could leave with only those goods they could carry. If they waited for
the town to fall by force, they faced death or enslavement.

(Powers 1988: 18)

Any of the three responses sct a problem for conquerors. The first imposed the
obligation — at least temporarily — to establish a system of parallel rule. The
second called for a redistribution of property as well as the settlement and
administration of a depopulated town. The third left slaves in the hands of the
victors, and posed even morc sharply the challenge of reestablishing production
and population. In one way or another, conquest entailed administration. On a
larger scale, these problems dogged the whole reconquest of Iberia. In different
forms, they marked the history of conquest throughout Europe.

The second dilemma parallels the first. Preparation for war, especially on a
large scalc, involves rulers ineluctably in extraction. It builds up an infrastructure
of taxation, supply, and administration that requires maintenancc of itself and
often grows faster than the armics and navies that it serves; those who run the
infrastructure acquire power and interests of their own; their interests and
powcr limit significantly the character and intensity of warfare any particular

Cities and States in World History 21

state can carry on. Europe’s Mongol and Tatar states resolved the dilemmas by
raiding and looting without building much durable administration, but their
strategy put inherent limits on their power, and eventually made them
vulnerable to well-financed mass armies. In contrast highly commercial states
such as Genoa resolved the dilemmas by borrowing or contracting out the
structure necessary to extract the means of war. Between the two extremes,
European states found a number of other ways of reconciling the demands of
warmaking, extraction, and other major activitics.

European states differed significantly, indeed, with respect to their salient
activities and organizations. Three different types of state have all proliferated
in various parts of Europe during major segments of the period since ggo:
ty =taking empires; systems of fragmented sovereignty such as city-states
and urban federations, and national states. The first built a large military and
extractive apparatus, but left most local administration to regional powerholders
who retained great autonomy. In systems of fragmented sovereignty, temporary
coalitions and consultative institutions played significant parts in war and
extraction, but little durable state apparatus emerged on a national scale.
National states unite substantial military, extractive, administrative, and
sometimes even distributive and productive organizations in a relatively
coordinated central structure. The Jong survival and coexistence of all three
types tells against any notion of European state formation as a single, unilinear
process, or of the national state — which did, indeed, eventually prevail — as an
inherently superior form of government.

Over the centuries, tribute-taking empires have dominated the world history
of states. Empires appeared_mainly under conditions of relatively low
accumulation of coercive means with high concentration of the available means.
When anyone other than the emperor accumulated important coercive means,
or the empcror lost the ability to deploy massive coercion, empires often
disintegrated. For all its appearance of massive durability, the Chinese Empire
suffered incessantly from rebellions, invasions, and movements for autonomy,
and long spent a major part of its budget on tribute to Mongols and other
nomadic predators. Nor did Europe’s empires enjoy greater stability. Napoleon’s
1808 invasion of the Iberian peninsula, for instance, shattered much of the
Spanish overseas empire. Within months, movements for independence formed
in most of Spanish Latin America, and within ten years practically all of the
region had broken into independent states.

Federations, city-states, and other arrangements of fragmented sovereignty
differed from empires in almost every respect. They depended on relatively
high accumulations, and relatively low concentrations, of coercion; the
widespread urban militias of fourteenth-century western Europe typify that
combination. In such states, a relatively small coalition of nominal subjects could
equal the ruler’s forces, while individuals, groups, and whole populations had
abundant opportunities for defection to compcting jurisdictions.

22 = Cities and States in World History

Fourteenth-century Prussia and Pomerania offer a telling contrast: in
Prussia, then dominated by the Teutonic Knights, no great princes rivalled the
Knights’ Grand Master, and towns wielded little power. But the landlords
installed by the Knights had wide discretion within their own extensive
domains, just so long as revenues flowed to the Knights. In nearby Pomerania, a
duchy established simultaneously by smaller-scale German conquests and
alliances, many armed rivals to the duke arose, and smaller lords took to
outright banditry, as towns dominated the duchy’s Estates and provided major
military forces in time of war.

During the 1326-8 war between the dukes of Pomerania and Mecklenburg,
Pomerania’s towns generally sided with their duke while nobles aligned
themselves with Mecklenburg. When the Pomeranian house won, the Estates,
in which the cities had much say, “were granted far-reaching privileges: the
guardianship over minor dukes, the decision whether new ducal castles should
be built or pulled down, the right to choose a new master if ever the duke broke
his promises or wronged his subjects” (Carsten 1954: go). The cities’ ability to
give or withhold support afforded them great bargaining power.

In between tribute-taking empires and city-states stand national states — Ts
around war, statemaking, and extraction like other states, but compelle

r_the subject population’s cession of coercive means rest
heavily in protection, adjudication, and sometimes even production and
distribution. The later history of Prussia illustrates the process by which
national states formed. During the fourteenth century, as we have seen, the
Teutonic Knights established a centralized empire there. During the fifteenth
century, the Knights, shaken by plague, out-migration of peasants, and military
defeat, began to disintegrate, and the regional magnates they had previously
controlled became Prussian political powers in their own right. They used their
power to impose greater and greater restrictions on the peasants who remained
on their estates; with coerced labor the increasingly powerful landlords shifted
toward demesne farming and the export of grain to western Europe.

At the same time, the rulers of Brandenburg and Pomerania, previously
weakened by alliances of their dukes with prosperous burghers, began to win
their incessant struggles with the towns, as the towns’ position in international
trade declined and the ability of the Hanseatic League to intercede on their
behalf weakened. The rulers then had to bargain with noble-dominated
Estates, which acquired the fundamental power to grant — or deny — royal
revenues for war and dynastic aggrandizement. Over the next few centuries
the Hohenzollern margraves of Brandenburg fought their way to pre-eminence
in what became Brandenburg-Prussia, absorbing much of old Pomeranja in the
process; they contracted marriage and diplomatic alliances that Pentually
expanded their domains into adjacent areas and into the capital-rich areas of
the lower Rhine; and thcy negotiated agreements with their nobility that ceded

Cities and States in World History 23

privileges and powers to the lords within their own regions, but gave the
monarch access to regular revenues.

Out of battles, negotiations, treaties, and inheritances emerged a national
state in which the great landlords of Prussia, Brandenburg, and Pomerania had
great power within domains the crown had never wrested from them. During
the eighteenth century, such monarchs as Frederick the Great locked the last
pieces of the structure into place by incorporating peasants and lords alike into
the army, the one under the command of the other. Prussia’s army mimicked
the countryside, with nobles serving as officers, free peasants as sergeants, and
serfs as ordinary soldiers. Peasants and serfs paid the price: many peasants fell
into serfdom, and “In war and peace Old Prussia’s military obligations
weakened the social position, the legal rights, and the property holding of serfs
vis a vis the noble estate” (Busch 1962: 68). In this respect, Prussia followed a
different path from Great Britain (where peasants became rural wage-workers)
and France (where peasants survived with a fair amount of property into the
nineteenth century). But russe, Oreat Britain, and France all-irembled-with

struggles between monarch and major Classes over the means of war, and felt
the consequent creation of durable state structure.

As military allies and rivals, Prussia, Great Britain, and France also shaped
each other’s destinies. In the nature of the case, national states always appear in

competition with each other, and gain their identities by contrast _with rival

states; they belong to systems of states. The broad differences among major
types of state structure are schematized in figure 1.7. Well developed examples
of all four kinds of state existed in different parts of Europe well after AD ggo.
Full-fledged empires flourished into the seventeenth century, and the last
major zones of fragmented sovereignty only consolidated into national states
late in the nineteenth.

High +— —— —— —— ———-—--— +
+ E : Ss 2
mpires uper

states +

g + Systems of 4
5 + national states +
e + +
5 ' i
+ No Fragmented 4

+ state sovereignty 4

Low + ———— — —— — — —— — — — — +
Low High

Accumulation

Figure 1.7 Alternative conditions of state growth as functions of accumulation and
concentration of coercion.
24 Cities and States in World History

Rulers of the three types faced some common problems, but faced them
differently. Of necessity, they distributed means of coercion unevenly through
the territories they sought to control. Most often they concentrated force at the
center and at the frontiers, attempting to maintain their authority in between by
means of secondary coercive clusters, loyal local wielders of coercion, roving
patrols, and widespread collection of intelligence. The Ottoman Empire, for
example, created two overlapping systems, one consisting of the kazas and other
units of civil administration, governed by kadis, the other composed of sancaks
and other districts of the feudal cavalry, governed by a military commander; in
time of conquest, the military system tended to absorb the civilian, at the cost of
losses in revenue (Pitcher 1972: 124).

The larger the state and the greater the discrepancy between the distribution
of coercion and that of capital, however, the stronger the incentives to resist
central control, and for alliances to form among different enemies of the state,
whether inside or outside its territory. In the sancak of Belgrade, part of
nineteenth-century Ottoman Serbia, the empire-scrving notables (avan)

logically concluded that they could enrich themselves more casily by creating their own
redistributive system than by serving simply as the stewards of redistribution. They
seized a share in the production of the peasantry, levied illegal tolls on the passage of
livestock, and retained a portion of the fees collected at the customs stations of the Sava
and Danube entrepdts, especially Belgrade, through which passed the cotton exports of
Serres and Salonika destined for Vienna and Germany. In particular, they asserted their
right to the deveto, ostensibly an illegal tribute of one-ninth of a peasant’s harvest after
the collection by the timariot (in return for cavalry service to the state) of the deseto or
tenth. By this action and other acts of violence against person or property, the dues in
kind exacted from many Serbian peasants were suddenly doubled, sometimes tripled.
(Stoianovitch 1989: 262-3)

This sort of devolution of power occurred widely in the disintegrating Ottoman
Empire of the nineteenth century. But in one version or another, agents of
indirect rule everywhere in Europe faced temptations to emulate their Serbian
cousins. Given the costs of communication and the advantages regional agents
of the crown could gain by evading demands from the center or by using
delegated national means for local or individual ends, all rulers faced repeated
challenges to their hegemony.

Rulers of empires gencrally sought to co-ont local and regional powerholders
without utterly transforming their bases of power and to create a distinctive
corps of royal servants — often present or former comrades in arms — whose fatc
depended on that of the crown. Mamluk sultans, to take an extreme case,
maintained a whole caste of enslaved foreigners who became warriogs and
administrators; except for fiets directly supporting officials, howevtr, the
Mamluks left local magnates in place within their domains. With such a
system, slaves actually ruled Egypt and adjacent areas of the Middle East from
1260 to 1517 (Garcin 1988). Rulers of national states usually tried harder to
Cities and States in World History 25

create a complete administrative hicrarchy and to climinate autonomous bases of
power. The Electors and kings of Brandenburg-Prussia, for example, ceded
great power to the landholding Junkers, but tied them closely to the crown by
means of offices, tax exemptions, and military service.

Those who ruled, or claimed to rule, in city-states, federations, and other
states of fragmented sovereignty often managed to exercise tight control over a
single city and its immediate hinterland. Beyond that scale, however, they had
no choice but to bargain with the authorities of competing centers. The local
control usually depended not only on the city’s coercive forces, but also on
extensive rural landholding by the urban ruling class. Once Florence began its
aggressive expansion beyond the municipal level during the fourteenth century,
its tyrants replaced the rulers of conquered cities with their own men as much
as possible, but selected the replacements from among the local patricians.

All these arrangements left considerable power and discretion in the hands of
local potentates, just so long as they contained the monarch’s enemies and kept
the revenues flowing to the national capital. On a national scale, in fact, no
European state (except, perhaps, Sweden) made a serious attempt to institute
direct rule from top to bottom until the era of the French Revolution. Before
then all but the smallest states relied on some version of indirect rule, and thus
ran serious risks of disloyalty, dissimulation, corruption, and rebellion. But
indirect rule made it possible to govern without erecting, financing, and feeding
a bulky administrative apparatus.
>The transition to direct rule gave rulers access to citizens and the resources
they controlled through household taxation, mass conscription, censuses, police
systems, and many other inivasions of small-stale social life. But it did so at the
cost of widespread resistance,-extensive bargaining, and the creation of rights
and perquisites for citizens} Both the penetration and the bargaining laid down
New state—structures, tiflating the government’s budgets, personnel, and
organizational diagrams. The omnivorous state of our own time took shape.

It is all too easy to treat the formation of states as a type of engineering, with
kings and their ministers as the designing engineers. Four facts compromise the
image of confident planning.

1 Rarely did Europe’s princes have in mind a precise model of the sort of
state they were producing, and even more rarely did they act efficiently to
produce such a model state. As the Norman Roger de Hauteville wrested Sicily
from Arab control between 1060 and 1075, for example, he improvised a
government by incorporating segments of the existing Muslim administration,
drew Muslim soldiers into his own army, and maintained Muslim, Jewish, and
Greek Christian churches, but took over large tracts of land as his own domain
and parceled out other lands to his followers. Calabria, which belonged to
Sicily, remained very Greck in culture and political style, with Byzantine offices
and rituals brought wholesale into Norman government. But Arab institutions
also had their place: Roger’s chief minister bore the wonderful title Emir of

26 = Cities and States in World History

Emirs and Archonte of Archontes. The resulting state was certainly distinctive
and new, but it did not,emanate from a coherent plan. Roger de Hauteville and
his followers created nosaic of adaptations and improvisationg (Mack Smith
1968a: 15-25).

2 Noone designed the principal components of national states — treasuries,
courts, central administrations, and so on. They usually formed as more or less

inadvertent by-products of efforts to carry out more immediate tasks,-especially
the creation and support of armed force. When the French crown, greatly
expanding its involvement in European wars during the 1630s, stretched its
credit to the point of bankruptcy, the local authorities and officeholders on
whom the king’s ministers ordinarily relied for the collection of revenues ceased
cooperating. At that point chief minister Richelieu, in desperation, began
sending out his own agents to coerce or bypass local authorities (Collins 1988).
Those emissaries were the royal intendants, who became the mainstays of state
authority in French regions under Colbert and Louis XIV. Only in faulty
retrospect do we imagine the intendants as deliberately designed instruments
of Absolutism.

3 Other states —- and eventually the entire system of states — strongly
affected the path of change followed by any particular state. From 1066 to
1815, great wars with French monarchs formed the English state, French
intervention complicated England’s attempts to subdue Scotland and Ireland,
and French competition stimulated England’s adoption of Dutch fiscal
innovations. From the sixteenth century onward, settlements of major wars
regularly realigned the boundaries and the rulers of European states, right up to
World War II; the division of Germany, the incorporation of Estonia, Latvia,
and Lithuania into the Soviet Union, and the dismantling of most European
overseas empires all stemmed more or less directly from the settlements of
World War II. In none of these cases can we reasonably think of a self-guided
state acting on its own.

4 Struggle and bargaining with different classes in the subject population
significantly shaped the states that emerged in Europe. Popular rebellions, for
example, usually lost, but each major one left marks on the state in the form of
repressive policies, realignments of classes for or against the state, and explicit
settlements specifying the rights of the affected parties. During the fierce revolt
of the Florentine workers (the Ciompi) in 1378, two of the three new
woolworkers’ guilds formed during the rebellion defected to the government
and thereby destroyed a front that had seized effective power in the city; in the
settlement, the still-insurrectionary (and more proletarian) guild lost its right to
exist, but the two collaborators joined the guilds that paraded and delibeyAted as
part of the official municipal government (Schevill 1963: 279 Cohn
1980: 129-54).

On a smaller scale, both the resistance and the cooperation of knights,
financiers, municipal officers, landlords, peasants, artisans, and other actors

Cities and States in World History 27

created and recreated state structure over the long run. Thus the class structure

of the population that fell under the jurisdiction of a particular state significantly

affected the organization of that state, and variations in class structure from one
part of Europe to another produced systematic geographic differences in the
character of states, Not only the ruling classes, but all classes whose resources
and activities affected preparation for war, left their imprint on European states.

Twin facts, for example, strongly affected the path of Swedish state
formation: first, the overwhelming presence of a peasantry that held plenty of
land well into the eighteenth century; second, the relative inability of landlords
either to form great estates or to coerce peasant labor on their lands. That
exceptional rural class structure prevented the royal strategy of granting nobles
fiscal and judicial privileges and assistance in bending peasants to their will in
return for collaboration in extracting revenues and military service from the
peasantry — even though such a strategy prevailed in nearby areas such as
Prussia and Russia. It also helps explain the survival of a separate peasant Estate
which actually had some power over governmental action, and the fact that in its
period of imperial expansion Sweden turned rapidly from the hiring of
mercenaries on the European market to the creation of militias whose members
received land, or the income from land, in return for their service. In Sweden as
elsewhere, the ambient class structure constrained rulers’ attempts to create
armed force, and therefore left its impact on the very organization of the state.

Concentration Concentration

of coercion SO of capital
™ Growth Growth

of states of cities

Accumulation

of coercion —_.. /
Form of states —

Accumulation
of capital

oo Figure 1.8 Relations among coercion, capital, states, and cities.
AY

A more general and schematic statement of the essential relationships is
given in figure 1.8. The diagram takes this shape for the reasons we surveyed
earlier: war and preparation for war involved rulers in extracting the means of
war from others who held the essential resources — men, arms, supplies, or
money to buy them — and were reluctant to surrender them without strong
pressure or compensation. The organization of major social classes within a
State’s territory, and thcir relations to the state, significantly affected the
strategies rulers employed tO extract resources, the resistance they met, the

s € Ited, the sorts of durable organization extraction and struggle

laid down, and therefore the efficiency of resource extraction. Within limits set

28 = Cities and States in World History

by the demands and rewards of other states, extraction and struggle over the
means of war created the central organizational structures of Sate The
organization of major social classes, and their relations to the state varied
significantly from Europe’s coercion-intensive regions (areas of few cities and
agricultural predominance, where direct coercion played a major part in
production) to its capital-intensive regions (areas of many cities and commercial
predominance, where markets, exchange, and market-oriented production
prevailed). Demands major classes made on the state, and the influence of those
classes over the state, varied correspondingly. The relative success of different
extractive strategies, and the strategies rulers actually applied, therefore varied
significantly from coercion-intensive to capital-intensive regions. As a con-
sequence, the organizational forms of states followed distinctly different
trajectories in these different parts of Europe. Such circumstances belie any
idea that European monarchs simply adopted a visible model of state formation
and did their best to follow it.

LONG TRENDS AND INTERACTIONS

Another illusion must also disappear. So far I have presented the relationships
as though capital and coercion always moved toward greater accumulation and
concentration. For the thousand years that concern us here, those have been
the main trends. Yet even within the European experience many states have
undergone deflation in both regards; Poland endured many reversals in capital
and coercion, successive Burgundian and Habsburg empires collapsed, and the
sixteenth-century religious wars seriously depleted Europe’s stocks of capital
and coercive means. The history of European state formation runs generally
upward toward greater accumulation and concentration, but it runs across
jagged peaks and profound valleys.

Accumulation probably made the larger long-term difference to the history
of the European economy. But concentration, deconcentration, and reconcen-
tration of coercion mark off major chapters in the story of state formation; the
concentration came to depend in important degree on the availability of
concentrated capital. Exactly why and how that was so will preoccupy this
book’s later sections and take us into complicated questions of fiscal policy. Yet
the central link is simple: over the long run, far more than other activities, war
and preparation for war produced the major components of European states.
States that lost wars commonly contracted, and often ceased to exist.
Regardless of their size, states having the st coercive means tended fo win
wars; efficiency (the ratio Set Pome oe ea
output).

Through the interplay of competition, technological change, and the sheer
gcale of the largest belligerent states, war and the creation of coercive means
Cities and States in World History 29

became immensely more expensive over time. As that happened, fewer and
fewer rulers could create military means from their own routine resources;
more and more they turned to short-term borrowing and long-term taxation.
Both activities went more easily where concentrations of capital already existed.
But everywhere they produced changes in governmental organization. —_——

How did changes in warfare and state organization relate to each other? As a
first approximation, we can divide the years since AD ggo into four segments,
with varying temporal limits from one part of Europe to another:

1 patrimonialism: a time (up to the fifteenth century in much of Europe)
when tribes, feudal levies, urban militias, and similar customary forces played
the major part in warfare, and monarchs generally extracted what capital they
needed as tribute or rent from lands and populations that lay under their
immediate control;

2 brokerage: an era (roughly 1400 to 1700 in important parts of Europe)
when mercenary forces recruited by contractors predominated in military activity,
and rulers relied heavily on formally independent capitalists for loans, for
management of revenue-producing enterprises, and for installation and collec-
tion of taxes;

3 nationalization: a period (especially 1700 to 1850 or so in much of
Europe) when states created mass armics and navies drawn increasingly from
their own national populations, while sovereigns absorbed armed forces directly
into the state’s administrative structure, and similarly took over the direct
operation of the fiscal apparatus, drastically curtailing the involvement of in-
dependent contractors;

4 specialization: an age (from approximatcly the mid-nineteenth century to
the recent past) in which military force grew as a powerful specialized branch of
national government, the organizational separation of fiscal from military activity
increased, the division of labor between armies and police sharpened, representa-
tive institutions came to have a significant influence over military expenditures,
and states took on a greatly expanded range of distributive, regulatory, compen-
satory, and adjudicative activities.

Clearly the relations between capital and coercion changed significantly from
one period to the next. — es wees

The transformation of states by war, in its turn,<atfercd the stakes of war.
Through the period of patrimonialism, conquerors sought tribute much more
than they sought the stable control of the population and resources within the
territories they overran; whole empires grew up on the principle of extracting
rents and gifts from the rulers of multiple regions without penetrating
significantly into their systems of rule. In the move to brokerage and then to
nationalization, a closely administered territory became an asset worth fighting
30 © Cities and States in World History

for, since only such a territory provided the revenues to sustain armed force.
But in the age of specialization, states accumulated claimants to their services so
rapidly that war became, even more than before, a means of satisfying the
economic interests of the ruling coalition by gaining access to the resources of
other states. Since World War II, with the extension of the European state
system to the entire world and the accompanying rigidification of national
boundaries, that has increasingly meant exercising influence over other states
without actually incorporating their territory into that of the more powerful
state.

Those were.the broad trends. Yct more than one combination of capital and
coercion appeared at each stage in the growth of European states. We might
distinguish a coercion-intensive, a capital-intensive, and a capitalized coercion
path to state formation. They do not represent alternative “strategies” so much
as contrasting conditions of life. Rulers pursuing similar ends — especially
successful preparation for war — in very different environments responded to
those environments by fashioning distinctive relations to the major social
classes within them. The reshaping of relations between ruler and ruled
produced new, contrasting forms of government, cach more or less adapted to
its social setting.

In the coercion-intenstve mode, rulers squeezed the means of war from their
own populations and others they conquered, building massive structures of
extraction in the process. Brandenburg and Russia — especially in their phases
as tribute-taking empires — illustrate the coercion-intensive mode. At the very
extreme of the mode, however, armed landlords wielded so much power that no
one of them could establish durable control over the rest; for several centuries,
the Polish and Hungarian nobilities actually elected their own kings, and struck
them down when they strove too hard for supreme power.

In the capital-intensitve mode, rulers relied on compacts with capitalists —
whose interests they served with care — to rent or purchase military force, and
thereby warred without building vast permanent state structures. City-states,
city-empires, urban federations, and other forms of fragmented sovereignty
commonly fall into this path of change. Genoa, Dubrovnik, the Dutch
Republic, and, for a time, Catalonia, exemplify the capital-intensive mode. As
the history of the Dutch Republic illustrates, at the extreme this mode
produced federations of largely autonomous city-states, and constant negotiation
among them over state policy.

In the intermediate capitalized coercion mode, rulers did some of each, but
spent more of their effort than did their capital-intensive neighbors on
incorporating capitalists and sources of capital directly into the structuyes of
their states. Holders of capital and coercion interacted on terms of felative
equality. France and England eventually followed the capitalized coercion
mode, which produced full-fledged national states earlier than the coercfon-
intensive and capital-intensive modes did.

Cities and States in World History 31

Driven by the pressures of international competition (especially by war and
preparation for war) all three paths eventually converged on concentrations of
capital and of coercion out of all proportion to those that prevailed in AD ggo.
From the seventeenth century onward the capitalized coercion form proved
more effective in war, and therefore provided a compelling model for states that
had originated in other combinations of coercion and capital. From the
nineteenth century to the recent past, furthermore, all European states involved
themselves much more heavily than before in building social infrastructure, in
providing services, in regulating economic activity, in controlling population
movements, and in assuring citizens’ welfare; all these activities began as by-
products_of rulers’ efforts to acquire revenues and compliance from their
subject populations, but took orrtives-amdrationates Uf ticir own. Contemporary
socialist states differ from capitalist states, on the average, in exerting more
direct, self-conscious control over production and distribution. As compared
with the range of states that have existed in Europe over the last thousand years,
nevertheless, they belong recognizably to the same type as their capitalist
neighbors. They, too, are national states.

Before their recent convergence, the coercion-intensive, capital-intensive
and capitalized coercion paths Ied to very different kinds of states. Even after
convergence, states retained some features — for example, the character of their
representative institutions — that clearly reflected their earlier historical
experiences. All three types of state were quite viable under certain conditions
that actually prevailed in Europe at various times before the present. Indeed, at
the abdication of Charles V in 1555, the major part of Europe lay under
imperial hegemony, rather than under the control of national states in any
strong sense of the term.

At that point, Suleyman the Magnificent’s Ottoman Empire (in addition to
dominating Anatolia and much of the Middle East) occupied most of the
Balkans and held in vassalage states from the Volga to the Adriatic. Charles V,
as Holy Roman Emperor, Emperor of Spain, and Elder of the Habsburgs, then
claimed rule over Spain, the Netherlands, Milan, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia,
Austria, Bohemia, Burgundy, Franche-Comté and (more contestably) the
swarm of states in the territory we now call Germany. Further east, Poland,
Lithuania, Muscovy, and the Don Cossacks also organized in imperial style. In
1555, northern Italy, Switzerland, and significant parts of the Holy Roman
Empire remained areas of intensely fragmented sovereignty, while only France
and England resembled our conventional models of national states. By that
time, city-states and other small-scale organizations were losing ground relative
to other forms of state. Yet the Dutch Republic was soon to prove that
federations of citics and adjacent territories could still hold their own as world
powers. Empires, furthermore, were advancing. Nothing then assured the
ultimate victory of the national state.

The lesson is clear. To usc twenticth-century strength as the main criterion

32 Cities and States in World History

of effective state formation (as many analysts do) means succumbing to the
temptations of teleology, misconcciving the relations among cities, states,
capital, and coercion in the European past. We can avoid these pitfalls by
following the choices of statemakers, and the consequences of those choices,
forward from an early date — here set arbitrarily at AD 990 — to the present.

That forward-looking strategy will allow us to reach some tentative answers
to this book’s crucial question: What accounts for the great variation quer time and
space in the kinds of states that have prevailed in Europe since_an 990, and why did
European states eventually converge on different variants of the national state?
Although the question is formidably broad, it translates into narrower, more
manageable problems such as:

av
> Yo 3 at accounts for the roughly concentric pattern of state formation in Europe as
large but thinly-controlled states as the Ottoman Empire and Muscovy
forming early around the periphery, smaller but more tightly governed states such as
France and Brandenburg grouped in a rough intermediate zone, and a central band of
city-states, principalities, federations, and other varieties of intensely fragmented
sovereignty that only after 1790 consolidated into larger states?

2 Why, despite obvious interests to the contrary, did rulers frequently accept the
establishment of institutions representing the major classes within the populations that
fell subject to the state's jurisdiction?

3. Why did European states vary so much with respect to the incorporation of urban
oligarchies and institutions into national state structure, with the Dutch Republic's
state practically indistinguishable from its cluster of municipal governments, the Polish
state almost oblivious to urban institutions, and a dozen other variants in between those
extremes?

4 Why did political and commercial pomer slide from the city-states and city-
empires of the Mediterranean to the substantial states and relatively subordinated cities
of the Atlantic?

5 Why did city-states, city-empires, federations, and religious organizations lose
their importance as prevailing kinds of state in Europe?

6 Why did war shift from conquest for tribute and struggle among armed tribute-
takers to sustained battles among massed armies and navies?

The questions remain large, but not so large as the demand for a gencral
explanation of the alternative trajectories taken by European states. The
challenge, then, is to address this huge problem and its more manageable
subsidiaries by close examination of the various paths that states actually took id
different parts of Europe after AD ggo. That will involve identifying the main
processes rming states, and sorting them out into their coercign-
intensive, capital-intensive, and capitalized-coercion variants.

Cities and States in World History 33

A book on these questions must steer a narrow road between randomness
and teleology. On one side, the blank wall of randomness, in which every
history seems sui generis, one king or battle after another. On the other, the
crevasse of teleology, in which the outcome of state formation seems to explain
its entire course. I will try to avoid the blank wall and the crevasse by pointing
out that the paths of state formation were multiple but not infinite, that at any
particular historical juncture several distinctly different futures were possible,
that states, rulers, and citizens influenced each other profoundly, that
systematic problems and processes connected the histories of all European
states, hence the relations among them. If successful, the chapters to come will
tell a tale of diversity in unity, of unity in diversity, of choice and consequences.

PROSPECTS

Let me confess at once: my reading of the European past is unconventional,
unproved, and riven with gaps. On the whole, students of European states have
prudently avoided synthescs on the scale of a thousand years. Those who have
made the leap have generally either sought to explain what was distinctive about
the West as a whole, or proposed a single standard path of state formation, or
both. They have usually proceeded retrospectively, seeking the origins of the
states we now know as Germany or Spain and ignoring states that disappeared
along the way rather than trying to chart the whole range of state formation.

By claiming the existence of multiple paths as a function of the relative ease
with which capital and coercion concentrated, in arguing a strong interdependence
between the form of a state and its previous access to capital, and by seeking to
replace a retrospective with a prospective analysis of transformations in state
structure I am abandoning the solid ways of established scholarship for an
adventure in rethinking the past. By discussing a thousand years in little more
than two hundred pages, furthermore, I can hope to do no more than identify
some important relationships, and illustrate how they worked.

A fully expanded version of the book’s argument would give far greater
weight to the dynamics of the European economy than the following pages do.
First of all, I will say far too little about swings in prices, productivity, trade and
population growth, neglecting among other things the probable importance of
price rises in the thirteenth, sixteenth, and eighteenth centuries and of
depressions in between for the viability of different kinds of states and the
relative power of merchants, peasants, landlords, officials, and other social
classes (Abel 1966, Frank 1978, Kriedte 1983, Wallerstein 1974-88).

Second, I will treat the changing organization of production and the resulting
class structure only cursorily. That is not because I think it negligible. On the
contrary: relations between landlords and cultivators made an enormous
difference to the consequenccs of statemaking, protection, and extraction, as
34 Cities and States in World History

contrasts among Hungary, Florence, and England instantly demonstrate. The
seventeenth-century Prussian state, for example, bore the marks of Prussia’s
earlier history: during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries a crusading
order, the Teutonic Knights, extended military control over that thinly-settled
region, subdued the Slavs who had previously occupied it, induced German
knights to come in and organize large estates, and encouraged cultivation by
those knights’ recruitment of peasants to clear and farm land that would be
theirs in return for ducs and service. Such arrangements at the level of
ho village, o inds of
taxation, conscription, and surveillance, But my assignment is already
complicated enough. In order to concentrate on mechanisms of state formation
I will repeatedly stereotype or take for granted the relations among landlords,
peasants, agricultural proletarians, and other major rural actors.

In attempting to close in on the crucial relationships, furthermore, I will
make no effort to review alternative theories of state formation, past or present.
Nor will I try to state the pedigrees of the book’s organizing ideas. Let us take
for granted the existence of analyses by Karl Marx, Max Weber, Joseph
Schumpeter, Stein Rokkan, Barrington Moore, Gabriel Ardant, and others that
obviously bear on the book’s subject matter; cognoscenti will surcly notice their
influence on almost every page, and reviewers will no doubt waste many of their
words trying to pigeonhole the book into one school or another. To deal with
those analyses, the theories behind them, and the historical phenomenon of
state formation at the same time would blunt the analysis and double its length
without advancing it greatly. Instead, the book will focus on the actual processes
of state formation.

In the interests of compact presentation, I will likewise resort to metonymy
and reification on page after page. Metonymy, in that I will repeatedly speak of
“rulers,” “kings,” and “sovereigns” as if they represented a state’s entire
decision-making apparatus, thus reducing to a single point a complex,
contingent set of social relations. Metonymy, in that cities actually stand for
regional networks of production and trade in which the large scttlements are
focal points. Reification, in that I will time and again impute a unitary interest,
rationale, capacity, and action to a state, a ruling class, or the people subject to
their joint control. Without a simplifying model employing metonymy and
reification, we have no hope of identifying the main connections in the complex
process of European state formation.

Most of the time the implicit model will contain these elements: a ruler
summing up the joint decision-making of a state’s most powerful officers; a
ruling class allied with the ruler and controlling major means of production
within the territory under the state’s jurisdiction; other clients enjoying special
benefits from their association with the state; opponents, enemies, and rivals of the
state, its ruler, its ruling class, and its clients, both within and outside the state’s
own area; the remainder of the popudation falling under the state’s jurisdiction; a

Cities and States in World History 35

coercive apparatus including armies, navies, and other organized, concentrated
means of force that operate under the state’s control; and the civilian apparatus
of the state, consisting especially of distinctive fiscal, administrative, and judicial
organizations that operate under its control.

Most of the arguments to come entail the description and explanation of the
different ways that rulers, ruling classes, clients, opponents, general populations,
coercive organizations, and civil administrations articulated in European history
from AD ggo onward. Occasionally they unpack one or another of these reified
categories — most notably by specifying when, why, and with what effects
capitalists (themselves, to be sure, a reified class of people) fell into one or
another of the categories. But usually the arguments proceed as if each category
were real, unitary and unproblematic. We pay that price for operating on the
scale of a continent and a thousand years.

A final apology. On such a scale, I must deal with historical facts like a rock
skipping water; spinning quickly from high point to high point without settling
for more than an instant at a time. I do not know all the history one would need
to write this book fully, and to supply all the documentation for the history I
think I do know would burden the text immeasurably. On the recent growth of
state activity, for example, any responsible author would want to cite Reinhard
Bendix, Walter Korpi, Theda Skocpol, Goran Therborn, and many more. I do
nothing of the sort, generally reserving citations for direct quotations and
esoteric or controversial information. Clearly, experts will have to scrutinize my
rendering of European histories, and ponder whether its errors vitiate its
arguments.

Given their broad, synthetic, and speculative character, this book’s arguments
do not lend themselves immediately to verification or refutation. Yet we can
judge them wrong to the degree that:

1 rulers having very different relations to capital and coercion nevertheless
pursued similar strategies, with similar effects, when they tried to build
armed force and state power;

2 major moments in the growth and transformation of particular states, and of
the European state system as a whole, did not correspond to war and
preparation for war;

3 efforts to amass the means of armed force did not produce durable features
of state structure;

4 rulerg deliberately set out to construct states according to preconceived
designs, and succeeded in following those designs;

§ some or all of the empirical regularities I have claimed — especially (a) state
formation’s geography, (b) differential incorporation of urban oligarchies and
36 © Cities and States in World History

institutions into national state structure, (c) development of representative
institutions despite rulers’ contrary interests, (d) movement of political and
commercial power from Mediterranean to Atlantic, (e) decline of city-
states, city-empircs, federations, and religious organizations, and (f) shift of
war to sustained battles among massed armies and navies — do not, in fact,
hold up to historical scrutiny;

6 alternative explanations provide more economical and/or convincing
accounts of those empirical regularities that do hold up to scrutiny.

If any of these holds true, my argument faces a serious challenge. If all of them
hold true, it is clearly wrong.

Important theoretical issues are at stake. One might expect a follower of
Joseph Strayer, for example, to hold that the domestic peacemaking activities of
monarchs began much earlier and played a much larger part in people’s
acceptance of the state than my account implies, and therefore to uphold most
of the checklist’s charges against the book’s analysis. One might expect a
follower of Douglass North to claim that the state’s construction and protection
of property rights underlay many of the changes I have attributed to preparation
for war. One might expect a follower of Immanuel Wallerstein to insist that the
activities of states forwarded the interests of capitalists to an even larger degree
than I have allowed, and a follower of Perry Anderson to counter (at least for
the middle period of my analysis) that the argument greatly underestimates the
weight of European nobilities in the creation of bulky “absolutist” states. Thus
the ways in which my arguments are right or wrong bear on widely-discussed
disagreements concerning Europcan state formation.

The checklist provides a means of sorting possible criticisms of the book into
legitimate, semi-legitimate, and illegitimate. It would be fully legitimate, and
quite illuminating, to establish that one of the conditions just listed, or a similar
condition implied by the book’s arguments did, indeed, hold for some
substantial block of European experience. It would be semi-legitimate to show
that the argument did not account for certain major, durable features of
particular states. (The criterion would be only semi-legitimate because it would
show that the argument was incomplete — which I concede readily in advance —
but not that it was wrong.)

It would be illegitimate to complain that the argument neglects variables the
critic happens to regard as important: physical environment, ideology, military
technology, or something else. The missing-variable criticism only becomes
legitimate when the critic shows that neglect of the variable causes a false
reading of relationships among variables that do appear in the argument. The
point is not to give a “complete” account (whatever that might be), but to get the
main connections right.

In pursuit of that goal, the next chapter concentrates on the changing

Cities and States in World History 37

geography of citics and states in Europe over the inquiry’s thousand years.
Chapter 3 takes up the mechanisms by which the rulers of states acquired the
means to carry on their major activities — especially the creation of armed force
— and the implications of those mechanisms for state structure. Chapter 4
concentrates on relations between states and citizens, tracing the formation
through bargaining of massive, multi-function states. Chapter 5 deals with
alternative paths of state formation, tracing out the effects of varying
relationships to capital and coercion. Chapter 6 examines European states as a
set of interacting parties, a system whose operation constrains the actions of its
members. Chapter 7 brings the story up to the present, reflecting on
contemporary relationships between capital and coercion in an effort to
understand why military men have gained power in so many states since World
War II, and in the hope of discerning in what ways European experience helps
us understand the troubled states of our own time.
2
European Cities and States

ABSENT EUROPE

A thousand years ago, Europe did not exist. A decade before the Millennium,
the roughly thirty million people who lived at the western end of the Eurasian
land mass had no compelling reason to think of themselves as a single set of
people, connected by history and common fate. Nor did they. The disintegration
of the Roman Empire, it is true, had left a significant part of what we now call
Europe connected by roads, trade, religion, and collective memory. But that
once-Roman world omitted much of the area east of the Rhine and north of the
Black Sea. Nor was the late empire exclusively European; it had extended all
around the Mediterranean into Asia and Africa.

From the viewpoint of trade and cultural contact, Millennial “Europe” broke
into three or four loosely connected clusters: an eastern band corresponding
roughly to today’s European Russia, which maintained strong connections to
Byzantium and to the major trade routes across Asia; a Mediterranean shared
by Muslims, Christians, and Jews that was even more strongly linked to the
great metropolises of the Middle East and Asia; a post-Roman system of cities,
towns, roads, and rivers that was densest in an arc from central Italy to
Flanders, but radiated into Germany and France; perhaps a distinct northern
cluster including Scandinavia and the British Isles. (Many of these labels, to be
sure, commit the crime of anachronism; short of adopting a ponderous set of
geographic conventions, we have no alternative to using such designations as
“Germany” and “British Isles” with a loud warning that they do not imply
political or cultural connectedness.)

In the year 990 Muslim dominions controlled a major share of the Roman
Empire’s former space: all of the Mediterranean’s southern shores and most of
the Iberian peninsula, not to mention numerous Mediterranean islands and a
European Cities and States 39

t—————— PERSIAN

== EMPIRE

Figure 2.1. Europe in ap 406 (adapted trom Colin McEvedy, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History,
Penguin Books, 1961).

few points along its northern coast. A loosely linked Byzantine empire extended
from eastern Italy to the Black Sea’s eastern end, while to its north an even
more indefinite Russian state stretched to the Baltic. A Danish kingdom
wielded power from the western Baltic over to the British Isles, while shifting
Polish, Bohemian, and Hungarian principalities controlled the territory south of
the Baltic. To their west lay a Saxon empire, claimant to the heritage of
Charlemagne, while still farther in the same direction Hugh Capet ruled the

kingdom of France.

Roa of these half-familiar place names, however, should disguise the
enormous fragmentation of sovereignty then prevailing throughout the territory
that would become Europe. The emperors, kings, princes, dukes, caliphs,
sultans, and other potentates of AD ggo prevailed as conquerors, tribute-takers,
and rentiers, not as heads of state that durably and densely regulated life within

their realms. Inside theit jurisdictions, furthermore,_rivals_and ostensible
subordinates commonly used armed force on behalf of their own interests while

paying little attention to thc interests of their nominal sovereigns. Private armies

40 European Cities and States

i

2 Vol
nee } PRINCIPALITY [8 Buigarse
H? Englanc OF RUSSIA :
o @0° eccoececscosoodcoseccon
D of The. 0° ° . Shuze ecco0c0ko
Brstary YY GERMAN Gy “ee oo
K of EMPI 5 d 0” Lt Po Karakhanid!
Naat Erance’ ———— o° ey ececeee °° ® 06 me me
fo. N04 Tmutorokan =F
of Leon Kat chy of Hungary) d09? ENS can unanate
UMAYYAD ‘County’ et Oy Shivan Samanid3
. Fema e—Emirate 3
Armenian Ps¥——9 . ——
iano a
Q EMIRATESS

Figure 2.2. Europe in ap 998 (adapted from Colin McEvedy, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History,
Penguin Books, 1961).

proliferated through much of the continent. Nothing like a centralized national
state existed anywhere in Europe.

Within the ring formed by these sprawling, ephemeral states soverei
fragmented even more, as bunds, of princtalles, biaNeprlan. y-aases, , bishoprics, city-states,
and other authorities exercised overlapping coatral in the small hinterlands of
their capitals. At the Millennium the pope, the Byzantine emperor and the Holy
Roman emperor claimed most of the Italian peninsula, but in fact almost every
important city and its hinterland operated as a political free agent. (In AD 1200,
the Italian peninsula alone hosted two or three hundred distinct city-states:
Waley 1969: 11.) Except for the relative urbanization of Muslim lands, the

correlation between size ¢ states and density of citics was negative: where cities

swarmed, sovereign coumbled
Soon a rough chronology of changes in cities and states over the last

thousand years will start to fall into place. In the meantime, however, let us
settle for an arbitrary comparison at 500-year intervals, just to get a sense of
how much changed. By 1490, the map and the reality had altered greatly.
Armed Christians were driving Muslim rulers from their last major territory on
the continent’s western half - Granada. An Islamic Ottoman empire had
displaced the Christian Byzantines between the Adriatic and Persia. The
Ottomans were grinding away at Venetian power in the eastern Mediterranean
and advancing into the Balkans. (In alliance with threatened Granada, they

European Cities and States 41

were also pursuing their first adventures in the western Mediterranean.) After
centuries during which European wars had remained regional, and only an
occasional crusade had involved the transalpine states militarily in the Medi-
terranean, furthermore, the kings of France and Spain were beginning to
struggle for hegemony in Italy.

. "oe
°
%
yf Great 3,
esol Principality {§ knanate %

J Pug of Moscow J of Kazan %
a "e 8
| e 900?

en) Timurid E.
&of Samarkand

@ Timund
Emirate
of Herat

£2, E of Granada
steteterege. ESSISSDS Py
Wattasid 3Se Zryanid Sgst jatsid
Sultanate 2426 Emirate 2geCaliphate

CSS OSS SPS SOS SSD
SLOSS SFS SSIS OS OSI west
re,

e, AMLUK \
Reo SULTANA E
So,

B Burgundian possessions

Figure 2.3. Europe in ap 1478 (adapted from Colin McEvedy, The Penguin Atlas of Medieval
History, Penguin Books, 1961).

Around Europe’s periphery, in 1490, stood rulers who dominated substantial
territories: not only the Ottoman Empire, but also Hungary, Poland, Lithuania,
Muscovy, the lands of the Teutonic Order, the Scandinavian Union, England, ‘
France, Spain, Portugal, Naples. Those powers lived largely from rents“and _
tributes, and ruled through regional magnates who enjoyed great autonomy¥
within their own terrains; the magnates frequently resisted or even rejected
royal power. Yet the great kings and dukes of 1490 were, on the whole,
consolidating and extending their domains.

Inside the broken circle of larger states, then, Europe remained a land of
intensely fragmented sovereignty. A scattered Habsburg empire, it is true, was
beginning to reach across the continent, while Venice dominated an important
arc of the Adriatic. But the zone from northern Italy to Flanders, and east to the
uncertain borders of Hungary and Poland, broke into hundreds of formally
independent principalities, duchies, bishoprics, city-states, and other political
42 European Cities and States

MARRAKESH

Cumsuctoo

Figure 2.4 The world in ap 1490 (adapted from Colin McEvedy, The Penguin Allas of Modern
History to 1815, Penguin Books, 1972).

entities that generally could use force only in the immediate hinterlands of their
capitals; south Germany alone included 69 free cities in addition to its multiple
bishoprics, duchies, and principalities (Brady 1985: 10). “In spite of the border
which a cartographer can draw around the area which opinion in the mid-
fifteenth century accepted as within the Holy Roman Empire, that is the chiefly
Germanic zone between France and Hungary, and Denmark and northern
Italy,” muses J. R. Hale, “he cannot colour in the multitude of cities, princely
enclaves and militant ecclesiastical territories that saw themselves as actually or
potentially independent, without giving the reader an impression that he is
suffering from a disease of the retina” (Hale 1985: 14). Europe’s 80 million
people divided into something like 500 states, would-be states, statelets, and
statelike organizations.

By 1990, another five centuries later, Europeans had greatly extended the
work of consolidation. Six hundred million people now lived within the
continent’s perimeter. No Muslim state remained on the continent, although a
powerful Islamic world thrived contentiously to the south and southeast of
Europe and impressive residues of Muslim culture survived in Spain, the
Balkans, and Turkey. A giant Russian state had taken shape on the east and
European Cities and States 43

stretched all the way to the Arctic and the Pacific, while a spacious Turkey
crossed the Asian border to the southeast. Much of the continent had settled
into states that occupied at least 40,000 square miles, not including colonies and
dependencies: Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Finland, France, each of the two
Germanies, Greece, Italy, Norway, Poland, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Turkey,
the United Kingdom, and the USSR. Microstates such as Luxembourg and
Andorra, although larger than many of the political entities that existed in 1490,
had become curiosities. Depending on the rules for counting, the whole of
Europe divided into a mere 25 to 28 states.

It took a long time for national states — relatively centralized, differentiated,
and autonomous organizations successfully claiming priority in the use of force
within large, contiguous, and clearly bounded territories — to dominate the
European map. In ggo nothing about the world of manors, local lords, military
raiders, fortified villages, trading towns, city-states, and monasteries foretold a
consolidation into national states. In 1490 the future remained open; despite
the frequent use of the word “kingdom,” empires of one sort or another

FINLAND $n eK
D> nA
°
a v

USSR

PORTUGAL

a SYRIA
Cauta at
(sPanisH) Pee

~ Melilla

{feranse) ALGERIA
MOROCCO TUNISIA §

Israel military LIBYA
occupation

Key preas under EGYPT \

Figure 2.5 Europe in AbD 1990.

44 European Cities and States

claimed most of the European landscape, and federations remained viable in
some parts of the continent. Some time after 1490 Europeans foreclosed those
alternative opportunities, and set off decisively toward the creation of a system
consisting almost entirely of relatively autonomous national states.

States, on the other hand, diminished in number and increased in area. In
order to draw the changing map, we must apply the term “state” generously, to
include any organization that commanded substantial means of coercion and
successfully claimed durable priority over all other users of coercion within at
least one clearly bounded territory. In the year ggo relatively large Muslim
states dominated much of the western Mediterranean, including southern
Spain and Africa’s north coast. Other sizeable states included the kingdom of
France, the Saxon empire, the Danish kingdom, Kievan Russia, Poland,
Hungary, Bohemia, and the Byzantine Empire. On the whole, the rulers of
these political entities drew tribute from the territories nominally under their
control. But outside their home regions they barely administered their
supposed domains, and saw their authority continually contested by rival
potentates, including their own putative agents and vassals.

Consider Hungary, a state that grew from conquest by Magyars, one of many
armed nomadic peoples who invaded Europe from the Eurasian steppe. During
the tenth century, the bulk of the Magyars migrated from the Volga and
overwhelmed the smaller number of tilling and forest-dwelling Slavs who
inhabited the Carpathian Basin, which we now call Hungary (Pamlenyi
1975: 21-5). Once they moved west of the Carpathians, the shortage of natural
pasture forced any predatory nomads to withdraw, thin their numbers, or
dismount (Lindner 1981). After a century of marauding, the now-Christianized
Hungarians settled increasingly into agriculture inside a territory almost
without cities.

Their agricultural base did not prevent the Hungarian nobility from warring
with their neighbors, struggling over the royal succession, or playing the
European game of marriages and alliances. Their control of armed force,
furthermore, permitted them to drive slaves and freemen alike toward a
common serfdom. Towns grew up as feudal agriculture prospered, mines
exported metals to the rest of Europe, and the region’s trade routes knitted
together with those of central and western Europe. German capital came to
dominate Hungarian commerce and industry. Hungary’s towns, however,
remained tightly subordinate to their noble lords until, during the fifteenth
century, the crown began to exert control over them.

During the later fifteenth century, King Janos Hunyadi and his son, King
Matthias Corvinus built a relatively centralized and effective war machine,
fighting off both the warlike Turks to their southeast and the hungry Habsburgs
to their west. With the death of Matthias, however, the nobility counter-
attacked, depriving his successor Ladislas of the means to keep his own army.
In 1514 the effort to mount yct another crusade against the Turks incited a
European Cities and States 45

huge peasant rebellion, whose repression in turn definitively reduced the
peasantry to servitude and abolished their right to change masters. In the
struggle among magnates that accompanied the settlement of the peasant war,
lawyer Istvan Verbéczi set down the nobles’ view of Hungarian customs,
including the retributive laws against the peasantry and the provisions that

nobles enjoyed immunity from arrest without prior legal judgment, were subject only toa
legally crowned king, paid no taxes whatsoever, and could be required to render military
service only for the defense of the realm. Finally, the right of rebcllion was guaranteed
against any king who infringed upon the rights of the nobility in any way.

(McNeill 1975 [1964]: 17)

Verbiczi’s treatise became the standard authority for Hungarian law and “the
bible of the nobility” (Pamlenyi 1975: 117). By 1526, Hungary had not one but
two elected kings, and the two were at war with cach other. Small wonder that
in the following half-century Turks were able to capture half the territory of
Hungary! In that era, clearly, large states were not necessarily strong states.

STATES AND COERCION

By 1490 Muslims were retreating from their last Iberian outpost, Granada, but
building a substantial empire around the eastern Mediterranean and making
inroads to the Balkans. States fielding large armies and extending some judicial
and fiscal control over good-sized territories were beginning to appear around
Europe’s edges, and city-states were arming for land war as never before. The
European map of 1490 assigns large areas to England, Sweden, Poland, Russia,
and the Ottoman Empire, but also marks off dozens of duchies, principalities,
archbishoprics, city-states, and other miniature states.

How many European states we distinguish depends on contestable decisions
bearing on the very nature of the cra’s states: whether the 13 Swiss cantons (as
of 1513) and the 84 free cities of the Ottoman Empire (as of 1521) count as
separate entities, whether such technically autonomous dependencies of
Aragon and Castile as Catalonia and Granada deserve recognition, whether the
entire patchwork of the Low Countries constituted a single state (or only part of
a state) under Habsburg hegemony, whether the tributary states under Ottoman
control belonged individually to the European state system of the time. No
plausible set of definitions yields fewer than 80 distinct units or more than 500.
We might arbitrarily take 200 as the median number. The roughly 200 formally
autonomous European political entities of the time controlled an average of
9,500 square miles, roughly the size of today’s El Salvador, Lesotho, and Qatar.

Europe’s population of approximately 62 million in 1490 divided up into an
average of some 310,000 persons per state. Of course, averages obscure
enormous variations: scores of Europe’s smaller states and their populations

46 European Cities and States

would have fitted easily into Russia’s vast territory. Nevertheless, Europe was
Joeginning to consolidate into territorially distinct states organized around
permanent military establishments, and military superiority was starting to give
the larger states better chances of survival.

Only starting, to be sure. In 1490, armies consisted largely of mercenaries
hired by the campaign, clients of great lords, and citizen militias. Standing
gemies had displaced urban militias in France and Burgundy, but few other
realms. Tribute and personal rents still bulked large in royal revenues. Within
the larger states, communities, guilds, churches, and regional magnates
retained large areas of immunity and self-government. Administration chiefly
concerned military, judicial and fiscal affairs. Europe’s central zone continued
to teem with tiny jurisdictions. Since city-states, leagues of cities, dynastic
empires, principalities having only nominal bonds to larger monarchies or
empires, and ecclesiastical entities such as the Teutonic Order all coexisted
(however contentiously) on the continent, it was not clear that national states as
we know them would become Europe’s dominant organizations. Not until the
nineteenth century, with Napoleon’s conquests and the subsequent unifications
of Germany and Italy, would almost all of Europe consolidate into mutually
exclusive states having permanent, professional armed forces and exercising
substantial control over people in areas of 40,000 square miles or more.

Over the next four centuries, many war settlements and a few deliberate
federations drastically reduced the number of European states. During the
nineteenth century, the number stabilized. At the beginning of 1848, for
instance, Europe hosted from 20 to 100 states, depending on how one counts
the 35 members of the German Confederation, the 17 papal states, the 22
technically autonomous segments of Switzerland, and a few dependent but
formally distinct units such as Luxembourg and Norway: in the Almanach de
Gotha, that directory of nobles and statesmen, the full alphabetical list then
began with tiny Anhalt-Bernburg, Anhalt-Dessau and Anhalt-Kothan before
getting to more substantial Austria, Baden, and Bavaria.

Major consolidations occurred with the formation of the German Empire
and the kingdom of Italy. By the start of 1890, the roster of states had declined
to about 30, of which nine were members of the German Empire. At the end of
1918, the count stood at around 25 separate states. Although boundaries
changed significantly with the settlements of World Wars I and II, the number
and size of European states did not change dramatically during the twentieth
century. If, following Small and Singer, we count only those states large enough
to make an independent military difference, we actually detect a slight reversal
of the long-term trend: 21 contenders at the end of the Napoleonic Wars, 26 in
1848, 29 (now including Malta, Cyprus, and Iceland) in 1980 (Small and
Singer 1982: 47-50).

In contrast to the 9,500 square milcs of 1490, the 30 states of 1890
controlled an average of 63,000 square miles, which put them in the class of

European Cities and States 47

today’s Nicaragua, Syria, and Tunisia. Instead of the 310,000 inhabitants of
1490, the average state of 1890 had about 7.7 million. Imagined as circles,
states rose from an average radius of §5 miles to 142 miles. Ata 55-mile radius,
direct control of the hinterland by a single city’s rulers was often feasible; at 142
miles, no one governed without_a specialized apparatus of surveillance and
intervention. Although such microstates as Andorra (175 square miles),
Liechtenstein (61), San Marino (24) and even Monaco (0.7) survived the great
consolidation, furthermore, inequalities of size declined radically over time.

Generally speaking, the last part of Europe to consolidate into substantial
national states was the city-state band running from northern Italy, around the
Alps, and down the Rhine to the Low Countries. The successive creations of
Germany and Italy brought those prosperous but cantankerous little municipalities
and their hinterlands under national control. It is as if Europeans discovered
that under the conditions prevailing since 1790 or so, a viable state required a
radius of at least 100 miles, and could not easily dominate more than a 250-mile
radius.

CITIES AND CAPITAL

To see the geographic pattern more clearly, we should distinguish between
city systems and systems of states. Europe’s systems of cities represented the
changing relations among concentrations of capital, its systems of states the
changing relations among concentrations of coercion. European cities formed a
loose hierarchy of commercial and industrial precedence within which at any
point in time a few clusters of cities (usually grouped around a single hegemonic
center) clearly dominated the rest. (The European hierarchy, to be sure,
formed only part of a vaster urban network that reached far into Asia at the start
of the period, and extended to Africa and the Americas as time went on.) In
Fernand Braudel’s useful simplification, Venice, Antwerp, Genoa, Amsterdam,
London, and New York successively topped the European system of cities from
the fourteenth century to the twentieth. 7

For dominance, the crucial matter was not so much size as centrality in the
European network of trade, production, and capital accumulation. Nevertheless,
the concentrations of capital and urban population corresponded closely
enough for the dominant cluster of citics to be always also one of the largest.
Using a rank—size criterion and some rather arbitrary blocking out of boundaries,
J. C. Russell delineates medieval regions centering on Florence, Palermo,
Venice, Milan, Augsburg, Dijon, Cologne, Prague, Magdeburg, Liibeck, Ghent,
London, Dublin, Paris, Toulouse, Montpellier, Barcelona, Cordoba, Toledo,
and Lisbon. The cities were denser and the regions correspondingly smaller in
the band from Florence to Ghent, especially at its Italian end; as gauged by the

48 European Cities and States

total population of their ten largest cities, the regions of Venice (357,000),
Milan (337,000), and Florence (296,000) led the pack (Russell 1972: 235). In
1490, Jan de Vries’ more precise computation of “urban potential” singles out
regions centering approximately on Antwerp, Milan, and Naples as the peaks of
the European urban system, while in 1790 the one zone around London
(including areas across the English Channel) clearly predominated (de Vrics
1984: 160-4).

City system and state system spread very unevenly, and in contrasting ways,
across the European map. In the year ggo, cities were small and scattered
almost everywhere north of the Alps. They were nevertheless denser, and
relations among them more intense, in a band extending north from Bologna
and Pisa across the Alps to Ghent, Bruges, and London. Secondary zones of
urban concentration appeared in southern Spain and southern Italy. The
Mediterranean lands hosted significantly more cities than those bordering the
Atlantic or the Baltic. Europe’s two largest cities were then Constantinople and
Cérdoba, not only major centers of trade but seats respectively of the Byzantine
Empire and the Umayyad caliphate; cach had a population approaching half a
million (Chandler and Fox 1974: 11). Over the next millennium the central
band remained Europe’s most intensely urban zone, but it widened, and its
center of gravity shifted northward toward the great Atlantic ports. From 1300
onward, the band of connected cities north of the Alps grew disproportionately.

The presence or absence of urban clusters made a profound difference to
regional social lifey and significantly shaped the possibilities for state formation.
Under the conditions of production and transportation prevailing in Europe
before the nineteenth century, substantial cities stimulated cash-crop agriculture
in tributary areas reaching many miles into the countryside. Commercial
agriculture, in its turn, gencrally promoted the prosperity of merchants, larger
peasants, and smaller landlords while reducing the ability of great landholders
to dominate the people in their rural surroundings. (A significant exception
occurred, however, where the city’s ruling class also held extensive land in the
hinterland, as was frequently the case in Italian city-states; there the peasantry
felt the full weight of lordly control.)

In addition, cities deeply affected the demography of surrounding regions.
Until recently, most European cities experienced natural decrease: their death
rates exceeded their birth rates. As a result, even stagnant cities drew
considerable numbers of migrants from nearby towns and villages, while
growing cities generated large migrant streams. The streams were much larger
than the urban deficit of births plus the urban rate of growth, since all migration
systems involved a great deal of movement back and forth; peddlers, merchants,
servants, and artisans frequently oscillated between city and country from year
to year or season to season. The net flow from country to city usually included
more women than men, with the result that sex ratios (males per 100 females)
ran characteristically high in the countryside and low in the city. Thus the city

European Cities and States 49

imprinted itself on the very opportunities for marriage of villagers in its
surroundings.

The commercial and demographic impact of cities made a significant
difference to state formation. Let us leave aside momentarily the importance of
urban ruling classes and city-based capitalists as supporters or opponents of
efforts to expand state power; they will get plenty of attention later on. The

existence of intensive rural-urban trade provided an opportunity for mulers to
collect_revenues_through customs_and excise taxes, while the relatively
commeretatized-econemy-made-it-casicr for monarchs to bypass great landlords
as they extended royal power to towns and villages.

Relations between city and country, furthermore, affected the potential
supply of soldiers: would they be the serfs and tenants of rural magnates,
mercenaries from regions of high mobility and low nuptiality, urban militias, or
landless workers swept up by pressing squads? Opportunities for taxation, the
power of landlords, and the supply of troops decry attecred how staves 160k
‘shape. Through food supply, migration, trade, communications, and opportunites
for employment, large urban clusters stamped their mark on the social life in
surrounding regions, and thereby influenced the strategies of rulers who
attempted to extend state power into those regions. Periods of urban growth
only accentuated these effects.

With some risk, and great disregard of regional variation, we can divide
European urban growth since 1000 into five phases: a period of considerable
expansion to about 1350; a time of depression and then of trendless fluctuation
between 1350 and 1500; a sixteenth-century acceleration; a seventeenth-
century slowdown, and finally an enormous acceleration after 1750 (Hohenberg
and Lees 1985: 7-9). The devastating fourtcenth-century spread of plague
marks the transition from the first phase to the second, Iberian navigation to
America the start of the third phase, the growth of cottage industry after 1600
the launching of the fourth; the implosion of capital, manufacturing, services,
and trade into cities the movement from the fourth to the fifth.

From the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, many European regions,
including the hinterlands of Milan, Lyon, and Manchester, experienced
protoindustrialization: the multiplication of small manufacturing units, including
households, and of small merchants who linked them with distant markets.
During that great industrial expansion, capital went to labor rather than vice
versa; rural labor proletarianized, in the sense of shifting decisively toward work
for wages using means of production owned by capitalists, but remained in
households and small shops. Capital then accumulated grandly, but did not
concentrate enormously. During the ninctecnth and twentieth centuries an
inverse movement occurred: capital imploded, manufacturing and workers
moved to citics, and vast areas of the countryside deindustrialized. Increasingly,
manufacturers located where they could minimizc the costs of getting to their
raw materials and to the markets for their goods, assuming correctly that

50 European Cities and States

workers would come to them at someone else’s expense. The last burst of
concentration greatly accelerated European urbanization, and produced the
citified continent we know today.

Cities grew with the European population as a whole, and the number of
urban places therefore multiplied even when the urban share of the population
was constant; on present evidence, we simply do not know whether the
European population actually became more urban before 1350. In any case, the
proportion living in cities did not rise dramatically until the nineteenth century.
According to the best available estimates, the share in places of 10,000 people
or more ran at around 5 percent in ggo, 6 percent in 1490, 10 percent in 1790,
and 30 percent in 1890, as compared with nearly 60 percent today (Bairoch
1985: 182, 282; de Vries 1984: 29-48).

The timetable of urbanization reflected the history of European capital. For
centuries, the bulk of Europe’s liquid capital lay in the hands of small
merchants who worked scattered through the continent, either trading goods
produced elsewhere or guiding manufacturing by formally independent
producers in villages, towns, and small cities. Great capitalists like those of
Genoa, Augsburg and Antwerp played a crucial part in linking Europe together
and with the rest of the world, but held only a small share of all the capital that
was in motion.

Before 1490, the scattered evidence makes it difficult to offer any more
detailed quantitative statements. Paul Bairoch’s estimates and Jan de Vries’s
recent compilation of evidence concerning European urbanization since 1500
nevertheless make possible some simple but telling computations. Table 2.1
shows the trivial long-run rate of urban growth before 1490, the acceleration of
the sixteenth century, the slowdown of the seventeenth, and the exceptional
urbanization after 1790. By 1980, the barrier of 10,000 had lost its meaning
(hence the speculative numbers in the table), and a full 390 cities had 100,000
inhabitants or more. In fact, the 1980 statistics locate 34.6 percent of the
population in cities of at least 100,000. The great acceleration of urban growth
arrived after 1790, with the nineteenth-century concentration of capital,

Table 2.1 Urbanization from ggo to 1980 in Europe west of Russia

990 1490 1590 1690 1790 1890 1980

number of cities of 10,000 or more IIT 154 220 224 364 1709 5000?
population in cities of 10,000 or more 2.6 3.4 5-9 7-5 12.2 66.9 250?
(millions)

annual percent rate of growth since _ 0.1 0.6 0.2 0.5 1.7 1.5?
previous date

percentage of population in cities of 4.9 5.6 7.6 9.2 10.0 29.0 55?
10,000 +

square miles per city (thousands) 17.1 12.3 8.6 8.5 5.2 1 0.4?

Source: de Vries 1984: 29-48, Bairoch 1985: 182
European Cities and States 51

increase in scale of workplaces, and creation of mass transport. But through
most of the period after 1490, the exclusive hinterlands available to most cities
were shrinking in size.

CITY-STATE INTERACTION

The diverging trends of cities and states changed some critical ratios. In
AD 990, with thousands of statelike units, Europe may well have had only one
city of 10,000 for every twenty or thirty “states.” In 1490, one such city existed
for every one or two states. In 1890, the mythical average state had about sixty
cities of 10,000 or more. That change alone implied fundamental alterations in
the relations between rulers and ruled: altered techniques of control, altered
fiscal strategies, altered demands for services, altered politics.

Cities shape the destinies of states chiefly by serving as containers and
distribution points for capital. By means of capital, urban ruling classes extend
their influence through the urban hinterland and across far-flung trading
‘networks. But cities vary_in how much capital their oligarchies control;
seventeenth-century Amsterdam made once-glorious Bruges look puny. The
fact that cities are loci of capital accumulation, furthermore, gives their political
authorities access to capital, credit, and control over hinterlands that, if seized
or co-opted, can serve the ends of monarchs as well. Adam Smith stated the
central fact forcefully:

A country abounding with merchants and manufacturers . . . necessarily abounds with a
set of people who have it at all times in their power to advance, if they choose to do so, a
very large sum of money to government.

(Smith rg1o [1778]: II, 392)

If they choose to do so: behind that qualifier hide centuries of contention between
capitalists and kings. Yet Adam Smith was absolutely right to stress the financial
advantages of states that operated in regions of abundant capital.

States themselves operate_chi eployers of coercive
means, especially armed force. Nowadays the development of welfare states, of
regulatory states, of states that spend a great deal of their effort intervening in
economic affairs, has mitigated and obscured the centrality of coercion. Over
the millennium of European history we are surveying, however, military
expenditure has usually consumed the majority of state budgets, and armed
forces have typically constituted the largest single branch of government.

Differences between the geographies of European state formation and city-
building presented an acute problem for any would-be ruler. Borrowing from
Paul Hohenberg and Lynn Lees, we can make a rough distinction between
Cities as central places and as points in urban networks; all cities belong to both
Systems, but the relative importance of the two sets of relations varies

52 European Cities and States

dramatically from one city to another (Hohenberg and Lees 1985: chapter 2).
The hierarchical central place system mediates the flow of ordinary goods such
as food and clothing among the settlements of a contiguous region; raw
materials and rough goods tend to move up the hicrarchy of central places
toward larger scttlements that serve more extensive markcts, while fine and
specialized goods — especially those produced outside the regional system —
tend to move downward from larger places to smaller ones. Over much of the
history we are examining, primary producers, local merchants, peddlers, and
recurrent public markets brought a major part of the goods sold to their
consumers.

Urban networks, on the other hand, link higher-level centers in separate
regional systems, sometimes removed from each other by thousands of
kilometers. Although timber, wheat, salt, and wine traveled great distances in
Europe well before 1500, urban networks long specialized in the exchange of
light, expensive goods such as spices and silks. Merchants and financiers with
substantial capital at their disposal figured importantly in Europe’s urban
networks. For centuries, what Philip Curtin calls trade diasporas had a crucial
role; geographically dispersed mercantile groups such as Jews, Armenians, or
Genoese, who shared language, rcligion, kinship, and (sometimes) geographic
origin reduced the uncertainties of international trade by extending each other
credit, market information, and preferential treatment (Curtin 1984). Even
where trade diasporas did not make the crucial links among distant centers,
dispersed merchants commonly maintained acquaintance with their colleagues
by means of voyages, personal correspondence, maintenance of local represent-
atives, and contact with mutual acquaintances.

A coercion-wiclding ruler can, with a certain amount of effort, capture the
entire territory of one or morc central-place hicrarchies, and even reshape a
hierarchy to correspond approximately with the limits of his state; by the
sixteenth century, a rough correspondence had emerged between England and
the central-place system of London, between France and the central-place
system of Paris. But it is rare and difficult to match a state to the contours of a
long-distance urban network. Federations such as the Hanseatic League and
maritime empires such as those of Venice and Portugal came close for a time,
but always found themselves competing or bargaining with territorial rulers who
laid claim on one or another of their trading outposts; the consolidation of an
Ottoman empire athwart Venice’s most lucrative trade routes doomed the
spectacular mercantile empire Venctians had stitched together during the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Territorial states whose merchants devoted
themselves to long-distance trade, on the other hand, always found themselves
confronted with powerful economic actors whose external relations they could
never entirely control, and who found it relatively easy to escape with their
capita] to another business site if the ruler’s demands became unbearable. The
long-lasting discrepancy between the geographics of coercion and of capital
European Cities and States 53

guaranteed that the social relations organized around them would evolve in
distinctive ways.

Over Europe as a whole, alterations in state control of capital and of coercion
between AD goo and the present have followed two parallel arcs. At first, during
the age of patrimonialism, European monarchs generally extracted what capital
they needed as tribute or rent from lands and populations that lay under their
immediate control — often within stringent contractual limits on the amounts
they could demand. In the time of brokerage (especially between 1400 and 1700
or so), they relied heavily on formally independent capitalists for loans, for
management of revenue-producing enterprises, and for collection of taxes. By
the eighteenth century, however, the time of nationalization had come; many
sovereigns were incorporating the fiscal apparatus directly into the state
structure, and drastically curtailing the involvement of independent contractors.
The last century or so, the age of specialization, has brought a sharper separation
of fiscal from military organization and an increasing involvement of states in
the oversight of fixed capital.

On the side of coercion, a similar evolution took place. During the period of
patrimonialism, monarchs drew armed force from retainers, vassals, and
militias who owed them personal service — but again within significant contractual
limits. In the age of brokerage (again especially between 1400 and 1700) they
turned increasingly to mercenary forces supplicd to them by contractors who
retained considerable freedom of action. Next, during nationalization, sovereigns
absorbed armies and navies directly into the state’s administrative structure,
eventually turning away from foreign mercenarics and hiring or conscripting
the bulk of their troops from their own citizenries. Since the mid-nineteenth
century, in a phase of specialization, European states have consolidated the
system of citizen militaries backed by large civilian burcaucracies, and split off
police forces specialized in the use of coercion outside of war.

By the nineteenth century, most European states had internalized both
armed forces and fiscal mechanisms; they thus reduced the governmental roles
of tax farmers, military contractors, and other independent middlemen. Their
rulers then continued to bargain with capitalists and other classes for credit,
revenues, manpowcr, and the necessitics of war. Bargaining, in its turn, created
numerous new claims on the state: pensions, payments to the poor, public
education, city planning, and much more. In the process, states changed from
magnified war machines into multiple-purposce organizations. Their efforts to
control coercion and capital continued, but in the company of a wide variety of
regulatory, compensatory, distributive, and protective activities.

Before the ninetcenth century, states differed markedly in the relative timing
and intensity of the two main processes of change. The Dutch state rented large
armics and navies for a century or more, adopted state management of finances
precociously, yet long remained beholden to the capitalists of Amsterdam and
other commercial cities. At moments, indeed, the Dutch state dissolved into the

54 European Cities and States

governments of its major municipalitics. In Castile, on the other hand, land
forces — often hired outside of Spain — prevailed; there the monarchy captured
the credit of merchants by turning them into rentiers and by relying on colonial
revenues for their reimbursement. Portugal, Poland, Italian city-states, and the
states of the Holy Roman Empire followed other combinations of the two arcs,
and thereby created distinctly different state structures.

STATE PHYSIOLOGIES

Why did European states follow such different trajectories, yet almost all head
in the direction of greater concentration with respect to capital and coercion?
Two secrets account for most of the complexity. The first is the continuous,
aggressive competition for trade and territory among changing states of unequal
size, which made War a driving force in European history. The second lies in
what Gabriel Ardant called the “physiology” of states: the processes by which
they acquire and allocate the means of carrying on their major activities. For
most of the history that concerns us here, the crucial means were especially
coercive, the means of war. Coercive means obviously played a part in
warmaking (attacking external rivals), statemaking (attacking internal rivals),
and protection (attacking the enemies of the state’s clients). Coercive means
also came into play in a state’s exercise of extraction (drawing the means of state
activity from its subject population) and adjudication (settling disputes among
members of that population). Only when it came to production and distribution
were coercive means not major supports of the state’s activity — and even there
the degree of coercion varicd from state to state. Where states established their
own monopolies over the production of salt, arms, or tobacco products, for
example, they typically did so by force of arms; contraband usually becomes
contraband when rulers decide to monopolize the distribution of the
commodity in question.

Coercive means combine weapons with men who know how to use them. (I do
mean men; in Western experience, women have played an amazingly small part
in the construction and usc of coercive organization, a fact that surely helps
account for their subordinate position within states.) Agents of states have an
easier time concentrating coercion, and keeping others from doing so, to the
extent that (a) production of weapons involves esoteric knowledge, rare
materials, or substantial capital, (b) few groups have the independent capacity to
mobilize large numbers of men and (c) few people know the secrets of
combining weapons with men. Over the long run, the rulers of European statcs
took advantage of all these conditions to move toward monopolies of the larger
concentrations of coercive means within their territorics: armics, police forces,
weapons, prisons, and courts.

European Cities and States 55

States used concentrated coercion in a number of different ways. During the
first few centuries after AD ggo, kings rarely had much more armed force under
their direct control than did their chief followers. The logistics of feeding and
maintaining armed men made the establishment of standing armics prohibitively
expensive. A royal army normally consisted of the king’s small permanent force
plus troops who came only temporarily from civilian life at his followers’ call.
The king’s presence reinforced the personal connections among warriors: “It
was a general rule that the king should command in person every important
campaign. Age did not matter; Otto ITI] was 11 when he led his army against the
Saxons (991) and Henry IV 13 when he went to war against the Hungarians in
1063” (Contamine 1984: 39). Royal armies on the move lived largely from
requisition (which was theoretically to be repaid from the royal treasury) and
plunder (which was not); the distinction, to be sure, remained unclear for
centuries.

Cities commonly organized citizen militias which guarded walls, patrolled
streets, intervened in public conflicts, and now and then fought battles against
enemies of city or of the kingdom. Spanish municipal militias were exceptional;
they played the central part in the conquest of Muslim Iberia by Christian
kings, a fact reflected in the great powers vested in the noble-dominated
municipalities after the Reconquista, and in the crystallization of the distinction
between caballero (horseman) and péon (foot soldier) into an enduring and

general social division (Powers 1988). Elsewhere, kings generally sought to
limit the independent armed force at the disposition of townsmen, for the very
good reason that townsmen were quite likely to use — us their own interest,
including resistance to royal demands. v2? mN
These various military forces confronted Sony group groups “of adn who did
not operate under dircct royal control: among others, the retainers of particular
lords who were not currently mobilized for royal service, bandits (who were
often demobilized soldiers, continuing their plunder without royal assent), and
pirates (who frequently worked with royal or civic protection). Accumulations of
coercive means were modest but very widely spread; concentration was slight.
Even so, rulers were doing morc to concentrate coercion than was anyone else.
Eventually states came to operate multiple armed forces, all of them
bureaucratized and more or Icss integrated into the national administration.
Even Spain, notorious for the repeated devolution of state powers to its agents
and grandees, made repeated efforts to detach its armed forces from their
civilian surroundings. Philip II, for example, deliberately placed under direct
government control armed forces whose commands had almost been private
possessions of grandecs during the reign of his father, Charles V. By 1580,

the entire military establishment had been restored to the Crown and was being run by
royal ministers; the galleys of Spain, Naples and Sicily, after a brief and unsuccessful
return to contracting in 1574-6, were back in administracién, the provisioning of the
Mediterranean fleets and the garrisons of north Africa was controlled by the royal
56 European Cities and States

commissariat in Seville, the arms industries and the saltpetre makers were under strict
royal supervision, and the manufacture of gunpowder was a royal monopoly.
(Thompson 1976: 6-7)

During the next half-century the exigencies of financing and administration led
Spain back to extensive contracting and local control; nevertheless, the armed
forces henceforth operated as distinct, differentiated branches of the national
state. Indeed by the nineteenth century the Spanish army acquired such
distinctness and autonomy as to intervene repeatedly as a separate force in
national politics (Ballbé 1983).

In Spain and elsewhere, a sharp division between armies and navies emerged
early, and endured. At a national scale, the division between armies (generally
specialized in combatting other armed forces) and police forces (generally
specialized in the control of unarmed or lightly-armed individuals and small
groups) only became general quite late - in most countries, during the
nineteenth century. By that time accumulations of coercive force were large,

concentrated, and therefore very uncqual. By the ninetcenth century, states had
l succeeded in_arming themselves impressixely,-and.in_almast disarming their
j civilian populations.

Figure 2.6 schematizes the relationship between cities and states as an
interaction of capital and coercion. Above the diagonal, coercion outran capital;
below it, capital outstripped coercion. The distinction applies to individual
cities; European ports such as Amsterdam and Barcelona typically wallowed in
capital while having relatively thin coercive apparatuses; seats of monarchs such
as Berlin and Madrid, on the other hand, stood much higher with respect to
coercion than to capital. - (e-a~ [\V ~227?

Capital concentration

Low High
+
+
+
+
Coercion- +
+
intensive ~.
. ath
Concentration of p *% *
coercive means +
+ Capital-
. + intensive
+ path
+
+
+
+
+
Low

Figure 2.6 Alternative paths of change in concentrated capital and concentrated coercive power in
Europe, 1000-1800.
European Cities and States 57

The distinction also applies to the environments of states. The general
direction of European change over the millennium undoubtedly ran up the
diagonal, toward greater and greater concentrations of both capital and
coercion. But different states followed different paths in the same general
direction. Brandenburg-Prussia grew up in a coercion-rich, capital-poor
environment, and bore the marks of its early environment even when it
extended its control to the capitalist cities of the Rhineland. Denmark usually
had greater concentrations of capital at its disposal than the rest of Scandinavia,
and invested less of its state effort in the building up of military might.

The Teutonic Knights (the Order of St Mary’s Hospital at Jerusalem) took
an irregular path: fram freebooting crusaders in the Holy Land (hence heavily
involved in the piratical world of oceanic commerce) at the end of the twelfth
century to governors of a large piece of Transylvania during the thirteenth
century to conquerors and colonizers of pagan Prussia, where they ruled in the
style of great landlords from about 1300 into the sixteenth century. The
Knights crossed the line from capital-intensive to coercion-intensive state
formation in about thirty years. The Knights of Malta (also known successively
as the Knights Hospitallers of St John of Jerusalem and the Knights of Rhodes)
likewise zigged and zagged, but ended up in a very different location:

. a religious order born in the Holy Land toward 1100, but almost immediately
transformed into a military order in defense of the East’s Latin states, then moving to a
maritime career in its retreat to Cyprus (1291) and then Rhodes (1309), and finally
forced to devote itself full time to that calling at its installation in Malta as a sovereign
state under the suzerainty of the King of Sicily in 1530.

(Fontenay 1988a: 362)

By devoting themselves to legalized piracy from their Maltese base, the Knights
followed a more capital-intensive course than their onetime neighbors in the
Holy Land. Thus we can think of the diagram as a map of the multiple paths
taken by different European states in their various interactions with the cities in
their territories.

The capital—coercion diagram embodics the argument I sketched in the first
chapter: the most powerful rulers in any particular region set the terms of war
for all; smaller rulers faced a choice between accommodating themselves to the
demands of powerful neighbors and putting exceptional efforts into preparations
for war. War and preparations for war involved rulers in extracting the means of
war from others who held the essential resources — men, arms, supplies, or
money to buy them — and who were reluctant to surrender them without strong
pressure or compensation. Within limits sect by the demands and rewards of
other states, extraction and struggle over the means of war created the central
organizational structures of states. The organization of major social classes
within a state’s territory, and their relations to the state, significantly affected
the strategies rulers employed to extract resources, the resistance they met, the

58 European Cities and States

struggle that resulted, the sorts of durable organization that extraction and
struggle laid down, and therefore the efficiency of resource extraction.

The organization of major social classes, and thcir relations to the state
varied significantly from Europe’s coercion-intensive regions (areas of few
cities and agricultural predominance, where direct coercion played a major part
in production) to its capital-intensive regions (areas of many cities and
commercial predominance, where markets, exchange, and market-oriented
production prevailed). The demands major classes made on the state, and their
influence over the state, varied correspondingly. The relative success of
different extractive strategies, and the strategies rulers actually applied,
therefore varied significantly from coercion-intensive to capital-intensive
regions.

As a consequence, the organizational forms of states followed distinctly
different trajectories in these different parts of Europe. Which sort of state
prevailed in a given era and part of Europe varied greatly. Only late in the
millennium did national states exercise clear superiority over city-states,
empires, and other common European forms of state. Nevertheless, the
increasing scale of war and the knitting together of the European state system
through commercial military, and diplomatic interaction eventually.gave the
farmaking sdyancage to thse sats that COUNT ett PENNE aes
states having access to a combination of Jarge rural populations, capitalists, and
relatively commercialized economics won out. They set the terms of war, and
their form of state became the predominant-ene~ip Europe. Eventually
European states Converep on that form: fhe national sp e.

Within each path Marked out in the capital—- n diagram, carlier steps
constrained later ones. If urban ruling classes played important parts in the
initial consolidation of a given state (as they did in Holland), long afterward the
state bore their imprint in the form of bourgeois institutions. If a state
originated in conquest of largely rural populations (as did successive Russian
empires) it continued to offer little scope to such cities as grew up in its midst;
in such regions, large nobilities grew up as monarchs granted fiscal privileges
and substantial local jurisdictions to arms-bearing landlords in return for their
intermittent military service.

LIAISONS DANGEREUSES

Through most of the last millennium, European cities and states have carried
on a series of liaisons dangereuses, love-hate affairs in which each became at once
indispensable and insufferable to the other. Cities and their capitalists drew
indispensable protection for their commercial and industrial activity from the
specialists in coercion who ran states, but rightly feared interference in their
money-making and diversion of their resources to war, preparation for war, or
European Cities and States 59

payment for past wars. States and military men depended on city-based
capitalists for the financial means to recruit and sustain' armed force, yet
properly worried about the resistance to state power engendered by cities, their
commercial interests, and their working classes. Cities and states found the
grounds for uneasy bargains in the exchange of protection for access to capital,
but until the nineteenth century such bargains remained fragile.

These days it is hard to imagine the seventeenth-century machinations of
Messina, Sicily’s most mercantile city. Sicily has become such an emblem for
backwardness that we easily forget the many centuries of Sicilian glory as a seat
of brilliant kingdoms, a breadbasket for the Mediterranean, and an object of
competition among great powers. Sicily - once Muslim, and then Norman —
had come under Aragonese rule in 1282, and had become a property of Spain
with the sixteenth-century formation of a unified monarchy. The merchant-
oligarchs of Messina chafed under Spanish rule, which cramped their access to
foreign markets, and especially their control over the export of Sicilian silk, in
favor of dynastic interests. In 1674, Spain (loosely allied with Holland) was at
war with France (loosely allied, for the moment, with England). Messina’s
leaders closed their gates to Spanish troops, appealed for help to France,
England, and the Ottoman Empire, bid for an independent Sicily ruled from
Messina by a foreign king, asked for their port to be free of customs, and
welcomed a French governor of Sicily with his troops.

After three years, however, the Messinans tired of French occupation as the
French lost their enthusiasm for maintaining a military establishment amid a
perfidious population. When the French withdrew and the leading families fled,
the remaining merchants formed a civic guard and cheered the return of
Spanish rule (Mack Smith 1968a: 225-30). In Sicily and elsewhere, state—city
compacts broke easily when external events altered the state’s military position
or the cities’ commercial position, and when one side or the other pushed its
advantage too far. Rulers and capitalists constantly renegotiated their relative
positions.

Not every state—city pair, however, maintained the same relationship. Far
from it: the pattern varied sharply from one part of Europe to another, and
changed dramatically over the centuries. Venice created its own commercial
empire and only later undertook the conquest of mainland territory, Polish
lords stunted the growth of their cities, while Paris, for all its rebellions, served
the French monarchy well.

Returning to the capital—coercion diagram, we might sketch the storics of a
number of different European areas as in figure 2.7. Thus, according to the
diagram, the Polish state lived in a coercion-rich, capital-poor environment,
and actually faced a decline in the concentrations of both as great nobles seized
their shares of coercion and capital. Scandinavian states gencrally began amid
substantial concentrations of coercion, and eventually moved toward higher levels
of control over concentrated capital. Small German states, Italian city-states,
60 European Cities and States

Low Capital concentration High
High
Russia
Scandinavia / /
Concentration / Va Poptugel Aragon
of coercive Castile ZZ
means
Italian /
Bélane city states
ak — Dutch
/ Republic
Low

Figure 2.7, Hypothetical trajectories of different states.

and the Dutch Republic, in contrast, began their trajectories in the presence of
substantial concentrations of capital but weak, intermittent armed force, only
gradually moving toward permanent, concentrated military establishments.

The positions of cities within market hierarchies (international markets,
regional markets, exclusively local markets, and so on) correlated approximately
with their size, their demographic impact on their hinterlands, the extent of
their capital accumulation and their ability to build up and control an extended
sphere of influence. These in turn strongly affected the relative attractiveness of
different cities as sources of capital for the building of armies and state
formation, the autonomy of their ruling classes with respect to would-be and
actual statemakers, and the strength of their representative institutions. The
higher its market position, on average, the more likely that within their relations
with national rulers a city’s oligarchy acted as indispensable equals having
extensive rights of representation.

As a consequence, major trading cities and city-states mounted more
effective resistance to the penetration of national states than did cities in mainly
agrarian regions. Most often national states only gained genuine control over
major trading cities when the cities had begun to lose their predominant
positions in international markets. Even then, important trading cities managed
to build into the state apparatus more of their municipal power structures than
did local and regional market centers, and their presence in great numbers
generally slowed down the formation of national states. In the absence of ready
capital, on the other hand, rulers built massive apparatuses to squceze
resources from a reluctant citizenry.
European Cities and States 61

With important exceptions, the Protestant Reformation concentrated in
Europe’s city-state band, and at first offered a further base for resistance to the
authority of centralizing states. The exceptions include Catholic northern Italy,
where the Roman church never lost its great influence, as well as Protestant
Bohemia and Hungary, profoundly rural areas that were already producing
populist variants of Christianity well before the Reformation. In many places,
notably England and the Nordic countries, rulers promoted and co-opted their
own versions of the Reformation, which established extensive state control over
the religious apparatus and close cooperation between clergy and lay officials in
local administration. Elsewhere (as in the Netherlands) Protestantism provided
an attractive doctrinal basis for resistance to imperial authority, especially
authority buttressed by claims of divinely-sanctioned royal privilege. Confronted
with the spread of popular Protestantism, a ruler had three choices: embrace it,
co-opt it, or fight it.

Within the Holy Roman Empire, the division between officially Protestant
and Catholic principalities and the threat that a ruler — seeking either dynastic
ends, religious solace, or a ground for resistance to the emperor — would change
faith, became constant sources of contention during the sixteenth century. The
Treaty of Westphalia, ending the Thirty Years’ War in 1648, featured a
provision that any ruler who switched faiths would forfeit his or her claim to the
crown. From that point on, religious differences remained important in
European domestic politics, but declined rapidly as a stake of war. ’

On the whole, bulky state churches (whether Protestamt, Catholic, or
Orthodox) came into being where the state itself built large civilian and military
bureaucracies in the process of massing armed force. People in arcas of
concentrated capital generally resisted the imposition of state-prescribed forms
of worship as successfully as they blocked the early development of national
states.

London and England constitute the obvious challenge to the thcoretical
opposition of capitalist activity and state power. In England, a substantial state
formed relatively early despite the presence of a formidable trading city and
maintained a hegemonic state church into the nineteenth century. Note,
however, several crucial features of the English experience. The monarchy
acquired extensive powers before London became a major international center;
a hat fepard- Eagan resembled Scandinavia more clostty-tham tt did the
Netherlands. Kinship, trade, and finance, however, gave London’s merchants
———eees
close ties to the country’s nobility and gentry; the City of London gained direct
representation in Parliament and, through the Livery, a semi-autonomous voice
in royal affairs. In those regards, England resembled the Netherlands more
closely than it did Scandinavia. From the seventeenth century onward, finally,
the state that emerged saw royal power increasingly contained by the joint
representative of landowners and bourgeoisie, Parliament. Thus England
managed to travel a certain distance on both the major paths to state formation.

62 Exropean Cities and States

ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF STATE

The experiences of other areas indicate that the focus of bargaining over the
wherewithal of war strongly affected the forms of representation that emerged.
In Portugal, with strong reliance on overseas trade for royal income, we see few
representative institutions of any kind except for the strong presence of
Lisbon’s municipal government as interlocutor. In sixteenth-century Aragon,
we observe Barcelona in a similar relation to the crown; its puissant Consell de
Cent could bypass the viceroy and speak directly to the king in Madrid, yet it
never had the power to dominate the whole of Aragon, much less of all Spain.
In Castile, we witness the power invested in the Cortes, an instrument of great
landlords and of eighteen cities’ oligarchies. On the whole, urban institutions
themselves seem to have become part of state structure morc readily where
capitalists predominated.

States in which capitalists and bourgeois institutions played commanding
roles had great advantages when it came to the rapid mobilization of capital for
expensive wars. But they remained vulnerable to withdrawals of capital and
demands for commercial protection. The Dutch Republic illustrates clearly the
costs and benefits of capitalist dominance. On the onc hand, the Dutch could
easily raise revenues for warfare — in the short run by means of loans from its
richer citizens, in the long run by means of customs duties and sales taxes on
everything from ivory to spirits (’t Hart 1986, 1989a, 1989b, Schama 1975);
they did so without creating much permanent state structure. Large Dutch
fleets, including the private navies of the East and West India Companies,
converted quickly into a formidable navy. But only when the major provinces
(especially Holland) agreed to pay could the republic undertake a war, or any
other large effort; they often disagreed. The military advantage of such states
varied with the prevailing type of warfare: it was historically great for naval
warfare, less so for artillery and cavalry, and a long-term drawback in mass-
army tactics.

Permanent military forces reduced (but by no means climinated) surges in
the demand for military means, and thereby increased the advantage of states
having long-term credit and large tax bases. States such as Prussia, France, and
Britain — often considered models of effective state formation — combined the
co-optation of landlords and merchants, built standing armies (and navies) in
the time of mass-army tactics from the Thirty Years’ War to the Napotetnic
Wars, and_as_a consequence created substantial central bureaucracies.
Contrasts among these textbook examples, however, occupied only a narrow
band in the whole spectrum of European state formation.

As they mobilized for the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, most
European states expanded and centralized. At war’s end they all contracted
somewhat — if only through the demobilization of the millions ‘of troops who

vv European Cities and States 63

were under arms by 1815 — but their budgets, personnel, and levels of activity
remained much higher than they had been in 1790. War in Europe and abroad
continued to provide the greatest stimulus to increases in state expenditure. Yet
during the nineteenth century several crucial changes in state formation
occurred. The great implosion of capital and labor into cities and towns
presented rulers with threats and opportunities they had not previously faced:
threats of concentrated working-class collective action, opportunities to extract
and control as never before. The scope of state activity broadened immensely
throughout Europe; improving navigation, building roads and _ railroads,
policing, creating schools, establishing post offices, regulating relations between
capital and labor all became regular activities of states, and occasions to add
Kpecialists to the state service. Professional civil services formed and multiplied.

Simultaneously, as rulers, bargained directly with their subject populations
for massive taxes, military service, and cooperation in state programs, most
states took two further steps of profound importance: a movement toward direct
rule that reduced the role of local or regional patrons and placed representatives
of the national state in every community, and expansion of popular consultation
in the form of elections, plebiscites, and legislatures. Together they promoted
nationalism both in the sense of popular identification with state ends (for the
majority) and (for the minorities) in the sense of resistance to demands for
uniformity and integration, resistance in the name of distinctive linguistic and
cultural groups. The omnipresent state, the struggles over its rulers and
policies, the formation of serious budgetary competitors to the armed forces,
and many other features of states we now take for granted emerged in the
nineteenth-century absorption of the general population into the state.
European states, for all their differences in relations between state and
economy, began to converge on a model of bureaucracy, intervention, and
control.

The analysis embedded in the capital—coercion diagram shows us multiple
paths of state formation and an ultimate convergence on states with high
concentrations of both capital and coercion. The analysis helps rephrase and
answer the initial question: What accounts for the great variation in time and space
in the kinds of states that have prevailed in Europe since an 990, and why did
European states eventually converge on different variants of the national state? There
are three answers: the relative availability of concentrated capital and
concentrated means of coercion in different regions and periods significantly
affected the organizational consequences of making war; until recently only
those states survived that held their own in war with other states; and finally,
over the long run the changing character of war gave the military advantage to
states that could draw large, durable military forces from their own populations,
which were increasingly national states.

The capital—coercion reasoning also suggests some possible solutions to the
historical problems that flow from this gencral question. What_accounts for the

64 European Cities and States

roughly concentric pattern of European state formation? It reflects the uneven spatial
distribution of capital, and therefore sets off the relatively large but capital-poor
states that ringed the continent from the swarm of smaller, capital-rich statelike
entities that proliferated near its center. The contrast distinguishes extcrior
states, such as Sweden and Russia, that went through their formative years with
relatively large concentrations of coercion and relatively small concentrations of
capital, from interior states, such as Genoa and Holland, for which the opposite
was true, and intermediate states, such as England and France, in which
concentrations of capital and of coercion grew up sidc by side.

Why, despite obvious interests to the contrary, did rulers frequently accept the
establishment of institutions representing the major classes within their jurisdictions? In
fact, rulers attempted to avoid the establishment of institutions representing
groups outside their own class, and sometimes succeeded for considerable
periods. In the long term, however, those institutions were the price and
outcome of bargaining with different members of the subject population for the
wherewithal of state activity, especially the means of war. Kings of England did
not want a Parliament to form and assume ever-greater powcr; they conceded to
barons, and then to clergy, gentry, and bourgeois, in the course of persuading
them to raise the money for warfare.

Why did European states vary so much with respect to the incorporation of urban
oligarchies and institutions? States that had to contend from the start with urban
oligarchies and institutions generally incorporated those oligarchies and
institutions into the national structure of power. Representative institutions
generally first appeared in Europe when local, regional, or national governments
bargained with groups of subjects who had enough power to inhibit the
governments’ operation but not enough power to take them over (Blockmans
1978). Where the governments in question were morc or less autonomous
states and the groups of subjects were urban oligarchies, municipal councils
and similar institutions commonly became integral clements of the state
structure. Where a single city predominated, a very effective form of state — the
city-state or city-empire — emerged. The city-state and city-empire lost out,
however, once mass armies recruited from the state’s own population became
crucial to successful warfare.

Why did political and commercial power slide from the city-states and city-empires of
the Mediterranean to the substantial states and relatively subordinated cities of the
Atlantic? They lost out not only because the Atlantic and Baltic trade eclipsed
that of the Mediterranean but also because control of massive, permanent
armed force became increasingly crucial to a state’s success in politics and
economics alike. When, in the late sixteenth century, Spain, England, and
Holland all started to send large armed vessels into the Mediterranean for trade
and piracy (the two were not so distinct), city-states such as Ragusa, Genoa, and
Venice found that their previous reliance on speed, connections, and craftiness
was no longer enough to evade massive commercial losses. The owners of big
European Cities and States 65

ships that were suitable for long ocean voyages won out in both commercial and
military terms (sec Guillerm 1985, Modelski and Thompson 1988).

Why did city-states, city-empires, federations, and religious organizations lose their
importance as prevailing kinds of state in Europe? Two things happened. First,
commercialization and capital accumulation in the larger states reduced the
advantage enjoyed by small mercantile states, which had previously been able to
borrow extensively, tax efficiently, and rely on their own scapower to hold off

large landbound states. Second, war eventually cha i irection that
made their small scale and_fragmented_soverci car disadvantage, and
they lost to large states. Florentine and Milanese republics crumbled under the

weight of the fifteenth and sixteenth century’s military requirements. Indced a
professional organizer of mercenary armies, Francesco Sforza, became duke of
Milan in 1450 before his descendants lost their duchy to France (1499) and
then to Spain (1535).

In Florence, a revived republic lasted until 1530, but then the combined
forces of the pope and Emperor Charles V occupied its contado, forced a
surrender of the city (despite fortifications recommended by a commission
headed by Nicol Macchiavelli and built under the direction of Michelangelo
Buonarotti), and installed the Medicis as dukes. With the partial exceptions of
Venice and Genoa, which retained some distinction as maritime powers, that

era of large armies, heavy artillery, and extensive fortifications relegated all the
Italian city-states to extinction, subordination, or perilous survival in the

interstices of great powers.

Why did war shift from conquest for tribute and struggle among armed tribute-takers
to sustained battles among massed armies and navies? For essentially the same
reasons: with the organizational and technical innovations in warfare of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, states with access to large numbers of men
and volumes of capital gained a clear advantage, and cither drove back the
tribute-takers or forced them into patterns of extraction that built a more
durable state structure. During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the
Russian state made the transition as Ivan III and Ivan IV used awards of land to
tie bureaucrats and soldiers to long-term service of the state. During the
eighteenth century, the ability of populous states such as Great Britain and
France to draw mass armies from their own citizens gave them the means to
overpower small states.

If this analysis is correct, it creates its own puzzles: why, for example, the
fragmented Holy Roman Empire lasted so long in the midst of consolidating,
bellicoge monarchics. Why didn’t it disappear into the maws of large, powerful

tes?\Again, what logic would have predicted that commercial Novgorod, a
ite city whose patricians exercised control over their own large hinterland,
would give way to princely Moscow? SGeopolitica position and stand-offs
among major powers surely played a larger part than my simple formulation
implies. They figure importantly in later chapters. Nevertheless, the line of

66 European Cities and States

reasoning summarized in the capital—coercion diagram invites us to rethink
European state formation in terms of the interplay of citics and states, and
thereby captures some broad regularities in state formation. It clearly improves
on the portrayal of English, French, or Prussian state formation (or some
generalization of the three) as the core process, and all others as attenuated or
failed attempts to follow the same path.

Over the centuries before the nineteenth, however, states had long diverged
as they fashioned military forces in situations of very different relations between
capital and coercion. Alternative paths of state formation, in their turn, led to
different forms of resistance and rebellion, different state structures, and
different fiscal systems. If so, standard debates about the transition from
feudalism to capitalism and the rise of national states have concentrated too
heavily on the experiences of France, England, and a few other massive states,
while neglecting a major determinant of the actual character of states. Great
landlords overwhelmed both capitalists and kings in Poland, but were practically
nonexistent in Holland. The “feudalism” of Florence and its contado differed so
greatly from the “feudalism” of Hungary that it hardly seems worthwhile to
cover them both by the same term.

More than anything else, the relative importance of cities, financiers, and
capital in a zone of state formation significantly affected the kinds of states that

thok shape there. Mobilizing for war had significantly different effects

depending on the presence or absence of substantial capital and capitalists. A
closer look at the actual operati tates — the business of the next
chapter ‘- will clarify how thet availability and form of “apital nade such a
difference to preparation for war, and how war, in its turn, shaped the durable
organizational structure of states.

Chapters 3 and 4 will neglect geographic variation within Europe in favor of
placing major changes in war, political structure, and domestic struggle firmly
in time. Chapters 5 and 6 (on alternative paths of state formation and the
evolution of the international state system) will, in contrast, pay great attention
to variation among different kinds of states, before chapter 7 confronts
European historical experience with the character of state formation in the
contemporary world.

3
How War Made States,
and Vice Versa

A BIFURCATION OF VIOLENCE

Despite the current forty-year lull in open war among the world’s great powers,
the twenticth century has already established itself as the most bellicose in
human history. Since 1goo, by one careful count, the world has seen 237 new
wars — civil and international — whose battles have killed at least 1,000 persons
per year; through the year 2000, the grim numbers extrapolate to about 275
wars and 115 million deaths in battle. Civilian deaths could easily equal that
total. The bloody nineteenth century brought only 205 such wars and 8 million
dead, the warlike eighteenth century a mere 68 wars with 4 million killed
(Sivard 1986: 26; see also Urlanis 1960). Those numbers translate into death
rates per thousand population of about 5 for the eighteenth century, 6 for the
nineteenth century, and 46 — cight or nine times as high — for the twentieth.
From 1480 to 1800, a significant new international conflict started somewhere
every two or three years, from 1800 to 1944 every one or two years, since World
War II every fourteen months or so (Beer 1974: 12-15; Small and Singer 1982:
59-60; Cusack and Eberwein 1982). The nuclear age has not slowed the
centuries-old trend toward more frequent, deadlier wars.

That Westerners commonly think otherwise probably results from the fact
that war has become rarer among the great powers: France, England, Austria,
Spain, and the Ottoman Empire in 1500; France, the United Kingdom, the
Soviet Union, West Germany, the United States, and China today; other sets
in between. Wars directly involving great powers have, on the average, declined
in frequency, duration, and number of participating states since the sixteenth
century. They have also, in bitter compensation, become much more severe —
especially if we count the number of deaths per month or per year (Levy
68 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

1983: 116-49). Among lesser powers, more and more wars, but fairly small
ones; among the great powers, fewer and fewer wars, but increasingly deadly
ones.

We can read the contrast between great power experience with war and that
of other states optimistically or pessimistically. Optimistically, we might
suppose that the great powcrs cventually found less costly ways of settling their
differences than incessant wars, and that the same thing will eventually happen
to other states. Pessimistically, we might conclude that the great powers have
exported war to the rest of the world, and have saved their own energy for
destroying each other in concentrated bursts. In cither mood, we see an
increasingly belligerent world in which the most powerful states enjoy a partial
exemption from war on their own terrains and therefore, perhaps, become less
sensitive to the horrors of war.

The problem is not, however, that people in gencral have become more
aggressive: AS the world has grown more warlike, interpersonal violence outside
Of the-staté’s sphere has generally declined (Chesnais 1981, Gurr 1981, Hair
1971, Stone 1983). At least that scems to be true of Western countrics, the only
ones so far for which we have long series of evidence. Although the reports of
murders, rapes, and collective violence in our daily newspapers may suggest
otherwise, the chances of dying a violent death at some other civilian’s hand
have diminished enormously.

Homicide rates in thirteenth-century England, for example, were about ten
times those of today, and perhaps twice those of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. Rates of murder declined with particular rapidity from the
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries. (Because the United States has by far
the highest national homicide rate in the Western world, it may be harder for
Americans than for others to appreciate how rare interpersonal violence has
become elsewhere; in most Western countries suicide is ten or twenty times as
common as murder, while the American population’s homicide rate approaches
its rate of suicide.) If it were not for war, state repression, the avomoniles and
suicide, the odds of violent death of any kind would be incomparably slimmer in
most of the Western world today than they were two or three hundred years ago.

€ Michel Foucault and Marvin Becker may be right to

Such-thinkers_as Michel Foucault and \
attribute part of the change to massive shifts in mentality. But surely a

significant contribution came from the increasing tendency of states to monitor,

control, and(monopolize the effective means of violence. In most of the world,

the activity of states has created a startling contrast between the violence of the
state’s sphere and the relative non-violence of civilian life away from the state.

oe

oe ™,
HOW STATES CONTROLLED GOERCION’

European states led the construction of that contrast. They did so by building
up fearsome coercive means of their own as they deprived civilian populations
How War Made States, and Vice Versa 69

of access to those means. For the most part, they relied heavily on capital and
capitalists as they reorganized coercion. Yet different states did so in strikingly
different ways.

Do not underestimate the difficulty or importance of the change. Over most
of European history, ordinary men (again, the masculine form of the word
matters) have commonly had Icthal weapons at their disposal; within any
particular state, furthermore, local and regional powerholders have ordinarily
had control of concentrated means of force that could, if combined, match or
even overwhelm those of the state. For a long time, nobles in many parts of
Europe had a legal right to wage private war; the twelfth-century Usatges, or
Customs, of Catalonia specifically recorded that right (Torres i Sans 1988: 13).
Bandits (who often consisted of disbanded segments of private or public
armies) flourished in much of Europe through the seventeenth century. In
Sicily, those controlled and protected entrepreneurs of violence called mafiosi
have terrorized rural populations into our own time (Blok 1974, Romano
1963). People outside the state have often profited handsomely from their
private deployment of violent means.

Since the seventeenth century, nevertheless, rulers have managed to shift the
balance decisively against both individual citizens and rival powerholders within
their own states. They have made it criminal, unpopular, and impractical for
most of their citizens to bear arms, have outlawed private armies, and have
made it seem normal for armed agents of the state to confront unarmed
civilians. By clinging to civilian possession of firearms, the United States now
sets itself apart from all other Western countries, and pays the price in rates of
death by gunshot hundreds of times higher than its European counterparts; in
the proliferation of private weaponry, the United States resembles Lebanon and
Afghanistan more than Great Britain or the Netherlands.

Disarmament of the civilian population took place in many small steps:
general seizures of weapons at the ends of rebellions, prohibitions of duels,
controls over the production of weapons, introduction of licensing for private
arms, restrictions on public displays of armed force. In England, the Tudors
suppressed private armies, reduced the princely power of great lords along the
Scottish border, contained aristocratic violence, and eliminated the fortress-
castles that once announced the power and autonomy of the great English
magnates (Stone 1965: 199-272). Louis XIII, the seventeenth-century monarch
who with the aid of Richelieu and Mazarin rebuilt the armed force of the
French state, probably tore down more fortresses than he constructed. But he
built at the frontiers, and destroyed in the interior. In subduing magnates and
cities that resisted his rule, he commonly demolished their fortifications,
reduced their rights to bear arms, and thereby decreased the odds of any
serious future rebellion.

At the same time, the state’s expansion of its own armed force began to
overshadow the weaponry available to any of its domestic rivals. The distinction

70 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

between “internal” and “external” politics, once quite unclear, became sharp
and fateful. The link between warmaking and state structure etrenpinened,

Max Weber’s historically contestable definition of the state — “a state is a
human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of
physical force within a given territory” (Gerth and Mills 1946: 78) — finally began
to make sense for European states.

Exactly how civilian disarmament proceeded depended on its social setting:
in urban regions, the installation of routine policing and the negotiation of
agreements between municipal and national authorities played a major part,
while in regions dominated by great landlords the disbanding of private armies,
the climination of walled, moated castles, and the interdiction of vendettas
alternated between co-optation and civil war. Coupled with the continued
buildup of the state’s armed force, the disa $ enormously
increased the ratio of coercive means in. state hands to those at the disposal of
domestic rivals or opponents of those currently holding state power. As a result,
it has become almost impossible for a dissident faction to seize power over a
Western state without the active collaboration of some segments of the state’s
own armed forces (Chorley 1943, Russcll 1974).

A ruler’s creation of armed force generated durable state structure. It did so
both because an army became a significant organization within the state and
because its construction and maintenance brought complementary organizations
- treasuries, supply services, mechanisms for conscription, tax bureaux, and
much more — into life. The Prussian monarchy’s chief tax-collection agency
came into being as the General War Commissariat. During the later seventeenth
century, England’s successive republican and monarchical governments, intent
on countering French and Dutch naval power, built royal shipyards into the
country’s largest concentrated industry. Such empire-building organizations as
the Dutch East India Company became enormously influential elements of
their national governments (Duffy 1980). From ADggo onward, major
mobilizations for war provided the chief occasions on which states expanded,
consolidated, “and created new forms of political organization.

WARS

Why did wars occur at all? The central, tragic fact is simple: coercion works;
those who apply substantial force to their fellows get compliance, and from that
compliance draw the multiple advantages of money, goods, deference, access to
pleasures denied to less powerful people. Europeans followed a standard war-
provoking logic: everyone wh ntial coercive means tried to
maintain a secure area within which he could enjoy the returns from coercion,
plus a fortified buffer zonc, possibly run at a loss, to protect the secure area.
Police or their equivalent deployed force in the secure area, while armies

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 71

patrolled the buffer zone and ventured outside it; the most aggressive princes,
such as Louis XIV, shrank the buffer zone to a thin but heavily-armed frontier,
while their weaker or more pacific neighbors relicd on larger buffers and
waterways. When that operation succeeded for a while, the buffer zone turned
into a secure area, which encouraged the wielder of coercion to acquire a new
buffer zone surrounding the old. So long as adjacent powers were pursuing the
same logic, war resulted.

Some conditions for war varied, however. Every state’s particular brand of
warmaking depended on three closely-related factors: the character of its major
rivals, the external interests of its dominant classes, and the Togic of the
protective activity in which rulers engaged on behalf of their own and dominant
classes’ interests. Where rivals were commercial seafarers, piracy and
privateering simply continued, regardless of the formal state of war and peace,
while where landlord-dominated agrarian powers lived shoulder to shoulder,
disputes over control of land and labor — especially at moments of disputed
succession — precipitated resort to arms much more frequently. When small
maritime powers owned large overseas empires, protection of interests drew
them into the patrolling of sea lanes, and therefore into inevitable battles with
others who coveted the same trade. Because the constellation of rivalries,
the nature of dominant classes, and the demands of protection changed
fundamentally over the thousand years we are surveying, the characteristic
causes of war changed as well.

Coercion is always relative; anyone who controls concentrated means of
coercion runs the risk of losing advantages when a neighbor builds, up his
means. In Europe before 1400, the control of most states by kin groups
compounded the competition. Where rulers formed a kin group, the tendency
of prospering kin groups to expand and to seek places for growing numbers of
heirs incited conquest, and therefore sharpened rivalries. Intermarriage among
ruling families, furthermore, multiplied the claims of powerful dynasties to
vacated thrones. In the fragmented sovereignty of Europe, rivals — whether
kinsmen or not — were always close at hand, but so was a coalition nearly always
available to keep any particular center from expanding indefinitely.

For a long time, furthermore, larger states such as Burgundy and England
always harbored internal rivals to the current sovereign, armed groups who had
also some claim to rule, and who sometimes served as implicit or explicit allies
of external enemies.| In China, once the vast imperial apparatus formed, a
waxing empire had plenty of enemies, but no real rivals inside or outside its
territories. Mongols constantly threatened along China’s northern border, and
intermittently staged devastating raids into the empire, but only once actually
took it over. In general, the Mongols were better at exacting tribute than they
would have been at running the state apparatus themselves. Chinese dynasties
collapsed when the empire’s administrative reach exceeded its grasp, when
warlords organized in the empire’s interstices, and when mobile invaders

72 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

(especially Manchus) swept into imperial territory and seized the levers of
power. China became the great land of rebellions and civil war, but not of war
among multiple states. For that, Europe held the record.

Over the long run, European wars became morc lethal and less frequent.
Drawing on the pioneer work of Pitirim Sorokin, Jack Levy has compiled a
catalog of larger wars involving great powers — European or otherwise — from
1495 through 1975 (see table 3.1). His catalog, which requires at a minimum
1,000 battle deaths per year, is much smaller than Evan Luard’s attempt at a
comprehensive listing of all substantial wars over a comparable period, but Levy
sets clearer criteria for inclusion and provides more detail on the wars he does
include (see Levy 1983, Luard 1987). Over the centuries, the number of great
power wars, their average duration, and the proportion of all years in which
such wars were in progress all dropped dramatically (Levy 1983: 88-91, 139).
William Eckhardt’s list of all wars — great power and other, international and
civil, combined - includes 50 for the eighteenth century, 208 for the
nineteenth, and 213 for the twentieth through 1987 (Eckhardt 1988: 7; Sivard
1988: 28-31).

Table 3.1. Wars involving great powers

Number = Average duration Proportion of
Century of wars of wars years war underway

(years) (%)
16th 34 1.6 95
17th 29 1.7 94
18th 17 1.0 78
1gth 20 0.4 40
2oth" 15 0.4 53

* through 1975
Source: Levy 1983, L.uard 1987

In addition, the intensity of war altered significantly. Figure 3.1 captures
some of the alteration by means of a device borrowed from the analysis of
strikes: a solid whose volume represents the total number of battle deaths
incurred by great powers per year, and whose threc dimensions show the
components of total battle deaths. The three.components are: number of battle
deaths per state participating in great power wars during the average year;
number of states participating in those wars during the average year; and
average number of wars per state-year of participation. Thus

battle deaths per year =
battle deaths per state X state-years per war X wars per year

x

which is what the solid shows.
How War Made States, and Vice Versa 73

KEY 1500-1599

Volume of +300

solid =

Battle deaths 7

per year +200 Battle
deaths
per

100 state
States per 7
war 1 ee 0
18 12 6
40
Wars per 29
year 20

1e00=1699

LY

1800-1899 1900-1975

7a

Figure 3.1 Magnitudes of great power war by century, 1500-1975.

Moving from century to century, we see the number of great power battle
deaths per state rising from just under 3,000 per year during the sixteenth
century to more than 223,000 during the twenticth. The avcrage number of
states involved in great power wars rosc from 9.4 in the sixteenth century to
74 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

17.6 in the eighteenth century, only to fall back to 6.5 in the twentieth. (The
rise and fall reveals the development of the general war among most or all of the
great powers, counterbalanced in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries by the
tendency of Western states to start or intervene in local conflicts outside of the
West.) Finally, the number of wars going on in a given year per warmaking state
dropped from the sixteenth to cighteenth centuries, then held steady: 0.34,
0.29, 0.17, 0.20, and 0.20. During the sixteenth century, that is, states that ever
participated in great power wars were at war during about one year in threc
(0.34); during the twentieth, one year in five (0.20).

As a result of these changes, the sheer volume of great power deaths per year
soared from 9,400 during the sixteenth century to 290,000 during the
twentieth. If we could include deaths of civilians and among troops of minor
powers, the inflation would surely be even more rapid. With aircraft, tanks,
missiles, and nuclear bombs, the death toll of twentieth-century wars far
outshadows those of previous centuries.

The numbers are only approximate, but they establish the heavy involvement
of European states (which, from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries
constituted almost all the world’s great powers) in warfare, century after
century. They also suggest that preparation for war, paying for it, and mending
its damage preoccupied rulers throughout the five centuries under scrutiny. In
the five centuries before 1500, furthermore, European states concentrated even
more exclusively on the making of war. Over the millennium as a whole, war has
been the dominant activity of European states.

State budgets, taxes, and debts reflect that reality. Before 1400, in the era of
patrimonialism, no state had a national budget in the understood sense of the
word. Taxes existed in Europe’s more commercialized states, but rulers
everywhere acquired most of their revenues from tribute, rents, dues, and fees.
Individual sovereigns borrowed money, but usually in their own names and
against real collateral. During the sixteenth century, as war multiplied state
expenditures through most of the continent, European states began to
regularize and expand budgets, t taxes, and debts alike. States’ future revealucs/
began to.serve.as security. for. long-term debt.

France’s public debt took on serious proportions when Francis I started
borrowing from Parisian businessmen in the 1520s, offering the city’s future
revenues as security (Hamilton 1950: 246). He spent the money on his great
campaigns against Habsburg Emperor Charles V. Although the French
national debt fluctuated as a function of war efforts and fiscal policies, in
general it galloped upward — to the point at which borrowing for eighteenth-
century wars swamped the state, ruined its credit, and led directly to the fateful
calling of the Estates General in 1789. Budgets and taxes swelled accordingly:
French taxes rose from the equivalent of about 50 hours of an ordinary
laborer’s wages per capita per year in 1600 to almost 700 hours per capita in
1963 (Tilly 1986: 62).

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 75

Great Britain survived without large state debts until the reign of William and
Mary. The War of the League of Augsburg (1688-97) elevated the long-term
British debt to.£22 million. By 1783, after the Seven Years’ War and the War
of American Independence, it had increased tenfold, to £238 million. In 1939,
as Britain rearmed, the public debt reached £8,300 million (Hamilton 1950:
254-7). From the late seventeenth century onward budgets, debts, and taxes
arose to the rhythm of war. All of Europe’s warmaking states had the same

experience.
If war drove states, it did not exhaust their activity. On the contrary: as a by-
product_of pre jons_ for war, rulers willy-nill d_activities and

organizations that eventually took on lives of their own: courts, treasuries,

systems of taxation, regional administrations, public_assemblies,and_much

more. Writing of the sixteenth century, J. H. Elliott notes:

a dominant theme in the history of Spain under Charles V and Philip II,
bureaucratizatidn was another . . . The replacement of the warrior-king Charles V by a
sé

I, who spent his working day at his desk surrounded by piles of
documents, fittingly symbolized the transformation of the Spanish Empire as it passed
out of the age of the conquistador into the age of the Civil Servant.

(Elliott 1963: 160)

The tasks of fitting out armies and navies were not the only ones which resulted
in an expanding governmental structure. No monarch could make war without
securitig the acquiescence of nearly all of his subject population, and the active
cooperation of at least a crucial few. Over and over, rulers sent troops to enforce
the collection of tribute, taxes, and levies of men or materials. But they also allowed
localities to buy off the costly imposition of troops by timely payments of their
obligations. In this regard, rulers resembled racketcers: at a price, they offered
protection against evils that they themselves would otherwise inflict, or at least
allow to be inflicted. . -~.

At the level of the state, the organizational division between armed forces
oriented to attacks on external enemies (armies) and those oriented to control of
the ‘national population (police) developed only slowly, and never became
complete. Problems of policing differ systematically between rural areas (where,
among other things, large proportions of land tend to be in private space,
forbidden to public authorities) and urban areas (where much land is public
space, accessible to anyone); a military style of policing on call suits most rural
areas, while systematic patrolling and surveillance becomes possible in urban
areas (Stinchcombe 1963). As a consequence of these and other differences,
cities generally developed distinct police forces well before the countryside, and
the separation of police forces from other military organizations occurred
earlier in relatively urban states.

Well into the seventeenth century, most large European states, by virtue of
their reliance on armed and partly autonomous regional magnates for domestic
76 Hom War Made States, and Vice Versa

rule, faced recurrent threats of civil war as magnates took up arms against
rulers. During the critical centuries from 1400 to 1700, rulers spent much of
their effort disarming, isolating, or co-opting rival claimants to state power.
Although municipalities and rural jurisdictions had created their own small
police forces long before, only during the nineteenth century, did European
‘states establish uniformed, salaried, bureaucratic police. forces. specialized in in
control of the civilian. "population. They thus freed their armies to concentrate
on external conquest and international war.

pnt

TRANSITIONS

War wove the European network of national states, and preparation for war

created the internal structures ¢ of the states within it. The years around 1500
were crucial. “Europeans “had started using gunpowder seriously in warfare
toward the middle of the fourteenth century. Over the following 150 years, the
invention and diffusion of firearms had tipped the military advantage toward
monarchs who could afford to cast cannon and build the new kinds of fortresses
that cannon could not easily shatter. Warfare shifted from battles fought on
open plains toward sieges of important cities. Around 1500 costs rose again as
mobile siege artillery, and infantry to accompany it, came into widespread use;
the development of portable musketry in the early sixteenth century further
enhanced the importance of trained, disciplined infantry. At the same time,
sailing vessels carrying big guns started to predominate in naval warfare. The
larger states north of the Alps, especially France and the Habsburg empire, had
the scale to absorb the increased costs, and took advantage of it.

For two more centuries, it is true, some states that concentrated on navies
continued to thrive; by some standards the Dutch Republic, with very small
land forces, became Europe’s leading state during the seventeenth century.
Portugal and Venice likewise held their own into the seventeenth century.
Insular England prospered as a maritime power before building up its armies
during the eighteenth century (Modelski and Thompson 1988: 151-244). Such
states drew riches from their colonies, profited from intensive international
trade, and took advantage of home bases that seapower could easily defend.
Eventually, however, those states that recruited and maintained huge armies
from their own national resources — France, Great Britain, and Prussia are the
preponderant models — prevailed over all the rest.

On a European scale, then, the late fifteenth century marked an important
transition: as the large military states began to feel the stimulus of capitalist
expansion, the advantages of the small mercantile states began to disappear.

ics played its part: the end of the Hundred Years’ War freed a relatively
unified France to look around for spaces to conquer. The multiple states of

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 77

Iberia, which were completing the expulsion of Muslim powers from the
peninsula, felt the French pressure; in 1463, Louis XI actually annexed the
Catalan counties of Roussillon and Cerdagne. The marriage of Ferdinand and
Isabella (1474), by joining the crowns of Aragon and Castile, replied to the
French threat, and threatened France in its turn. The rivalry of France and
Spain then began to reverberate through European politics.

Italy felt the impact of that change first. The papal states, the republics, and
the small monarchies of Italy had, of course, long involved themselves in politics
outside of the peninsula. Delicately balanced alliances, appeals to outside
mediators, and timely marriages played significant parts in their politics. During
the eleventh to fourteenth centuries, popes had devoted much of their energy to
checking, controlling, or even engineering the elections of German-based Holy
Roman emperors. The emperors, in their turn, had typically claimed suzerainty
over much of Italy. In short, Italian politics had long connected with politics
elsewhere.

Nor were war and international rivalry novelties in the peninsula. During the
thirteenth century, Aragon, the Holy Roman Empire, France, and the papacy
had all contended for priority in Italy. Many of the century’s major battles
occurred there. By the 1490s, furthermore, the major powers of Italy —- Venice,
Milan, Florence, Naples, and the papal states — had been warring with each
other intermittently for decades. Their wars, however, had proceeded in a
genteel, limited way. Then the usurper-duke Ludovico Sforza of Milan invited
Charles VIII of France to press his family’s claims to the kingdom of Naples.

With Charles VIII’s siege of Naples, not one scourge but two entered Italy.
Before 1494, syphilis probably did not exist in Europe; returnees from
Columbus’s first voyage to Amcrica, who had contracted the disease in America,
very likely introduced the disease to Spain. Spanish mercenaries at the siege of
Naples (1494-5) suffered an epidemic that was almost certainly syphilis,
whence it spread throughout the continent. As the plague spread, the French
commonly called it “Neapolitan disease,” while Neapolitans preferred to call it
“the French disease” (Baker and Armelagos 1988). Whatever the precise origin
of that first epidemic, Italians soon knew that the French and their mercenaries
had returned to the peninsula, with a vengeance. If the French arrived, the
Spanish would follow.

The 1490s therefore differed from the past. They differed in bringing not
just ambassadors, princes, and imperial forces, but large armies from the
waxing national states across the Alps, into city-state Italy. The northerners
arrived, furthermore, with mobile siege guns and tactics to accompany them,
which multiplied the scale and destructiveness of warfare. The French invasion
of 1494 made the peninsula Europe’s battleground, ended the round of small-
scale wars among autonomous city-states, and shocked Italian thinkers.

Their shock resulted from the fact that barbarian forces had once again
overrun the homeland of civilization. As J. R. Hale puts it:
78 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

The change that came over the nature of warfare after 1494 was overstressed by
Machiavelli in the interest of proving a thesis about the relative merits of militiamen to
condottieri, as it was by Guicciardini in the interest of turning the knife in the wound to
Italy’s self-esteem, but a change there certainly was, and it was grected with widespread
horror. This horror, however, was not directed against large-scale war as such, as
opposed to earlier small-scale wars, nor even against a long period of such wars; nor was
it directed to any important extent against the changed nature of war — more bloody,
more total, more expensive. It was caused by the evidence provided by these wars of a
failure of morale, a failure of the Italian character to meet their challenge.

(Hale 1983: 360)

A significant portion of Machiavelli’s writing about military affairs stemmed
from his effort to think through what was happening to the Italian state system,
and what to do about it.

What was happening to the Italian state system? The national states in
formation north of the Alps, by competing for hegemony in Italy, were forcibly
integrating it into a larger system spanning much of Europe. Soon after, the
Ottoman Empire was expanding deep into European territory, and putting
pressure on Italy from the southeast; the reign of Suleyman the Magnificent
(1520-66) brought the Turks to the summit of their European power. The
Ottoman advance, in its turn, started a four-century struggle with Russia,
aligning the strategically-located Crimean Tatars with the Ottomans and
against the Russians for the first time.

In Italy, the alteration of warfare had devastating consequences. By the
1520s, Habsburgs and Valois were fighting their dynastic wars on Italian
territory. In 1527, the Habsburg empcror’s mercenaries sacked Rome. As of
1540, Milan and Lombardy had fallen under Spanish rule, France occupied
much of Savoy and Piedmont, Florence had become a Medici-ruled duchy
nominally subject to the empire, and Naples was an appanage of the Spanish
crown. Of the greater Italian powers, only the most maritime, Venice and
Genoa, had maintained their oligarchic institutions. Even they lost their
pre-eminence in the Mediterranean.

As the northern states generalized their wars and drew Italy into their
struggles, war on land became more important, and the ability to field large
armies more critical to a state’s success. France had 18,000 troops under arms
in 1494, 32,000 in 1525, and 40,000 in 1552. Spain’s forces expanded much
faster: from 20,000 soldiers in 1492 to 100,000 in 1532. By 1552, Emperor
Charles V had some 148,000 men under arms, a total unprecedented since
Roman times (Parker 1988: 45). At Spain’s peak, around 1630, 300,000 men
served under its banners. The ratio of troops to total population rose
significantly. The figures in table 3.2 require many qualifications. The dates are
approximate, “England and Wales” means England and Wales through 1600,
Great Britain in 1700, and the United Kingdom thereafter, the boundaries of
all these states changed continually throughout the period, and the frequent

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 79

Table 3.2, Men under arms, Europe 1500-1980

Thousands of troops under arms ‘Troops as percent of national population

Country 1500 1600 1700 1850 1g¥o 1500 1600 1700 1850 1980
Spain 20 200 50 154 342 0.3 #25 O07 1.0 09
France 18 Bo 400 439 ©6495 Of O04 21 1.2 0.9
England/Wales 25 30 292 201 329 10 0.7 §.4 411 0.6
Netherlands 20 100 30 115 1300«§.30C~C‘TC OB
Sweden 15 100 63 66 1567. 18 OB
Russia 35. 170 «850 3663 03 #412 15 tg

Source: Compiled trom Ballbé 1983, Brewer 1989, Corvisicr 1976, Flora 1983, Jones 1988, I.ynn
1989, Mitchell 1975, Parker 1976, Parker 1988, Reinhard, Armengaud and Dupaquier 1968,
Sivard 1983, de Vries 1984, Wrigley and Schofield 1981.

employment of foreign mercenaries meant that between 1500 and 1700 the
figures shown here were in most cases much higher than the proportion of the
national population under arms. Furthermore, the official and real strengths of
armies often differed significantly, especially before 1800. Finally, for reasons
this chapter explores, numbers of troops fluctuated dramatically from year to
year, depending on public finances and the state of war; in France toward 1700,
for example, the peacetime army ran to around 140,000 men, but Louis XIV
brought it up to 400,000 in the midst of his great campaigns (Lynn 1989).
Nevertheless, the figures make their main point eloquently. uring the

ixteenth and seventeenth centuries d, They bec

business.

ar ore budgets, taxes, and debt rose accordingly. Castile’s tax revenues rose
from less than go0,000 reales in 1747 to 26 million in 1504 (Elliott 1963: 80). At
the same time, Ferdinand and Isabella borrowed to pay for their wars in
Granada and Italy. As Spanish control over Italy deepened, Italian taxation
became a prime source of crown income; the Netherlands likewise yielded an
important share of Castile’s revenue. The Cortes of Catalonia, Aragon, and
Valencia, in contrast, successfully resisted royal demands to increase their
contributions to the state’s warmaking. By the middle of the sixteenth century,
Spain’s Italian and Dutch provinces ceased to yicld substantial increases;
Charles V and Philip II turned increasingly to Castile (where their predecessors
had more effectively subjugated nobility, clergy, and cities to royal will) and to
America for financial aid (Elliott 1963: 192-3). They also borrowed through
anticipations of revenue from both Castile and America, with the result that by
1543, 65 percent of the crown’s regular revenues went to payment of annuities
(Elliott 1963: 198; for more detail, see Fernandez Albaladejo 1989).
Unsurprisingly, the crown went bankrupt, repudiating its debts in 1557.

At the same time, the Swiss - still, at that time, a conquering people —
developed new, highly-disciplined infantry tactics that rapidly proved their
superiority. The Swiss had established their military mettle in defeating
80 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

Burgundy’s Charles the Bold repeatedly during the 1470s. Soon almost every
power needed its own Swiss soldiers, and the Swiss began substituting the
training and export of mercenaries for the conduct of their own wars (Fueter
191g: 10). In the process, the Swiss cantons themsclves entered the business of
supplying soldiers for pay (Corvisicr 1976: 147). Like other exporters of
mercenaries, Switzerland already had a substantial number of poor, mobile,
semi-proletarianized and late-marrying highlanders who became attractive
candidates for military service away from home (Braun 1960). Mercenaries,
Swiss and otherwise, displaced armies of clients and citizen militias.

On a small scale, mercenaries had played their part in European wars for
centuries. From the time of the crusades, freebooting soldiers from north of the
Alps had sold their services to princes, actual and aspiring, all through the
Mediterranean. When no one employed them, they extorted and pillaged on
their own account (Contamine 1984: 158). During the fourteenth century,
Italian city-states started employing small bodies of hired troops. As it acceler-
ated its forcible annexation of adjacent territory in the 1320s, for example,
Florence began relying regularly on mercenary cavalry. In the 1380s, democratic
Florence engaged — or bought off — the great English mercenary Sir John
Hawkwood, who had been pillaging Tuscany since the end of a war between
Milan and the papacy Icft his company jobless. Hawkwood had previously
served England, Savoy, Milan, Pisa and the papacy. Unfortunately for Florentine
democrats, Hawkwood backed the oligarchy in their successful rising of 1382;
Hawkwood “was accorded the rare favor of Florentine citizenship together
with a pension for life and exemption from taxation; and when he died in
1394 the grateful government not only honored him with a splendid funeral at
public expense, but also commemorated his services by having him painted on
the wall of the inner facade of the cathedral mounted on horseback in full
panoply of war” (Schevill 1963: 337). Today’s tourists still see the curiously
secular mural.

In Venice, that great maritime power, the resident nobility long provided its
own military commanders on sca and land; they recruited their soldiers and
sailors, furthermore, largely from the Venetian population. But by the end of
the fourteenth century Venice, like its Italian neighbors, was hiring mercenary
captains, condottieri, who recruited their own troops and fought the city-state’s
wars for a handsome price. Since a condotta was a contract to make war for a
particular sovereign, condottiere meant, essentially, contractor. The German
word Unternehmer conveys the same commercial tone. The condottieri were the
oilmen of their time, shifting allegiances from deal to deal and sometimes
accumulating great wealth; when the mercenary entrepreneur Bartolomeo
Colleoni died in 1475, his fortune was “comparable to the riches of the
leading banker of the age, Cosimo de’Medici” (Lane 1973a: 233). By 1625
Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, ran his own domain of 2,000 square miles and
used it as a supply base for troops he deployed — at a profit — on behalf of the
How War Made States, and Vice Versa 81

Holy Roman Emperor. Instead of allowing his troops to loot indiscriminately,
he organized a protection racket, forcing occupied cities to pay lest the soldiers
be let loose (Maland 1980: 103). Under Wallenstein, war became a well-oiled
business.

War did not merely entail recruiting and paying troops. Warmaking states
had to supply them as well. During the later seventeenth century, a typical army
of 60,000 men, with its 40,000 horses, consumed almost a million pounds of
food per day — some carried with the army, some stored in magazines, the great
bulk procured wherever the army was located, but all of it requiring massive
expenditure and organization (Van Creveld 1977: 24). At the prices and wages
of the time, a million pounds of grain cost the equivalent of the daily wages of
about 90,000 ordinary laborers (calculated from Fourastié 1966: 423). In
addition to food, armies had to acquire weapons, horses, clothing, and shelter;
the larger the armies, the less feasible to have cach individual supply his own.
From Wallenstein to Louvois, the great seventeenth-century organizers of war
involved themselves in supply as much as in battle. That made their big
business even bigger.

From the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries — the critical period for European
state formation — armies deployed through much of Europe consisted largely of
mercenaries recruited by great lords and military entrepreneurs. Similarly,
national navies (especially the corsairs who preyed on enemy shipping with
authorization from a protector state) commonly grouped hired sailors from all
over the continent (Fontenay 1988b). True, states varied in how much, and how
long, they relied on mercenaries. Rulers of larger, more powerful states strove
to limit their dependence: France, Spain, England, Sweden, and the United
Provinces kept their own generals in place while hiring regiments and
companies, but smaller states commonly rented whole armies from generals on
down. The German Habsburgs relied on local levies until the Thirty Years’
War, engaged the great but demanding condottiere Wallenstein during the war
and then moved to create a standing army during the latter half of the
seventeenth century.

Since battles pay off on the size of armics relative to each other rather than.
on the per capita effort behind them, one can see why relatively prosperous
smaller states often rented their armies on the he international market. Navies, too,
mixed private and public forces. “Until the 1660s,” remarks ; M. S. Anderson,

a considerable proportion of the French galley-flect was provided by private
entrepreneurs (often Knights of Malta) who owned the galleys they commanded and
served the king under contract for a fixed period in return for a specified sum. In Spain in
1616, when the navy was at a very low ebb, of the seventeen vessels in the fleet five were
privately owned, hired merely for the summer (the campaigning season at sea as on
land), while in the following year another six or seven had to be hired to provide an
escort to bring the silver flotas from America into port. In England, of the twenty-five
ships which had made up Drake’s expedition to the West Indies in 1585 only two were
82 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

supplied by the queen; and though he sailed as Elizabeth’s admiral and had official
instructions, only about a third of the cost of fitting out the expedition was met by the

government.
(Anderson 1988: 27; see also I’ontenay 1988a, 1988b)

Privateers, who thrived in seventeenth-century sea warfare, came by definition
from licensed non-governmental forces.

Rented armies and leased navies lived chiefly on payments made or
authorized by agents of the crowns they served. Etymologically, after all,
“soldier” carries the meaning “he who fights for pay.” The Sdéldner and the
Unternehmer complemented each other. The peculiarity of the system became
clear early on, when in 1515 “two Swiss armies, one in the service of the French
king and one in the service of an Italian baron, met on opposing sides in a battle
at Marignano in northern Italy and almost completely annihilated each other”
(Fischer 1985: 186). The event helped persuade the Swiss to avoid wars of
their own, but it did not keep them from shipping mercenaries to other people’s
battles.

For several centuries, European states found the system of hire-purchase
through returns from taxation/a convenient way to build armed force. The

extreme case of state specialization in the production of mercenaries was no
doubt Hesse-Cassel, a small eighteenth-century state that maintained a full
7 percent of its entire population under arms — 12,000 in domestic garrisons
that participated in the local economy, and another 12,000 in a well-trained
army that the Landgrave rented out for profit (Ingrao 1987: 132). When Britain
needed extra troops for its war against rebellious Americans, it turned to Hesse.
As a result, in American folk history “Hessian” signifies crass and unpatriotic —
in short, rffercenary. On the basis of military business, Frederick II (1760-85)
built an entigttened despotism complete with poor relief and maternity
hospital; most of the programs, however, collapsed as the American war ended
and as Europe’s states turned to recruiting their own national armies (Ingrao
1987: 196-201). The age of mercenaries was then ending.

Europe’s larger states had long struggled to contain mercenaries within
armies commanded by their own nationals and controlled by their own civilians.
With the eighteenth century, furthermore, the costs and political risks of large-
scale mercenary forces led those states’ rulers to enlist more and more of their
own citizens, and to substitute them for foreign mercenaries where possible. In
the early stages of military expansion by means of rented armies, rulers found
the raising of armies from their own populations costly and politically risky; the
danger of domestic resistance and rebéllion remained large. The wars of the
French Revolution and Empire capped the trend, and ended the dominance of
mercenary armies. As Carl von Clausewitz reflected after Napoleon’s defeat:

Whilst, according to the usual way of seeing things, all hopes were placed on a very
limited military force in 1793, such a force as no one had any conception of made its
How War Made States, and Vice Versa 83

appearance. War had agai fair of
numbering thirty milliong every one of whom regarded himself as a citizen of the State
. .. By this participation of the people in the War instead of a Cabinet and an Army, a
whole Nation with its natural weight came into the scale. Henceforth, the means
available — the efforts which might be called forth — had no longer any definite limits; the
energy with which the War itself might be conducted had no longer any counterpoise,

and consequently the danger for the adversary had risen to the extreme.
(Clausewitz 1968 [1832]: 384-5)

With a nation in arms, a state’s extractive power rose enormously, as did the
claims of citizens on their state. Although a call to defend the fatherland
stimulated ext extraordinary support for the efforts of war, rellance 00 _mass.
conscription, confiscatory taxation, and conversion of production to the ends of
war made any state vulnerable to popular r resistance, and answerable to popular
demands, _aS_ never ‘before. From that point onward, the character of war.
changed, and the relationship between warmaking and civilian politics altered
fundamentally.

“Given the general move toward monetization and commodification, the
disappearance of mercenary armed forces comes as a surprise. Why on earth
would states stop buying their soldiers and sailors and substitute for them
standing armies based on conscription? Several factors converged on that
outcome. The creation of immense armed forces whose obligation to the crown
was purely contractual raised the dangers of foot-dragging, rebellion, and even
rivalry for political power; a state’s own citizens, commanded by members of its
own ruling classes, often fought étter, more reliably, and nfore cheaply. The
power over the domestic population that rulers gained through the construction
of mercenary armies and the infrastructure to support them eventually shifted
the balance; as mercenaries became expensive and dangerous in their own
right, the chances of effective resistance on the part of the national population
declined. ‘As wars became more expensive, “the sheer cost of warfare on the
scale established by their large rivals overwhelmed the financial resources of all
but the most commercialized states. During the eighteenth century, the vast
expansion of rural industry opened up alternative economic opportunities to the
people of major regions, such as highland Switzerland, that had been exporting
soldiers and domestic servants to the rest of Europe, and thus squeezed the
supply of mercenaries. The French Revolution and Napoleon gave the coup de
grace to the mercenary system by raising huge, cffective armies chiefly from
France’s own expanding territory. By that time, however, even domestically
recruited standing armies had to be paid and supplied. From the fifteenth
century onward, European states moved decisively toward the creation of paid
forces supported by loans and taxes.

“The mercenary system had, indeed, a great weakness: when pay came too.
slowly or not at all, mercenaries commonly mutinicd, ‘lived off the land, became
bandits, or all three at once; local people paid the price (see Gutmann

84 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

1980: 31-71). In the wars of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, booty
supplemented military income, but fell far short of allowing armies to support
themselves. With great variability from state to state, the leasing of armed force
from more or less independent entrepreneurs peaked in the seventeenth
century, and began to recede during the cighteenth. Over three or four
centuries, nevertheless, mercenaries set the European standard of military
performance. For the most part, entrepreneurs who served armies bought food,
arms, uniforms, shelter, and means of transport either directly or through
allowances to subordinate officers. For that, they needed'money, and plenty of
it. In 1502 Robert de Balsac, veteran of the Italian campaigns, concluded a
treatise on the art of war with advice to any prince: “most important of all,
success in war depends on having enough money_to_provide whatever _the

a
>

enterprise needs” (Hale 1967: 276).

SEIZING, MAKING, OR BUYING COERCION

By 1502, most European princes already knew de Balsac’s lesson by heart.
Roughly speaking, rulers had three main ways of acquiring concentrated means
of coercion: they could seize them, make them, or buy them. Before the
twentieth century, few European states ever manufactured a major share of
their own coercive means; they rarely possessed the necessary capital or
expertise. Such expensive and dangerous manufactures as gunpowder and
cannon constituted the chief exceptions. Increasingly after AD gg0, European
states moved away from direct seizure and toward purchase.

Several important changes pushed them in the same direction. First, as war
became more complex and capital-intensive, fewer and fewer people in the
civilian population had the means of war; every, thirteenth-century. noble
household owned swords, but no twenticth-century household owns an

aircraft carrier. Second, rulers deliberatcly disarmed their civilian populations

as they armed their troops, thus sharpening the distinction between those who
controlled the means of war and those whom the monarch ordinarily wanted to

pay for war. Third, states involved themselves increasingly in producing the
means of warfare, which restated the question as a choice between scizing and
buying the means of production instead of the products themselves. Fourth, the
mass of the subject population resisted direct scizure of men, food, weapons,
transport, ind other means of war much more vigorously and effectively than
they fought against paying for them. Although various forms of conscription
have continued to our own time, European states generally moved toward a
System of collecting taxes in moncy, paying for coercive means with the money
thus collécied, and using some of the coercive means to further the collection of

taxes.
“Such a system only worked well under two very demanding conditions: a

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 85

relatively monetized economy, and the ready availability of credi). In an
economy where only a small share of goods and services are boughtdnd sold, a
number of conditions prevail: collectors of revenue are unable to observe or
evaluate resources with any accuracy, many people have claims on any
particular resource, and the loss of that resource is hard for the loser to repair.
As a result, any taxation imposed is inefficient, visibly unjust, and quite likely to
stir up resistance. When little credit is available, even in a monetized economy,
current spending depends on cash on hand, and surges in spending can only
occur after careful hoarding. In these circumstances, any ruler who cannot seize
the means of war directly from his subject population or acquire it without
payment elsewhere is hard pressed to build up his state’s armed force. After
1500, as the means of successful warfare became more and more expensive, the
rulers of most European states spent much of thcir time raising money.

Where did the money come from? In the short run, typically from loans by
capitalists and levies on local populations unlucky cnough to have troops in their
vicinity, In the long Tan, from one form of taxation or another. Norbert Elias
sees an intimate relationship between taxation and military force:

The society of what we call the modern age is characterized, above all in the West, by a
certain level of monopolization. Free use of military weapons is denied the individual
and reserved to a central authority of whatever kind, and likewise the taxation of the
property or income of individuals is concentrated in the hands of a central social
authority. The financial means thus flowing into this central authority maintain its
monopoly of military force, while this in turn maintains the monopoly of taxation.
Neither has in any sense precedence over the other; they are two sides of the same
monopoly. If one disappears the other automatically follows, though the monopoly rule
may sometimes be shaken more strongly on one side than on the other.
(Elias 1982: II, 104)
Elias’s duo, however, actually forms two voices of a trio. The missing member,
crediy, links the military monopoly to the monopoly of taxation.
istorically, few large states have ever been able to pay for their military
expenditures out of current revenues. Instead, they have coped with the
shortfall by one form of borrowing or another: making creditors wait, selling
offices, forcing loans from clients, borrowing from bankers who acquired claims
on future governmental revenues. If a government and its agents can borrow,
they can separate the rhythm of their expenditures from that of their income,
and spend : ahead of t their income. Spending ahead of income makes expensive
warmaking easier, since “expenditures for men, arms, and other requisites of war
usually come in surges, while potential and actual state revenues ordinarily
fluctuate_much less from one year to the next. A state that borrows quickly,
furthermore, can mobilize faster than its encmies, and thus increase its chances
of winning a war.
The availability of credit depends on a state’s previous repayment of its debts,
to be sure, but it depends even morc on the presence of capitalists. Capitalists
86 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

serve states, when they are willing to do so, as lenders, as mobilizers of loans,
and as managers or even collectors of revenues to repay the loans. European
capitalists sometimes combined all these activities in the much-hated figure of
the tax farmer, who advanced money to the state in anticipation of taxes he
himself collected with the authority and military force of the state, and charged
a handsome cut of the taxes as his payment for credit, risk, and effort. But even
more often capitalists served as major organizers and holders of public debt.
Their activity also promoted monetization of a state’s economy; some of the
crucial relationships are summarized in figure 3.2. These are not the only
relationships affecting the variables in the scheme. A crown’s direct access to
easily sold resources, for example, made it more attractive to creditors, and
occasionally provided an alternative to borrowing. So long as gold and silver
flowed in from the Americas, Spanish kings found willing lenders in Augsburg,
Antwerp, Amsterdam, and elsewhere. In the age of mass mobilization and huge
citizen armies that began with the French Revolution, the sheer size of a state’s
population began to figure very largely in the ease of warmaking. Even then the
relationships among capitalist activity, monetization, available credit, and easq
of warmaking made a major difference among the states of Europe; they gave
states that had ready access to capitalists signal advantages in moving quickly to
a war footing.

Monetization

_—~

Capitalist activity | Ease of warmaking
——_——"
Available credit

Figure 3.2 I low the presence of capital facilitates warmaking.

The relative presence or absence of commercial cities within a state’s
territories therefore strongly affected the ease of its mobilization for war. Not
only did loans and taxes flow more readily into state coffers where cities
abounded — given sufficient state attention to the burghers’ interests inside and
outside the territory - but also urban militias and commercial fleets lent
themselves readily to adaptation for defense and military predation. Where
cities were weak and rare, rulers either went without large loans or resorted to
foreign bankers who exacted high prices for their services, enlisted the
cooperation of magnates who controlled armed force and likewise demanded
privileges in return, and built up cumbersome fiscal apparatuses in the process
of taxing a resistant, penniless population.

During the sixteenth century, as the scale of war expanded and the use of
mercenaries generalized, the ability to borrow became more and more crucial to
military success. South German merchants such as the Fuggers of Augsburg
joined their Italian colleagues in lending to kings; the Fuggers borrowed in

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 87

Antwerp, for example, to finance Spanish wars, with future deliveries of
American silver as collateral. Long-range borrowing obligated monarchs to
foreigners they could not easily control, but allowed them to repudiate their
debts with less catastrophic effects on their local economies. Eventually the
disadvantages outweighe e advantages, and those monarchs who could
moved toward Those who could borrow at home were, of
course, especially those whose states included important zones of capitalist
enterprise. Around the time of Henry IV (1 598-1610), France moved rapidly
from dependency on other centers of capital (notably Lyon, a conduit for Italian
capital) to Parisian financial dominance, from foreign to French financiers, and
from negotiation to enforced payment of taxes (Cornette 1988: 622-4).
Although insolvency threatened the crown repeatedly during the following two

centuries, that consolidation of fiscal power_ gave France an enormous

advantage in the wars to come.

PAYING THE DEBTS

Whether they borrowed heavily or not, all rulers faced the problem of paying for
their wars without destroying the ability of their sources to pay again in the
future. They adopted very different fiscal strategies. Governmental revenues in
general (“taxes,” in a loose sense of the word) fall into five broad categories:
tributes, rents, payments on flows, payments on stocks, and income taxes.
Tributes include arbitrary payments levied on individuals, groups, or localities;
head taxes which are equal across the population or across its major categories
constitute a special kind of tribute. Rents consist of direct payments for lands,
goods, and services supplied contingently to particular users by the state. (Some
states — Russia, Sweden, and the Ottoman Empire, for example — gave a special
twist to rents by assigning some military officers and civilian officials the rents
from crown lands the officers held so long as they remained in royal service.)

Both rents and tributes can easily be collected in kind. Payments on flows and
stocks cannot. Payments on flows cover excise, customs, tolls, transaction
charges, and other collections on transfers or movements; specialists often call
them indirect taxes, because they reflect only quite indirectly the taxpayer’s
ability to pay. Payments on stocks divide chiefly into land and property taxes;
specialists often call them direct taxes. /ncome taxes (actually a special case of
payments on flows) touch current REVENUES, especially salaries and other
monetary revenues.

The five kinds of taxes form a kind of continuum with respect to their
dependence on monetization of the ambient economy. They also differ in terms
of the amount of continuous surveillance the collector must apply (sec
figure 3.3). In general, taxes that require little surveillance rely on open use of
force more frequently than those that entail continuous surveillance, and
88 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

Ow High

High ¢+-— — — —-—-—— —-—-—-— —- +

¥ Income *

+ +

+ +

+ +

+ Stocks +

+ +

8 + +
& + +
Fa n Flows 4
g + +
B + +
+ Rent +

+ : +

+ +

+ +

+ Tribute +

Low+t—— ear —+

Figure 3.3 Alternative forms of taxation.

therefore promote the development of specialized staffs for evaluation and
collection. Governments that have plenty of force at their disposition can collect
tributes and rents in relatively unmonetized economies, although even there
people’s ability to pay cash still depends on their ability to sell goods or services
for cash. Even customs revenues depend on the existence of well-defined and
well-defended borders; smuggling — the evasion of internal or external customs
duties — became a crime precisely to the extent that European states attempted
to define and defend their boundaries. In the ages of patrimonialism and
brokerage, indeed, states often relied on tolls collected at strategic roads, ports,
or waterways instead of customs collected all round a monitored frontier
(Maravall 1972: I, 129-33).

Payments on flows depend heavily on monetization, because monetization
increases such flows, eases assessors’ evaluations of flows, and increases the
ability of those who are liable to pay in cash. Payments on stocks, counter-
intuitively, also depend heavily on monetization, since in the absence of an
active market for the land or property in question assessors lack the means to
match tax with value; when the match is poor, the tax is inefficient (see Ardant
1965). Thus monetization strongly affects the effectiveness with which a state
can finance its war effort by means of taxation, instead of wresting the means of
war directly from its citizenry. The income tax is an extreme case, one that only
becomes a durable and effective source of governmental revenue in economies
where practically everyone is involved in the money economy and most workers
toil for wages.

Highly commercialized states, however, draw some important advantages from
How War Made States, and Vice Versa 89

these relationships. Given an appropriate level of monetization, the taxes
toward the upper end of the continuum are relatively efficient. They build on
the measurement and visibility a commercial economy applies to property, goods,
and services. Participants in markets already do a significant share of the
requisite surveillance through the recording of prices and transfers. Properly
socialized citizens, furthermore, come to attach moral value to the payment of
taxes; they monitor themselves and each other, blaming tax evaders as free
riders. Taxes on flows, stocks, and especially income therefore yield a high
return for a given amount of effort at collection, and adapt more readily than
tribute or rents to alterations in state policy. A state attempting to collect exactly
the same amount from the same tax in a less commercialized economy faces
greater resistance, collects less efficiently, and therefore builds a larger
apparatus of control in the process. If two states of similar size but different
degrees of commercialization go to war and attempt to extract comparable sums
of money from their citizens by means of the same sorts of taxes, the less
commercialized state creates a bulkier state structure as it wars and pays for
war. The more commercialized state, on the average, makes do with a slimmer
administrative organization.

~ The direct supplying of armies, the imposition of taxes, and the management
of royal credit all went more easily in commercialized, _capital-r -rich economies.
Wherever they occurred, however, they multiplied the he state’s civilian servants,
A major war effort generally produced a permanent expansion of the state’s
central apparatus — the number of its full-time personnel, the scope of its
institutions, the size of its budget, the extent of its debt. When Holland and
Spain reached a truce in their draining war over Dutch claims to independence
in 1609, many observers on both sides expected relief from the extraordinary
taxation that had beset them during the previous decade. As it turned out, debt
service, building of fortifications, and other state activities easily absorbed the
revenues freed by military demobilization. Taxes did not decline significantly in
either country (Israel 1982: 43-4).

Some historians speak of a “ratchet effect” by which an inflated wartime
budget fails to return to its prewar level (Peacock and Wiseman 1961; Rasler
and Thompson 1983, 1985a). The ratchet does not occur universally, but it
does appear quite often, especially in states that have not suffered great losses
in the war at hand. It occurs for three reasons: because the wartime increase in
state power gives officials new capacity to extract resources, take on new
activities, and defend themselves against cost-cutting; because wars either
Cause of ‘revea} new problems that call for state attention; and because the
Wartime accumulation of debt places new burdens on the state.

National debts arose largely from borrowing for and during wars. The ability
to borrow for military expenditure strongly affected a statc’s ability to mount
effective military campaigns. The seventeenth- -centiry claims of the Dutch
Republic on the financiers of Amsterdam and other major trading cities allowed

90 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

a small state to raise enormous sums rapidly for its armies and navies, and to
become the dominant European power for a time. The critical innovations had
occurred between 1515 and 1565, when the States General of the Habsburg
Netherlands (of which the northern provinces, after their rebellion of 1568,
would eventually become the Dutch Republic) took steps toward issuing state-
backed annuities secured by specific new taxes and bearing attractive interest
(Tracy 1985). As a result, “in an emergency, the Dutch Republic could raise a
loan of 1 million florins at only 3 percent in two days” (Parker 1976: 212-13).
State securities became a favorite investment for Dutch rentiers, whose
representatives taxed the entire economy for their benefit. Indeed, the word
“capitalist” in its modern use seems to have come from the word for those
Dutch citizens who paid the highest per capita tax rate, thereby advertising their
wealth and creditworthiness.

Dutch bankers were so affluent, adept, and independent that after 1580, as
the war of the northern Netherlands against their former Spanish masters
continued, the bankers were able to make money by shipping silver diverted
from the Spanish fleet to Antwerp, where it paid for Spanish expenses of the
war (Parker 1972: 154-5). When in 1608 Spain proposed to recognize Dutch
independence if Holland withdrew from the East and West Indies, Dutch
negotiator Oldenbarnevelt “retorted that too many prominent personages in the
Republic were involved in the East India Company for it to be disbanded”

(Israel 1982: 9). On the whole, however, the merchants’ affluence worked _to
the advantage of their own Dutch state. An intenscly commercial economy
permitted the seventeenth-century Dutch state ee lew a path hi that the
neighboring Prussians found barred and that the English, newly blessed with a
Dutch king, borrowed in the 1690s. By adopting Dutch fiscal techniques, the
English managed to reduce their previous dependence on Dutch bankers, and
eventually to best the Dutch at war.

The seventeenth-century Dutch occupied an extreme position on the axis of
commercialization. Other capital-intensive states, such as the Italian commercial
powers of Genoa and Venice, adopted similar approaches to the raising of
military force through public €reditgnd (axatidn on flows of goods. In coercion-
intensive regions, resources that might be used for war remained embedded in
agriculture, and in the hands of magnates who wielded considerable
autonomous force; there, the extraction of military resources obviously took
very different forms: various combinations of expropriation, co-optation,
clientage, conscription, and heavy-handed taxation. In between the two
extremes, in areas of capitalized coercion, the mv - ~ en balance of capital and
coercion allowed rulers to play one against ’ “ing purchased force to
check the holders of private armies and nanona aruiiés to persuade the holders
of private capital; in the long run, as the sheer bulk of military requirements
rosc, the combination gave rulers of capitalized-coercion states the decisive
advantage in warfare; as a consequence, their sort of state — the national state

How War Made States, and Vice Versa

won out over city-states, empires, urban federations, and other forms of state
that had sometimes prospered in Europe.

THE LONG, STRONG ARM OF EMPIRE

By the end of the seventeenth century, a significant part of European war —
including war between ncighboring Holland and England — was taking place at
sea, far from the continent. The struggle for maritime empire complemented
European land warfare in shaping distinctive kinds of European states. re
they created national states, Europeans had plenty of experience wi
Norsemen constructed fleeting empires well before the Millennium. Mongol,
Russian, Ottoman, Swedish, Burgundian, and Habsburg empires long dominated
significant parts of Europe. Great trading cities such as Genoa and Venice
conquered or purchased their own scattered empires. Napoleon built a vast, if
short-lived European empire. Ottoman, Austro-Hungarian, Russian, and
German empires existed up to World War I. As the centuries rolled on, to be
sure, European empires came increasingly to resemble national states. In their
heterogeneity and their residues of indirect rule through viceroys or the
equivalent, nevertheless, they faced distinctive problems of control over their
subject populations.

Beginning in the fifteenth century, European powers moved toward the

For another century and a half the Portuguese confined their maritime
attentions to trade in Europe and Africa, but in 1415 their capture of Ceuta on
the Moroccan coast launched an expansion that did not cease for two hundred
years. By the time of the death of Prince Henry (the so-called Navigator) in
1460, his forces had extended their control, both political and commercial, well
down Africa’s western coast as well as seizing Madeira and the Azores in the
Atlantic. With the assistance of Genoese condottieri and entrepreneurs, they
began almost at once to make new colonies commercially viable. Before
the century’s end Vasco da Gama had sailed around Africa to Calicut, thus
extending Portuguese influence into the Indian Ocean and the Pacific.

The Portuguese sought deliberately to break Muslim—Venetian control of
European access to Asian spices and luxury goods, and to establish their own
hegemony in the sea lanes to Asia. Through great energy, exceptional risk-
taking, and supreme ruthlessness, they almost succeeded. During the sixteenth
century Portuguese carracks and galleons commanded much of the Indian
Ocean, and carried close to half of all spices shipped to Europe and the
Ottoman Empire (Boxer 1969: 59). In the course of the same century
Portuguese settlers began migrating to Brazil; they started to export sugar
produced by the labor of impressed Amerindians and, increasingly, slaves
92 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

imported from Angola, Congo, and Senegambia. The Portuguese crown then
received a major share of its income from customs duties on goods from its
colonies.

Portugal, however, suffered some severe handicaps. Its domestic supply of
men, timber, and other resources for imperial adventure remained perilously
thin, so much so that sixteenth-century “Portuguese” ships often bore no native
Portuguese but their commanders. From 1580 to 1640 Portugal merged with
the Spanish crown, and thus inherited Spain’s war with the fearsome Dutch.
With its rebellion against Spain in 1640, the small kingdom warred against both
the Dutch and the Spanish until 1689. Wars with maritime rivals endangered
Portuguese merchants on the high seas. That Portugal remained powerful for
so long testifies to extraordinary toughness and ingenuity.

As they attached an immense empire to a fragile home base, Portuguese
conquerors established characteristic forms of rule overseas, and transformed
their own state. Overseas, Portugal made most of its colonies into military

utposts, one of whose chief activities was to generate revenues for the crown.
‘Unlike she Dutch, the English, and the Venetians, Portuguese rulers did not
license merchants to organize colonial rule. Unlike the Spanish, they did not
tolerate the creation of great autonomous domains in their overseas territories.
But they could not stop colonial administrators, priests, and soldiers from
trading on their own account, or from accepting payoffs for illegal uses of their
official powers. Colonial revenues thus made Lisbon and its king relatively
independent of powerholders elsewhere in Portugal, but dependent on
frequently corrupt officials. Such a monarchy could only prosper when gold and
goods flowed freely from the colonies.

As compared to the neighboring Portuguese, Spaniards were latecomers to
overseas conquest. In 1492, Granada, last Muslim stronghold on the Iberian
peninsula, fell to Castile. By then, the south-driving Spaniards were already
beginning settlement of the Canary Islands. The same year, Queen Isabella
authorized the Genoese condottiere Christopher Columbus to sail west, via the
Canaries, in search of India and Cathay. Within fifteen years Spain had
functioning colonies in the Caribbean. A century after Granada’s fall,
Spaniards ruled — however thinly — almost all of Central and South America
except Brazil, and had reached out to conquer the Philippines as well.

About that time, Dutch and English seafarers sailed onto the scene. The two
nations’ civilian-run East and West India companies, not to mention their
freebooters, moved aggressively into Portuguese and Spanish waters in the
South Atlantic, the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific. During their eighty-year war
of independence against Spain, ironically, Dutch merchants made their greatest
profits by trading with the enemy; they brought goods from northern Europe to
Iberia, and used old commercial ties to penetrate the trading networks of the
Spanish and Portuguese empires. That initiated their construction of a
world-wide Dutch empire. In the Atlantic, English merchants attached

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 93

themselves to Portuguese trade, and became spccialists in outwitting royal
customs officers. They started as parasites, but soon became the chief
organisms in their territorics.

Throughout the history of European imperialism, indeed, a new phase
usually began with competition between an established dominant in one world
region or trade route and a newcomer who attempted either to challenge the
hegemon or to outflank him, or both, The early targets of European attack were
usually Muslims, but by the fifteenth century Europeans were battling each
other for access to the East. Sixteenth-century Portuguese adventurers almost
succeeded in reaching around the Venetians who controlled the western end of
Europe’s land connection with East and South Asia, only to find themselves
challenged on the sea by Spain, Holland, and England a century later. The
English and Dutch never expelled Portuguese merchants and viceroys from
their entire domain, but they ended the supremacy Portugal had enjoyed until
1600. (During the Dutch war of 1647-8, for example, enemy action took 220
vessels from the Portuguese Brazil fleet: Boxer 1969: 221.) The Dutch East
India and West India companies governed great empires of their own, gaining
the advantage over their competitors “by virtue of their greater control of the
market and the internalization of protection costs” (Steensgaard 1974: 11). Over
the seventeenth century as a whole, the Dutch became the world’s greatest
naval and commercial power.

Then the British displaced the Dutch. As Dutch naval strength faltered,
British ships came to prevail on most of the world’s seas. By the eighteenth
century, French corsairs, men-of-war, and merchantmen were likewise
venturing to the Americas, Asia, and the Pacific — they made little impact in
Africa before the nineteenth century — and further crowding the sea lanes. The
eighteenth-century discovery of gold and diamonds in Brazil revived the
Portuguese colonial economy, but failed to restore anything like Portugal’s
sixteenth-century hegemony. France and Britain came late to territorial
conquest outside of their own immediate perimeters, but swiftly made up the
lag after 1700. By the end of the eighteenth century, Spain, Portugal, the
United Provinces, France, and Great Britain all had large overseas empires and
world-wide webs of trade; Britain stood above all the rest. Imperial conquest
accelerated in the nineteenth century. “Betwcen 1876 and 1915,” notes Eric
Hobsbawm, “about one-quarter of the globe’s land surface was distributed or
redistributed as colonies among a half-dozen states” (Hobsbawm 1987: 59). By
World War I, Spain, Portugal, and what was then the kingdom of the
Netherlands held little more than shreds of thcir former empires, while the
fabric of French and, especially, British dominion stretched across the world.

All these empires combined conquered territories with “factories,” recognized
trading settlements at the edges of lands governed by indigenous rulers. With
exceptions such as Portuguese Macao, no European powers conquered in
Japan or China. But the Portuguese, the Spanish, and then the Dutch

94 How War Made States, and Vice Versa

maintained commercial enclaves in Japan; during the closed years of the
Tokugawa shogunate (1640-1854), the Dutch outpost at Deshima was
practically Japan’s only point of contact with Europe (Boxer 1965: 237). Over
time, however, the European pattern shifted toward conquest and partial
settlement. Starting in 1652, for example, even the Dutch — who actually
colonized very few of the lands in which they gained commercial hegemony -
began to conquer, administer, and settle around the Cape of Good Hope; the
word Afrikaner began to apply to transplanted Europeans early in the eighteenth
century (Boxer 1965: 266). In the nineteenth century especially, European
states tried to carve up most of the non-European world into mutually exclusive
colonial territories.

Empire overseas did not build up state structure to the same extent as land
war at home. Nevertheless, the connection between state and empire ran in
both directions: the character of the European state governed the form of its
expansion outside of Europe, and the nature of the empire significantly affected
the metropole’s operation. Capital-intensive states such as Venice and the
Dutch Republic reached out chiefly by the ruthless pursuit of trading
monopolies, but invested little effort in military conquest and colonization.
Coercion-intensive states such as the Norse and the Spanish devoted more of
their energy to settlement, enslavement of the indigenous (or imported) labor
force, and exaction of tribute. The in-between_states, such as Britain and
France, entered the imperial game relatively late,) and excelled at it by
combining the capitalist and coercive strategies.

The capitalist strategy added relatively little bulk to the central state,
especially when conducted through essentially private organizations such as the
Dutch East India Company. These commercial megaliths, however, became
political forces to be contended with in their own right; thus privatization
pushed the state toward bargaining with | its ‘subject population, or at least with
the dominant commercial class. The strategy of conquest and settlement, which
inevitably called forth durable armies and navies, added to the central state
bureaucracy, not to mention the world-wide web of officialdom it called into
being. Where it brought in riches — especially in the form of bullion, as in Spain
— conquest created an alternative to domestic taxation, and thereby shielded
rulers from some of the bargaining that established citizens’ rights and set limits
on state prerogatives elsewhere.

On both the domestic and overseas fronts, how much state apparatus emerged
from the interaction between the creation of a military machine and the
development of markets depended on several factors: the bulk of the machine
in relation to the population that supported it, the prior commercialization of
the economy, and the extent to which the state relied on the wartime
mobilization of powerholders who provided their own military force and
retained the ability to return it to peacetime uses at the end of war. We might
imagine a continuum from an impcrial Russia in which a cumbersome state

How War Made States, and Vice Versa 95

apparatus grew up to wrest military men and resources from a huge but
uncommercialized economy Ao a Dutch Republic which relied heavily on
navies, ran its military forces on temporary grants from its city-dominated
provinces, easily drew taxes from customs and excise, and never created a
substantial central bureaucracy. In between we would place cases such as
France and Prussia, where kings had access to important regions of agricultural
and commercial capitalism, but had to bargain with powerful landlords for
support of their military activity. In the long run, military requirements for men,
money, and supplies grew so demanding that rulers bargained with the bulk af.
the population as well, The next chapter focuses on that bargaining and its
variations from one sort of state to another.

4

States and their Citizens
t

FROM WASPS TO LOCOMOTIVES

Over the last thousand years, European states have undergone a peculiar
evolution: from wasps to locomotives. Long they concentrated on war, leaving
most activities to other organizations, just so long as those organizations yielded
tribute at appropriate intervals. Tribute-taking states remained fierce but light
in weight by comparison with their bulky successors; they stung, but they didn’t
suck dry. As time went on, states — even the capital-intensive varieties — took on
activities, powers and commitments whose very support constrained them.
These locomotives ran on the rails of sustenance from the civilian population
and maintenance by a civilian staff. Off the rails, the warlike engines could not
run at all.
A state’s essential minimum activities form a trio:

-_

statemaking: attacking and checking competitors and challengers within the
territory claimed by the state;

warmaking: attacking rivals outside the territory already claimed by the state;

protection: attacking and checking rivals of the rulers’ principal allies, whether
inside or outside the state’s claimed territory.

No state lasts long, however, that neglects a crucial fourth activity:

extraction: drawing from its subject population the means of statemaking,
warmaking, and protection.

At the minimum, tribute-taking states stayed close to this indispensable set of
four activities, intervening in the lives of their nominal subjects chiefly to
impose ruling-class power and to extract revenucs. Beyond a certain scale,
however, all states found themselves venturing into threc other risky terrains:
States and their Citizens 97

adjudication: authoritative scttlement of disputes among members of the
subject population;

distribution: intervention in the allocation of goods among members of the
subject population;

production: control of the creation and transformation of goods and services
by members of the subject population.

The major connections among these activities run roughly as shown in
figure 4.1. Warmaking and statemaking reinforced cach other, indeed remained
practically indistinguishable until states began to form sccure, recognized
boundaries around substantial contiguous territories. Both Ied to extraction of
resources from the local population. The play of alliances and the attempt to
draw resources from relatively powerful or mobile actors promoted the state’s
involvement in protection, checking the competitors and enemies of selected
clients. As extraction and protection expanded, they created demands for
adjudication of disputes within the subject population, including the legal
regularization of both extraction and protection themselves.

Warmaking # Statemaking
,
Extraction Protection
/ "Sas oeseenen NN |
Production ~ Distribution

Figure 4.1 Relations among major activities of states.

Over time, the weight and impact of state activities standing lower in the
diagram — adjudication, production, and distribution — grew faster than those at
the top: warmaking, statemaking, extraction, and protection. The shcer volume
mest European states invested in warmaking (attacking rivals outside the
territory claimed by the state) or statemaking (attacking and checking
competitors and challengers within the territory) continued to increase
irregularly into the twentieth century; but adjudication, production, and
distribution went from trivial to tremendous. Even those non-socialist states that
maintained wide private ownership, for cxamplc, eventually invested large sums
in the production and/or regulation of encrgy, transportation, communication,
food, and arms. As rulers drew more and more resources for war and other
coercive enterprises from their local economics, the major classes within those
economies successfully demanded more and more state intervention outside
the realm of coercion and war. Over the thousand-ycar span we are surveying
here, nevertheless, coercive activities clearly predominated.
98 States and their Citizens

Warmaking frequently involved European states in the production of arms,
and extraction in the production of goods (e.g. salt, matches, and tobacco)
whose monopolies fed state coffers. Later, all states intervened more generally
in production as demands from workers and intellectuals for the checking of
capitalist excesses became effective; socialist states merely represent the
extreme of a general tendency. Extraction, protection, and adjudication
intertwined, finally, to draw states into control of distribution — first as a way of
assuring state revenues from the flow of goods, then as a response to popular
demands for correction of inequities and local shortages. Again socialist state’
mark but the extreme version of a very general expansion in state activity
outside the military realm.

In the course of extracting resources and pacifying the population, every
European state eventually created new administrative structure at the local and
regional levels as well as on a national scale. The treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis
(1559), for example, created the kingdom of Savoy-Piedmont, and placed
Emmanuel-Philibert on its throne. Soon the quest for funds drove the new king
to innovate: first a profitable forced sale of salt, second a census to determine
who was taxable, then a tax based on each community’s productive area. The
tax forced adjacent communities to delineate their boundaries precisely, which
drew them into preparing cadasters and creating officials to administer them
(Rambaud and Vincienne 1964: 11). Everywhere extractive efforts not only
withdrew valuable resources from their customary uses but also created new
forms of political organization.

State activities therefore had profound implications for the interests of the
general population, for collective action, and for the rights of citizens. As rulers
and agents of states pursued the work of warmaking, statemaking, protection,
extraction, adjudication, distribution, and production, they impinged on well-
defined interests of people who lived within their range of control; the impact
was often negative, since states repeatedly seized for their own use land, capital,
goods, and services that had previously served other commitments. Most of the
resources that kings and ministers used to build armed might came ultimately
from the labor and accumulation of ordinary people, and represented a
diversion of valuable means from pursuits to which ordinary people attached
much higher priority. Although capitalists sometimes invested gladly in state
finances and in the protection that state power gave to their business, and
although regional magnates sometimes allied themselves with kings in order to
hold off their own enemies, most people who had an investment in the
resources that monarchs sought to seize resisted royal demands tenaciously.

The labor, goods, money, and other resources demanded by states were,
after all, typically embedded in webs of obligation and committed to ends that
households and communitics prized. From the short-run perspectives of
ordinary people, what we in blithe retrospect call “state formation” included the
setting of ruthless tax farmers against poor peasants and artisans, the forced sale
States and their Citizens 99

for taxes of animals that would have paid for dowries, the imprisoning of local
leaders as hostages to the local community’s payment of overdue taxes, the
hanging of others who dared to protest, the loosing of brutal soldiers on a
hapless civilian population, the conscription of young men who were their
parents’ main hope for comfort in old age, the forced purchase of taintcd salt,
the elevation of already arrogant local propertyholders into officers of the state,
and the imposition of religious conformity in the name of public order and
morality. Small wonder that powerless Europeans so often accepted the legend
of the “good tsar” who had been misled, or even held captive, by bad advisors.

Both the character and the weight of state activity varied systematically as a
function of the economy that prevailed within a state’s boundaries. In coercion-
intensive regions, rulers commonly drew resources for warmaking and other
activities in kind, through direct requisition and conscription. Customs and
excise yielded small returns in relatively uncommercialized economies, but the
institution of head taxes and land taxes created ponderous fiscal machines, and
put extensive power into the hands of landlords, village heads, and others who
exercised intermediate control over essential resources. In capital-intenstve
regions, the presence of capitalists, commercial exchange, and substantial
municipal organizations set scrious limits on the state’s direct exertion of
control over individuals and households, but facilitated the use of relatively
efficient and painless taxes on commerce as sources of state revenue. The ready
availability of credit, furthermore, allowed rulers to spread the costs of military
activity over substantial periods rather than extracting in quick, calamitous
bursts. As a’¥esult, states in those regions generally created slight, segmented
central apparatuses. In regions of capitalized coercion, an intermediate situation
prevailed: however uneasily, rulers relied on acquiescence from both landlords
and merchants, drew revenues from both land and trade, and thus created dual
state structures in which nobles confronted — but also finally collaborated with -
financiers.

~ BARGAINING, RIGHTS, AND COLLECTIVE ACTION

State intervention in everyday life incited popular collective action, often in the
form of resistance to the state but sometimes in the guise of new claims on
the state. As authorities sought to draw resources and acquiescence from the
subject population, state authorities, other powerholders, and groups of
ordinary people bargained out (however lopsidedly) new agreements concerning
the conditions under which the state could extract or control, and the kinds of
claims that powerholders or ordinary people could make on the state. The
bargaining and the claims changed fundamentally with the movement from
patrimonialism to brokerage to nationalization to specialization; under
patrimonialism, for example, bargaining often occurred in regional rebellions
100 = States and their Citizens

led by magnates who advanced their own claims to independent statchood,
while under brokerage, as former patrons sided with the state, magnate-led
rebellions gave way to popular insurrections against taxation or conscription.

The actual forms and sequences of state impact on interests, collective
action, bargaining, and establishment of rights varied greatly as a function of the
relative salience of coercion and capital as the basis of state formation. In
coercion-intensive regions such as Poland and Russia, control over land and of
labor attached to the land long remained the central object of struggle, while in
regions of capital intensity, such as the Low Countries, capital and marketable
commodities occupied a morc salient position with respect to the bargaining
that created state structure and citizens’ claims on states. In capital-intensive
zones, furthermore, states acted earlier and more effectively to establish bourgeois
property rights — to reduce multiple claims on the same property, to enforce
contracts, and to strengthen the principal owner’s capacity to determine the
property’s use. Everywhere, nevertheless, the state’s creation of military might
involved its agents in bargaining with powerholders and with groups of ordinary
people. The subject population’s class structure therefore helped determine the
state’s organization: its repressive apparatus, its fiscal administration, its
services, its forms of representation.

The translation from class structure to state organization occurred through
struggle. The tax rebellions that shook much of western Europe during the
seventeenth century sprang from the competing claims of kings, regional
powerholders, local communities, and individual households to land, labor,
‘commodities, cattle, tools, credit, and household wealth that could not serve all
ends at once. When resistance to taxation aligned the claims of great lords with
those of local communities, as it often did in early seventeenth-century France,
it threatened the very viability of the crown. But even on a smaller scale, day-to-
day individual and collective action against the growing statc’s extractive efforts
posed serious challenges to every ruler.

To the extent that a state’s population was segmented and hcterogencous,
the likelihood of large-scale rebellion declined, but the difficulty of imposing
uniform administrative arrangements increased. In a homogeneous, connected
population, an administrative innovation installed and tested in one region had
a reasonable chance of working elsewhere, and officials could easily transfer
their knowledge from one locality to another. In the period of movement from
tribute to tax, from indirect to direct rulc, from subordination to assimilation,
states generally worked to homogenizc their populations and break down their
segmentation by imposing common languages, religions, currencies, and legal
systems, as well as promoting the construction of connected systems of trade,
transportation, and communication. When those standardizing efforts threatencd
the very identities on which subordinate populations based their everyday social
relations, however, they often stirred massive resistance.

Resistance to state demands usually occurred covertly, on a local scale,
States and their Citizens 101

employing the “weapons of the weak” James Scott has described — sabotage,
foot-dragging, concealment, evasion (Scott, 1985). It compounded into mass
rebellion chiefly when (1) the state’s demands and actions offended citizens’
standards of justice or attacked their primary collective identities, (2) the people
touched by offensive state actions were already connected by durable social ties,
(3) ordinary people had powerful allies inside or outside the state, and (4) the
state’s recent actions or interactions revealed that it was vulnerable to attack.
Under these circumstances, popular rebellion not only was likely to occur, but
also had some chance of success.

The 1640s combined all these conditions in a number of European states,
and one of the most rebellious decades in European history resulted. The nasty
tangle of struggles we now remember as the Thirty Years’ War taxed the
capacities of most western European states, revealing their vulnerability at the
very time when they were demanding unprecedented sacrifices of their
subjects. England went through a civil war, France entered the turmoil of the
Fronde, Scotland almost shook itself free of England, Catalonia and Portugal
broke loose (the former provisionally, the latter definitively) from the control of
the composite Spanish crown, while in Naples the fisherman Masaniello led a
great popular revolt.

In Catalonia, for example, royal demands for increased war taxes brought the
king (or, rather, his minister Olivares) into bitter conflict with the Cortes. In
1640, the crown dispatched 9,000 troops into the province to enforce its claims
for payment, reduce the likelihood of organized resistance, and apply a kind of
blackmail (since the Catalans had to support the troops and endure their
depredations so long as their obligations remained unpaid). The stationing of
troops without provincial consent violated established Catalan rights. A broad
popular rebellion followed. As it began to spread, the Diputacié — loosely
speaking, the Cortes’ executive committee — placed itself at the revolt’s head,
and went so far as to call France’s Louis XIII to assume sovereignty in
Catalonia. Profiting from France’s distraction by the Fronde, a French army
finally reconquered Barcelona, and hence Catalonia, in 1652. At that point,
“Philip ITV granted an amnesty and vowed to respect Catalonia’s traditional
liberties” (Zagorin 1982: II, 37).

When faced with resistance, dispersed or massive, what did rulers do? They
bargained. Now, you may object to using the word “bargain” for the sending in
of troops to crush a tax rebellion or capture a reluctant taxpayer. Nonetheless,
the frequent use of exemplary punishment — hanging a few ringleaders rather
than all the rebels, jailing the richest local taxpayer instead of all the delinquents
— indicates that the authorities were negotiating with the bulk of the population.
In any case, bargaining took many other more acceptable forms: pleading with
parliaments, buying off city officials with tax exemptions, confirming guild
privileges in return for loans or fees, regularizing the assessment and collection
of taxes against the guarantee of their more willing payment, and so on. All this
102 States and their Citizens

bargaining created or confirmed individual and collective claims on the state,
individual and collective rights vis-a-vis the state, and obligations of the state to
its citizens. It also created rights — recognized enforceable claims — of states
with respect to their citizens. The core of what we now call “citizenship,”
indeed, consists of multiple bargains hammered out by rulers and ruled in the
course of their struggles over the means of state action, especially the
making of war.

Bargaining was obviously asymmetrical: at the showdown, cannon versus
staves; the state’s steady disarmament of the general population compounded
the asymmetry. Yet even forceful repression of rebellions against taxation and
conscription ordinarily involved both a set of agreements with those who
cooperated in the pacification and public affirmation of the peaceful means by
which ordinary citizens could rightfully seek redress of the state’s errors and
injustices. Those means commonly included petition, suit, and representation
through local assemblies. As workers and bourgeois (or, less often, peasants)
organized, they took advantage of the permitted means to press for expanded
rights and direct representation. During the age of specialization, states
preempted or responded to the growing demands of bourgeois and workers by
committing their agents to such programs as social insurance, veterans’
pensions, public education, and housing; all of these programs added bureaux,
bureaucrats, and budget lines to increasingly civilian states.

Through struggle, negotiation, and sustained intcraction with the holders of
essential resources, states came to reflect the class structures of their subject
populations. The dominant classes had the largest effects, so that states
dominated by great landlords developed very different structures from those
controlled by capitalists (Moore 1966). But the sheer necessity of dealing with
peasants, or artisans, or landless laborers, also marked a state’s fiscal
organization, controls over trade, police forces, and much more. Specifically
negotiated agreements that ended sustained resistance or facilitated popular
assent created a significant share of those state institutions.

Again we must imagine a continuum of experiences. At one extreme stand
those bargains struck with powerful organizations that existed before the great
expansion of state power, and survived the expansion, notably the governing
bodies of capitalist municipalities such as Amsterdam. Those bargains generally
incorporated the governing bodies into the state, and turned them into
representative institutions. On a larger scale, rulers in areas having prosperous
cities often treated with councils representing the urban powerholders. Thus
the early princes of Catalonia admitted delegates of Barcelona and other
Catalan cities into their councils beside nobles and clergy, and thereby
established the predecessor of the tricameral Catalan Corts (Vilar 1962: 1, 439).

At the other extreme stand bargains struck with large blocs of the
population, such as all landowners, especially in the form of legislation
establishing rules for taxation, conscription, and other extractive activities.
States and their Citizens 103

Thus when Britain’s prime minister William Pitt sought to pay part of the cost
of warring with France by means of Britain’s first general income tax (1799), he
struck implicit bargains with landholders, capitalists, and wage-earners alike: he
engineered a bill permitting redemption of the inequitable old land tax (Watson
1960: 375-6). When peace with France returned (abortively) in 1802 and
(definitively) in 1815, Parliament soon took steps to repeal the tax; although
Prime Minister Liverpool tried in 1816 to retain the income tax to help pay off
Britain’s huge accumulation of war debt, Parliament clearly read the bargain as
tying the tax to the war emergency (Levi 1988: 140-3).

In between the Yxtremes we find bargains struck with defined groups of
powerholders such as church officials, who when defeated and dispossessed
commonly acquired state-guaranteed claims to stipends and protection, and
who, when effective in their resistance to extraction, often forced the creation or
recognition of representative bodies such as church assemblies. England’s
Henry VIII stripped his country’s church of its lands and its ties to Rome, but
thereby took on the obligation to provide stipends forever to all priests who
accepted his version of Reform.

On the whole, the officials of states that grew up amid the network of trading
cities stretching from northern Italy to Flanders and the Baltic found
themselves near the first extreme, bargaining with municipal oligarchies that
had their way, survived, and became major components of the state; city-
empires such as that of Venice mark the extreme case. Agents of states-in-the-
making that formed outside the city-state band more often found themselves
bargaining with great landlords and their clientele, and creating new
representative institutions in the process. In those larger states, nobles often
gained confirmations of their privileges and monopolies of higher military
offices in return for their collaboration with royal attempts to build national
armies. But all along the continuum bargaining over the statc’s extractive claims
produced rights, privileges, and protective institutions that had not previously
existed.

THE INSTITUTION OF DIRECT RULE

A widespread movement from indirect to direct rule occurred with the
nationalization of military power. It offered a seductive but costly opportunity to
ordinary people. After 1750, in the eras of nationalization and specialization,
states began moving aggressively from a nearly universal system of indirect rule
to a new system of direct rule: unmediated intervention in the lives of local
communities, households, and productive enterprises. As rulers shifted from
the hiring of mercenaries to the recruitment of warriors from their own national
populations, and as they increased taxation to support the great military forces
of eighteenth-century warfare, they bargaincd out access to communities,
104 States and their Citizens

households, and enterprises, sweeping away autonomous intermediaries in the
process.

Throughout the millennium we have been surveying, city-states, autonomous
bishoprics, petty principalities, and other microstates ruled in a relatively direct
way. Agents who were immediately responsible to the crown and served at the
monarch’s pleasure collected taxes, administered courts, tended crown
property, and maintained day-to-day contact with local communities falling
under the crown’s jurisdiction. Larger states, however, invariably opted for
some form of indirect rule, co-opting local powerholders and confirming their
privileges without incorporating them directly into the state apparatus.

Before the seventeenth century, every large European state ruled its subjects
through powerful intermediaries who enjoyed significant autonomy, hindered
state demands that were not to their own interest, and profited on their own
accounts from the delegated exercise of state power. The intermediaries were
often privileged members of subordinate populations, and made their way by
assuring rulers of tribute and acquiescence from those populations. In
southeastern Europe especially, the presence of multiple populations mixed by
centuries of conquest and Mediterranean trade combined with the characteristic
forms of Muslim rule through semi-autonomous subordinates to produce a vast
zone of indirect rule whose traces remain today in the region’s cultural
heterogeneity and its continuing struggles over the rights of minorities. Crucial
intermediaries included clergy, landlords, urban oligarchies, and independent
professional warriors, in proportions that varied along the continuum from
capital-intensive to coercion-intensive regions. The centrality of these various
intermediaries identified alternative systems of indirect rule.

Any system of indirect rule set serious limits on the quantity of resources
rulers could extract from the ambient economy. Beyond that limit, intermediaries
acquired an interest in impeding extracting, even in allying themselves with
ordinary people’s resistance to state demands. In the same circumstances,
however, rulers developed an interest both in undermining the autonomous
powers of intermediaries and in making coalitions with major segments of the
subject population. As war demanded greater resources, emphatically including
manpower, and as the threat of conquest by the largest states grew more
serious, ever more rulers bypassed, suppressed, or co-opted old intermediaries
and reached directly into communities and houscholds to seize the wherewithal
of war. Thus national standing armies, national states, and direct rule caused
each other.

Before then, how much autonomy powerholders enjoyed varied significantly_
from state to state; after its early phase of conquest and military administration,
the Ottoman Empire installed two successive forms of rule in the Balkans, the
second even more indirect than the first. Into the seventeenth century, sultans
drew tribute from their vassal states but within thcir own domains divided
substantial parts of their lands into timars, grants held by warriors so long as
, States and their Citizens 105

they continued to serve in thearmed forces. The timarlis (grant-holders) drew
their own revenues from the land, collected taxes for the sultan, ran the civil
administration, and controlled the Christian serfs, but gained no right to
alienate the land or pass it on to their children. Sixteenth- and seventeenth-
century wars, however, killed off many timarlis, and the demand to collect more
and more taxes for increasingly expensive warmaking made the grants less
attractive to warriors. Sultans turned increasingly to tax farmers, who used their
leverage to convert the lands they taxed into their own property. As that
happened, other groups demanded and received the right to buy and own lands
that paid taxes; chiftliks, private lands, displaced timars (Roider 1987: 133-4).

Thus the Ottomans inadvertently installed a classic system of indirect rule.
That system later turned against both subjects and rulers by virtue of the power
it put into the hands of semi-independent warriors. At the peace of Sistova
between the Ottoman and Austrian empires (1791), for example,

the janissaries and the irregular military units [in Serbia] found themselves unemployed.
They thus turned and preyed on the population. Bands of these men seized villages and
their lands and converted the property into their own estates. Others joined rebel avans
or bandit organizations and plundered peaceful Muslims and Christians alike.
(Jelavich and Jelavich 1977: 27)

The autonomy and predation of the janissarics eventually hindered Ottoman
rule so seriously that in 1826 the sultan’s troops, at his behest, joined with the
crowds of Constantinople in slaughtering the remainder of their corps. The
great risks of indirect rule were predation by intermediaries, which incited
resistance to the intermediaries by the gencral population, and resistance by the
intermediaries, which incited recalcitrance of whole regions to national role.

Most of the time, however, local rulers governed in a relatively stable fashion,
and bought insulation for the local population through the timely payment of
tribute to the Ottoman state. Meanwhile, Prussian Junkers scrved simultaneously
as masters of their own great estates, judges, military commanders, and
spokesmen of the crown, as the English gentry, nobility, and clergy divided the
work of civil administration outside of the capital. Under favorable circumstances,
the middlemen thus empowered mitigated the effects of state expansion on the
social organization and wealth of their subjects. The nature of their mediation
differed significantly between two types of regions: those having an indigenous
nobility and those dominated by aliens. Where the nobility shared religion,
tongue, and tradition with the peasantry (as in Austria and Bohemia), some
possibility of regional solidarity against the crown’s demands existed. Where
nobles were foreigners (as in the European portion of the Ottoman Empire
through much of its history), village headmen and tribal elders frequently linked
local people to national authorities. In such regions, the empire’s collapse left
peasants, merchants, and professionals in direct contact with the state (Berend
and Ranki 1977: 29-36).
106 = States and their Citizens

Whether indigenous or alien, middlemen werc usually tyrants within their
own zones of control. As the chiftlik system displaced the timars in Ottoman
territory, even the appeal to Muslim courts and officials disappeared as a
resource, and absentee landlords frequently pressed their peasants harder than
their military predecessors (Roider 1987: 134). When the center’s power
declined — as it did generally during the nincteenth century — landlords
acquired increasing control of local affairs. In nineteenth-century Bosnia and
Serbia, Muslim landlords drove their Christian tenants into serfdom (Donia
1981: 4-5). In those circumstances, banditry became rampant in the Balkans.
As a result of exploitation by middlemen, an alliance with the distant king or his
agents often seemed an attractive alternative to exploitation close at hand;
villagers then appealed to royal agents, took their cases against landlords to
royal courts, and cheered the curtailment of urban privileges. In the short run,
they sometimes gained by these choices. But in the long run, the destruction of
intermediate barriers made them more vulnerable to the state’s next round of
war-generated demands.

The growth of domestically recruited standing armies offered a strong
stimulus to direct rule. Although rented troops persisted in some armies
through the eighteenth century, rulers in regions of capitalized coercion —
especially in France, Prussia, and England — began to move away from wholesale
engagement of mercenary armies during the seventeenth. Mercenaries had the
severe drawbacks of being unreliable when poorly paid, seeking booty and
rapine when not closely supervised, causing widespread trouble when
demobilized, and costing a great deal of cash. The effort to maintain substantial
armies in peacetime, pioneered by such rulers as Prussia’s Friedrich Wilhelm in
the seventeenth century, exceeded most states’ ability to tax the essential
revenues, especially in the face of competition from regional powerholders.
These circumstances encouraged rulers to establish durable domestic military
administrations, and then to conscript, co-opt, and penetrate. These steps
bypassed intermediaries, and led the way from indirect to direct rule.

The domestic recruitment of large standing armies entailed serious costs.
While discharged mercenaries had few enforceable claims on any states,
veterans of a national force did, especially if they had incurred disabilities in the
nation’s service. Families of dead or wounded warriors likewise acquired
benefits such as preference in the state-run sale of tobacco and matches. The
garrisoning of troops within the country involved military officials and their
civilian counterparts in food supply, housing, and public order. Eventually the
health and education of all young males, which affected their military
effectiveness, became governmental concerns. Thus military reorganization
entered a wedge for expansion of state activity into what had previously been
local and private spheres.

In one of their more self-conscious attempts to engineer state power, rulers
frequently sought to homogenize their populations in the course of installing
tok States and their Citizens 107

direct rule. From a ruler’s point of view, a linguistically, religiously, and
ideologically homogeneous population presented the risk of a common front
against royal demands; homogenization made a policy of divide and rule more
costly. But homogeneity had many compensating advantages: within a
homogeneous population, ordinary people were more likely to identify with
their rulers, communication could run more efficiently, and an administrative
innovation that worked in one segment was likely to work elsewhere as well.
People who sensed a common origin, furthermore, were more likely to unite
against external threats. Spain, France, and other large states recurrently
homogenized by giving religious minorities — especially Muslims and Jews — the
choice between conversion and emigration; in 1492, shortly after the completed
conquest of Granada, for example, Ferdinand and Isabella gave Spanish Jews
just that choice; Portugal followed suit in 1497. As it happened, Jewish exiles
from Iberia, the Sephardim, then constituted a trade diaspora elsewhere in
Europe, using their existing connections to set up a powerful system of long-
distance credit and communication that allowed them to establish near-
monopolies in precious stones, sugar, spices, and tobacco at various times in the
succeeding centuries (von Greyerz 1989).

The Protestant Reformation gave rulers of smaller states a splendid
opportunity to define their nation’s distinctness and homogeneity vis-a-vis the
great empires, not to mention a chance to co-opt the clergy and their
administrative apparatus in the service of royal ends. Sweden set an early
example, with large chunks of public administration placed in the hands of
Lutheran pastors. (Today’s Swedish historians still benefit from the long series
of parish registers, complete with information about literacy and changes of
residence, those pastors prepared faithfully from the seventeenth century
onward.) Over and above any possible influence on beliefs about the state’s
legitimacy, a shared clergy and a common faith linked to the sovereign provided
a powerful instrument of rule.

THE FRENCH REVOLUTION: FROM INDIRECT TO DIRECT RULE

European states began forcing the choice between local and national loyalties
during the eighteenth century. Although Enlightenment “reforms” often had
the effect of reinforcing direct rule, the most sensational move in that direction
was no doubt the work of the French Revolution and Empire. French actions
from 1789 to 1815 forwarded the general European transition from indirect to
direct rule in two ways: by providing a model of centralized government that
other states emulated, and by imposing variants of that model wherever France
conquered. Even though many of the period’s innovations in French
government cmerged from desperate improvisations in response to threats of
108 States and their Citizens

rebellion and bankruptcy, their battle-tested forms endured beyond the
Revolution and Empire.

What happened to France’s system of rule during the revolutionary years?
Before 1789 the French state, like almost all other states, ruled indirectly at the
local level, relying especially on priests and nobles for mediation. From the end
of the American war, the government’s efforts to collect money to cover its war
debts crystallized an antigovernmental coalition that initially included the
Parlements and other powerholders, but changed toward a more popular
composition as the confrontation between the regime and its opponents
sharpened (Comninel 1987, Doyle 1986, Egret 1962, Fréche 1974, Stone
1981). The state’s visible vulnerability in 1788—g encouraged any group that
had a stifled claim or grievance against the state, its agents, or its allies to
articulate its demands and join others in calling for change. The rural revolts —
Great Fear, grain seizures, tax rebellions, attacks on landlords, and so on — of
spring and summer 1789 occurred disproportionately in regions with large
towns, commercialized agriculture, and many roads (Markoff 1985). Their
geography reflected a composite but largely bourgeois-led settling of scores.

At the same time, those whose social survival depended most directly on the
Old Regime state — nobles, officeholders, and higher clergy are the obvious
examples — generally aligned themselves with the king (Dawson 1972: 334-46).
Thus a revolutionary situation began to form: two distinct blocs both claimed
power and both received support from some significant part of the population.
With significant defections of military men from the crown and the formation of
militias devoted to the popular cause, the opposition acquired force of its own.
The popular bloc, connected and often led by members of the bourgeoisie,
started to gain control over parts of the state apparatus.

The lawyers, officials, and other bourgeois who scized the state apparatus in
1789-90 rapidly displaced the old intermediaries: landlords, seigneurial
officials, venal officeholders, clergy, and sometimes municipal oligarchies as
well. “(I]t was not a rural class of English-style gentlemen,” declares Lynn
Hunt, “who gained political prominence on either the national or the regional
level, but rather thousands of city professionals who seized the opportunity to
develop political careers” (Hunt 1984: 155; see also Hunt 1978, Vovelle 1987).
Ata local level, the so-called Municipal Revolution widely transferred power to
enemies of the old rulers; patriot coalitions based in militias, clubs, and
revolutionary committees and linked to Parisian activists ousted the old
municipalities. Even where the old powerholders managed to survive the
Revolution’s early turmoil, relations between each locality and the national,
capital altered abruptly. Village “republics” of the Alps, for example, found
their ancient libertics — including ostensibly free consent to taxes — crumbling
as outsiders clamped them into the new administrative machine (Rosenberg
1988: 72-89). Then Parisian revolutionaries faced the problem of governing
without intermediaries; they experimented with the committees and militias
'
ton States and their Citizens 109

that had appeared in the mobilization of 1789, but found them hard to control
from the center. More or less simultaneously they recast the French map into a
nested system of departments, districts, cantons, and communes, while sending
out représentants en mission to forward revolutionary reorganization. They
installed direct rule.

Given the unequal spatial distribution of cities, merchants, and capital,
furthermore, the imposition of a uniform geographic grid altered the relations
between cities’ economic and political power, placing insignificant Mende and
Niort at the same administrative level as mighty Lyon and Bordeaux (Lepetit
1988: 200-37; Margadant 1988a, 1988b; Ozouf-Marignier 1986; Schulz
1982). As a result, the balance of forces in regional capitals shifted significantly:
in the great commercial centers, where merchants, lawyers, and professionals
already clustered, departmental officials (who frequently came, in any case,
from the same milieux) had no choice but to bargain with the locals. Where the
National Assembly carved departments out of relatively uncommercialized rural
regions, the Revolution’s administrators overshadowed other residents of the
new capitals, and could plausibly threaten to use force if they were recalcitrant.
But in those regions, they lacked the bourgeois allies who helped their confreres
do the Revolution’s work elsewherc, and confronted old intermediaries who
still commanded significant followings.

In great mercantile centers such as Marseille and Lyon, the political situation
was very different. By and large, the Federalist movement, with its protests
against Jacobin centralism and its demands for regional autonomy, took root in
cities whose commercial positions greatly outpaced their administrative rank. In
dealing with these alternative obstacles to direct rule, Parisian revolutionaries
improvised three parallel, and sometimes conflicting, systems of rule: the
committees and militias; a geographically-defined hierarchy of elected officials
and representatives; and roving commissioners from the central government.
To collect information and gain support, all three relied extensively on the
existing personal networks of lawyers, professionals, and merchants.

As the system began to work, revolutionary leaders strove to routinize their
control and contain independent action by local enthusiasts, who often resisted.
Using both co-optation and repression, they gradually squeezed out the
committees and militias. Mobilization for war put great pressure on the system,
incited new resistance, and increased the national leaders’ incentives for a tight
system of control. Starting in 1792, the central administration (which until then
had continued in a form greatly resembling that of the Old Regime) underwent
its own revolution: the staff expanded enormously, and a genuine hierarchical
bureaucracy took shape. In the process, revolutionaries installed one of the first
systems of direct rule ever to take shape in a large state.

That shift entailed changes in systems of taxation, justice, public works, and
much more. Consider policing. Outside of the Paris region, France’s Old
Regime state had almost no specialized police of its own; it dispatched the
110 ~—- States and their Citizens

Maréchaussée to pursue tax evaders, vagabonds, and other violators of royal
will and occasionally authorized the army to quell rebellious subjects, but
otherwise relied on local and regional authorities to deploy armed force against
civilians. The revolutionaries changed things. With respect to ordinary people,
they moved from reactive to proactive policing and information-gathering:
instead of simply waiting until a rebellion or collective violation of the law
occurred, and then retaliating ferociously but selectively, they began to station
agents whose job was to anticipate and prevent threatening popular collective
action. During the Revolution’s early years, Old Regime police forces generally
dissolved as popular committees, national guards, and revolutionary tribunals
took over their day-to-day activities. But with the Directory the state
concentrated surveillance and apprehension in a single centralized organization.
Fouché of Nantes became minister of police in the year VII/1799, and
thenceforth ran a ministry whose powers extended throughout France and its
conquered territories. By the time of Fouché, France had become one of the
world’s most closely-policed countries.

Going to war accelerated the move from indirect to direct rule. Almost any
state that makes war finds that it cannot pay for the effort from its accumulated
reserves and current revenues. Almost all warmaking states borrow extensively,
raise taxes, and seize the means of combat — including men — from reluctant
citizens who have other uses for their resources. Pre-revolutionary France
followed these rules faithfully, to the point of accumulating debts that
eventually forced the calling of the Estates General. Nor did the Revolution
repeal the rules: once France declared war on Austria in 1792, the state’s
demands for revenues and manpower excited( resistance just as fierce as that
which had broken out under the Old Regime. In overcoming that resistance,
revolutionaries built yet another set of centralized controls.

The French used their own new system as a template for the reconstruction
of other states. As revolutionary and imperial armies conquered, they attempted
to build replicas of that system of direct rule elsewhere in Europe. Napoleon’s
government consolidated the system and turned it into a reliable instrument of
rule. The system survived the Revolution and Empire in France and, to some
degree, elsewhere; Europe as a whole shifted massively toward centralized
direct rule with at least a modicum of representation for the ruled.

Resistance and counter-revolutionary action followed directly from the
process by which the new state established direct rule. Remember how much
change the revolutionaries introduced in a very short time. They eliminated all
previous territorial jurisdictions, consolidated many old parishes into larger
communes, abolished the tithe and feudal dues, dissolved corporations and
their privileges, constructed a top-to-bottom administrative and electoral
system, imposed expanded and standardized taxes through that system, seized
the properties of emigrant nobles and of the church, disbanded monastic
orders, subjected clergy to the state and imposed upon them an oath to defend
States and their Citizens 111

the new state church, conscripted young men at an unprecedented rate, and
displaced both nobles and priests from the automatic exercise of local
leadership. All this occurred between 1789 and 1793.

Subsequent regimes added more ephemeral changes such as the revolutionary
calendar and the cult of the Supreme Being, but the early Revolution’s overhaul
of the state endured into the nineteenth century, and set the pattern for many
other European states. The greatest reversals concerned the throttling of local
militias and revolutionary committees, the restoration or compensation of some
confiscated properties, and Napoleon’s Concordat with the Catholic Church.
All in all, these changes constituted a dramatic, rapid substitution of uniform,
centralized, direct rule for a system of government mediated by local and
regional notables. What is more, the new state hierarchy consisted largely of
lawyers, physicians, notaries, merchants, and other bourgeois.

Like their pre-revolutionary counterparts, these fundamental changes
attacked many existing interests, and opened opportunities to groups that had
previously had little access to state-sanctioned power — especially the village
and small-town bourgeoisie. As a result, they precipitated both resistance and
struggles for power. Artois (the department of Pas-de-Calais) underwent a
moderate version of the transition (Jessenne 1987). Before the Revolution,
Artesian nobles and churchmen held a little over half of all land as against a
third for peasants. Between 60 and 80 percent of all farms had fewer than 5
hectares (which implies that a similar large majority of farm operators worked
part-time for others), and a quarter of household heads worked primarily as
agricultural wage-laborers. Taxes, tithes, rents, and feudal dues took a
relatively low 30 percent of the income from leased land in Artois, and a fifth of
rural land went on sale with the revolutionary seizure of church and noble
properties. Agricultural capitalism, in short, was well advanced by 1770.

In such a region, large leaseholders (fermiers) dominated local politics, but
only within limits set by their noble and ecclesiastical landlords. The
Revolution, by sweeping away the privileges of those patrons, threatened the
leaseholders’ power. They survived the challenge, however, as a class, if not as a
particular set of individuals: many officeholders lost their posts during the
struggles of the early Revolution, especially when the community was already at
odds with its lord. Yet their replacements came disproportionately from the
same class of comfortable leaseholders. The struggle of wage-laborers and
smallholders against the cogs de village that Georges Lefebvre discovered in the
adjacent Nord was less intense, or less effective, in the Pas-de-Calais. Although
the larger farmers, viewed with suspicion by national authorities, lost some of
their grip on public office during the Terror and again under the Directory,
they regained it later, and continued to rule their roosts through the middle of
the nineteenth century. By that time, nobles and ecclesiastics had lost much of
theiftapacity to contain local powerholders, but manufacturers, merchants, and
other capitalists had taken their places. The displacement of the old
112 States and their Citizens

intermediaries opened the way to a new alliance between large farmers and
bourgeoisie.

Under the lead of Paris, the transition to direct rule went relatively smoothly
in Artois. Elsewhere, intense struggle accompanied the change. The career of
Claude Javogues, agent of the Revolution in his native department of the Loire,
reveals that struggle, and the political process that incited it (Lucas 1973).
Javogues was a huge, violent, hard-drinking roustabout whose close kin were
lawyers, notaries, and merchants in Forez, a region not far to the west of Lyon.
The family was on the ascendant in the eighteenth century, and in 1789 Claude
himself was a well-connected thirty-year-old avocat at Montbrison. The
Convention dispatched this raging bourgeois bull to the Loire in July 1793 and
recalled him in February 1794. During those six months, Javogues relied
heavily upon his existing connections, concentrated on repression of the
Revolution’s enemies, acted to a large degree on the theory that priests, nobles,
and rich landlords were the enemies, neglected and bungled administrative
matters such as the organization of food supply, and left behind him a
reputation for arbitrariness and cruelty.

Yet Javogues and his co-workers did, in fact, reorganize local life. In
following his action in the Loire, we encounter clubs, surveillance committees,
revolutionary armed forces, commissars, courts, and représentants en mission. We
see an almost unbelievable attempt to extend the direct administrative purview
of the central government to everyday individual life. We recognize the
importance of popular mobilization against the Revolution’s engmies — real or
imagined — as a force that displaced the old intermediaries. We therefore gain
insight into the conflict between two objectives of the Terror: extirpation of the
Revolution’s opponents and forging of instruments to do the work of the
Revolution. We discover again the great importance of control over food as an
administrative challenge, as a point of political contention, and as an incentive
to popular action.

Contrary to the old image of a unitary people welcoming the arrival of long-
awaited reform, local histories of the Revolution make clear that France’s
revolutionaries established their power through struggle, and frequently over
stubborn popular resistance. Most of the resistance, it is true, took the form of
evasion, cheating, and sabotage rather than outright rebellion. Where the
fault lines ran deep, however, resistance consolidated into counter-revolution:
the formation of effective alternative authorities to those put in place by the
Revolution. Counter-revolution occurred not where everyone opposed the
Revolution, but where irreconcilable differences divided well-defined blocs of
supporters and opponents.

France’s South and West, through similar processes, produced the largest
zones of sustained counter-revolution (Lebrun and Dupuy 1987, Nicolas 1985,
Lewis and Lucas 1983). The geography of executions under the Terror
provides a reasonable picture of counter-revolutionary activity. The departments
States and their Citizens 113

having more than 200 executions included: Loire Inférieure (3,548), Seine
(2,639), Maine-et-Loire (1,886), Rhone (1,880), Vendée (1,616), Ille-et-
Vilaine (509), Mayenne (495), Vaucluse (442), Bouches-du-Rhéne (409), Pas-
de-Calais (392), Var (309), Gironde (299), and Sarthe (225). These
departments accounted for 89 percent of all executions under the Terror
(Greer 1935: 147). Except for the Seine and the Pas-de-Calais, they
concentrated in the South, the Southwest and, especially, the West. In the
South and Southwest, Languedoc, Provence, Gascony, and the Lyonnais
hosted military insurrections against the Revolution, insurrections whose
geography corresponded closely to support for Federalism (Forrest 1975; Hood
1971, 1979, Lewis 1978; Lyons 1980; Scott 1973). Federalist movements
began in the spring of 1793, when the Jacobin expansion of the foreign war —
including the declaration of war on Spain — incited resistance to taxation and
conscription, which in turn led to a tightening of revolutionary surveillance and
discipline. The autonomist movement peaked in commercial cities that had
enjoyed extensive liberties under the Old Regime, notably Marseille, Bordeaux,
Lyon, and Caen. In those cities and their hinterlands, France fell into bloody
civil war.

In the West, guerrilla raids against republican strongholds and personnel
unsettled Brittany, Maine, and Normandy from 1791 to 1799, while open armed
rebellion flared south of the Loire in parts of Brittany, Anjou, and Poitou
beginning in the fall of 1792 and likewise continuing intermittently until
Napoleon pacified the region in 1799 (Bois 1981, Le Goff and Sutherland
1984, Martin 1987). The western counter-revolution reached its high point in
the spring of 1793, when the Republic’s call for troops precipitated armed
resistance through much of the West. That phase saw massacres of “patriots”
and “aristocrats” (as the proponents and opponents of the Revolution came to
be called), invasion and temporary occupation of such major cities as Angers,
and pitched battles between armies of Blues and Whites (as the armed elements
of the two parties were known).

The West’s counter-revolution grew directly from the efforts of revolutionary
officials to install a particular kind of direct rule in the region: a rule that
practically eliminated nobles and priests from their positions as partly
autonomous intermediaries, that brought the state’s demands for taxes,
manpower, and deference to the level of individual communities, neighborhoods,
and households, that gave the region’ s bourgeois political power they had never
before wielded. In secking to extend the state’s rule to every locality, and to
dislodge all enemies of that rule, French revolutionaries started a process that
did not cease for twenty-five years. In some ways, it has not yet ceased today.

In these regards, for all its counter-revolutionary ferocity, the West
conformed to France’s general experience. Everywhere in France, bourgeois —
not ewners of large industrial establishments, for the most part, but merchants,
lawyers, notarics, and others who made their livings from the possession and
114 States and their Citizens

manipulation of capital — were gaining strength during the eighteenth century.
Throughout France, the mobilization of 1789 brought disproportionate
numbers of bourgeois into political action. As the revolutionaries of Paris and
their provincial allies displaced nobles and priests from their critical positions as
agents of indirect rule, the existing networks of bourgeois served as alternative
connections between the state and thousands of communities across the land.
For a while, those connections rested on a vast popular mobilization through
clubs, militias, and committees. Gradually, however, revolutionary leaders
contained or even suppressed their turbulent partners. With trial, error, and
struggle, the ruling bourgeoisie worked out a system of rule that reached
directly into local communities, and passed chiefly through administrators who
served under the scrutiny and budgetary control of their superiors.

This process of state expansion encountered three huge obstacles. First,
many people saw the opening up of opportunities to forward their own interests
and settle old scores in the crisis of 1789. They either managed to capitalize on
the opportunity or found their hopes blocked by competition from other actors;
both categories lacked incentives to support further revolutionary changes.
Second, the immense effort of warring with most other European powers
strained the state’s capacity at least as gravely as had the wars of Old Regime
kings. Third, in some regions the political bases of the newly-empowered
bourgeois were too fragile to support the work of cajoling, containing, inspiring,
threatening, extracting, and mobilizing that revolutionary agents carried on
everywhere; resistance to demands for taxes, conscripts, and compliance with
moralizing legislation occurred widely in France, but where preexisting rivalries
placed a well-connected bloc in opposition to the revolutionary bourgeoisie,
civil war frequently developed. In these senses, the revolutionary transition from
indirect to direct rule embodied a bourgeois revolution and engendered a series
of anti-bourgeois counter-revolutions.

Outside of France, finally, the imposition of French-style administrative
hierarchies almost everywhere the revolutionary and imperial armies conquered,
pushed the experiment yet another step, installing direct rule (mediated, it is
true, by viceroys and military commanders) in half of Europe. In mobilizing
against the French, many German states likewise undertook extensive programs
of centralization, nationalization, and penetration (Walker 1971: 185-216). If
Napoleon’s armies eventually lost and France’s puppet states eventually
collapsed, the administrative reorganization left a great impact on such
countries-to-be as Belgium and Italy. The age of direct rule had begun.

STATE EXPANSION, DIRECT RULE, AND NATIONALISM

The most dramatic expansion of nonmilitary state activity began in the age of
military specialization after 1850 or so. In that period, which extends to the
States and their Citizens 115

recent past, military organization moved from a dominant, partly autohomous
segment of state structure to a more subordinated position as the largest of
several differentiated departments under control of a predominantly civilian
administration. (That subordination was, of course, greater in peace than in
war, greater in Holland than in Spain.) The nationalization of military forces
during the previous century had already drawn most European states into
bargaining with their subject populations over the yielding of conscripts, war
materials, and taxes; immense citizen armies like those of the Napoleonic Wars
entailed an unprecedented invasion of everyday social relations by the predatory
state.

In the process of installing direct rule, European states shifted from what we
might call reactive to proactive repression, especially with respect to potential
enemies outside the national elite. Up to the eighteenth century, agents of
European states spent little time trying to anticipate popular demands on the
state, rebellious movements, risky collective action, or the spread of new
organizations; their spies, when they had them, concentrated on the rich and
powerful. When a rebellion or “sedition” occurred, governors brought in armed
force as fast as they could, punishing in as visible and minatory a manner as they
could devise. They reacted, but not by establishing continuous monitoring of
potential subversives. With the installation of direct rule came the creation of
systems of surveillance and reporting that made local and regional administrators
responsible for prediction and prevention of movements that would threaten
state power or the welfare of its chief clients. National police forces penetrated
local communities (see Thibon 1987). Political and criminal police made
common cause in preparing dossiers, listening posts, routine reports, and
periodic surveys of any persons, organizations, or events that were likely to
trouble “public order.” The long disarmament of the civilian population
culminated in tight containment of militants and malcontents.

In similar ways, European states began to monitor industrial conflict and
working conditions, install and regulate national systems of education, organize
aid to the poor and disabled, build and maintain communication lines, impose
tariffs for the benefit of home industries, and the thousand other activities
Europeans now take for granted as attributes of state power. The state’s sphere
expanded far beyond its military core, and its citizens began to make claims on
it for a very wide range of protection, adjudication, production, and
distribution. As national legislatures extended their own ranges well beyond the
approval of taxation, they became the targets of claims from all well-organized
groups whose interests the state did or could affect. Direct rule and mass
national politics grew up together, and reinforced each other mightily.

As direct rule expanded throughout Europe, the welfare, culture, and daily
routines of ordinary Europeans came to depend as never before on which state
they happened to resigé in. Internally, states undertook to impose national
languages, national educational systems, national military service, and much
116 States and their Citizens

more. Externally, they began to control movement across frontiers, to use
tariffs and customs as instruments of economic policy, and to treat foreigners as
distinctive kinds of people deserving limited rights and close surveillance. As
states invested not only in war and public services but also in economic
infrastructure, their economies came to have distinctive characteristics, which
once again differentiated the experiences of living in adjacent states.

To that degree, life homogenized within states and heterogenized among
states. National symbols crystallized, national languages standardized, national
labor markets organized. War itself became a homogenizing experience, as
soldiers and sailors represented the entire nation and the civilian population
endured common privations and responsibilities. Among other consequences,
demographic characteristics began to resemble each other within the same state
and to differ ever more widely among states (Watkins 19809).

The later stages of European state formation produced both of the disparate
phenomena we group together under the label “nationalism.” The word refers
to the mobilization of populations that do not have their own state around a
claim to political independence; thus we speak of Palestinian, Armenian,
Welsh, or French-Canadian nationalism. It also, regrettably, refers to the
mobilization of the population of an existing state around a strong identification
with that state; thus, in the 1982 Malvinas/Falklands War, we speak of clashing
British and Argentinian nationalisms. Nationalism in the first sense ran
throughout European history, whenever and wherever rulers of a given religion
or language conquered people of another religion or language. Nationalism in
the sense of heightened commitment to a state’s international strategy appeared
rarely before the nineteenth century, and then chiefly in the heat of war. The
homogenization of the population and the imposition of direct rule both
encouraged this second variety of nationalism.

Both nationalisms multiplied during the nineteenth century, so much so that
it might be better to invent a different term for their equivalents before 1800.
As regions of fragmented sovereignty such as Germany and Italy consolidated
into substantial national states and the whole map of Europe crystallized into 25
or 30 mutually exclusive territories, the two nationalisms incited each other.
Great movements of conquest have typically aroused both nationalisms, as
citizens of existing states saw their independence threatened and members of
stateless but coherent populations saw possibilities both for extinction and for
new autonomy. As Napoleon and the French reached out into Europe,
national-state nationalism swelled on the French side and on the side of the
states France menaced; by the time Napoleon lost, however, his imperial
administrations had created the bases for new nationalisms of both types —
Russian, Prussian, and British, to be sure, but Polish, German, and Italian as
well — through much of Europe.

During the twentieth century, the two kinds of nationalism have increasingly
intertwined, with one nationalism provoking the other — the attempt of rulers to
States and their Citizens 117

commit their subjects to the national cause generating resistance on the part of
unassimilated minorities, the demand of unrepresented minorities for political
autonomy fostering commitment to the existing state on the part of those who
benefit most from its existence. After World War II, as decolonizing powers
started to map the entire remainder of the world into bounded, recognized,
mutually exclusive states, the connection between the two nationalisms grew
ever tighter, for the successful claim of one relatively distinct people to its own
state usually spelled the rejection of at least one other people’s claim to a state;
as the door closes, more peoples try to escape through it. At the same time,
through implicit international compact, the boundaries of existing states have
become less subject to alteration through warfare or statecraft. More and more,
the only way minority nationalisms can achieve their goal is through the
subdivision of existing states. In recent years, such composite states as Lebanon
and the Soviet Union have felt acutely the pressure for subdivision. The
pressure is still building.

UNINTENDED BURDENS

Struggle over the means of war produced state structures that no one had
planned to create, or even particularly desired. Because no ruler or ruling
coalition had absolute power and because classes outside the ruling coalition
always held day-to-day control over a significant share of the resources rulers
drew on for war, no state escaped the creation of some organizational burdens
rulers would have preferred to avoid. A second, parallel process also generated
unintended burdens for the state: as rulers created organizations either to make
war or to draw the requisites of war from the subject population — not only
armies and navies but also tax offices, customs services, treasuries, regional
administrations, and armed forces to forward their work among the civilian
population — they discovered that the organizations themselves developed
interests, rights, perquisites, needs, and demands requiring attention on their
own. Speaking of Brandenburg-Prussia, Hans Rosenberg says that the
bureaucracy

acquired an esprit de corps and developed into a force formidable enough to recast the
system of government in its own image. It restrained the autocratic authority of the
monarch. It ceased to be responsible to the dynastic interest. It captured control of the
central administration and of public policy.

(Rosenberg 1958: vii-viii)

In similar ways, bureaucracies developed their own interests and power bases
throughout Europe.

Response to the ngw interests brought more organization into being: niches
for military veterans, orders of nobility for state officials, training schools, courts
118 States and their Citizens

and lawyers adjudicating official privileges, providers of food, housing, and
other necessities for the state’s agents. From the sixteenth century onward,
many states undertook their own production of materials that were crucial to
either the conduct of war or the collection of revenue; at one time or another,
many states manufactured weapons, gunpowder, salt, tobacco products, and
matches for the one purpose or the other.

A third process likewise added to the state’s burdens. Classes outside the
state found they could turn institutions that originated with a narrow range of
activities into solutions for problems that interested them seriously, even when
the problems interested state officials very little. In order to build the coalitions
required to get their own work done, officials accepted the broadening of
institutions. Courts originally convened to enforce the king’s writ with respect
to arms and taxes became vehicles for the settlement of private disputes, army
regiments became convenient places to lodge the nobility’s incompetent
younger sons, registry offices set up to receive fees for the certification of
documents became sites of negotiation over inheritances.

The history of state intervention in food supplies illustrates how these three
processes created unintended burdens for the state. Since urban food supplies
remained risky for centuries, municipal officers bore the major responsibility
for overseeing markets, seeking extra supplies in times of shortage, and making
sure that poor people could get enough to keep them alive. Palermo’s
authorities, for example, faced an especially serious problem because their
native nobles disdained commerce, which remained largely in the hands of
foreign merchants. During seventeenth-century threats of famine:

citizens of Palermo had to carry identity cards in order to exclude aliens from the bread
queues. Those who had lawsuits at Palermo received special permission to enter the
town, but only if they brought their own food; everyone else was liable to be excluded by
a rigid watch and ward at the city gate. The making of sweet pastries was sometimes
forbidden altogether, or only stale bread was sold so as to diminish consumption. Special
police used to ferret out stocks of wheat concealed in the countryside, and Spaniards
were preferred for this office since Sicilians had too many friends to favour and enemies
to injure.
(Mack Smith 1968a: 221)
Although these regulations applied to citizens, they laid onerous burdens of
enforcement on authorities. Where municipal officers did not meet their
responsibilities, they faced the possibility of rebellions based on coalitions of
their own enemies with the urban poor. On the whole rebellions did not occur
when people were hungriest, but when people saw that officials were failing to
apply the standard controls, tolerating profiteering or, worst of all, authorizing
shipments of precious local grain to other places.
In most of Europe, citics adopted claborate rules forbidding wholesale
purchases of grain outside the public market, withholding of locally-stored
grain from the market, and charging a price for bread that was greatly out of line
States and their Citizens 119

with the going price for the staple grain. States that built substantial armies,
administrative staffs, and capital citics thereby multiplied the number of people
who did not produce their own food, and added to the demand for grain outside
of the usual regional markets. Regional and national officials of the state found
themselves spending large proportions of their time assuring and regulating the
food supply.

Beholden to landlords who did not welcome state interference in their
operations, European states concentrated their controls on distribution, not
production. States such as Prussia and Russia, which ceded enormous powers
to landlords and reinforced landlords’ domination of peasants in return for
noble provision of military and administrative service, thereby affected the
character of agriculture profoundly, but only indirectly. State-led redistribution
of church lands, as in France, Italy, and Spain, impinged significantly on
agriculture, but did not cause the states to supervise production as such. Not
until the twentieth century, when some socialist regimes took over agricultural
production and most capitalist regimes intervened in production by manipulating
credit, prices, and markets, did states involve themselves heavily in that end of
the food supply. Except for wartime rationing and occasional interdictions
motivated by fisgal or political programs, states steered clear of consumption as
well. But in the sphere of distribution, European states all found themselves
dealing seriously with food.

Following decisively different timetables in different parts of Europe, the
sixteenth to nineteenth centuries saw the interdependent expansion of
international markets, rise of the wholesale food merchant, and increase in the
number of wage-earners who depended on the market for food. At this point,
the managers of states were balancing the demands of farmers, food merchants,
municipal officials, their own dependents, and the urban poor — all of whom
caused the state trouble when it harmed their particular interests. State and
national officials developed the theory and practice of Police, in which the
detection and apprehension of criminals played a minor part. Before the
nineteenth-century proliferation of professional police forces as we know them,
the word Police referred to public management, especially at the local level;
regulation of the food supply was its single largest component. The great
treatise of Nicolas de la Mare, Traité de la Police, first published in 1705, sums
up that broad but food-centered conception of the state’s police powers.

To be sure, state approaches to food supply varied with the character of the
state and its dominant classes. As Prussia built a standing army that was very
large for the size of its base population, it also created stores and supply systems
for the army, as well as encouragements for grain to flow into provinces where
the army was concentrated; that system, like almost everything else in the
Prussian state, depended on the cooperation of landlords and on the
subordination of the#peasantry. Despite intermittent national legislation on the
subject, England generally left practical control over food supply in the hands of
120 States and their Citizens

its local magistrates, and only intervened actively in the shipment of grain into
and out of the whole country; the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 marked the
end of the long period in which the state restricted the importation of grain
when prices were not very high, hence the period in which the state protected
grain-growing landowners and their farmers against foreign competition. In
Spain, the administrative effort to feed landlocked Madrid froze the food
supply through much of Castile, and probably slowed the development of large-
scale markets over the whole Iberian peninsula (Ringrose 1983).

Increasing state action caused a large expansion in the bulk of the national
political apparatus devoted to regulation of flows of food, even when the avowed
objective of state policy was to “free” the grain trade. That policy, increasingly
adopted in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, consisted essentially of
reinforcing the right of large merchants to ship food to where it would fetch the
highest price. Eventually municipalities, urged on by state legislation, dismantled
the old controls. In the long run, agricultural productivity rose and distribution
improved sufficiently to reduce the vulnerability of cities, armies, and poor
people to sudden food shortages. But along the way states created staffs that
specialized in food, in surveillance and intervention to assure the flow of
supplies to those whose action the state prized or feared. Indirectly, the pursuit
of military power led to intervention in subsistence. Similarly, attempts to
acquire men, uniforms, arms, lodgings and, above all, money to sustain military
activity drew state officials into creating administrative structures they then had
to supervise and sustain.

The forms of mass representation that European rulers bargained out with
their subjects-become-citizens during the nineteenth century involved states in
whole new arenas of activity, especially with respect to production and
distribution. Characteristic bourgeois political programs - elections, parliaments,
wide access to office, civil rights — became realities. Once citizens had
enforceable claims on the state backed by popular elections and parliamentary
legislation, the better organized among them demanded state action on
employment, on foreign trade, on education, and eventually much more. States
intervened in capital—labor relations by defining acceptable strikes and labor
unions, by monitoring both of them, and by negotiating or imposing settlements
to conflicts. On the whole, states that industrialized late committed more of the
governmental apparatus — banks, courts, and public administrations — to the
promotion of industry than did those that led the way (Berend and Ranki
1982: 59-72).

Table 4.1 shows how much state expenditures altered. Over these years, the
Norwegian state’s personnel expanded as well: in 1875, the central government
employed about 12,000 civilians, about 2 percent of the labor force; in 1920,
54,000 (§ percent); in 1970, 157,000 (10 percent: Flora 1983: I, 228; see also
Gran 1988b: 185). In Norway and elsewhere in Europe, central administration,
justice, economic intervention, and, especially, social services all grew as an
States and their Citizens 121

Table 4.1 State expenditure as a percentage of GDP in Norway, 1875-1975

Total Administration, Economy, Social
Year = government __i military justice environment __ services
1875 3.2 Ld 1.0 0.4 0.3
1900 5-7 1.6 1.2 1.0 1.2
1925 6.5 0.9 0.7 0.8 1.8
1950 16.8 333 1.4 3.9 7.4
1975 24.2 3.2 2.3 6.8 9.5

Source: Flora 1983: I, 418-19

outcome of political bargaining over the state’s protection of its clients and
citizens.

The increase in social services occurred across Europe. Table 4.2 takes
Austria, France, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Germany as
exemplars, simply because Peter Flora has assembled comparable data on
them. States that moved to centrally planned economies, such as the Soviet
Union, surely saw even larger increases in the proportion of national income
devoted to social services. Everywhere, especially after World War II, the state
intervened in health, in education, in family life and finances.

Table 4.2 State expenditure on social services as a percentage of GDP, 1900-75

Year" Austria France UK Netherlands Denmark “Germany”
1900 0.7 1.0

1920 2.0 2.8 4.1 3.2 2.7 75
1940 2.3 5.1 53 44 4.8 Wal
1960 73 8.9 9.6 8.7 7.6 14.9
1975 10.8 9.2 15.0 17.2 24.6 20.8

* Dates are approximate
Source: Flora 1983: 1, 348-9

As the availability of the figures itself suggests, all these interventions
produced monitoring and reporting, so much so that the period from about
1870 to 1914 became a golden age of state-sponsored statistics on strikes,
employment, economic production, and much more. Thus the state’s managers
became responsible for the national economy and the condition of workers to a
degree unimaginable a century earlicr. If the extent and timing of these changes
varied dramatically from a resistant Russia to a volatile Great Britain, almost all
nineteenth-century states moved in the same gencral direction.
122 States and their Citizens

MILITARIZATION = CIVILIANIZATION

The state-transforming processes we have surveyed produced a surprising
result: civilianization of government. The result is surprising because the
expansion of military force drove the processes of state formation. Schematically,
the transformation occurred in the now-familiar four stages of patrimonialism,
brokerage, nationalization, and specialization: first, a period in which major
powerholders themselves were active military men, recruiting and commanding
their own armies and navies; then the heyday of military entrepreneurs and
mercenary troops in the hire of civilian powerholders; followed by the
incorporation of the military structure into the state with the creation of
standing armies; and finally, the shift to mass conscription, organized reserves,
and well-paid volunteer armies drawn essentially from the state’s own citizenry,
which led in turn to systems of veterans’ benefits, legislative oversight, and
claims of potential or former soldiers to political representation.

We see the transition from patrimonialism to brokerage in the rise of the
Italian condottieri. The shift from brokerage to nationalization begins with the
Thirty Years’ War, which brought the apogee and self-destruction of such great
military entrepreneurs as Wallenstein and Tilly — no relation of mine, so far as I
know. One sign of that shift appears in the elimination of Prussian colonels
from the clothing business, from which they once made handsome profits, in
1713-14 (Redlich 1965: II, 107). France’s /evée en masse of 1793 and thereafter
signals the shift from nationalization toward specialization. Elsewhere in
Europe it became quite general after 1850. By the end of the process civilian
bureaucracies and legislatures contained the military, legal obligations for
military service extended with relative equality across social classes, the
ideology of military professionalism restrained the involvement of generals and
admirals in civilian politics, and the possibility of direct military rule or coup
d’état declined greatly.

After 1850, during the age of specialization, civilianization of government
accelerated. In absolute terms, military activity continued to grow in expense
and importance. But three trends checked its relative importance. First, limited
by the competing demands of the civilian economy, peacetime military
personnel stabilized as a proportion of the total population while other
government employment continued to expand. Second, expenditure on non-
military activities grew even faster than military expenditure. Third, civilian
production eventually grew quickly enough to outstrip military expansion, with
the result that military expenditures declined as a share of national income.
Non-military activity and expenditure captured a larger and larger part of
governmental attention.

In the same states whose social expenditure we examined carlier, military
personnel fluctuated as a percentage of the male population aged 20-44 (see
States and their Citizens 123

Table 4.3. Military personnel as a percentage of the male population aged 20-44, 1850-1970"

Year” Austria France UK Netherlands Denmark “Germany”
1850 14.5 6.5 4.3 5-4 10.3 47
1875 8.4 7-4 45 6.4 6.4 5.9
1900 6.9 8.8 6.6 3.6 2.8 6.3
1925 2.5 6.7 4.3 1.2 2.3 1.0
1950 ? 8.4 7.6 12.7 2.3 ?
1970 4.2 5.8 4.2 53 53 45

" Boundaries and identities of these states varied significantly with the fortunes of war
Source: Flora 1983: I, 251-3

table 4.3). With important variations due to wartime deaths and war-related
mobilizations, the western European states of 1970 were gencrally maintaining
troops at around 5 percent of the male population aged 20-44. In 1984, the
percentage of the total population in military service varied as follows (Sivard

1988: 43-4):

less than 0.5 percent: Iceland (0.0), Luxembourg (0.2), Ireland (0.4), Malta
(0.3), Switzerland (0.3);

0.5 to 0.9 percent. Denmark (0.6), West Germany (0.8), Italy (0.9),
Netherlands (0.7), Norway (0.9), Spain (0.9), United Kingdom (0.6), Poland
(0.9), Rumania (0.8), Austria (0.7), Sweden (0.8);

1.0 to 1.4 percent: Belgium (1.1), France (1.0), Portugal (1.0), Czechoslovakia
(1.3), East Germany (1.0), Hungary (1.0), USSR (1.4), Albania (1.4), Finland
(1.1), Yugoslavia (1.0);

1.5 percent or more: Greece (2.0), Turkey (1.6), Bulgaria (1.6).

A few essentially demilitarized states now have less than 0.5 percent of their
population under arms, and a few militarized ones run above 1.4 percent, but
the bulk of European states lie in between. All of these shares — even those of
semi-belligerent Greece and Turkey — run far below the 8 percent of its
population Sweden placed in its military at its peak toward 1710. With high
proportions of their able-bodied populations already at work and low
proportions in agriculture, furthermore, European states now face severe limits
to the number of additional troops they can mobilize in wartime without major
reorientations of their economics.

Meanwhile, non-military activities were ballooning so fast that military
expenditure declined as a share of most state budgets, despite the great
expansion of those budgets. Taking the same countries as before, we find the
decreasing trends in percentage of budget devoted to military expenditure
shown in table 4.4.4In every state, the long-term trend led to a declining
proportion of expenditure on military activity.
124 States and their Citizens

Table 4.4 Military expenditure as a percentage of state budget 1850-1975

Year’ Austria France UK Netherlands Denmark “Germany”
1850 27.4

1875 23.2 37.8 34.0
1900 37-7 74.2 26.4 28.9 22.9
1925 7-7 27.8 19.1 15.1 14.2 4.0
1950 20.7 24.0 18.3 15.6 13.5
1975 4-9 17.9 14.7 11.3 7-4 6.4

* Dates are very approximate
Source: Flora 1983: 1, 355-449

Eventually, indeed, national income rose faster than military expenditure. In
1984, the proportion of Gross National Product devoted to military expenditure
varied in a pattern similar to that of men under arms (Sivard 1988: 43-4):

less than 2 percent: Iceland (0.0), Luxembourg (0.8), Rumania (1.4), Austria
(1.2), Finland (1.5), Ireland (1.8), Malta (0.9);

from 2 to 3.9 percent: Belgium (3.1), Denmark (2.4), West Germany (3.3),
Italy (2.7), Netherlands (3.2), Norway (2.9), Portugal (3.5), Spain (2.4),
Hungary (2.2), Poland (2.5), Sweden (3.1), Switzerland (2.2), Yugoslavia (3.7);

from 4 to 5.9 percent: France (4.1), Turkey (4.5), United Kingdom (5.4),
Bulgaria (4.0), Czechoslovakia (4.0), East Germany (4.9), Albania (4.4).

6 percent or more: Greece (7.2), USSR (11.5);

The standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union helped create
this distribution of expenditures. In 1984, the United States was spending 6.4
percent of its own enormous GNP on military activity to match the 11.5 percent
the Soviet Union was squeezing from its significantly smaller economy.
Nevertheless, the general European trend ran downward: smaller proportions
of the population under arms, smaller shares of state budgets devoted to the
military, smaller percentages of national income spent on soldiers and weapons.
These changes resulted from, and reinforced, the organizational containment
of military men. At each step from patrimonialism to brokerage, from brokerage
to nationalization, and from nationalization to specialization, then, new and
significant barriers arose to limit the autonomous power of military men.
Deviations from the idealized sequence confirm its logic. Spain and Portugal
escaped the civilianization of government by drawing on colonial revenues for a
major share of military expenditures, continuing to recruit officers from the
Spanish aristocracy and foot soldiers from the poorest classes, and maintaining
military officers as the crown’s representatives in provinces and colonies (Ballbé
1983: 25-36; Sales 1974, 1986). All these factors minimized the sort of
bargaining for warmaking resources with the subject population that elsewhere
States and their Citizens 125

built up rights and restraints. Spain and Portugal may also have caught
themselves in the “territorial trap” — the conquest of so much dependent
territory, relative to their means of extraction, that administrative costs ate up
their gains from imperial control (Thompson and Zuk 1986). Spain and
Portugal thus anticipated, in some regards, the situations of many contemporary
Third World states in which military men hold power.

Behind the differentiation of civilian from military organization, and the
subordination of the military to the civilian, lay a fundamental geographic
problem. Under most circumstances, the spatial distribution of state activity
that serves military purposes well differs sharply from the spatial distribution
that serves the production of revenues. So long as a state is operating through
conquest and tribute in a contiguous territory, the discrepancy need not be
large; occupying soldiers can then serve as monitors, administrators, and tax
collectors. Beyond that point, however, four interests pull in different
directions: the placement of military forces between their likely sites of activity
and their major sources of supplies; the distribution of state officials who
specialize in surveillance and control of the civilian population in a pattern that
compromises between spatial completeness and correspondence to the
population distribution; the apportioning of state revenuc-collecting activities to
the geography of trade, wealth, and income, and finally, the distribution of state
activities resulting from bargaining over revenues according to the spatial
structures of the parties to the bargains.

Obviously the resulting geography of state activity varies with its relation to all
four of these forces; navies concentrate in deep-water locations along a state’s
periphery, while post offices distribute in close correspondence to the
population as a whole and central administrative offices cling to each other. The
bigger the military establishment, the greater its orientation to war outside the
state’s own territory, and the more extensive the apparatus of extraction and
control that grows up to support it, the greater is the discrepancy between their
geographies, and the more distant the ideal military geography from onc that gives
the armed forces substantial day-to-day control over the civilian population.

-The geographic discrepancy encourages the creation of separate organizations
for each activity, including the division of armed force into armies and police
forces. The distribution of police forces comes to approximate the geography of
the civilian population, while the distribution of troops isolates them from
civilians and places them where international strategy dictates. Indced, the
French model divides land forces into three parts: soldiers grouped into
garrisons located for administrative and tactical convenience; gendarmes
(remaining under military control, and mobilizable into the military in wartime)
spread across the communications lines and thinly-settled segments of the
territory; and police stationed in the country’s larger agglomerations. Soldiers
then patrol the frontiers, protect the sites of national power, intervene overseas,
but rarely take part in control of crime or civilian conflicts.
126 = States and their Citizens

Except for highways, gendarmes dcal chiefly with those portions of the
territory in which private property occupies most of the space, and therefore
spend most of their time patrolling communication lines and responding to calls
from civilians. Urban police, in contrast, crisscross territories dominated by
public space and having valuable property within reach of that public space;
they correspondingly spend more of their effort reaching out to control and
apprehend without calls from civilians. Ultimately, any such geographic division
separates the military from political power and makes it dependent for survival
on civilians whose preoccupations include fiscal soundness, administrative
efficiency, public order, and the keeping of political bargains as well as (perhaps
even instead of) military efficacy. This complex logic strongly affected the
spatial differentiation of European states.

To be sure, the discrepancy was more than geographic. As we have seen, the
people who ran the state’s civilian half had litdle choice but to establish working
relations with capitalists, and to bargain with the rest of the population over the
yielding of resources for an expanding range of state activities. As they pursued
revenue and acquiescence, officials built organizations that grew quite distinct
from the military, and for most purposes became increasingly independent of it.
In Europe as a whole, these processes did not prevent steadily increasing
military expenditure or ever more destructive wars, but they did contain
domestic military power to a degree that would have astonished a European
observer of AD ggo or 1490.
5

Lineages of the National State

CHINA AND EUROPE

G. William Skinner portrays the social geography of late imperial China as the
intersection of two sets of central-place hierarchies (Skinner 1977: 275-352;
see also Wakeman 1985, Whitney 1970). The first, constructed largely from the
bottom up, emerged from exchange; its overlapping units consisted of larger
and larger market areas centered on towns and cities of increasing size. The
second, imposed mainly from the top down, resulted from imperial control; its
nested units comprised a hierarchy of administrative jurisdictions. Down to the
level of the Asien, or county, every city had a place in both the commercial and
the administrative hierarchy. Below that level, even the mighty Chinese Empire
ruled indirectly via its gentry. In the top-down system, we find the spatial logic
of coercion. In the bottom-up system, the spatial logic of capital. We have seen
two similar hierarchies at work repeatedly in the unequal encounter between
European states and cities.

An some Chinese regions, imperial control was relatively weak and
commercial activity relatively strong; there, cities generally occupied higher
ranks in the order_of markets than in the imperial order. Elsewhere (especially
at the empire’s(p , where regions were typically more valuable to the
center for security than for revenue), imperial control placed a city higher than
did commercial activity. Skinner sketches some critical correlates of a city’s
relative position in the two hierarchies; for example, imperial administrators
assigned to cities occupying relatively high positions in the market hierarchy
accomplished more of their work by dealing with “parapolitical” networks of
merchants and other prospering notables than did their colleagues in less well-
favored areas, while the regionsyincluding those major market cities financed
more than their share of candidates for the imperial cxaminations that led to

128 — Lineages of the National State

careers in the bureaucracy. Many other consequences flowed from that
interplay of top-down and bottom-up systems.

How did China differ from Europe? In a pamphlet published in 1637, Jesuit
Giuldo Aldeni reported that his Chinese friends often asked of Europe “If there
are so many kings, how can you avoid wars?” He reported answering, naively or
disingenuously, “The kings of Europe are all connected by marriage, and
therefore live on good terms with one another. If there is a war, the Pope
intervenes; he sends out envoys to warn the belligerents to stop fighting”
(Biinger 1987: 320). This in the middle of the frightful Thirty Years’ War,
which eventually drew the vast majority of European states into the
bloodletting. The-difference is critical: although China had once lived through
an era of Warring States that had much in common with the international
anarchy of Europe, and if insurrections and invasions from the fronticrs
recurrently threatened imperial control, most of the time a single center
dominated much of Chinese space, a zone that was unimaginably large by
European standards. Empire was long China’s normal condition; when one
empire declined, another seized its place. During the eighteenth century,
furthermore, while direct rule from a single center was beginning to take hold
in Europe, Qing emperors were imposing an even more far-reaching direct rule
throughout their domains; in 1726 Emperor Yongzheng went so far as to
replace the chiefs of ethnic minorities in southwest China with administrators
of his own regime (Bai 1988: 197). In Europe, fragmentation into multiple
competing states has prevailed over all of the last millennium.

Although Russian tsars eventually commanded a huge expanse of Asia,
Europe itself never hosted an empire of the scale of China’s at its prime. After
the fragmentation of Rome’s domains, nonetheless, many rulers attempted to
build empires in Europe, or to extend them into Europe. A succession of
Muslim empires reached into Spain and the Balkans, but got no farther.
Byoenne Balgariam Serbianeanl ONGHan cuipires onetime eundilled. the
Balkans and the Middle East, while Mongols and other Asian invaders left an
imperial heritage in Russia. In Europe’s heartlands, Charlemagne pieced
together a fissiparous empire, Normans made several attempts at empire-
building, and both a Holy Roman empire (de jure) and a Habsburg empire (de
facto) made their presence felt. Yet these imperial efforts all fell far short of
grasping the entire continent. After Rome no large section of Europe felt the

evertheless Europe experienced in its own more segmented way the
interplay of the two processes Skinner detects in China: the bottom-up building
of regional hierarchies based on trade and manufacturing, the top-down
imposition of political control. Europe’s urban networks represented the
hierarchy of capital; they comprised the higher levels of commercial connections
that reached into towns and villages, linked by culporteurs (etymologically, those
who carried goods on their shoulders), peddlers (etymologically, those who

Lineages of the National State 129

walked their goods from placc to place), and other more substantial merchants
who made capital accumulation through local and regional trade their business.
As an English king or a Burgundian duke reached into the countryside for taxes
and soldiers, he found well-established commercial connections he had played
little part in creating, and could not completely control. Indeed, Europe’s
Bottom-up hierarchies long remained more complete, connected and extensive
than its top-down structures of political control” That was a major reason for
the failure of the many post-Koman attempts to build empires spanning the
continent.

R. Bin Wong’s comparison of Struggles over food in Europe and China
suggests some important Skinnerian parallels between the experiences of the
two continents (Wong 1983; Wong and Perdue 1983). Despite significant
differences in structure, people in both regions seem to have been espccially
likely to seize food forcefully in times of shortage and/or high prices where and
when the gap was widening. between the extent of food marketing and the
degree of governmental control over food supply. Poor people who depended
on local markets for their food substituted themselves for authorities who could
or would no longer enforce the locality’s claims to food stored, marketed, or
shipped within its perimeter. Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century China
experienced a decline in imperial control as markets held their own or even
expanded, and local people blocked shipments, bullied merchants, or seized
stored grain to enforce their claims to the supply.

Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Europe, for its part, saw marketing of
food expand ever { (faste asic fan the local strength of governments: its local people
seized grain to enforce claims that their officials would no longer respect
(Bohstedt 1983, Charlesworth 1983, Tilly 1971). No one has done a
sufficiently broad geography of grain seizures in Europe to determine whether
they followed an appropriately Skinncrian pattern. Given the marked tendency
of grain scizures to ring major cities and ports, however, such a pattern is quite
plausible. China’s banditry, rebellion, and other forms of collective conflict also
showed marked regional differences that bear at least a rough correspondence
to-the joint distribution of imperial and mercantile activity. From that fact, we
might reasonably search for similar geographic inequalities within Europe.
Popular collective action might well display a Skinnerian logic.

The patterns of political covariation Skinner describes also have European
counterparts: the administrative capitals in regions of scanty. commerce in
which a viceroy held power through direct military control but could produce
little revenue for the king, the lowcr-ranking royal officials surrounded by
prosperous landlords and “merchants with whom they had no choice but. to.
negotiate, | Consider the contrast between eastern Prussia, where the state’s
administrative apparatus overwhelmed merchants in favor of great landlords,
and western Prussia, where a similar apparatus almost dissolved in the region’s
commercial activity. Gabricl Ardant pointed out thirty years ago that the “fit”

130 Lineages of the National State

between fiscal system and regional economy determines the cost and
effectiveness of attempts to tax (Ardant 1965). In an area with little market
activity, a land tax based on cstimated value and levied in cash is likely to cost a
great deal to collect, strike the population very inequitably, miss a good deal of
potential revenue, and incite widespread resistance. In a highly commercialized
area, in contrast, a flat head tax generates less revenue at higher cost than a
comparable tax designed to fit the loci of capital and the paths of commerce.

On the other hand (as Ardant did not observe), with high levels of
commercial activity, a often hold considerable political power, and

assets and cramp 1 ‘their ae In Europe, as we have seen, the extent of
commercial activity strongly affected the viability of the various tactics used to
build state strength. Outside of Gdansk, which prospered with the quickening
of Baltic trade, Polish merchants were unable to break the grip of great
landlords. (Ironically, the power of Polish landlords also cramped Poland’s
elected king, and thereby made him an attractive suzerain for Prussian cities
that were trying to escape the more demanding tutelage of the Teutonic
Knights.) But the merchants of Amsterdam, Dubrovnik, Venice, and Genoa,
high points in the commercial hierarchy, could dictate the terms on which any
state would operate in their territories. Thus Skinner’s model of China sheds
light on the geography of state formation in Europe.

In fact, earlier chapters have laid out a model of Europe a Skinnerian can
easily recognize. It has three elements:

1 aset of social relations characterized by exchange and capital accumulation
in which concentration produces cities and inequality rests on exploitation;

2 another set of social relations characterized by coercion in which
concentration produces states and inequality rests on domination;

3 aset of activities carried on by states which involve their agents in acquiring
resources from others.

The networks defined by the two sets of social relations articulate unevenly:

at some locations dense concentrations of coercion meet equally dense concen-
trations of capital, at others dense coercion encounters sparse capital, and
so on. Similar state activities carried on at_different locations therefore work
differently, and have different organizational consequences. That sums up, very
abstractly, the main message of this whole book so far.

STATES AND CITIES REEXAMINED

Recall what a state is: a distinct organization that controls the principal
concentrated means of coercion within a well-defined territory, and in some
Lineages of the National State 131

respects exercises priority over all other organizations operating within the same
territory. (A national state, then, extends the territory in question to multiple
contiguous regions, and maintains a relatively centralized, differentiated, and
autonomous structure of its own.) Armed men form states by accumulating and
concentrating their means of coercion within a given territory, by creating an
organization that is at least partially distinct from those that govern production
and reproduction in the territory, by seizing, co-opting, or liquidating other
concentrations of coercion within the same territory, by defining boundaries,
and by exercising jurisdiction within those boundaries. They create national
states by extending the same processes to new adjacent territories and by
elaborating a centralized, differentiated, and autonomous organization as they
go.

The formation and transformation of state organization occur largely as
consequences of efforts to conquer, and to maintain control over the people and
property in the territory. Although statemakers always have models of conquest
and control in mind, and frequently follow them self-consciously, they rarely
plan out the step-by-step construction of the state that these activities bring into
being. Nevertheless, their activity inevitably creates top-down hierarchies of
coercive control.

As rulers form and transform states, they and their agents consume large
quantities of resources, especially resources that lend themselves to military
applications: men, arms, transport, food. Those resources are, for the most
part, already embedded in other organizations and social relations: households,
manors, churches, villages, feudal obligations, connections among neighbors.
The ruler’s problem is to extract the essential resources from those
organizations and social relations, while ensuring that someone will reproduce
and yield similar resources in the future. Two factors shape the process by
which states acquire resources, and strongly affect the organization that results
from the process: the character of the bottom-up hierarchy of capital, and the
place within that hierarchy of any location from which a state’s agents try to
extract resources. _

Fhe range of cities a would-be statemaker faced in Europe was very large.
Resorting to yet another two-dimensional diagram (figure 5.1), we might array
cities by the extent to which their activities articulated with those of their
hinterlands (from a superficial to a profound connection) and by their market
position (from a purely local or regional market to an international center of
trade, processing, and capital accumulation). Thus thirteenth-century Florence,
whose merchants and rentiers exercised extensive control over land, production,
and trade in its contado, qualified as more of a metropolis than Genoa, an
international link having weaker ties to its own hinterland. Fifteenth-century
Madrid, rather closed in upon itself and its section of Castile, looked more like
a regional market than Lisbon, whose dominance extended both inside and
outside of Portugal.
132  Lineages of the National State

High +— — — —— — — —— — ——-— ——-—-— +

; Regional Metropolis +
market +

+ +

+ +

Integration 4+ +
with + f
hinterland =, +
+ +

+ Local International +

+ tink link +

+

Low +——— — — — — — — — — — —--— —— — +

Low High

+m — Market position ——————>

ligure 5.1 ‘l'ypes of cities.

The distinctions matter because they significantly affected the prospects for
the formation of different kinds of states. The higher a city’s market position,
the more likely that anyone building up concentrated force had to negotiate
with the capitalists based there, or even be one of them. The greater its
economic articulation with its hinterland, the less likely that a separate group of
landlords would serve as the city’s counterweight or enemy in any process of
state formation. In the early stages of European state formation, a city that
dominated its own hinterland and occupied an international market position
had a strong probabili i own autonomous state, whether a

city-state like Mil ity-empire like Venice.
nder the conditions prevailing in Europe before 1800 or s0, in regions

where cities proliferated, international trade was intense. Some of the cities
occupied central positions in international markets, and capital accumulated and
concentrated. In those circumstances, no one created or altered a state except
in close collaboration with the local capitalists. Flanders, the Rhineland, and the
Po Valley illustrate the principle dramatically. Conditions differed where cities
were sparse; there, international trade played a small part in economic life, few
cities GF any) occupied high positions in international markets, and capital
neither accumulated nor concentrated at a rapid rate. In such regions, states
commonly formed without cither the collaboration or the.cflective opposition of
local capitalists. There, coercion reigned. Poland and Hungary stan
exemplars. In between, the presence of at least one major center of capital
accumulation in a region otherwise dominated by landlords made possible an
intermediate path to the state, a path in which holders of capital and of coercion
struggled, but ultimately bargained out a modus vivendi. Aragon and England
provide cases in point.

These differences followed a well-defined geographic pattern in Europe.
Although seacoast regions had more than their share of cities, ports outside of
the Mediterranean generally had shallow hinterlands, and backed on larger

Lineages of the National State 133

regions controlled by landlords. The broad urban column that reached roughly
northwest from the Italian peninsula to southern England dominated the map
of fragmented sovereignty, the zone of capitalist strength in state formation; as
commerce on the Atlantic coast, the North Sea, and the Baltic gained
importance, the column acted as a kind of percolator, pumping merchandise,
capital, and urban population up from the Mediterranean and the various Easts
to which it connected. Big, powerful national states formed chiefly at the edges
of the urban column, where cities and their capital were accessible but not
overwhelming. Farther out, states occupied even larger territories, but until
fairly late exercised only episodic control over the people and activities within
them.

These contrasting circumstances marked out different paths of change in
states. To make discussion feasible, let us again schematize (see figure 5.2),
reducing many paths to just three. The diagram argues that when men began to
concentrate coercion in various parts of Europe the relative presence or
absence of concentrated capital predicted (and to some degree caused)
different trajectories of change in state structure; although all regions of Europe
eventually converged toward the large national state, states actually diverged
over a long period; for several centuries, coercive, capitalist, and capitalized-
coercion states moved further apart in structure and action. For all its crudity,
the diagram allows some useful distinctions. Within the Nordic countries, for
example, we might sketch the alternative paths as in figure 5.3. In order to take
the scheme seriously, to be sure, we would have to recognize that at various
times Finland, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark all belonged to empires and
federations dominated by others, that the boundaries of the states and
dependencies designated by those names fluctuated significantly as a result of
conquest and negotiation, that before the middle of the seventeenth century
Denmark operated a classic coalition between powerful landlord nobles and a

High +-—-——— OO EO eS +

+ +

. + ae +
+ Coercion-intensive +

+ path a 4

s + / Capitalized t
5 ; coercion path } ;
oO + a +
+ Capital-intensive +

+ path +

+ —— +

Low +—————-— — — — —— — — — —— — +
Low High

Capital

Figure 5.2 Relative concentration of capital and coercion as determinants of
states’ paths of growth.
134 Lineages of the National State

High +— —— —-———-——-——--—-——— +
+ +
+ /fetend +
+ +
- + (su +
£ Sweden
8 +
- /ormet +
+ Norway +
+ +
+ +
+ +
Low +—— ———————-—— —-———— — +
Low High
Capital

Figure 5.3 Paths of state formation in Scandinavia.

landlord king, and that over the entire time since AD goo Finland has enjoyed
only a few decades of existence independent of neighboring powers. With those
qualifications, the diagram provides an opportunity to sketch how Denmark
began the millennium as a relatively uncommercialized conquering power, then
capitalized on growing trade between western Europe and the Baltic to become
significantly more prosperous than its neighbors, while Finland remained a
commercial backwater, governed by force, much longer.

The Nordic countries created their own variant of coercive state formation.
Before the seventeenth century, they comprised one of Europe’s most
profoundly rural regions. Many towns came into being as fortified outposts of
royal power rather than as significant commercial centers. Despite the early
importance of Bergen, Copenhagen, and other commercial centers as outposts
for trade, in 1500 no city in the region had as many as 10,000 inhabitants (de
Vries 1984: 270). German merchants long dominated Scandinavian trade, to
the extent that city councils and urban geography alike often split into distinct
German and local sections.

Scandinavian trade became a near-monopoly of the Hanse. The Hanse cities
resolutely excluded Italian bankers and refused to create banks and credit
institutions of their own. Instead they relied on bilaterally balanced trade, often
in kind (Kindleberger 1984: 44). Only with the quickening of Baltic trade
during the sixteenth century did significant concentrations of capital and urban
population start to appear in Norway, Sweden, Finland, or Denmark. Even
then, the Dutch merchants who succeeded the Germans managed much of the
trade, capital, and shipping. Yet the region’s warriors left their mark on many
parts of Europe.

In the centuries around AD goo Vikings and their cousins conquered widely
outside of the North, and often set up states dominated by warrior-landlords.
They were generally unable, however, to follow the same course in their
homelands. There the salience of forestry and fishing, the thinness of
Lineages of the National State 135

settlement, the openness of fronticrs, and the rarity of external invasions
combined to assure the survival of smallholders and to set limits on the ability of
warriors to become great landlords. In seeking to secure military service,
Swedish kings made grants that actually multiplied small landowners. Up to the
seventeenth century, they drew most of their troops by means of variants of the
same system: nobles (and later rich peasants) qualified for tax exemption by
fitting out cavalrymen for poorly-paid royal service, while commoners shared
the responsibility for supplying infantrymen as well as providing land to them
and their families. Except for mercenaries stationed in war zones and frontier
provinces, the arrangements sustained themselves without large cash outlays by
the crown.

Sweden and Denmark maintained major military forces for several centuries.
Under Gustav Vasa (1521-60) and his successors, Sweden built up formidable
military power at the cost of subjecting large parts of the economy to demands
of the state. The Scandinavian Union of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway
(1397-1523) formed largely as a means of asserting royal power against the
commercial dominance of German merchants and the Hanseatic League.
Among other moves, Vasa dispossessed the clergy and created a Protestant church
subordinated to the state. Like his Russian contemporaries, Gustav Vasa also
forwarded the view “that all land belonged to the crown and those non-nobles
enjoying temporary possession of it could only expect continued tenure while
they fulfilled their fiscal obligations to the government” (Shennan 1974: 63).
The state’s search for cash to pay for war in a largely subsistence economy
motivated an expansion of mining and manufacturing, an elaboration of the
fiscal apparatus, the beginning of a substantial national debt, a bypassing of
older representative assemblies, and an increasing involvement of the clergy
(now Protestant and national) in record-keeping for the crown (Lindegren
1985, Nilsson 1988).

More commercial Denmark financed its warmaking from the income of
crown lands up through the Thirty Years’ War. Indeed, until 1660 no
commoner could own land in Denmark. The war beween Sweden and
Denmark in the 1640s combined with economic depression to precipitate a
struggle over revenues between the Danish aristocracy and the elected king. In
a coup d’état, the crown established a hereditary monarchy and greatly reduced
noble power. But that meant reduced cooperation from the nobility. As a result
Denmark made a decisive shift to taxation, including the lucrative tolls of the
Sound. “Whereas 67% of Danish state revenues in 1608 consisted of income
from crown lands, a half century later such revenues amounted to only 10%”
(Rystad 1983: 15). To liquidate its war-induced debts, indeed, the monarchy
sold off the bulk of its lands between 1660 and 1675 (Ladewig Petersen
1983: 47). Thus the expense of seventeenth-century warmaking produced
major governmental changes in both Denmark and Sweden.

Sweden (like Denmark) relied largely on mercenaries during the Thirty
136 Lineages of the National State

Years’ War, but shifted back toward a conscripted national force as its troop
requirements rose during the later seventeenth century. Charles XI (1672-97)
engineered his own coup d’état by wresting from magnates crown lands his
predecessors had been selling off to pay for their warmaking, and then
allocating much of the land to part-time soldiers who thus owed military service
for their means of subsistence. By 1708 Sweden and Finland (then a Swedish
province) were fielding 111,000 troops from a total population of about two
million (Roberts 1979: 45). The Swedish monarchy was constantly short of
funds, but was able to pay for war without bankruptcy by exporting copper and
iron, by building its own large arms industry on its rich base of minerals, and by
exacting enormous payments from the territories it won. That system of tribute
worked well enough so long as conquest continued, but collapsed at the advent
of peace and stable rule.

With the assassination of Charles XII (1718), Sweden abandoned its drive
for imperial power. By that time, however, the creation of a large military force
on the basis of a small population, a relatively unmonetized economy, and an
exiguous bourgeoisie had produced a very substantial state apparatus in which
civil bureaucrats and clergy did a great deal of work for the crown. Norway
(which lived under Danish, and then Swedish, rule until 1905) and Finland
(which was a province of Sweden until 1809 and then a Russian grand duchy
until 1917) underwent similar evolutions despite their dependent positions and
greater peripherality with respect to European markets. Denmark, commanding
the traffic of the Sound with the substantial tolls that traffic generated, putting a
much larger part of its military effort into the navy than its neighbors, and
building commercialized agriculture in trade with Germans to the south,
created a larger bourgeoisie and a smaller state apparatus.

Although Swedish landless laborers increased greatly in number with the
consolidation of holdings after 1750 (Winberg 1978), they never fell under the
control of big landholders. Instead, the state bureaucracy extended its
monitoring directly to peasants and laborers, who retained considerable
bargaining power; in Sweden, indeed, peasants maintained representation
through a separate Estate from those of the clergy, nobility, and bourgeoisie.
The resulting states organized around coercion and gave little scope to capital,
but lacked the great territorial lords of their neighbors to the south.

In comparison with the rest of Europe, then, the Nordic areas all clustered
along the coercion-intensive path to statehood. At the other extreme, the
commercial city-states and city-empires of Italy followed a distinctly different
path to the state, relying on high concentrations of capital, but concentrating
coercion less decisively and more temporarily than their North European
cousins. That is the main point: trajectories of change in European states
differed dramatically, and produced contrasting kinds of state. Those that
followed the capitalized-coercion path eventually became dominant in Europe,
and other states converged on their characteristics. But before that late
Lineages of the National State 137

consolidation of the European state system, many other kinds of state formed
and performed quite effectively.

Let me recall the crucial points. Interacting with each other and jointly
involved in international wars, rulers in different parts of Europe pursued
similar activities: they sought to create and use warmaking capacity to_their
own advantages. But each one did so under the highly variable conditions set by
‘the combination of coercion and capital that prevailed in his_own territory.
Alternative combinations meant different class configurations, different potential
allies and enemies, different organizational residues of state activity, different
forms of resistance to state activity, different strategies for the extraction of
resources, and therefore different levels of efficiency in resource extraction.
Because each interaction produced new organizational residues and social
relations, the path followed by a state up to a certain point in time limited the
strategies open to its rulers beyond that point. For that reason, even states
occupying identical locations with respect to coercion and capital at different
points in time behaved somewhat differently. Nevertheless, the great distinctions
separated coercion-intensive, capital-intensive, and capitalized-coercion traject-
ories of state formation.

COERCIVE TRAJECTORIES

Take the path that led through high coercion. In the European portion of what
is now the USSR, trade routes were thin and capital lacking. In AD ggo, the
chief center of commerce and manufacturing was Kiev, which served as a
northern offshoot of the great commercial band connecting Byzantium with
India, China, and the rest of the civilized world; Kiev also lay on the lesser
north-south trade route linking the Baltic to Byzantium. In the year 988,
tradition says, Prince Vladimir of Kiev had cemented the Byzantine connection
by accepting baptism into its branch of Christianity. Princes of Kiev,
descendants of Vikings who had moved south to conquer, exercised weak
sovereignty over the rulers of other Russian city-states and regional dukedoms.
At a local level, much of the land remained under the control of peasant
communes; as in the rest of eastern Europe, landlords were able to coerce
income from peasants in the form of dues, fines, use fees, and part-time labor
on their estates, but could only intervene with difficulty in households’ and
communities’ management of their own plots. The thinness of settlement made
it relatively easy for cultivators to flee oppressive masters and seek refuge in the
lands of other lords. Great landlords also suffered repeated raids and conquests
from the mobile peoples of the steppe. On a larger scale, nevertheless, relatively
autonomous armed landlords dominated most of the territory.

To the west, in AD ggo, a Polish state was aggrandizing by conquest of
territories nominally belonging to the Holy Roman Empire. It was also
138 Lineages of the National State

expanding eastward; in 1069 its grand duke drove his armies to Kiev and put
one of his kinsmen on the Russian throne. To the northwest, Viking states
made periodic attempts to extend their frontiers into the lands claimed by
Russia and Poland. A bellicose Bulgarian state flexed its muscles to Russia’s
southwest. In the same region, kings of Bohemia and Hungary (the latter newly
crowned) were likewise marking out their own zones of control. Around
Europe’s western rim — notably in the British Isles, the Iberian peninsula, and
Italy — the armed invaders that rolled continually out of Scandinavia and the
Middle East commonly seized land and created states based on agriculture;
however thinly, they settled on the land. Almost all of Europe’s eastern third, in
contrast, was forming into tribute-taking states that claimed priority in large
territories but governed them only loosely, if at all.

In the East, nomadic conquerors simultaneously threatened the hegemony of
any substantial state and maintained a strong investment in the continued
existence of agrarian states they could exploit. When their numbers were large
and their force too great for them to fix themselves as parasites on existing
states, some of them gradually settled and formed their own exploitative states.
In all these ways, they shaped the east European pattern of state formation for a
thousand years after AD 500. One after another, they roared out of the steppe:
Bulgars, Magyars, Petchenegs, Mongols, Turks, and many lesser peoples.

Invasions from the southeast continued well past the Millennium, reaching
their peak in the 1230s, when Mongols sacked Kiev and established hegemony
in its domains. At that point, Mongols were on their way to ruling most of
Eurasia, from Russia to China. In much of their domain, to be sure, that “rule”
consisted of little more than the requirement of formal submission, the exaction
of tribute, the fighting off of rival claimants, and the conduct of occasional
military raids on insufficiently cooperative subjects. For two centuries,
nevertheless, Russian princes paid tribute and homage to the Golden Horde,
who set their capital on the lower Volga. Indeed, the Horde’s khans commonly
forced sons of ruling Russian princes to inhabit the Mongol capital, and thus to
serve as hostages to their fathers’ performances (Dewey 1988: 254).

From the fifteenth century onward the frequency and intensity of attacks
from the southeast seems to have declined as the central Mongol empire
collapsed and the steppe’s armed horsemen turned their attention to
the vulnerable, and much richer, states along their southern flank. When
Tatars sacked Moscow in 1571, they unknowingly marked the end of major
incursions into Russia. During the seventeenth century, Zunghar Mongols
actually collaborated with the Russians in the conquest of Siberia. Very
likely the combination of devastating disease (especially plague) on the
Eurasian steppe and the European opening of sea routes that offered viable
alternatives to the ancicnt caravan road from China and India to Europe
diminished the threat from the steppe to creators of Russian states (McNeill

1976: 195-6).
Lineages of the National State 139

By 1400, Europe from the Vistula to the Urals was consolidating into large
states, including Lithuania, the republic of Novgorod, and the realm of the
Golden Horde. To the northwest, the Prussia of the Teutonic Knights and a
Denmark temporarily including Sweden and Norway dominated the Baltic.
During the first half of the sixteenth century, the vast grand duchies of
Lithuania and Moscow divided the area above the band of Muslim kingdoms
that extended from the east along the north shore of the Black Sea all the way to
Hungary, Greece, and the Adriatic. (In 1569, Lithuania would unite with
Poland, to its west, placing a huge, if thinly-governed, state between Russia and
the rest of Europe.) The sixteenth-century establishment of an Arctic sea route
from England and Holland to Archangel fortified the European connections of
the growing Russian state.

Conquests of Peter the Great (1689-1725) and Catherine the Great (1762-
96) brought Russia’s boundaries definitively to the Black Sea and provisionally
to Estonia, Latvia, and Karelia. Both rulers intensified the involvement of
Russia in the culture and politics of western Europe. The end of the
Napoleonic Wars left European Russia within something like its present
borders, adjacent to Prussia, Poland, Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire. The
Ottoman state, itself an outgrowth of conquest from the east, covered the
Balkans and reached west to touch the thin strip of Austrian territory bordering
the Adriatic. Between the sixteenth and eightcenth centuries, Europe’s entire
eastern frontier consolidated into states that claimed control over large
expanses of land. At the same time, the Russian state and economy shifted their
orientations from southeast to northwest. As compared with the tribute-
collecting states of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries these states
exercised significant control over their borders and substantial power over the
populations within them.

Poland remained for centuries the exception that proved the rule, the country
in which the nominal ruler could never rule the great landlords, and could
rarely get them to join in a sustained, coordinated military effort. During the
1760s, when the Polish state still occupied a territory larger than that of France,
the national army mustered only 16,000 men, while Polish nobles had some
30,000 men under arms. This at a time when adjacent Russia, Austria, and
Prussia stood by with armies of 200 to 500 thousand men (Ratajczyk
1987: 167). As mass armies formed, failure to match your great neighbors, or to
ally with at least one of them, invited conquest. In the later eighteenth century
Russia, Austria, and Prussia swallowed adjacent sections of Poland, eventually
leaving none behind.

Poland again fell prey to Prussia, Austria, and Russia in the nineteenth
century, but otherwise Russia’s European borders remained relatively stable
until World War I, whose settlement placed a serics of small republics, plus a
substantial Poland, to the west of the newly-formed Soviet Union. World War II
brought some of those republics back into the USSR’s state territory, and the
140 Lineages of the National State

rest of them into its orbit. To discuss the formation of the “Russian” state is
thus to follow a titanic series of changes in hegemony and territory.

Before the twentieth century, none of that territory contained a great
concentration of cities, and little of it even reached into the continent’s regions
of intense trade. After 1300, indeed, with the contraction of the old commercial
belt that ran from China to the Balkans (and therefore of its northward
extension to the Baltic), and with predatory Mongols blocking access to the
Mediterranean and the Black Sea, the once-thriving network of cities including
Kiev, Smolensk, Moscow, and Novgorod thinned out. The sixteenth-century
revival of trade multiplied towns, but did not bring into being anything
resembling the urban density of western and Mediterranean Europe. The
Russian state took shape in a capital-poor environment.

The environment was also coercion-rich. For five centuries after AD ggo the
various states that grew up in that part of Europe operated through conquest,
fed on tribute, and ruled (the word exaggerates) chiefly through regional
magnates who had their own bases of power. Under Mongol hegemony, the
largely independent princes of the North parceled out their sovereignty to
landlords who fused economic and political control of the peasants in their
jurisdictions. During the sixteenth century, as the Mongol states collapsed,
Russian conquests to the south and east brought into being a system of land and
labor grants to warriors, forced labor by peasants, restrictions on their right to
move, and rising taxation for war; the durable traits of Russian serfdom began
to appear.

Up to that point, Russian emperors were trying to rule a vast territory with
insufficient force. They governed quite indirectly, through a church and a
nobility that held tremendous powers and retained the ability to check royal
demands. Muscovite tsars Ivan III (the Great, 1462-1505) and Ivan IV (the
Terrible, 1533-84) began to establish more direct rule by sapping the power of
independent landlords; in their place they created an army and a bureaucracy
attached to the crown through the imperial land grants their chief officers
enjoyed. “Ivan [the Great] and his successors,” reports Jerome Blum,

were intent upon building up the military forces they needed to conquer their brother
princes, to crush the oligarchic ambitions of their own boyars, to stave off foreign
invasions, and to expand their realm. ‘They needed an army that was as dependent as
possible upon them, and upon whosc loyalty, therefore, they could themselves depend.
But they lacked the money to buy the men and the allegiance they required. So they

decided to use land.
(Blum 1964: 170-1)

That was the quintessential coercion-intensive strategy. Since most of the
essential land belonged to armed, semi-independent landlords, the tsars’
reorganization precipitated bloody battles with the nobility. The tsars won. In
the process, landlords who enjoyed imperial favor gained a signal advantage
Lineages of the National State 141

over their rebellious neighbors: they could count on the government’s armed
force to fix an otherwise footloose peasantry on their lands. Thus the logic of
warmaking and statemaking in a region of little capital led rulers to buy
officeholders with expropriated land. Eventually Russia’s rulers established the
principle that only servants of the state could own land; although exceptions and
violations abounded, the principle provided yet another incentive for the
multiplication of offices, and for collaboration between officials and landholders
in the exploitation of the peasantry.

The placing of small estates in the hands of profit-secking officeholders
increased the pressure on peasants in the northwest. Combined with the
opening of new territories to the south and east, that pressure induced a
depopulation of the old areas of settled agriculture, which only increased the
incentive to fix peasants in place by local practice and imperial decree; the so-
called Assembly Code of 1649 codified a system of serfdom that had been
developing for two centuries. In addition, slave labor, especially in the newer
areas of settlement, continued to expand during the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. During the eighteenth century, in seeking to extract revenue from
slaves as well as serfs, the tsars practically eliminated the Icgal distinction
between them. After an abortive attempt to tax individual peasants, Peter the
Great made landlords responsible for the soul tax, an act that reinforced the
interdependence of crown and landlords, not to mention the state-backed power
that landlords wielded over their hapless serfs. Peter decreed in 1700 that any
freed slave or serf must report immediately for military service, and if rejected
for service bind himself to another master. Peter likewise created a distinctive
nobility, neatly graded by rank of service to the tsar. To a degree unimaginable
in western Europe, Russia acquired a social hierarchy defined, supported, and
dominated by the state.

From top to bottom, the emerging structure of social relations depended on
coercion. As the Russian state began seriously to engage in war with its heavily
armed western ncighbors, the effort to extract essential revenues from an
uncommercialized economy multiplied the state structure. At the same time,
the ‘conquest of lands lying between Muscovy and the Ottoman Empire
expanded the military apparatus, exported the Russian mode of serfdom and
landholding, and built up the imperial bureaucracy to its full, ponderous form.
Peter the Great began the great effort to eliminate separatisms, to subject all
segments of the empire — and their revenues — to Muscovite regulations and
central administration:

Accompanying Peter’s campaign to weed out Ukrainian separatism was a policy of
extracting the maximum in economic and human resources from the Hetmanate.
Regulations on trade routes, state monopolies, tariffs on foreign goods, and import-
export taxes were introduced for the first time ... Peter also began a massive
conscription of Cossacks, not for war but for imperial public works — the building of
142 Lineages of the National State

canals, fortifications, and, especially, Peter’s favorite project, the new capital of St.
Petersburg.

(Kohut 1988: 71; sec also Raeff 1983)
Catherine the Great completed the incorporation of the Ukraine by abolishing
the semi-autonomous Hetmanate outright. The same bureaucracy then
reached all parts of the empire. The challenge of war with Napoleonic France,
which transformed state structure through much of Europe, fortified the
Russian state, magnified its budget, taxation, and staff, expanded its military,
and locked into place a deeply coercive state.

In broadly similar ways, Russian, Polish, Hungarian, Serbian, and Branden-
burger states formed on the basis of strong alliances between warmaking
princes and armed landlords, large concessions of governmental power to
nobles and gentry, joint exploitation of the peasantry, and restricted scope for
merchant capital. Repeatedly, leaders of conquering forces who lacked capital
offered their followers booty and land, only to face the problem of containing
the great warrior-landlords they thereby created. Mongols stood out as
exceptions because they rarely settled down to run their own lands, and usually
continued to live on tribute exacted by the perpetual threat of devastating
invasion.

Although the relative weight of crown and nobility (and therefore the extent
to which warfare created durable state structure) varied significantly from state
to state, all these states stood out from their European neighbors by heavy
reliance on brute coercion. When, in the sixteenth century, large volumes of
eastern European grain began to flow westward, the existing structure of
control permitted great landlords to profit directly from those shipments; they
used state power to contain merchants and coerce peasant producers, building a
new serfdom in the process. In that balance of power, even extensive
commercialization did not build cities, an independent capitalist class, or a state
more greatly resembling those of urban Europe.

The experience of Sicily curiously parallels that of eastern European powers.
Sicily was for centuries a breadbasket, a rich source of grain for all the
Mediterranean. Yet its Arab and Norman rulers clamped on the island a system
of alliance with militarily-active landlords that left little scope for cities and
capitalists. King Frederick II, who came to power in 1208, subordinated cities
to his glorious state. “Fredcrick’s subjection of the towns,” reports Dennis
Mack Smith,

helped to ensure that there was never any class of merchants or civic officials
independent and vigorous enough to offset the landowning aristocracy; and this lack of
challenge to the aristocracy was to be a fundamental factor in the political, cultural and
economic decline of Sicily. Whenever strong government failed, it was the nobles and
not the local cities which filled the vacuum of power. It was therefore foreign towns —
Pisa, Genoa, Venice, Amalfi, Lucca — which dominated Sicilian commerce.

(Mack Smith 1968a: 56)
Lineages of the National State 143

That external contro! over commerce continued for six centuries, with the
result that an agriculturally rich Sicily remained capital-poor and subject to
coercive control.

We begin to see a pattern of uniformity and variation among coercion-
intensive paths of state formation. All Europe’s areas of high coercion began
with some combination of two conditions: (1) a major effort to expel a tribute-
taking power, (2) few cities and little concentrated capital. The expulsion of
tribute takers was relatively unimportant in the Nordic countries, the extent of
cities and capital greater in the Iberian peninsula and Sicily than in eastern and
northern Europe. But everywhere the combination encouraged a strategy of
conquest in which territorial lords simultaneously _leagued together against
common enemies and fought each other for r for priority within their own territory,
with the Ieading lord ceding control over land and Tabor to his fellows in
exchange for military assistance. On the whole, that strategy left little space for
an autonomous bourgeoisie, hence for accumulation and concentration of
capital outside the state.

There the differences began. In some areas (Poland and Hungary are the
obvious examples) warrior nobles retained great power, including the ability to
install and depose kings. In others (Sweden and Russia are cases in point) a
single power managed to establish priority by constructing a state bureaucracy
that gave nobles and clergy great privileges with respect to the commoner
population, but committed them to service of the state. In still others (Sicily and
Castile come to mind), a nobility whose richer and more powerful members
resided in the capital on incomes drawn from distant estates and state revenues
coexisted with state officials who reached far into the provinces and relied on
priests and local nobles for assistance in working the royal will. The big
division, then, separated the first variant from the other two — marked off states
in which rival armed landlords long held the upper hand from those in which
one of them early established supremacy over all the others. In all of them,
states grew up starved for capital, bartered state-guaranteed privileges for
national armed force, and relied heavily on coercion to assure compliance with
royal demands.

CAPITALIST TRAJECTORIES

What a contrast with the states of Flanders or northern Italy! Consider the
upper Adriatic, the arc of coastline from Ravenna to Trieste. For centuries,
Venice dominated the region both economically and politically. But to the south
rival powers struggled for control of the coastal area. Ravenna, for example,
having been the residence of Roman and Goth emperors, passed the
Millennium as a republic, only came under Venctian control during the
144 Lineages of the National State

fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and from then until the Risorgimento
belonged to the pope’s domains. To the west, a region of multiple city-states
yielded to Venice’s fourteenth-century conquests, giving the Venetian city-
empire a common frontier with a Lombardy that was first an independent state,
then a possession successively of Spain, Austria, and unified Italy. To the north,
the Holy Roman Empire and its successor states always loomed large, and
sometimes held the coast. To the east, empire after empire surged and pushed
toward the Adriatic. In the year ggo, the Byzantine Empire exercised nominal
control in Dalmatia and the Venetian region, while a shadowy “Roman” empire
based in central Europe claimed sovereignty in the adjacent sections of Italy.

To simplify a very complicated story, let us concentrate on Venice, and
simply note the city’s interactions with all those competing powers. We shall
look for: the_interaction between substantial, increasing concentrations of
capital and weak, fragmented concentrations of coercion; the profound
influence of capitalists over any attempt to create autonomous coercive power;
the emergence of a sleek, efficient, r rapacious, protection-oriented_seafaring
state; the eventual hemming-in of that state by larger land-based powers; in
short, the quintessence..of.capital-intensive state formation...

The Lombard invasion of Italy (aD 568) had transformed a scattering of
boatmen and saltmakers into a set of refugee settlements with strong ties to
mainland Italy. Venice remained a nominal part of the Byzantine Empire while
Lombards and then Franks seized much of the nearby territory. Up to AD ggo,
as the Byzantine Empire reached its high point, Venice served chiefly as a
transfer station for goods dispatched to northern Italy by traders within the
Byzantine system; the city sent its own merchants to Pavia and other inland
markets, exchanging salt, fish, and precious goods from the East for grain and
other necessities. As they turned seaward, however, Venetian merchants added
slaves and lumber to their wares. They also extended the city’s commercial and
political influence to much of the Adriatic.

In the Mediterranean of that time, the limits of shipbuilding and navigation
meant that ships hugged shores, followed a relatively small number of routes
defined by winds, currents, and shoals, put in frequently for water and other
supplies, evaded corsairs with difficulty once they encountered them, and when
they traveled long distances could only afford to carry valuable goods (Pryor
1988). No state became a great maritime power without having extensive
privileges in many ports away from its home territory. States that did control
many ports gained from them a triple return: access to long trade routes, trade
in those ports, and use of the ports as bases for corsairs to prey on the
commerce of other powers. For a time, Venice met these conditions and
became the Mediterranean’s greatest seapower. It contributed mightily to the
Christian states’ capture of major sea lanes from Muslim control, which began
in the tenth century and did not recede until the Turkish advances of the
fourteenth. Only the consolidation of Ottoman power during the fifteenth and

Lineages of the National State 145

sixteenth centuries seriously compromised Western domination of Mediterranean
sea-lanes (Pryor 1988: 172-8).

During the eleventh century, Venice’s fleet began both to carry its trade into
the Mediterranean and to fight off rivals for control of the Adriatic —
Dalmatians, Hungarians, Saracens, and Normans. Venetian forces annexed
Dalmatia in the year ggo, but lost it to an expanding Hungarian state around
1100; for five centuries thereafter, they dominated Dalmatia’s commercial
activity, but waxed and waned in its political control as a function of expansion
and contraction of territorial states to the east. For their collaboration with the
Byzantine emperor in wars against his enemies, they received exceptional
trading privileges in the empire, including their own quarter in Constantinople
(1082). Like Hanse merchants in Scandinavia and North Germany, Venetian
traders came to manage much of Byzantium’s long-distance commerce. During
the twelfth century, they expanded their scope to the whole eastern
Mediterranean, profitably mixing trade, piracy, conquest, and participation in
crusades. Since crusading itself combined trade, piracy, and conquest, the
activities complemented each other. By 1102, Venice had its own merchant
quarter in Sidon; by 1123 it had established a base in Tyre as well.

In 1203 and 1204 Venice received the payoff on its combined strategy, as a
crafty doge diverted a crusade to Constantinople and delivered a death blow
to the Byzantine Empire. The bronze horses of San Marco, seized in
Constantinople, still stand as monuments to that tour de force. Venice ended up
in control of large pieces (legally, three eighths) of the late empire. The city
then granted fiefs in the Greek islands to members of its great families, on
condition that they keep the trade routes open.

Through all the conquest, Venetian commercial interests reigned supreme.
The city’s leading families were merchants and bankers, the city’s governing
council represented the leading familics, the doge came from that same
patriciate, the city’s military forces drew on its own population, and its military
and diplomatic policies promoted the establishment of commercial monopolies,
protection for its merchants, and channeling of trade through Venice rather
than the creation of a territorial empire. Once they consolidated their superior
position, Venetian authorities became reluctant to tolerate piracy and license
privateers, since both would menacc their investment in peaceful commerce.

The city’s maritime dominance, in its turn, opened new opportunities for
profit in transporting goods and people safely. Venetian shippers grew rich by
carrying crusaders, and then pilgrims, to the Holy Land. Freight charges on the
transport of crusaders to Constantinople in 1203, “came to about twice the
annual income of the king of England” (Scammell 1981: 108). For all their
service of crusaders and pilgrims, furthermore, Venetian rulers did not hesitate
to deal with the enemies of Christendom. After Tripoli (1289) and Acre (1291)
‘fell to the Ottoman Turks, for example, Venice immediately negotiated a treaty
with the Ottomans for retention of their old trading rights.
146  Lineages of the National State

Within the Adriatic, rival cities were unable to hold their own against Venice
without the aid of territorial powers. Trieste and Ragusa, for example, were
likewise trading cities that enjoyed a certain independence, but they could not
check Venice without outside help. Venice conquered Trieste in 1203, and held
the port in uneasy thrall for more than a century. During Trieste’s unsuccessful
rebellion of 1368, Duke Leopold of Austria, an old enemy of Venice who
coveted an opening onto the Adriatic, sent a relieving force. In 1382, Trieste
succeeded in placing itself under Leopold’s overlordship; Trieste then
remained Austrian (indeed, remained Austria’s principal port) until the
twentieth century.

Ragusa/Dubrovnik followed a broadly similar strategy. Ragusa lived under
nominal Venetian overlordship until 1358, but maintained relative independence
before then by cultivating good relations with the neighboring kingdoms of
Serbia and Bosnia, in whose trade its merchants played a dominant role. An
expanding Hungary expelled Venice from Dalmatia in the 1350s, and granted
Ragusa a nearly independent position at the periphery of its empire. As
Ottoman Turks won the Balkans in the 1460s, the merchant-patricians of
Ragusa managed to negotiate similar arrangements with the new Muslim
rulers. Shielded from Italian conquest by its successive protectors and
guaranteed great autonomy within Slavic and Ottoman empires by its
commercial position, Ragusa operated as an essentially independent city-state
until the Napoleonic invasion of 1808.

Although the Italian cities whose supply lines Venice dominated and the
Dalmatian cities over whom Venice exercised direct control struggled
continually to check Venetian hegemony, Venice competed for seapower most
directly with Genoa, a similar ocean-going city-state. During the later
thirteenth century, Genoa expanded through the western Mediterranean and
out past Gibraltar along the Atlantic coast in the same way that Venice
penetrated the eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea; but Genoa reached
more effectively east than Venice reached west; the two powers clashed
especially at the meeting points of their maritime zones. Genoese control of the
Black Sea during the latér thirteenth century blocked Venetian access to the
lucrative trade with that which passed from Trebizond to China through
Mongol-held territory. Once Venetian forces blockaded and captured the
Genoese fleet in Chioggia’s lagoon (1380), however, Venice held priority in the
east.

After the Millennium, as Venice’s place in the trade of the Adriatic and
eastern Mediterranean grew ever larger, the city’s population bounded to one of
Europe’s greatest: 80,000 or more in 1200, 120,000 or so in 1300. Although
the Black Death (introduced into Italy by Genoese galleys returning from
Caffa) killed over half the city’s population in 1347, 1348, and 1349, the
number of inhabitants swung around 120,000 for centuries thereafter, in fact
unt! now. From the thirteenth century onward, manufacturing and commerce
Lineages of the National State 147

displaced seafaring as the city’s dominant activities. But Venice remained a
critical link in maritime trade, and a great power in maritime politics. Its empire
extended, for example, to Cyprus until 1573 and to Crete until 1669. The city’s
forces warred to maintain access to commercial opportunities, and warred to
hold off such rivals as Genoa. More than anything else, its rulers gained
reputations from the ability to wage canny and successful sea wars at relatively
low cost to the city’s merchants, bankers, and manufacturers.

The nature of Venetian trade facilitated creation of an exceptionally supple
and predatory state. Unlike the Dutch, who gained their riches transporting
bulky products such as grain, salt, and wine, Venetians concentrated on high-
priced luxuries: spices, silks, slaves. What is more, they frequently carried great
quantities of bullion. Efficiency, monopoly, and military protection from
marauders therefore became crucial to their success. “[T]hough other imperial
powers might devote much of their energies and resources to the defence of
some particular monopoly,” remarks G. V. Scammell, “with none, except
Venice, did its running and protection become in effect the whole purpose of
their being, with the state providing the ships for its operation and a navy and
empire for its safeguard” (Scammell 1981: 116). Such a state made as little war
as possible, but made that war ruthlessly.

Doges, especially, bore responsibility for warfare. The first doges had been
servitors of the Byzantine Empire. As Venice established its independence
from the empire, doges had acted increasingly like elected but thenceforth
sovereign princes, acting without formal consultation of the community and
designating their successors from within their own dynasties. With the city’s
growth after AD ggo, however, Venice moved increasingly to formal oligarchy. A
general assembly in which the great families played a preponderant role elected
the doge. He had to consult a council that, in theory, represented the
Commune formed by all the settlements of the lagoons and, in practice, spoke
for the great families in the central settlement. As is so often the case, a formal
council took shape when a would-be sovereign faced a group of well-defined
and disparate interests without whose support he could not govern. Over time,
the great council became more and more exclusive; in 1297, membership
became essentially hereditary. In 1300 and 1310, the council fought off popular
rebellions against the exclusion of non-patricians from its deliberations. From
that point on, members of the oligarchy struggled for preeminence within the
city, but never relinquished collective control over its destiny.

Rather than a single governing council, indeed, successive struggles over
power produced a shifting hierarchy of councils, from the doge’s own advisors
to the general assembly of all inhabitants, the latter now reduced to ratifying the
decisions of their betters. On the other hand, Venice secreted no bureaucracy;
elected committees and officials’ personal retainers did the bulk of governmental
work. By 1200, the doge had become rather the oligarchy’s executive officer
than an autocrat chosen by popular acclamation. As a result, the interests of
148 —Lineages of the National State

merchant capitalists dominated the policy — domestic and foreign — of the
Venetian state.

If commercial interests guided Venice, the state in turn regulated its citizens’
commercial activity. “The Venetian travelling to the Levant on business,”
remarks Daniel Waley,

was likely to go in a state-built galley, commanded by a captain chosen by the state,
within a convoy organised by the state, and when he reached Alexandria or Acre he
might well be ordered to join other Venetians in a joint, state-organised purchase of
cotton or pepper. The advantage of the last system was that prices would be kept lower if
Venetians were not competing against each other. ‘The convoy system for longer voyages
goes back at least to the twelfth century. By the thirteenth the routine arrangements
allowed for two convoys of galleys a year to the eastern Mediterranean and by the
beginning of the fourtcenth there were also annual sailings to England and Flanders, to
north Africa (“Barbary”) and to Aigues-Mortes (near the mouth of the Rhone). The
arsenal, the state shipbuilding yard, dates back to the early thirteenth century and the
materials used there were usually purchased directly by the Venetian republic.

(Waley 1969: 96)

The state, executive committee of the bourgeoisie, took its responsibilities
seriously.

Yet the Venetian state was never bulky. The fiscal system lent itself to slim
government. In 1184, for example, Venice established a monopoly over the
production and sale of salt from Chioggia’s lagoon; although such a monopoly
encouraged petty smuggling and fraud, it also produced substantial revenues
without extensive manpower. From the thirteenth century onward, the
commune established a funded debt. The Monte Vecchio and the other Monti
succeeding it, the securities representing that debt, came to be a favorite
investment in Venice and elsewhere. The city borrowed to finance wars, then
relied on customs and excise to pay for them. The great ritual and charitable
confraternities, the Scuole Grandi, loaned substantial sums to the state (Pullan
1971: 138). Since it could borrow from its own merchants and tax the flows
through an extensively commercialized economy, the state created little new
organization for its finances.

The fourteenth century involved Venice more emphatically in land warfare,
and built up the state structure correspondingly. As the city-states of northern
Italy began to expand their territories, they threatened both Venice’s sources of
industrial supplies on the mainland and its merchants’ access to vital trade
routes across the Alps. Venctians began two fateful games: conquest on the
mainland, and shifting alliances with other north Italian powers. By the end of
the century, as transalpine powers started serious incursions into northern Italy,
Venice was organizing coalitions against France, and joining with such powers
as the king of Castile and the German emperor. A set of permanent
ambassadors fanned out to the major courts of Europe. The advance of the
Lineages of the National State 149

Turks around the eastern Mediterranean, and even into Italy, simultaneously
drew the city into increased naval warfare.

The expanded scale of warfare caused changes in the city’s organization for
war. For the first time, Venice entrusted warfare to outsiders, condottieri, who
employed mercenaries in large numbers. The government balanced condottiere
influence by sending out patrician commissioners, provveditori, who had
widespread power over supplies, pay, and sometimes military strategy itself
(Hale 1979). Not long after, the city resorted to conscription in its subject
territories and in Venice itself, where the guilds of artisans and shopkeepers
received quotas of oarsmen for war galleys. During the fifteenth century,
Venice began to force convicts and captives to man its galleys; in the process,
the galleys shifted from the trireme, which required three skilled rowers, each
with his own oar, on every bench, to the ship with one large oar per bench, on
which even unskilled, reluctant, and shackled prisoners could lean their weight.
The day of an all-volunteer force had long since passed.

The swelling of warfare and the shift away from citizen-soldiers placed new
financial burdens on the city. By the later fourteenth century, Venice was
levying forced loans, income taxes, and direct property taxes to pay its war-
induced debts. Nevertheless, these exceptional efforts did not build up a bulky
or permanent bureaucracy; in a highly commercialized economy, elected
officials and a small professional corps of clerks and secretaries administered
the city’s accounts without a large staff. The state parceled out many
responsibilities to the citizenry, as when they required the Scuole Grandi to
raise portions of a war fleet on their own (Pullan 1971: 147-56; Lane
1973b: 163). Nor did financial obligations overwhelm the city’s fiscal apparatus.
At the start of the seventeenth century, while other European states were
painfully accumulating war debts, Venice actually managed temporarily to
liquidate its entire long-term indebtedness (Lane 1973a: 326).

Well before 1600, the city passed its apogee of commercial power. From the
fifteenth century onward, a concatenation of changes reduced Venice to a
second-rank actor on the international scene: Turkey’s exclusion of Venice
from Black Sea and eastern Mediterranean ports, the near-surrounding of
Venetian territory by Habsburg, Bourbon, and Turkish empires, Venice’s
declining access to timber, its consequently dwindling shipbuilding industry, its
diminishing ability to control Dalmatia, and Mediterranean competition-cum-
piracy of Atlantic maritime powers such as Holland and England. By
circumnavigating Africa and penetrating the Indian Ocean’s trade routes,
Portuguese merchants broke the Venetian stranglehold on the spice trade. At
the end of the sixteenth century, Portuguese vessels were carrying from a
quarter to a half of all the spices and drugs that Europeans brought from the
Far East (Steensgard 1981: 131). Portuguese dominance did not last long,
however; within a century the efficiently-organized Dutch and British East
India Companies had displaced their Iberian rivals (Steensgard 1974).
150 Lineages of the National State

The arrival of the large, armed sailing ship on the Mediterranean scene
cracked the long hegemony of the Venetian galley. Thereafter Venice remained
bustling and independent, increasingly engaged in manufacturing and in
administration of its mainland territory, but no longer the Mediterranean’s
leading force. Even within the Adriatic, once practically the city’s private lake,
sixteenth-century Venctian vessels were unable to contain the rival merchants
of Ragusa or to check the depredations of pirates. In the eighteenth century,
they gave up trying to exclude foreign warships from their gulf. By then, not
only Ragusa but also Trieste and Ancona competed actively for Adriatic trade.

Venice settled for a general policy of military and diplomatic neutrality, an
important commercial niche, an increasing reliance on mainland territories as
an economic base, and a republican public life dominated by the old oligarchy.
“In the hard choice between political independence and commercial success,”
concludes Alberto Tenenti about the seventeenth century, “in her uncertainty
about her own fate, the proud determination of Venice still shone forth above all
her mistaken and her shabby actions. Instead of choosing, like her neighbor
Ragusa, a life with no risks and no history, the old city-state refused to give way
to the predominance of any power, be it Turkish or Papal, Spanish or
Habsburg” (Tenenti 1967: xvii—xviii).

Yet that choice finally failed: in 1797, Napoleon’s invasion brought the
eighteenth-century settlement to an end. Venice and its mainland territories
became properties first of Austria, then of a Napoleonic kingdom of Italy, then
again of Austria. In 1848, a group of insurgents led by Daniele Manin briefly
held power, but Austria soon brought its revolutionary subjects into line.
Finally, in 1866, Prussia’s defeat of Austria freed Venice to join the new Italian
national state.

Venice followed a unique historical trajectory. Yet the city’s history had
something in common with Genoa, Ragusa, Milan, Florence, and even
Holland, Catalonia, or the Hanse. During the fourteenth century, after all,
Barcelona sent traders up and down the Mediterranean, and ruled Thebes,
Athens, and Piraeus. The Dutch Republic, a frequently turbulent federation of
trading centers, remained pne of Europe’s dominant states for more than a
century. City-states, city-empires, and urban federations all held their own for
centuries as commercial and political powers, gave high priority to commercial
objectives, created effective state structures without large bureaucracies,
invented relatively efficient ways of paying for war and other state expenditures,
and built institutions representing their commercial oligarchies into the very

organization of their states

[_Capainensie state formation differed from coercion-intensive and
pitalized-coercion paths of change in three fundamental regards. (1) The

influence of commercial oligarchies promoted the development of states

organized around the p protection and expansion of commercial enterprise -

especially, in European experience, maritime enterprise. (2) The institutions

Lineages of the National State 151

created by the bourgeoisie for the defense of their own interests actually
became sometime instruments of state administration; Venice, Genoa, and the
Dutch Republic achieved a remarkable fusion of municipal and national
government. (3) The availability of capital and capitalists permitted these states
to Rorrgws (fax, purchase, and wage war effectively without creating bulky,
durable ale patel adifiinistrations. ~ Until the sl sheer scale of war with nationally

power, capital-intensive states prospered in a warlike world. Not long after the
Medici, with the aid of papal armies, returned to rule his native Florence,
Niccolé Machiavelli wrote that

if any one should wish to establish a republic in a country where there are many
gentlemen, he will not succeed until he has destroyed them all; and whoever desires to
establish a kingdom or principality where liberty and equality prevail, will equally fail,
unless he withdraws from that general equality a number of the boldest and most
ambitious spirits, and makes gentlemen of them, not merely in name but in fact, by
giving to them castles and possessions, as well as money and subjects; so that surrounded
by these he may be able to maintain his power, and that by his support they may satisfy
their ambition, and the others may be constrained to submit to that yoke to which force
alone has been able to subject them.

(Discourses, 1, 55; 1 owe this apt reference to Richard Frank)

More than anything else, gentlemen — that is, aristocratic landlords -
shouldered _coercion-intensiye states, while capitalists — that is, merchants,
bankers, and manufacturers — dominated their capital-intensive rivals. The
differences in their experiences depended on when they formed, how n much
territory they attempted to control, the extent ‘to which agriculture and
manufacturing became significant parts of their economic bases, and in what
kinds of commodities they specialized.

These factors depended, in their turn, on the geographic and geopolitical
locations of the core cities in each state. The presence of large agricultural
hinterlands, when it occurred, promoted the formation of larger territorial
states..Port cities serving primarily as markets for long-distance trade more
frequently created ‘city-states or city-empires on the basis of small home
territories. Adjacency to substantial empires and national states favored either
absorption into those states or entry into the same struggle for control of
territory. These variations, nevertheless, operated within limits set by the
powerful presence of capital and capitalists.

TRAJECTORIES OF CAPITALIZED COERCION

Not all of the upper Adriatic, obviously, illustrates the capitalist path through
state formation equally well. Austria eventually managed to claim a significant
section of the shore, including Trieste, and to subordinate it to a state that had
152 Lineages of the National State

strong coercive interests elsewhere. Byzantine, Serbian, Hungarian, and
Ottoman empires all struggled with Venice for control of Dalmatia, and the
Ottomans won — at least for several centuries. Nevertheless, the upper
Adriatic’s history contrasts sharply with that of European Russia. In the
Adriatic, abundant capital facilitated the building of armed force, especially
maritime force, but provided an incentive and a means for capitalists’ resistance
to the creation of large states that could subordinate their interests to those
of a dynasty. In Russia, the rarity of concentrated capital (especially after
the fourteenth-century contraction of trade connections with Asia and the
Byzantine Empire) and the presence of warrior-landlords predisposed all the
states that formed toward coercive means. There the big question was whether
magnates would continue to hold fragmented sovereignty in their many hands,
or a single ruler would somehow establish firm priority over all the rest. Once
the Russian state opted for the centralized construction of armed force, its
efforts brought into being a ponderous state in which landlords retained great
discretion within their own territories, but lost it vis-a-vis the tsar.

The fate of peasants — the bulk of the population almost everywhere in
Europe before the eighteenth century — differed dramatically between
coercion-intensive and capital-intensive regions. In most areas of coercion-
intensive state formation, rulers created states in close collaboration with large
landlords who retained extensive military and civilian powers, Russia, Poland,
Hungary, and Brandenburg-Prussia exemplify the process, which had some
parallels in Sicily and Castile. In such states, the expansion of trade in the
sixteenth century encouraged and enabled landlords, backed by state power, to
enserf peasants from whom they had previously drawn ample rents; most
commonly, they required poorly-remunerated labor service on the landlord’s
demesne from cultivator households who drew their own subsistence from
small farms to which they were attached by law. In other coercion-intensive
regions (especially Scandinavia) where landlords never acquired the economic
and political power of their eastern European counterparts, rulers of the
sixteenth century and later instituted direct controls over the peasantry_with the
help of clergy and other bureaucrats, thus guaranteeing the long survival of
subsistence-oriented peasants.

In capital-intensive are Bese aS Netherlands and some of Switzerland,
the peasantry underwent.bifurcation) In the presence of urban markets and
aggressive capitalists, agriculture commercialized early and frequently combined
with rural industry. As a result, a minority of peasants grew rich on cash crops
and the labor of their neighbors. The majority became poor wage-laborers,
many of whom doubled in domestic manufacturing or peddling when demand
was on the upswing. In the company of omnipresent merchants, the minority
and the majority produced a_cural economy that supplied its cities easily, lent
itself to efficient taxation, and fell under the control of cities that were regional
centers of trade. Contrasting peasant experiences Were both cause and effect of

Lineages of the National State 153

the very different trajectories of state formation in capital-intensive and
coercion-intensive regions.

In between the capitalist and coercive extremes lay the paths of capitalized
coercion, those instances where the concentrations of coercion and of capital
occurred in greater equality and tighter connection with each other. The British
Isles — Ireland, Scotland, England, and Wales — illustrate the path. They also
show how much the placement of any experience within the coercion—capital
diagram depends on the temporal and geographic limits we place on the
experience. Seen from Denmark in the year ggo, the British Isles look like a
peripheral zone of conquest and tribute within a substantial empire centered on
Scandinavia. Seen from Ireland over the period since then, state formation in
the British Isles has a much more coercive cast than when seen from
southeastern England. Scen from Scotland over the years 1500 to 1700, state
formation looks like the competition and interaction of three rather separate
states having different economic bases — English, Irish, and Scottish. Let it be
clear, then, that we are examining the whole region during the thousand years
following AD goo. Over the whole millennium the central drama was the
expansion of an English state initially formed in conquest but soon counter-
balanced by a great port and a commercialized economy.

In the year ggo, Ireland was locked in struggle among multiple Celtic
kingdoms and the coastal dominions of Norsemen. Although multiple Nordic
conquerors divided the islands of the North Sea, mainland Scotland and Wales
were more or less unified under the leadership of warrior-kings. A Dane,
Canute, was in the process of wresting a weakly-connected England from
Anglo-Saxon King Ethelred, who had already paid tribute to the Danes for a
decade. Not only paying tribute, but suffering continual depredation. In its
entry for 997, the Laud Chronicle reports that:

In this year the [Danish] host went around Devonshire into the mouth of the Severn, and
there harried, both in Cornwall, Wales, and Devon, and landed at Watchet; they
wrought great havoc by burning and killing people and went back round Land’s End to
the south side, and entered the estuary of the Tamar, and so up it until they came to
Lydford. There they burned and slew everything they met, and burnt to the ground
Ordwul’s abbey church at Tavistock, carrying off an indescribable amount of plunder
with them to the ships.

(Garmonsway 1953: 131)
As other Scandinavians sailed out to Iceland, Greenland, and America, Canute
and his raiders brought England temporarily into a tribute-taking empire that
stretched to Denmark and Norway. The new domains were valuable: at that
point, Dublin had perhaps 4,000 inhabitants, York 10,000, Norwich 4,000, and
London 25,000, far larger than any Scandinavian town. York served as an
important link to Scandinavia, and London to the rest of the world. While not
exactly criss-crossed with urban networks, the islands connected well with the
cities of continental Europe.
154  Lineages of the National State

Only sixty years later, Normans (descendants of earlier Viking warriors who
had settled in Gaul) organized one more invasion of Britain. Their conquest of
England followed the characteristic pattern of distributing land in fief to
soldiers become regional agents (and potential rivals) of the crown. It slowed
Scandinavian incursions and started the process by which the rulers of England
expanded their domains both within and beyond Britain. Over the next two
centuries, Norman-English and Scottish arms practically eliminated Danes and
Norwegians from control of territory in the British Isles.

As the play of alliance and inheritance increased “English” holdings in what
was to become France, the rulers of England began warring with their Norman
cousins. During the twelfth century, they also attempted to extend their rule to
Wales, Scotland, and Ireland. With his marriage to Eleanor of Aquitaine in
1152, Henry II had strong claims to rule England, Normandy, Maine, Brittany,
Anjou, Aquitaine, and much of Wales; during the following years, he extended
those claims to Scotland and portions of Ireland. As he ran that empire, he built
up a relatively effective royal judicial structure. Yet from 1173 onward his sons
began to contest his power in alliance with many barons and, at times, the
queen.

In the process of making war and intervening in dynastic rivalries, the barons
on whom English kings relied for their wars acquired enough power to fight the
king as well as each other, exacting chartered concessions — most dramatically
in Magna Carta — from the monarch. The Great Charter of 1215 committed
the king to cease squeezing feudal obligations for the wherewithal to conduct
wars, to stop hiring mercenaries when barons would not fight, and to impose
the major taxes only with the consent of the great council, representative of the
magnates. The council started to wield durable power, reinforced especially by
its place in the approval of new taxation. Later kings confirmed the charter
repeatedly. Nevertheless, the continuing efforts of English monarchs to create
armed force produced a durable central structure: royal treasury, courts, and
domain.

Edward I (1272—1307), for example, extended compulsory knighthood to all
holders of lands worth twenty pounds a year, required all knights to serve in royal
militias, established taxation for the payment of foot soldiers, imposed the first
regular customs dues on wool and hides, built up a permanent central staff who
took over some of the activities previously performed by barons and the king’s
personal retainers, and regularized the separate assemblies of barons, knights of
the shire, burgesses, and clergy that granted him money. (In 1294, preparing
for another campaign in France, Edward went so far as to sextuple the export
duty on wool and demand half the clergy’s income in taxes: Miller 1975: 11-
12.) The creation of central state structure continued during the fourteenth
century: not only did royal courts extend their jurisdiction throughout the land,
but justices of the peace began to wicld local power as commissioned agents of
the crown.
Lineages of the National State 155

Not that stability prevailed at the center. After all, Edward II died, murdered,
in prison (1327), Edward III expired practically powerless (1377), and a
deposed Richard II died - perhaps murdered as well — in prison (1400). The
houses of Lancaster and York fought thirty years of civil war (the Wars of
the Roses, 1455-85) over the right to the crown; the wars ended with Richard
III slain by the forces of Henry Tudor, who thereupon became Henry VII.
Armed struggles over royal power and royal succession continued for three
centuries, until the Glorious Revolution of 1688 set the House of Orange on
the throne.

At the same time, English kings tried repeatedly to capture territory in
Ireland, Wales, Scotland, and France. Edward I reduced Wales to subjugation
as well as nominally subordinating Ireland and Scotland to the English crown.
Welshmen only mounted one more serious rising, that of Owen Glendower
(1400-9). Both Irish and Scots, however, resisted English rule tenaciously,
and often found support from French kings who were happy to see their
English rivals distracted by military activity within the British Isles. In the
course of resistance both created parliaments having some parallels to their
English counterpart. Both also experienced bloody internal struggles over royal
succession and over the relative powers of kings and barons. While Ireland
remained a fractious colony, Scotland became an independent European power
in its own right. Not until the seventeenth century did Ireland and Scotland
succumb to relatively stable English control.

The long, and ultimately losing, effort of English kings to hold their French
possessions kept the state at war through most of the years from 1337 to 1453.
The financial demands of that effort (later called the Hundred Years’ War)
consolidated the position of Parliament, and regularized the division between
its two houses. For well over a century thereafter, wars against Scotland and
France (and sometimes both together) involved Parliament in royal fund-
raising, and established its right to consent to taxation.

The lower house, eventually to be called the Commons, assembled
representatives of the boroughs and the counties, who were largely merchants
on the one hand and landlords on the other. A long, if uneasy, alliance between
merchants and landlords began in the thirteenth century, as British wool first
fed continental textile manufactures and then became the basis for spinning and
weaving in Britain. Britain began the slow but fateful shift from exporting wool
to manufacturing and exporting woolens. From that point on, English
merchants established themselves in Flanders, and began to spread out through
the rest of Europe. During the fifteenth century, the English likewise proved
themselves formidable men of the sea; east coast sailors, for example, reopened
the continent’s trade with Iccland around 1412 (Scammell 1981: 460). The
Intercursus Magnus, a commercial treaty of 1496, established England as a
recognized partner in Flemish international trade. Although forcign merchants
and vessels dominated England’s trade for another half-century, by 1600 the
156 Lineages of the National State

English were competing with Spaniards, Portuguese, and Dutchmen throughout
the world.

In the same period, British seafarers such as the Bristol men who sailed with
John Cabot (himself, as it happens, a Venetian) began joining Dutchmen,
Italians, Spaniards, and Portuguese in exploring distant parts of the world, and
in laying the bases for a world-wide trading empire. By 1577 Sir Francis Drake
was circumnavigating the globe. The crown participated in these adventures to
the extent that they promised additions to governmental revenues or military
power (Andrews 1984: 14-15). British landlords, aided by legally sanctioned
enclosures of open fields and common lands, involved themselves heavily in the
marketing of wool and grain; the House of Commons came increasingly to
represent a tight alliance of merchants and cash-cropping landowners. The
country’s growing commercial strength facilitated a growth in state power; it
enabled Henry VII (1484-1509) and the later Tudors to check the Scots and
challenge the French, expand the state’s warmaking powers, extend taxation,
and reduce the great lords’ private armies.

Henry VIII’s secession from Rome, seizure of church revenues, and
expropriation of monasteries (1534-9) enhanced royal revenues and aligned
the cooperating clergy with royal interests. Tudor aggrandizement also incited
repeated regional rebellions, including the great Pilgrimage of Grace (1536).
Nevertheless the Tudors eventually curbed the great aristocrats, with their
private armies and claims to autonomous power (Stone 1965: 199-270). The
country’s nearly ceaseless commercialization, proletarianization, and economic
expansion provided an economic base for state activity, and the state’s reliance
on customs and excise made extraction of resources from that base more
efficient — but only when magnates, crown, and Parliament could bargain out an
agreement to cooperate.

During the sixteenth century, Scotland drew ever closer to France; when the
young Mary Queen of Scots became qucen of France as well (1559), the two
kingdoms approached merger. But a Protestant rebellion then contained
Mary’s power in Scotland, where she ruled unsteadily for six years before
inciting another insurrectior and fleeing to protective detention by Elizabeth in
England; her beheading in 1586 ended the threat of a French Scotland and of a
Catholic queen of England. At Elizabeth’s death, however, Mary’s son James,
who had been James VI of Scotland since 1567, succeeded to the crown of
England as James I. The French connection had almost dissolved.

Under James | (1603-25) and the later Stuarts, struggles within England
over royal revenues for continental wars precipitated great constitutional
divisions, attempts of kings to rule (and, especially, to tax) without Parliament,
and eventually a civil war entailing execution of Charles I. Ina sign of the times,
Charles alienated the last block of crown lands to the City of London in 1627,
receiving for it a cancellation of past debts and a further loan; from that point
onward his credit failed, and his demands for loans and taxes only sharpened
Lineages of the National State 157

conflict with Parliament and its financiers. By 1640 he was seizing the gold and
silver left in the Tower of London for safekecping, and bargaining with the
goldsmiths and merchants who owned it for a loan secured by customs revenues
(Kindleberger 1984: 51). Charles’ attempt to raise and control an army to put
down rebellion in Ireland and resistance in Scotland did him in. During the
Commonwealth and Protectorate (1649-60), varying fragments of the army
and of Parliament ruled the country while trying to bring Ircland and Scotland
back under state control and to battle against Spain and Holland as well. The
Restoration, initiated by an army-inspired Parliamentary invitation to Charles
II, confirmed the power of Parliament within the British state, especially when it
came to revenues and expenditures. The tight interdependence of royal affairs
and continental wars continued with the Stuart restoration, as England
continued to fight Holland on the seas. The 1688 revolution brought a dramatic
reversal of alliances; it carried Dutch Protestant William of Orange and his wife
Mary, daughter of the duke of York, to the throne, as France’s Louis XIV
supported the exiled Stuarts. At that point Britain reverted to its historic rivalry
with France, and borrowed Dutch institutions in the process. Thc state
founded the Bank of England in 1694 as a vehicle for financing the war with
France that had begun in 1688 (Kindleberger 1984: 52-3). With the end of
revolution and the renewal of British military involvement on the Continent, a
new era began. Britain started to form a substantial standing army, an effective
central bureaucracy took shape, and the tax-granting House of Commons
gained power vis-a-vis the king and his ministers (Brewer 1989).

Once again repeated rebellions in Scotland and Ireland — often involving
rival claimants to the English crown, not to mention the fine hand of France —
strained the state’s warmaking powers. Wars and dynastic struggles combined
to produce great transformations of the state, including a stable union of
England with Scotland (1707), the definitive seating of the German house of
Hanover (later renamed Windsor) on the throne (1714-15), and the
establishment of a modus vivendi between the monarchy and a powerful
Parliament representing the country’s landed and commercial interests. A
rebellion on behalf of the Stuart claimant to the throne (1715) failed utterly, as
did a second rebellion in 1745, which marked the last serious threat to royal
succession in Great Britain. British military power kept on growing: “By 1714,
the British Navy was the largest in Europe, and it employed more workers than
any other industry in the country” (Plumb 1967: 119).

As compared with its continental neighbors, the British state governed by
means of a relatively small central apparatus, supplemented by a vast system of
patronage and local powerholding in which Lords Lieutenant, sheriffs, mayors,
constables and justices of the peace did the crown’s work without serving as its
full-time employees; before the Napolconic Wars, only customs and excise
had substantial numbers of regularly appointed officials. Until then, Britain did
not maintain a standing army, and relied especially on wartime mobilization of
158  Lineages of the National State

naval power for its armed force. Except in Ireland, the army played a relatively
small part, and militias a relatively large part, in control of Britain’s domestic
population. In Ireland, the British government continued to deploy armed force
and experiment with new means of policing throughout its time of hegemony;
indeed, Britain generally used Ireland as a proving ground for techniques of
policing the state later introduced in England, Wales, and Scotland (Palmer
1988).

Great Britain kept on making war in Europe and striving for empire in the
rest of the world; the end of the Seven Years’ War against France (1763) left
Britain the world’s greatest colonial power. The loss of American colonies
(1776-83) did not threaten state power in the way that previous defeats had.
Repeated mobilizations for war with France, especially between 1793 and 1815,
greatly expanded taxation, national debt, and state intervention in the economy,
while causing a subtle but definitive shift in influence from the king and his
ministers to Parliament. During those wars (1801), Great Britain incorporated
Ireland (not definitively, but for more than a century) into a United Kingdom.
By the early nineteenth century that United Kingdom had become the very
model of a parliamentary monarchy dominated by landlords, financiers, and
merchants.

Imperial expansion continued through the rapid industrialization and
urbanization of the nineteenth century. Within Britain the state made a decisive
shift toward direct intervention in local affairs: while in previous centuries king
and parliament had frequently enacted legislation to govern the sale of food, the
control of collective action, the treatment of the poor, or the rights and
obligations of workers, they had almost always relied on local authorities for
initiative and enforcement. While Britain maintained local authorities to a
larger degree than many of its continental ncighbors, during the nineteenth
century national officials involved themselves as never before in policing,
education, factory inspection, industrial conflict, housing, public health, and a
wide range of other affairs. Incrementally but decisively, the British state moved
toward direct rule.

Despite occasional mobilization of national sentiment, Wales and Scotland
had long since ceased threatening the breakup of the British state. But Britain
never succeeded in integrating, or even cowing, most of Ireland. Irish resistance
and rebellion peaked in the aftermath of World War I; through several steps all
but the more heavily Protestant and anglicized northeast corner (Ulster)
became an independent state, first within the British Commonwealth, then
finally outside it. The struggle in and over Ulster has not ended.

Although in retrospect Great Britain often serves as a model of political
stability, a close look at state formation in the British Isles shows how
continuously powerful parties battled for control of the state, and how often the
transition from one regime to the next occurred in violence. Ireland’s
experience demonstrates the capacity of the region to create a relatively weak
Lineages of the National State 159

state along a coercion-intensive path. Nevertheless the British state came to
dominate much of the world during the eighteenth and ninetcenth centuries,
and remains a world power today. The history of that state is not simply a
compromise (or even a synthesis) between the histories of Venice and Russia, of
coercion-intensive and capital-intensive countrics.

The English, then British, state built on a conjunction of capital and coercion
that from very early on gave any monarch access to immense means of
warmaking, but only at the price of large concessions to the country’s merchants
and bankers. The uneasy alliance between landlords and merchants constrained
royal autonomy, but fortified state power. Commercialized agriculture, far-
ranging trade, imperial conquest, and war against rival European powers
complemented each other, promoting an investment in naval power and a
readiness to mobilize land forces for action overseas. The commercialization of
both urban and rural economies meant that taxation and borrowing for war
went more easily, and with less state apparatus, than in many other European
countries. Adam Smith put it in terms of a simple comparison between England
and France. “In England,” he remarked, “the seat of government being in the
greatest mercantile city in the world, the merchants are generally the people
who advance money to government . . . In France, the seat of government not
being in a great mercantile city, merchants do not make so great a proportion of
the people who advance money to government” (Smith 1910 [1778]: II, 401).
At that point England stood closer to the capital-intensive path of state
formation than did France. England wrought a remarkable combination of easy
access to capital and heavy reliance on landlords for day-to-day government of
the realm. Although pre-revolutionary France relied similarly on nobles and
priests for much of its local government, the effort to wring the means of war
from a less capitalized and commercialized economy built up a significantly
bulkier central state apparatus than in England.

Yet if we consider Venice or Moscow we immediately see great resemblances
between capital—coercion relations in Britain and France. We are accustomed to
contrasting the trajectories of Britain, France, Prussia, and Spain as the chief
alternative types of state formation. Within the whole European range, however,
the four have common properties that distinguish them clearly from the capital-
intensive and coercion-intensive paths. In all four cases ambitious monarchs
tried, with varying success, to crush or circumvent representative assemblies
such as” ‘provincial Estates during the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century
buildup of military power; in France and Prussia, the Estates succumbed, in
Spain the Cortes staggered on, and in Britain Parliament survived as the
bulwark of ruling-class power. In all four cases the coincidence of coercive
centers with centers of capital facilitated — at least for a while — the creation of.
massive military force in a time when large, expensive, well-armed armies and
navies gave those national states that were able to create them the overwhelming.
advantage in the search for hegemony and empire.

160 —_Lineages of the National State

Why didn’t Venice or Russia become England? The question is not absurd; it
follows from the recognition that European stafes in general moved toward
greater concentrations of capital and coercion, converging on the national state.
Part of the answer is: they did. The Russian and Italian states that entered
World War I had far more of the traits of national states than had their
predecessors of a century of two before. But the more profound answer is that
their previous histories haunted them. Venice created a state. that bent to the
interests of a mercantile patriciate and that patriciate found its advantage. i in
secking out the interstices of the European commercial system rather than by
collaborating in any effort to build up massive, durable military power. Russia
created a state led by a supposed autocrat, but totally dependent on the
cooperation of landlords whose own interests dictated a withholding of peasant
labor and its products from the state’s ends, and on a bureaucracy that could
easily consume any surplus the state generated. Different kinds of revolution -
a Risorgimento and a Bolshevik seizure of power — drew Venetians and
Muscovites into new states that came increasingly to resemble the great national
states of western Europe. But cven the successor states bore marks of their
previous identities.

G. William Skinner’s schematic portrait of China, set into motion, thus
provides keen insight into European experience. It helps us recognize how the
construction of armed force and its organizational consequences varied from
one section of Europe to another as a function of the relative weight of capital
and coercion, of the “bottom-up” and “top-down” systems of exploitation and
domination, of cities and states. Although all states devoted major efforts to war
and preparation for war, beyond that commonality their predominant activities
varied according to their positions in the networks of capital and coercion and
their prior histories. Even similar activities, furthermore, laid down different
organizational residues depending on where and when they occurred.
Increasingly, however, relations to other states determined the structure and
activity of any particular state. Because of their advantages in translating
national resources into success in international war, large national states
Superseded tribute-taking empires, federations, city-states, and all their other
cGmipetitors a3 the predoriinant European political entities, and as the models
for state formation. Those states finally defined the characte er of the European
state system and spearheaded its extension to the entire world.

6

The European State System

THE CONNECTEDNESS OF EUROPEAN STATES

Ottoman naval might drove Venice from the castern Mediterranean, and
hastened the city-empire’s descent as a major military power. When warlike
Turks started moving into Europe from the Asian steppe they were landbound
nomads like many of their bellicose neighbors. But once they reached the Black
Sea and the Mediterranean they quickly learned to build ships and to sail. What
is more, during the fifteenth century they started using gunpowder on a scale
Europeans had not previously seen. They struck terror into European hearts
because they won both hard-fought victories at sea and brutal conquests on
land. No one, it seemed, would be safe from these fierce marauders. By the
fifteenth century, their advances into the Mediterranean and the Balkans
menaced Italy and Austria as well.

The Ottoman seizure of Constantinople (1453) clearly threatened Venetian
interests, but Venice bought time by making a commercial treaty with the
Turks. The time purchased was short: Turkey and Venice soon went to war,
with dire results for Venice. The loss of Negroponte, chief Venetian base in the
northern Aegean (1470) initiated the city’s exit from the Ottoman zone. From
that time, Venice conducted intermittent defensive warfare against the Ottoman
Empire, while the Turks carried on raids into the Italian mainland, for fifty
years.

The Venetian—Turkish war of 1499-1503 forced Venice down one more
step of the international ladder. Although sometime enemy Hungary joined
Venice against the Ottoman Empire in 1500, the city’s mariners failed to defeat
the Turks. Instead, a Turkish navy led by Kemal Re’is gave a drubbing to the
largest fleet Venice had ever assembled, in the “deplorable battle of Zonchio”
(Lane 1973a: 242). Venice lost Modon, Koron, and Lepanto, important
162 The European State System

Mediterranean outposts, in battle. At the peace the Venetians surrendered their
claims to a number of Greek and Albanian cities.

Other European powers saw the settlement of that war as a critical event, and
joined in the writing of the treaty. For at the same time as Venice had been
losing outposts in the eastern Mediterranean, the republic had been
conquering important territorics in northern Italy, where Spain and France
intervened in the 1490s. Southern Europe’s political boundaries were shifting
with exceptional speed. “The peace of Buda (August, 1503) included Turkey,
Moldavia, Ragusa, Venice, the Papacy, Bohemia—Hungary, Poland—Lithuania,
Rhodes, Spain, Portugal, and England, and ranks as the first great international
settlement of modern times” (Pitcher 1972: g8—g). The holding of that great
peace conference has an additional meaning: in the face of Ottoman expansion,
and in the aftermath of French and Spanish warmaking in Italy, Europeans
were beginning to fashion a distinctive and connected system of states.

States form a system to the extent that they interact with each other regularly,
and to the degree that their interaction affects the behavior of each state. In
AD gg0, nothing like a European state system existed. By AD 1990, a system that
once was primarily European had exploded to include almost the entire earth.
In between, Europe passed through a few centuries during which most
European states maintained fairly strong connections — hostile, friendly, neutral
or, more likely, mixed and variable — with most other European states but with
few others outside the continent. In their collective power and connectedness
those states stood out from the rest of the world. The dominant political fact of
the last thousand years is the formation and extension of a European state
system consisting largely of national states rather than empires, city-states,
or other variants of coercive power.

The world headed toward its present peculiar condition from a very different
set of circumstances. A thousand years ago, people throughout the earth lived
either under loose-knit empires or in situations of fragmented sovereignty.
Although empires such as the Mayan and Chinese had achieved a fair degree of
centralization, even they ruled quite indirectly outside their cores, taking tribute
and entrusting government to regional powerholders who enjoyed considerable
autonomy. Movements of conquest, battles at the margins of state territories
and raids for tribute, booty, and captives often occurred, but declared wars with
formal alliances and massed armies were rare events anywhere.

As of ggo, Europe’s own space fragmented into four or five relatively distinct
clusters of states. The conquest regimes of eastern Europe raided continually
into each other’s zones of control, while maintaining some connections with the
Scandinavians to their north, the Byzantines to their south, and the armed
peoples of the steppe to their east. A better-defined and more tightly-connected
set of states, predominantly Muslim, ringed the Mediterranean and covered
most of Iberia. In the relatively urban band from central Italy to Flanders,
hundreds of semi-autonomous powers overlapped with the claimed jurisdictions
The European State System 163

of the papacy and Holy Roman Empire. A Saxon realm touched the
northeastern edge of that band. In a somewhat separate sphere of influence to
the north, a Danish empire reached out to the British Isles.

These partly separate clusters of states were soon to acquire stronger mutual
connections, as well as a sharper distinction from the states of Asia and Africa.
They began to connect through the expansion of trade northward from the
Mediterranean, the continuous movement of nomadic troops from the steppe,
the struggle for territory between Christians and Muslims, and widespread
raiding by seaborne warriors from the north. Norman descendants of the
Vikings who had been pillaging northern and western Europe for several
centuries, for example, were not only to consolidate their own kingdom in the
midst of what we now call France, but also to conquer England and Sicily.

The history of Sicily illustrates how large conquests knit Europe together.
The island had lain under the domination of one non-lItalian power after
another from the fall of the Roman Empire: first Byzantium, then (starting in
AD 827) a series of Muslim states. After two centuries of Muslim rule, Norman
adventurers seized the island during the later eleventh century. Their
successors became kings of Sicily and married into transalpine royal families.
On Christmas Day 1194 Holy Roman Emperor Henry VI (strong in the
combined rights of inheritance and conquest) awarded himself the crown.
Thereafter, members of German, French, or Spanish royal houses governed
Sicily until Napoleon arrived. For a thousand years, Sicily served as a
crossroads for movements of conquest that reached the Mediterranean.

International connections also cut across the city-states of northern Italy.
They often articulated, furthermore, with domestic politics. Thirteenth-century
Florence, for instance, divided bitterly over allegiance to the pope or the
emperor. The struggle continued until the victorious Black (anti-imperial) party
managed to exile the rival Whites, including Dante Alighieri. In 1311, the
Blacks obliterated from the streets of Florence the many representations of the
imperial eagle (Schevill 1963: 187). That did not, however, end Florence’s
international involvements. During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
Florence devoted an important part of its public life to receiving the princes and
ambassadors of all Europe (Trexler 1980: 279-330). Meanwhile, Venice and
Genoa conquered up and down the Mediterranean. Well before 1500, in short,
Italian states engaged themselves actively in European politics. In Italy,
especially, we can see the elements of a European state system, more or less
deliberately separated from the Muslim powers of the south and east, that was
forming during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

Move forward to 1490. Five hundred years ago, Europeans were busy
creating a pair of arrangements that were then unique: first, a system of
interconnected states linked by treaties, embassies, marriages, and extensive
communication; second, declared wars fought by large, disciplined military
forces and ended by formal peace settlements. They were entering a period in
164 The European State System

which the major realignments of boundaries and sovereigns throughout the
continent occurred at the ends of wars, under the terms of agreements joined
by multiple states. Older styles of warfare survived in piracy and banditry, in the
last phases of Mongol intervention, in the irregular battles of Muslims and
Christians across the Balkans, and in European adventurers’ voyages to Africa,
Asia, the Americas, and the rest of the world. But in Europe something
resembling the state system we know today was taking shape. The participants,
moreover, were increasingly not city-states, leagues, or empires, but national
states: relatively autonomous, centralized, and differentiated organizations
exerting close control over the population within several sharply-bounded
contiguous regions.

Historical starting points are always illusory, because in a continuous
historical process some carlier element always links to any supposed beginning.
Nevertheless, we can reasonably date the establishment of regular diplomatic
missions within Europe to the fifteenth-century practise of Italian states. The
French and Spanish invasions of Italy generalized the practise:

By the early 1490s Milan had resident representatives in Spain, in England, in France,
and at the imperial court. Ferdinand of Aragon had blazed the trail with a resident in
Rome by the 1480s, later one in Venice, and in England by 1495. His representation to the
Hapsburgs (sic) was by 1495 the double one of an ambassador at the imperial court and
another in the Netherlands. The Emperor Maximilian’s network, built up before the end
of 1496, collapsed through lack of money, as it did again in 1504. ‘The papacy eventually
succumbed to this trend. Resident nuncios, who in a sense were the direct descendants of
the tax collectors, were sent to Spain, France, England, Venice and the Emperor by the

end of Alexander VI’s pontificate (1503).
(Russell 1986: 68)

With the institution of embassies came extended information-gathering,
widened alliances, multilateral negotiations over royal marriages, greater
investment of each individual state in the recognition of other states, and a
generalization of war.

We can reasonably date a comprehensive European state system from the
French and Spanish invasions of Italy, which greatly expanded the scale of
European warmaking, and opened the age of mass mercenary armies. The
Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis (1559) ended the Habsburg—Valois wars. It
confirmed the virtual exclusion of France from Italy, the primacy of Spain
there, and the expulsion of England from Calais. In addition to the cessation of
hostilities, ambassadors at that conference negotiated a remarkable range of
European affairs, including the fates of such powers as Savoy and Scotland, and
the marriage of King Philip of Spain to Princess Elisabeth of France. Statecraft,
backed by war, was flowering.

Not all European states nested neatly into the emerging system. During the
sixteenth century, the Nordic countries still formed a region apart, although
quickened trade between the Low Countries and the Baltic was beginning to
The European State System 165

knit Denmark and Sweden into western European connections. Poland—
Lithuania was distant, and Russia, from a western European perspective, half-
mythical: Sebastian Miinster’s Kosmographie of 1550 located the “Muscovites”
on the Baltic (Platzhoff 1928: 30-1). Yet the Habsburgs had established
diplomatic relations with the grand duke of Moscow during the fifteenth
century, and through its repercussions on powers farther west the continuing
Russian expansion connected the Muscovites with Europe.

The diplomatic and dynastic connections of Sweden under Johan III (1568-
g2) demonstrate that even peripheral states reached far into the system. As the
Livonian empire of the Teutonic Knights disintegrated, Sweden, Poland,
Denmark, and Russia all tried to claim their pieces of the wreck. In his
campaigns, Johan seized Reval, Estonia, and other lands along what came to be
a lengthy Swedish—Russian border; despite great rivalry among them, he also
managed to join Poland and Denmark in holding Russia back. As he warred,
Johan also scored diplomatic successes. Johan’s wife Katarina Jagellonica was a
Polish princess and the daughter of a Sforza from Milan. The Polish link made
possible the election of their son Sigismund as king of Poland. When Johan
died, Sigismund became king of Sweden as well — at least until his uncle Karl
deposed him. Another son of Johan, Gustavus Adolphus, later built peripheral
Sweden into one of Europe’s great powers. By the early seventeenth century the
European state system spanned from Sweden to the Ottoman Empire, from
Portugal to Russia.

THE ENDS OF WARS

The increasingly connected European state system shifted to the rhythm of
major wars. Jack Levy has prepared a valuable catalog of European great
powers and their wars since the end of the fifteenth century. Let us arbitrarily
take all wars in Levy’s list during which great powers suffered at least 100,000
battle deaths. They include:

Great Power

War Battle Deaths Principal Settlement
Thirty Years’ (1618-48) 2,071,000 ‘Treaty of Westphalia
Franco-Spanish (1648-59) 108,000 Treaty of Pyrenees
Ottoman (1657-64) 109,000 Truce of Vasvar
Franco-Dutch (1672-8) 342,000 ‘Treaty of Nimwegen
Ottoman (1682-99) 384,000 Treaty of Karlowitz
League of Augsburg (1688-97) 680,000 Treaty of Ryswick
Spanish Succession (1701-13) 1,251,000 Treaty of Utrecht

Austrian Succession (1739-48) 359,000 ‘Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle
166 The European State System

Great Power

War Battle Deaths Principal Settlement
Seven Years’ (1755-63) 992,000 ‘Treaties of Paris,
Hubertusburg
Ottoman (1787-92) 192,000 ‘Treaty of Jassy
French Revolutionary (1792-1802) 663,000 ‘Treaty of Amiens
Napoleonic (1803-15) 1,869,000 Congress of Vienna
Crimean (1853-6) 217,000 Congress of Paris
Franco-Prussian (1870-1) 180,000 Treaty of Frankfurt
Russo-Turkish (1877-8) 120,000 ‘Treaty of San Stefano,
Congress of Berlin
World War I (1914-18) 7,734,300 Treaties of Brest-Litovsk,

Versailles, St Germain,
Neuilly, Trianon

Sino-Japanese (1937-41) 250,000 none: merged into
World War II

World War II (1939-45) 12,948,300 no general settlement

Korean (1950-3) 954,960 armistice: no settlement

Casualty figures for great power battle deaths only are, of course, misleading:
considering the enormous decline of European population, only some of which
could have resulted from outmigration, total deaths directly attributable to the
Thirty Years’ War, including civilians and the troops of all powers, may well
have topped five million, instead of the two million sustained by the great
powers.

The roughly 750,000 Chinese losses in the 1937-41 death struggle with
Japan disappear from the count because China did not then qualify as a great
power. The Vietnam war misses the cutoff (mine, I hasten to add, not Levy’s)
because the United States lost “only” 56,000 troops as compared to the
estimated 650,000 battle deaths among Vietnamese forces. Nevertheless, the
catalog gives an idea of the enlarging scale of war, and the increasing generality
of peace settlements up to World War I. It also suggests that with World War II
the internationalization of conflicts burst the four-hundred-year-old system of
peace settlements by general congresses. Since that time, the standoff between
the Soviet Union and the USA has greatly complicated the completion of any
general peace settlement.

The cruel Thirty Years’ War locked the European state system in place.
Actually a complex web of wars, the struggle that began as a Holy Roman
Emperor’s attempt to put down the Protestants of Bohemia eventually involved
most of Europe’s powers. The Ottoman Empire, the Italian states, England, and
the states of eastern Europe were the principal absentees. The Ottomans were
preoccupied with their Persian struggles, and England had major divisions of its
own to deal with. At the end, the chief alignment pitted Spain and the Holy
The European State System 167

Roman Empire against France and Sweden. Another way to put it is:
Habsburgs against the rest of Europe.

It took seven years of negotiations, beginning in 1641, even to assure a peace
conference — or, rather, two of them, one at Miinster (mainly for Protestant
powers) and the other at Osnabriick (for Catholics). Fighting continued through
those seven years. Threatened with their making separate peaces, Emperor
Ferdinand conceded to individual imperial states the right to attend the
conference, and to treat it as an imperial diet. The Dutch Republic, which
finally wrested recognition of its independence from Spain in January 1648,
likewise participated. Venice and the papacy, although not belligerents, played
the parts of chairs and mediators.

Altogether, the Treaty of Westphalia (1648) brought together 145 represen-
tatives from most parts of the European state system. They not only bargained
out terms for ending the war but also settled a number of outstanding
diplomatic issues, such as whether to recognize the Swiss Confederation and
the Dutch Republic as sovereign states. By placing the mouth of the Scheldt in
Dutch territory, they assured the blockage of overseas traffic to Antwerp, and
thus confirmed the commercial advantage of the Dutch Republic over the
Spanish Netherlands. The treaty froze the existing divisions between Protestant
and Catholic states by threatening to depose any monarch who changed
religion. In the process, France gained Alsace and other territories, Sweden
acquired (among other lands) Western Pomerania, and important realignments
occurred with the Holy Roman Empire.

In an empire, one state exercises sovereignty over at least one other distinct
state (Doyle 1986: 30). A century before the Treaty of Westphalia, empires of
one sort or another had dominated Europe. The settlement of the Thirty Years’
War, however, definitively blocked consolidation of a Habsburg empire,
sounded the death knell of the Habsburg-dominated Holy Roman Empire, and
made it unlikely that any other empire — except perhaps the Russian or
Ottoman — would expand within the continent. After the peace settlement’s
precedent, individual German states carried on diplomacy for themselves,
instead of accepting the emperor as their spokesman. Thus the end of the
Thirty Years’ War consolidated the European system of national states.

At the same moment as empires were losing out within Europe, to be sure,
Europe’s major states were creating empires beyond Europe, in the Americas,
Africa, Asia, and the Pacific. The construction of external empires provided
some of the means and some of the impetus for the fashioning of relatively
powerful, centralized, and homogenized national states within the continent.
European powers fought each other in those imperial zones. During the long
war following the Dutch revolt, the Dutch battled Spain in America, Africa, and
Asia as well as in Europe; Dutch mariners practically expelled Portugal (until
1640 subject to the Spanish monarchy) from Asia and Africa (Parker 1975: 57-
8). But in 1648 those external empires were not yet subject to negotiation.
168 The European State System

Subsequent peace settlements followed the pattern of 1648, with one critical
difference: non-European empires entered the picture. Although victory and
defeat in the war that was ending continued to determine the bargaining
positions of states as negotiations began, boundaries and rulers shifted most
decisively at the moment of settlement. In fact, states often gave up territories
they had conquered in exchange for others they found more desirable. At the
Treaty of Breda (1667), which ended one of the era’s multiple Anglo-Dutch
wars, all the important transfers of territory occurred in the Americas. The
Dutch, among other things, gave up New Amsterdam (now New York) for
Suriname, an exchange that (at least in retrospect) marks the advantage Britain
was then winning over Holland.

The War of the League of Augsburg (1688-97) set Louis XIV against that
league, which included the Holy Roman Empire, Sweden, Spain, Bavaria,
Saxony, the Palatinate and, later, Savoy; Holland and England allied themselves
with the league without joining it. France, England, Spain, and Holland ended
the war by means of the Treaty of Ryswick. In addition to territorial
adjustments, recognitions, and guarantees of security, the settlement included
another Anglo-Dutch colonial agreement, and a score for France: Holland
returned Pondicherry (India) to France’s East India Company in return for
trading rights. From that point on, non-European territories figured more and
more prominently in European peace settlements.

By the early eighteenth century, wars among Europe’s great powers regularly
included overseas combat, and their settlements often included realignments of
overseas empires. The War of the Spanish Succession began in 1701 when
Louis XIV sought to press the advantage given him by the accession of his
grandson, the duke of Anjou, to the Spanish throne; among other moves, wily
King Louis immediately dispatched troops to occupy Spanish-held fortresses in
Flanders. During the war, France and Britain fought in America and India as
well as on the high seas. The war ended in the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), which
established Britain as the leading colonial power and confirmed the declining
relative position of Spain within Europe. In that treaty, among other outcomes,
Britain received Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, the Hudson’s Bay Territory,
Gibraltar, and Minorca, access to Spanish colonial ports, rights to supply slaves
to Spanish colonies, and recognition of its Protestant succession. Savoy
annexed Sicily and other Italian territory at Spain’s expense; Prussia gained
recognition as a kingdom; France, while a loser in many respects, not only
regained Lille but also had a Bourbon recognized as king of Spain; and in the
closely related treaties of Rastatt and Baden (1714) the Austrian Habsburgs
acquired control of what had been the Spanish Netherlands.

The Seven Years’ War (1756-63) and the War of the American Revolution
(1778-84) again pitted France against Britain in America; as a result of the
first, France ceded mainland Canada, while in the second Britain lost thirteen
prosperous North American colonies. With the independence of the United
The European State System 169

States, European politics spilled over into the creation of new members for the
state system, members entirely outside of Europe.

The Congress of Vienna (1815), ending the Napoleonic Wars, brought
together representatives of all Europe’s powers, not to mention many of its
would-be powers. The Congress rewrote much of Europe’s map, restoring only
a few prewar boundaries and creating such entirely new entities as the kingdom
of the Netherlands, the Germanic Confederation, and the Lombardo-Venetian
Kingdom. But it also added Ceylon, the Cape of Good Hope, Tobago,
St Lucia, Mauritius, and Malta to Britain’s empire. In that settlement and in
the negotiations following World War I, the great powers came as close as they
ever have to the deliberate collective mapping of the entire state system, right
down to the boundaries, rulers, and constitutions of individual states.

Through the nineteenth century and up to World War I, war settlements
continued to engage many members of the state system, and to mark the major
realignments in its membership. It may stretch the point to include the
establishment of a separate Belgium (whose secession from the Netherlands
occurred immediately after the French revolution of 1830, and survived thanks
to direct armed intervention by the French) as a delayed portion of the
Napoleonic Wars’ settlement. But the French annexation of Savoy and Nice
and the creation of a kingdom of Italy sprang from the 1859 war of France and
Piedmont against Austria. The formation of both a dual Austro-Hungarian
monarchy and a North German Confederation (immediate predecessor of the
empire, itself a fairly direct outcome of the Franco-Prussian War), furthermore,
issued from the Austro-Prussian war of 1866. In southeastern Europe, the
Crimean, Austro-German, and multiple Russo-Turkish wars each precipitated
a further disintegration of Ottoman control and the formation of new national
states under strong international influence: Greece, Serbia, Rumania, Bulgaria,
Montenegro. The Crimean War’s settlement (1856), moreover, recast the
Ottoman Empire as Turkey, a new state in something resembling the European
format.

The settlements of World War I brought the last more or less general,
simultaneous, and consensual redrawing of Europe’s map. New or renewed
states of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Yugoslavia gained independence,
Germany lost substantial territory to France, Poland, and other adjacent
powers, Rumania gained Transylvania as consequence of a late switch to the
Allied side, the remainder of the Ottoman Empire fell into fragments, and the
League of Nations claimed its place as an arbiter of state system membership
and behavior. The multiple treaties of 1919 and 1920 included such
temporizations as the French control, without sovereignty, of the Saar, and
suffered from the American rejection of the League. The cracks in World War
I’s settlement, indeed, forecast the fissures that opened up at the end of World
War II. By that time the world-wide reach of the formerly European state
system, and the emergence of such geographically and politically eccentric
170 ©The European State System

powers as Japan and the United States put great stress on a set of relations that
had worked more or less well for four centuries.

MEMBERS OF THE SYSTEM

Who were the great powers? We might compare two recent efforts to identify
them. George Modelski and William Thompson have used naval power to
compile the roster of “global powers” from 1494 to the present. A “global
power,” according to their definition, had at least 5 percent of the total naval
expenditures or 10 percent of the total warships of the global powers and
carried its naval activity outside of its own region into the oceans. Similarly, Jack
Levy has assembled a catalog of the world’s great powers and of major wars
involving them from 1495 to 1975. As great powers, he singled out those states
anywhere on earth that, in his estimation, had high military capabilities relative
to others, pursued continental or global interests, defended those interests by
means of a wide range of instrumentalities, including force and threats of force,
received recognition from the most powerful states as major actors, and
exercised exceptional formal rights in international relations (Levy 1983: 16-
18). Among likely European candidates, Levy judged his criteria to exclude the
Holy Roman Empire, Venice, the Swiss Confederation, Portugal, Poland, and
Denmark throughout the period from 1495 to 1975.
The two rosters include:

Modelski-
State Levy Thompson
Portugal — 1494-1580
France 1495- 1494-1945
England/Great Britain 1495- 1494-1945
“Austria” 1495-1519, 1556-1918 —
Spain 1495-1519 1494-1808
Ottoman Empire , 1495-1699 _
United Habsburgs 1519-56 —
Netherlands 1609-1713 1579-1810
Sweden 1617-1721 —
Russia/Soviet Union 1721- 1714-
Prussia/Germany/West Germany  1740- 1871-1945
Italy 1861-1943 —
United States 1898- 1816-
Japan 1905-45 1875-1945
China 1949- —_

* Includes Austrian Habsburgs, Austria, and Austria-I fungary
The European State System 171

The demanding Modelski-Thompson criterion excludes a number of great
powers that relied primarily on armies rather than navies. Some of these
assignments, furthermore, are contestable. No doubt a national state called
France has existed more or less continuously since 1495. Nor is it absurd to see
some continuity in the mutable entity successively called England, Great
Britain, and the United Kingdom. But in what sense Prussia, the German
Confederation, the German Empire, the Weimar Republic, the Third Reich
and the Federal Republic of Germany are successive manifestations of a single
entity called Germany is open to question.

Again, various agglomerations of Habsburg lands appear at four different
places in the catalog: as Austrian Habsburgs, Spain, the United Habsburgs, and
the Netherlands. Spain and the Habsburgs, furthermore, certainly did not
disappear from the European scene with the abdication of Charles V in 1556, as
Levy’s chronology indicates; the Spanish Armada was still a formidable force in
1588. Yet the entity “Spain” is problematic, considering that during the war-
torn years of the 1630s Philip IV, nominally head of all the various Iberian
kingdoms, was unable to persuade Catalonia, Valencia, and several of his other
domains to join the war effort Castile was then leading. And what of Portugal?
Levy does not mention Portugal. Modelski and Thompson identify Portugal as
a global power (the elite of great powers) between 1494 and 1580, when
Portugal was independent of the Spanish crown. Even during the following
sixty years of Spanish hegemony, Portugal operated as a distinct power. In
terms of international relations, in short, it is hard to speak of Spain in the
singular before the eighteenth century. The lists therefore simplify radically.
Still, they provide a defensible first approximation of an important succession in
priorities among European powers.

The two lists display a very strong bias toward Europe. Until the arrival of the
United States (1816 for Modelski-Thompson, 1898 for Levy), the set consists
exclusively of powers having a major base in Europe. From this information a
reader would find it hard to imagine, for example, that in 1495 China had about
a million men under arms, or that the Mali, Songhai, Persian, Mughal, Aztec,
and inca empires were thriving outside of Europe. Nor can we assume that the
European network was incomparably richer and therefore worthier of attention
than the others. During the seventeenth century as much as half the silver
mined in the Americas may have ended up in China, traded for silks,
porcelains, and other precious goods (Wakeman 1985: 2-3). At that point, per
capita income in Europe was not obviously superior to that in China. Before the
later eighteenth century, in short, it was not clear that European powers led the
world economically.

A eurocentric list nevertheless has a military justification; not long after 1495,
Europeans (including the now semi-European Ottomans) had so far extended
their military control that their system had become the great power system of
the entire world. By the 1540s, for example, the Ottoman Empire was entering
172 The European State System

regularly into alliances with European powers such as France. By virtue of its
threat to Italy and the Habsburg lands it was applying considerable leverage to
the alignments and strategies of the other major players.

By the end of the fifteenth century, then, the European state system had
acquired a clear structure and membership. It was on its way, furthermore, to
dominating the world. The Levy and Modelski-Thompson compilations identify
great powers, but not lesser members of the system. As a first approximation of
the entire system’s limits around 1500, we might take Eduard Fueter’s break-
down in the first volume of the von Below and Meinicke Politische Geschichte
(Fueter 1919). Understandably, Fucter pivots his classification of states on
involvement in the wars precipitated by the French and Spanish invasions of Italy:

major states that took part directly in the Italian struggles

France

Spain

the Habsburg power
Burgundy
Austria
Germany

Venice

minor states that took part directly
Milan
Florence
Papal states
Naples and Sicily
Genoa
Savoy
other small Italian states: Ancona, Ferrara, Urbino, Mantua, Monaco etc.
Switzerland

major states that did not take part directly

Ottoman Empire
England

minor states that did not take part directly
* Hungary
North African corsair states
Poland
Scotland
Denmark, then Denmark and Sweden
Portugal
Persia
Navarre
The European State System 173

Fueter’s inventory of the state system differs from its chief alternative, a catalog
of states and rulers by Spuler (Spuler 1977, vol. 2) in consolidating all members
of the Holy Roman Empire (Baden, Brandenburg, Cologne, Hanover, Hesse-
Cassel, Mainz and dozens more) into a single state, in lumping together the far-
flung Habsburg domains, in neglecting the Ottoman Empire’s European
tributary states (e.g. Bosnia, Moldavia, and Wallachia), in slighting the semi-
independent states of eastern Europe (e.g. Lithuania), and in placing Persia on
the list of participants.

Fueter defended the treatment of the multiple states of the Holy Roman
Empire as a single “Germany” on the ground that members of the Empire
could only carry on diplomatic relations with external powers through their
elected emperor. But he conceded that the Reformation, in which many German
territorial lords found Protestantism an attractive alternative to the emperor’s
Catholicism, accentuated the Empire’s fractionation (Fueter 1919: 123-36).
Similarly, he lumped together Castile, Aragon, and the territories they
controlled on the ground that their common monarch spoke for all of them
(Fueter 1919: 79-103). He included Persia in the system because European
states sometimes allied with the Persians against the Ottomans, and the North
African pirates because they carried on running warfare with Mediterranean
seafarers.

If we compare Fueter’s rollcall of the European state system from 1492 to
1559 with the later two volumes in the same series by Walter Platzhoff (1559-
1660) and Max Immich (1660-1789), the membership of the system shows the
following changes (Platzhoff 1928, Immich 1905):

State 1492-1559 1559-1660 1660-1789

Austria + +
Brandenburg-Prussia ?
Burgundy

Denmark

England

Florence

France

Genoa

Germany/H.R. Empire
Hungary

Livonia

Milan

Naples-Sicily

Navarre

Netherlands

North African corsairs
Ottoman Empire

wt wel ttt tt

b+vbt ttt ti

++) ttt il +eett+eees i

+ 1+ 1
+ 1+ 1
174 The European State System

State 1492-1559 1559-1060 1660-1789
Papacy + + +
Persia + - -
Poland + + +
Portugal + + +
Russia - + +
Savoy + + +
Scotland + + -
small Italian states + + +
Spain + + +
Sweden + + +
Swiss federation + + +
Venice + + +

? = not listed, but mentioned in text as separate state

Since in 1500 Russia and Livonia were actually present, although weakly
connected with the rest of Europe, the only genuine newcomers are the
Netherlands, formed in revolt against the Habsburgs, and Brandenburg-
Prussia, forged in centuries of war. The insistence of these German authors on
keeping “Germany” together, even after the disintegration of the Holy Roman
Empire, hides the independent importance of such states as Bavaria and
Saxony. Despite Fueter’s separate listing, the duchy of Burgundy had fallen to
France in 1477, and the Burgundian dynasty of the Netherlands had given way
to the Habsburgs in 1482. With the qualifications that the Holy Roman and
Habsburg empires fell to pieces and an independent Netherlands became a
major power, then, the main movement from 1495 to 1789 ran toward
agglomeration: as Milan, Naples, Navarre, and Sicily disappear into France and
Spain, as Hungary dissolves into the Ottoman Empire and as Scotland blends
into Great Britain, we see the consolidation of European states at work.

How did these states connect with each other? Historians and _ political
scientists have often treated the European state system as a simple hierarchy,
with either one hegemonic. power or two competing powers at the summit
(Gilpin 1988, Modelski and Thompson 1988, Levy 1988, Thompson 1988).
Whole theories of hegemonic war have built on the supposition that states
struggled for the top position. In fact, no single state has ever dominated the
system in the way such a model requires; at the peak of France’s power toward
1812, Britain and Russia remained anything but subordinate. As Britain
flourished during the nineteenth century, France, Germany, Russia, and the
United States disputed British power at every turn.

The flaw in the single hierarchy model is obvious and critical: the exercise of
power always depends on location; he who deploys immense power in his
immediate vicinity finds his power dwindling as he moves away from his base.
Venice, as we have seen, once exerted enormous influence in the Adriatic —
The European State System 175

indeed, stood for a time as Europe’s greatest single power — yet made almost no
difference at all in the Baltic. A far better conception of the European state
system treats it as a geographically dispersed network in which some states are
more central and influential than others, but hierarchies differ from one
location in the system to another.

Again Jack Levy’s compilation helps us. Levy defines a major war as one
involving an average of 1,000 or more battle deaths per year. He excludes civil,
colonial and imperial wars. By his criteria, the world experienced 119 major
wars involving at least one great power between 1495 and 1975. The
participants in those wars (including those that did not qualify as great powers)
set a rough boundary to membership in the state system of the last half-
millennium. Who, then, were the members? Levy does not say, but a look at the
full set of participants in wars during the first twenty years of his inventory
(1495-1514) gives an interesting idea (Levy does not enumerate all the
belligerents, but standard histories easily yield their identities):

War of the League of Venice (1495-7): France, Venice, Holy Roman Empire,
Papacy, Milan, Spain, Naples

Polish-Turkish War (1497-8): Ottoman Empire, Poland, Krim Tatars, Russia,
Moldavia

Venetian-Turkish War (1499-1503): Ottoman Empire, Venice, Hungary

First Milanese War (1499-1500): France, Milan

Neapolitan War (1501-4): France, Spain, Papacy, Naples

War of the League of Cambrai (1508-9): France, Spain, Austrian Habsburgs,
Papacy, Milan, Venice

War of the Holy League (151-14): France, England, Spain, Austrian Habs-
burgs, Papacy, Venice, Milan, Swiss cantons

Austro-Turkish War (1512-19): Austrian Habsburgs, Hungary, Ottoman
Empire

Scottish War (1513-15): England, Scotland

The implied list of members resembles Fueter’s enumeration for 1492-1559,
but is narrower. From Fueter’s participants in the state system, Levy’s inventory
of wars omits Denmark, Florence, Genoa, Savoy, the North African corsairs,
Persia, and the smaller Italian city-states, because they involved themselves no
more than marginally in great power wars during those two decades. Florence,
for example, actually declared for the French side in the War of the Holy
League — and suffered for it at the peace settlement; but between 1495 and
1514 Florentines were so concerned with their internal divisions and the
rebellions of such dependencies as Pisa that they stayed out of the larger-scale
combats swirling about them. Off in the cast, on the other hand, the wars
176 The European State System

identify Russia, Moldavia, and the Krim Tatars, through their battles with the
Ottomans, as part of the European state system.

Figure 6.1 graphs the joint involvement of the various states in these wars. It
simplifies a complex set of relations by disregarding who fought whom, by
lumping together the Austrian Habsburgs and the Holy Roman Empire they
dominated, and by distinguishing only among (1) no joint involvement, (2) joint
involvement in a single war, and (3) joint involvement in two or more of the
wars. Since participation of at least one great power qualified a war for Levy’s
list, the graph necessarily exaggerates the centrality of those powers in the wars
of 1495 to 1515. Yet a plausible picture of the European state system emerges:
Russia, Poland, the Krim (Crimean) Tatars, Moldavia, and the Ottoman
Empire form a distinct set (the restriction of the catalog to wars involving great
powers eliminates repeated struggles between Poland and Russia and between
Poland and Livonia during the two decades, but their inclusion would merely
accentuate the distinctness of the eastern—southeastern set). The Ottomans
war with the closest European powers, Hungary hangs between Venice and the
Ottoman Empire, England and (especially) Scotland stand at the periphery of
international relations, while Aragon, France, the Austrian Habsburgs, Venice,
the papacy, Milan, and Naples interact constantly. Note the centrality of Milan,
Venice, and the papacy (not, by Levy’s standards, great powers) in European
affairs, the position of Venice as (in William McNeill’s phrase) the “hinge of
Europe,” the looming presence of the Ottoman Empire, and the weak
involvement of northern Europe as a whole.

If we stride forward a century and a half, we discover a very different state

Seouane
eodlend Russia
Mde Moldavia
Aragon ewiss
Castile IN AN NAY ant Ons ___ Austrian
a= Habsburgs Hunga

Krim
Tatars
NY

Papacy

Naples

Figure 6.1 Joint involvement ot European states in great power wars, 1496-1514.
The European State System = 177

system. Levy’s catalog of wars involving great powers that were raging in any
year from 1655 to 1674 includes these:
Spanish-Portuguese (1642-68): Spain, Portugal
Turkish-Venetian (1645-69): Ottoman Empire, Venice, France
Franco-Spanish (1648-59): France, Spain, England
Scottish (1650-1): Scotland, England
Anglo-Dutch (1652-5): England, Netherlands

Northern (1654-60): Austrian Habsburgs, Netherlands, Sweden, Poland,
Brandenburg, Russia, Denmark

English-Spanish (1656-9): England, Spain

Dutch-Portuguese (1657-61): Netherlands, Portugal

Ottoman (1657-64): Ottomans, France, Austrian Habsburgs

Sweden-Bremen (1665-6): Sweden, Bremen

Anglo-Dutch (1665-7): England, Netherlands, France, Denmark

Devolutionary (1667-8): France, Spain, Austrian Habsburgs

Dutch (1672-8): France, Netherlands, England, Spain, Austrian Habsburgs,
Sweden, Brandenburg

Turkish-Polish (1672-6): Ottoman Empire, Poland

Figure 6.2 summarizes the joint involvements. As compared with the earlier
diagram, it reveals a European state system that had become more tightly knit,

Austrian
Habsburgs

Venice

1 war
2+ wars oS
Ottoman

Empire

Figure 6.2 Joint involvement of European states in great power wars, 1656-74.
178 The European State System

had shifted decisively northward, and had thereby lost its Italian focus. As of
1655-75, France and Spain retained their importance, England and the
Austrian Habsburgs had become more central, and Sweden, the Netherlands
and Brandenburg had appeared as important actors. Although the relative
power and centrality of the participants altered considerably during the next two
centuries, the map for the later seventeenth century shows us something like
the structure that prevailed into our own time. The main thing it does not show
is the expanding involvement of most of these states in the world outside
Europe.

Diagrams for later periods become impossible to read; first they connect
every European state with almost every other European state, then they reach
with link after link to the world outside of Europe. For the twenty years from
1790 to 1809, Levy’s great power wars include the Russo-Swedish (1788-90):
Russia, Sweden, Denmark; French Revolutionary (1792-1802): France, Great
Britain, Spain, Austria, Holland, Russia, Prussia, Sardinia, Saxony, Hanover,
Oldenbourg, Hesse-Cassel, Baden, Wiirttemberg, Bavaria, Piedmont, Parma,
Modena, Mantua, the papacy, Malta, Venice, Genoa, Switzerland, Egypt,
Ottoman Empire, Portugal, Naples, Tuscany; Napoleonic (1803-15): France,
United Kingdom, Spain, Austria, Russia, Prussia, Sweden, Bavaria, Wiirttem-
berg, Hesse, Nassau, Naples, Baden, Darmstadt, Berg, Brunswick, Niirnberg,
Ottoman Empire, Moldavia, Wallachia; Russo-Turkish (1806-12): United
Kingdom, Russia, Ottoman Empire; Russo-Swedish (1808-9): Russia, Sweden,
Denmark.

Except for the somewhat separate triangle connecting Russia, Sweden, and
Denmark, we might as well treat the period as one continuous war drawing in
all European states; the corresponding network shows almost every European
state including the Ottoman Empire coinvolved with every other one, and Egypt
drawn into the system by Napoleon’s invasion. If we were to extend the period
to 1812, we would find the recently-formed United States entering the system
as well. Despite these outliers and despite the pursuit of these wars in many
colonial territories, the wars of the period were essentially European.

The restriction of great power wars to European states soon ended. Changes
in the system since 1815 are clear and dramatic. Between the Franco-Prussian
War of 1870-1 and the end of World War I, three critical transformations
appeared in the European state system: the fragmented states of Germany and
Italy consolidated into substantial, relatively unitary national states; the
Ottoman and Habsburg empires fractured into a limited number of distinct
national states, and multiple European states struggled with cach other and with
indigenous peoples for colonial empires in Africa, Asia, and the Pacific. In this
period treaties among European powers — for example, the Triple Alliance of
Germany, Austria, and Italy — typically included provisions concerning the
defense of overseas interests against other European states. Those clashing
interests often issued in war, overt or covert.
The European State System 179

During the two decades from 1880 to 1899 major wars (those causing at least
1,000 battle deaths per year) included the British-Afghan (1878-80: UK and
Afghans), Pacific (1879-83: Chile, Bolivia, and Peru), Franco-Indochinese
(1882-4: France and Indochinese), Mahdist (1882-5: UK, Egypt and
Sudanese), Sino-French (1884-5: France and China), Central American (1885:
EI Salvador, Guatemala), Serbo-Bulgarian (1885: Serbia and Bulgaria), Franco-
Madagascan (1894-5: France and Madagascans), Cuban (1894-8: Spain and
Cubans), Sino-Japanese (1894-5: China and Japan), /talo-Ethiopian (1895-6:
Italy, Ethiopians), First Philippine (1896-8: Spain and Philippines), Greco-
Turkish (1897: Ottoman Empire, Greece), Spanish-American (1898: Spain and
USA), Second Philippine (1899-1902: USA and Philippines), and Boer (1899-
1902: UK and Boers; Small and Singer 1982: 85-99). Levy classifies none of
these as a great power war, and only the Sino-French as a war involving the
great power system. All the others pitted either minor powers or a major power
and colonized people against each other. All but two (the Serbo-Bulgarian and
Greco-Turkish wars, which took place at the edges of a disintegrating Ottoman
Empire) began in battlegrounds far outside Europe.

The settlements of World War I (more or less conclusive) and World War II
(still unsettled) produced further critical changes in the European state system,
including the wave of decolonizations since 1945. From World War I onward,
indeed, it becomes increasingly difficult to separate the European system from
the world system of states that was forming rapidly. Belligerents during World
War I included not only almost all European states, but also Turkey, Japan,
Panama, Cuba, Bolivia, Siam, Liberia, China, Peru, Uruguay, Brazil, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Haiti, and Honduras. European colonies in
Africa, Asia, and the Pacific contributed troops as well.

In recent decades, war has become even more international. During the last
twenty years of Levy’s compilation (1956-75) Small and Singer enumerate
twelve interstate wars causing at least 1,000 battle deaths per year:

Russo-Hungarian (1956): USSR, Hungary

Sinai (1956): France, United Kingdom, Israel, Egypt

Sino-Indian (1962): China, India

Vietnamese (1965-75): North Vietnam, South Vietnam, Thailand, USA,
Kampuchea, Korea, Australia, Philippines

Second Kashmir (1965): Pakistan, India

Six Day (1967): Israel, Eygpt/UAR, Jordan, Syria

Israeli-Egyptian (1969-70): Israel, Egypt/UAR

Football (1969): El Salvador, Honduras
. Bangladesh (1971): India, Pakistan
180 The European State System

Yom Kippur (1973): Isracl, Egypt/UAR, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia
Turko-Cypriot (1974): Turkey, Cyprus
Vietnamese-Cambodian (1975—-): Vietnam, Kampuchea

Of this set, the only wars directly involving great powers, by Levy’s criteria,
were the Russian invasion of Hungary (1956), the Sinai war (1956), the Sino-
Indian war (1962), and the war in Vietnam (1965-73). Only one of the four
took place in Europe. In Hungary one of the world’s dominant powers put
down rebellion in a satellite state. In Sinai, France and Britain intervened
quickly after Israel invaded Egyptian territory and Egypt, retaliating, entered
the Suez Canal zone and sank ships to block the canal. A United Nations
peacekeeping force stabilized the territory, and after two months Israel with-
drew its forces from the Sinai peninsula, except for the Gaza Strip and Sharm
el Sheikh. On the Chinese Indian border, Chinese troops invaded highland
territories after India attempted to occupy a high ridge in a disputed zone. The
Chinese stopped in their tracks and then began withdrawing.

The Vietnamese conflict far surpassed the others in duration and casualties;
over its ten brutal years, it produced some 1.2 million battle deaths, plus
countless civilian casualties (Small and Singer 1982: 93). There the former
colonial overlord, France, had withdrawn, leaving behind a war between two
halves of a divided state. After two years of clandestine involvement, the world’s
greatest power, the United States, then intervened openly with devastating —
but finally ineffectual — force. US troops later invaded the neighboring state of
Cambodia, and bombed its cities. A rising great power, China, watched closely
from just across the border, as the Soviet Union sent in supplies for the north,
as Australia, New Zealand, South Korea, the Philippines, and Thailand aided
the American effort in the south, and as the whole conflict boiled over into a
Laotian civil war. The Cambodian—Vietnamese war likewise grew from
struggles that began during the American intervention in Vietnam.

The Vietnam War dramatizes what had happened to the state system. Wars
among or by the great powers had become relatively infrequent but immensely
destructive. An increasing share of all major wars occurred within constituted
states, as one or more of the great powers intervened directly or indirectly on
behalf of local parties to a civil war. With the important exception of separatist
demands, the contest rarcly concerned the territory to be occupied by a given
state; instead, the combatants fought over what groups were to control the
existing state within its established boundarics. State persecution, liquidation,
or expulsion of cthnic minoritics began to gencrate refugees on a scale
unprecedentcd in world history. Yet the displacement of the European concert
by bipolar Soviet-American hegemony destroyed the practice of general peace
settlements.

This set of changes, if it persists, constitutes a remarkable break with the
past. It alters the stakes of war: no longer can a state’s rulers hope to gain (or
The European State System 181

fear to lose) substantial territory through belligerence. Israel’s territorial wars
with its neighbors would have surprised no European of the eighteenth century,
but in the period since 1945 they have become anomalies. Wars increasingly
concern who is to rule in each state, which states will control the policies of
other states, and what transfers of resources, people, and goods among states
will occur.

THE CREATION OF A STATE-LINKED WORLD

During the last five hundred years, then, three striking things have occurred.
First, almost all of Europe has formed into national states with well-defined
boundaries and mutual relations. Second, the European system has spread to
virtually the entire world. Third, other states, acting in concert, have exerted a
growing influence over the organization and territory of new states. The three
changes link closely, since Europe’s leading states actively spread the system by
colonization, conquest, and penetration of non-European states. The creation
first of a League of Nations, then of a United Nations, simply ratified and
rationalized the organization of all the earth’s people into a single state system.

Note the meaning of these changes. On the average state formation moved
from a relatively “internal” to a strongly “external” process. War has weighed
heavily on the formation of states throughout the history we have been
surveying; to that extent the process has always been external. Nonetheless the
further we go back in time the more we see rulers and would-be rulers struggle
to tame the populations within the territories they nominally control, fight off
armed rivals within those territories, conquer adjacent lands and peoples, and
build up their own monopolies of force. Thus we see them inadvertently
constructing states whose structures bear the marks of the struggles and
bargains that brought them into being. Conversely, as we move forward in time
we witness the increasing salience of concerts among states for the fate of any
particular state — at least until World War II (sec Chapman 1988, Cronin 1988,
Cumings 1988, Dower 1988, Eden 1988, Geyer 1988, Gran 1988a, Levine
1988, Rice 1988, Stein 1988).

Belgium’s appearance as a separate state illustrates the significance of
external influences in Europe (Clark 1984, Zolberg 1978). Never really a
distinct and unified state before 1831, Belgium formed in approximately the
section of the Low Countries that Spain, and then the Austrian Habsburgs,
retained after the revolt of the Netherlands. France conquered and incorporated
those territories in 1795, and held them until the war settlement of 1815;
twenty years of French administration transformed the region’s economy, and
made it one of Europe’s prime industrial centers. The post-Napoleonic
settlement assigned the region to a newly-formed kingdom of the Netherlands
seated at the Hague. Soon a coalition of industrialists, liberals, francophones,
182 The European State System

and Catholics (the categories overlapped, but were by no means identical) were
pressing for regional rights.

In October 1830 the activists of that coalition, inspired by the July Revolution
in neighboring France, formed a revolutionary provisional government, and the
threat of French retaliation stayed the Dutch government from reacting with
force. In November, the British convened a conference of European powers,
which the following month declared the dissolution of the kingdom of the
Netherlands into its two component parts. Under the close surveillance of
France and Britain the newly baptized Belgians then went about recruiting a
king and drafting a liberal constitution. When the London conference proposed
a long-term settlement that was relatively unfavorable to Holland, Holland’s
King William sent in an army, defeated improvised Belgian troops, and incited
a French invasion; the British later joined in the cffort to expel Dutch forces
from what was now to be Belgian territory. In 1839, King William finally
accepted a settlement that not only recognized Belgium but also launched an
independent (if territorially diminished) duchy of Luxembourg as a distinct
state. From beginning to end, the entrance of Belgium into the European state
system passed through a channel dug by its powerful neighbours.

Over the last three centuries, compacts of powerful states have increasingly
narrowed the limits within which any national struggle for power occurred.
They have done so through imposition of international war settlements,
organization of colonies, diffusion of standard models for armies, bureaucracies,
and other elements of the state apparatus, creation of international organizations
charged with tending the state system, collective guarantee of national borders,
and intervention to maintain domestic order. That narrowing restricted the
alternative paths of state formation. Throughout the world state formation
converged on the more or less deliberate construction of national states — not
empires, not city-states, not federations, but national states — according to
models offered, subsidized, and enforced by the great powers.

Not that would-be rulers or their patrons simply ordered up a whole state like
a prefabricated house. When a European power installed courts, fiscal systems,
police, armies, or schools in one of its colonies it usually followed European
precepts. When independent Third World states turned to great powers for
help in organizing markets, manufacturing, or military might the great powers
commonly persuaded them to organize the European way. When such
international institutions as the World Bank loaned money to struggling non-
European states they regularly stipulated that those states undertake “reforms”
bringing them into line with European and Amcrican practices. When, finally,
poor countries looked around for places to educate their bureaucrats,
technicians, and military officers they often sent them to train in Europe or one
of its extensions. Once the national state dominated Europe and parts of the
world settled chiefly by Europeans, it served as the template for state formation
everywhere.
The European State System 183

Why national states? National states won out in the world as a whole because
they first won out in Europe, whose states then acted to reproduce themselves.
They won out in Europe because the most powerful states - France and Spain
before all others — adopted forms of warfare that temporarily crushed their
neighbors, and whose support generated as by-products centralization,
differentiation, and autonomy of the state apparatus. Those states took that step
in the late fifteenth century both because they had recently completed the
expulsion of rival powers from their territories and because they had access to
capitalists who could help them finance wars fought by means of expensive
fortifications, artillery and, above all, mercenary soldiers.

Let me not exaggerate: maritime states such as the Dutch Republic and
Venice competed effectively with major land powers for another century;
control of coasts remained crucial for supplying the interior, their fleets helped
protect them from invasion, and overseas empires were growing in importance.
Some relatively uncommercialized states, such as Sweden and Brandenburg,
managed to build competitive military forces through an cnormous coercive
penetration of their territories. But eventually only those countries that
combined significant sources of capital with substantial populations yielding
large domestic military forces did well in the new European style of warfare.
Those countries were, or became, national states.

National states would no doubt have prevailed in Europe even if France and
Spain had been less aggressive at the end of the fifteenth century. During the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries many other European states attempted
conquest within Europe for a time: Sweden, Brandenburg, and Russia come
immediately to mind. In addition, the Dutch Republic, Portugal and Great
Britain began competing for overseas empires, with many of the same effects on
relations between states and citizens. European states held political control over
about 7 percent of the earth’s land in 1500, 35 percent in 1800, and 84 percent
in 1914 (Headrick 1981: 3). That expansion in itself facilitated the multiplication
of national states throughout the world. If another combination of states had
dominated the struggles, their character would have affected the path and
outcomes of European state formation significantly. Still, the expansion of
capital and the reorganization of war in the sixteenth century jointly favored the
increasing dominance of national states.

HOW WARS BEGAN

A system wrought by war shaped the conditions under which its members went
to war. The conditions under which states went to war changed significantly —
and more than once — during the long period we are examining. With significant
modulations as a function of a state’s chief rivals, the character of its dominant
184 The European State System

classes, and the sort of protective activity undertaken on its dominant classes’
behalf, conditions changed as a function of a now-familiar constant logic that
continued to operate under shifting circumstances: rulers normally tried to
establish both a secure area within which they could enjoy the returns from
coercion and a fortified buffer zone to protect the secure area. When the effort
worked well, the buffer zone became a secure area, which encouraged the
wielder of coercion to acquire a new buffer zone surrounding the old. So long
as adjacent powers were pursuing the same logic, war resulted. In Europe, once
the Roman Empire collapsed, thousands of warlords engaged in the same
exercise. Hence unceasing and widespread, if chiefly regional, warfare. The
later enlargement of state territories, the substitution of compact national states
for multiple territories and the sccuring of borders through international
agreements greatly reduced the length of vulnerable borders, but did not
eliminate the war-promoting logic.

Other conditions, however, altered drastically. During the era of patrimonialism
(up to 1400 in much of Europe), the groups that controlled substantial coercive
means were typically either kin groups, neighbors, sworn communities of
warriors, or combinations of the three. Ducal lineages exemplify the first,
crusading orders the second, and feudal aristocracies their combination.
Groups that controlled substantial coercive means generally sought to maximize
the tribute they could extract from surrounding populations, by force if
necessary, and to assure the future availability of tribute for their offspring and
followers. By intermarrying, creating a noble caste, and (encouraged by a
Catholic church that benefited from donations of land and revenues)
establishing widely shared rules of inheritance, the ruling classes laid the
groundwork for dynastic politics in which marriages cemented alliances among
states and successions became the object of international attention. At the same
time peasant communities, urban militias, groups of brigands, and other groups
having no claims to state authority often warred on their own. As a result, wars
tended to occur when a powerholder showed signs of weakness vis-a-vis his
neighbor, when a disputable succession occurred, and when a new conqueror
heaved onto the scene.

For the first half of our millennium, indeed, it is hardly worth asking when
states warred, since most states were warring most of the time. True, massed
armies drew chiefly on militias and feudal levies, which means that campaigns
ordinarily went on during only a few months of each year. When an
international war began, nevertheless, it usually ran for many campaigns. The
decades from about 1150 to 1300 broke the nearly annual rhythm of war in
England and France, but even then Scandinavia, Russia, Italy, the Mediterranean,
and Iberia all saw incessant warfare. In a period of intensely fragmented
sovereignty, furthermore, the differences among soldiers, bandits, pirates,
rebels, and lords doing their duty blurred into a continuum of coercive action.
Between great campaigns, local battles multiplied. Before 1500, the more
The European State System 185

meaningful questions are not when states warred, but who fought whom, how
often, and how vigorously.

From the sixteenth century onward, the situation changed fundamentally.
Consolidation of the state system, segregation of military from civilian life, and
disarmament of the civilian population sharpened the distinction between war
and peace. War became more intense and destructive, more continuous once it
began, but a much rarer event. The twentieth century, in that respect, merely
caps a long-term trend.

In the time of brokerage (roughly 1400 to 1700 in important parts of the
continent), dynastic ambitions still dominated state policy, but the bulk of the
state apparatus and the scale of war efforts meant that the interests of the major
classes supporting the state scriously limited the possibilities for war; only with
their consent and collaboration could monarchs assemble the means to fight.
The interests of landlords weighed heavily in coercion-intensive states, the
interests of capitalists in capital-intensive states.

Under the regime of brokerage, wars still followed dynastic opportunity, the
weakness of adjacent states, and the arrival of conquerors such as the Tatars or
the Turks, but several things changed. The dominant classes’ commercial
opportunities and threats became more frequently occasions for war, states
whose economic bases were expanding became much more able to seize
opportunities and head off threats, alliances among states entered the
definitions of those opportunities and threats, such alliances frequently formed
to contain the expansion of the currently most powerful state, expanding states
fought more often to enlarge their contiguous territories rather than to accrete
new tribute-paying units regardless of their location, and large-scale rebellions
incited by rulers’ attempts to extract the means of war or to impose a national
religion provided more frequent opportunities for intervention by neighboring
states. Meanwhile the gradual disarmament of the civilian population reduced
the involvement of non-governmental groups as combatants — but not, alas, as
victims — in wars. To some extent, the defense of coreligionists displaced
dynastic inheritance as the ground of intervention by one state in the affairs of
another.

As European states moved into the phase of nationalization (especially
between 1700 and 1850, with wide variation from one kind of state to another),
dynasties lost much of their ability to make war on their own behalf, and
something we vaguely call “national interest” came to dominate states’
involvement or non-involvement in wars. National interest synthesized the
interests of the dominant classes, but compounded them with a much stronger
drive to control contiguous territories and populations within Europe, as well as
a fiercer competition for land outside of Europe.

Under nationalization, three critical changes affected the conditions for war:
the current condition of the entire state system — notably the extent to which a
balance of power currently obtained — began to make a major difference in the
186 The European State System

likelihood and location of war (Levy 1988); increasingly, pairs of states that
were approaching equality of power went to war, especially if they occupied
adjacent territories (Organski and Kugler 1980, Moul 1988, Houweling and
Siccama 1988); total (rather than per capita) national income began limiting the
military capacity of states as never before, with the result that large commercial
and industrial states began to prevail within the state system. The era of war on
the basis of rational expectations of gain and rational minimization of loss came
upon Europe and its extensions. At the same time, third parties intervened
much more frequently in nationalist rebellions against composite monarchies,
as when France, Britain, and Russia joined the Greeks in their 1827 revolt
against the Ottoman Empire. As grounds for intervention, common nationality
displaced both dynastic inheritance and shared religion.

During the subsequent period of specialization, the conditions for war altered
relatively little, except that competition for empire — direct or indirect — far from
the national territory played a larger part than ever. After 1945, the standoff
between the Soviet Union and the United States almost eliminated war among
European states within Europe, but made the points of contact among Soviet,
American, and Chinese power outside of Europe critical locations for the
pursuit of national interest.

With the nationalization and specialization of armed force, international war
developed a reciprocal relationship to revolution, rebellion, and civil war.
During the centuries in which dynasties usually controlled states, a weakening
in the ruling kin group — for example, the death of a king with an infant heir or
none at all — signaled to rivals outside the state an opportunity to attack. When
rebellion occurred first, it invited outsiders to intervene on behalf of the
challengers. As religious divisions became fundamental matters of state (which
means especially between 1520 and 1650), the incentives to intervene became
even more compelling. Both the effort of a ruler to extract greatly increased
means of war from a reluctant population and the weakening of a state through
losses in war sometimes incited rebellions and civil wars. If the rebel coalition
won its battle with the rulers, displaced them, and undertook a social
transformation, a full-scale revolution resulted.

All of Europe’s great revolutions, and many of its lesser ones, began with the
strains imposed by war. The English Revolution began with the efforts of
Charles I to bypass Parliament in acquiring revenues for war on the continent
and in Scotland and Ireland. The debt accumulated by the French monarchy
during the Seven Years’ War and the War of American Independence
precipitated the struggles of the French Revolution. Russian losses in World
War I discredited tsarist rule, encouraged military defections, and made the
state’s vulnerability patent; the revolutions of 1917, followed.

State formation also affected the rhythms and character of popular collective
action short of revolution. During the phases of brokerage and nationalization,
episodic but massively increasing demands for money and men repeatedly
The European State System 187

stimulated resistance at the level of the village or the region. Local people ran
out the tax collector, attacked the house of the tax farmer, hid their young men
from recruiters, petitioned the king for relief, asked patrons to intercede for
them, and fought efforts to inventory their wealth. They aimed especially at
local people who were linked to the state, either as state officials or as agents of
indirect rule. With the later stages of nationalization and the movement to
specialization, popular collective action itself nationalized and became more
autonomous; as the national state’s policies and demands came to bear more
and more directly on their fates, workers, peasants, and other ordinary people
banded together to make claims on the state — claims for redress, certainly, but
also claims for rights they had never previously enjoyed at a national scale
(Tilly, Tilly, and Tilly 1975, Tilly 1986). The political party, the special-
interest association, the national social movement, and all the rest of popular
politics took shape. Thus war drove not only the state system and the formation
of individual states, but also the distribution of power over the state. Even with
the last few centuries’ civilianization of Western governments, war has
remained the defining activity of national states.

SIX SALIENT QUESTIONS

As a way of gauging how far we have come, let us return to the questions that
began this inquiry. This time, let us reverse the order, taking the more detailed
questions, and leading up to the general problem.

What accounts for the roughly concentric pattern of state formation in ‘Europe asa
whole? We now see that the question misstates the initial situation in some
regards. In AD gg0, almost all of Europe lived in fragmented sovereignty. Yet
the character and degree of fragmentation varied. In different segments of the
outer circle, large landlords and nomadic raiders deployed coercion in relative
autonomy, although in most cases one of them bore some such title as duke,
khan, or king, received deference and tribute from the others, and had claims
on the intermittent military service of the rest.

Europe’s gross geographic variation in paths of state formation reflected the
differential distribution of coercion and capital. In the outer circle, typified by
Russia and Hungary, the rarity of concentrated capital, the consequent
weakness of cities and capitalists, the strength of armed landlords, and the
struggle with powerful invaders such as the Mongols gave the advantage to
rulers who could squeeze military force from landlords and peasants without
raising large amounts of cash. States following the coercion-intensive path
co-opted landlords and clergy, subordinated the peasantry, built extensive
bureaucracies, and stifled their bourgeoisies.

In the inner zone, typified by Venice and the Netherlands, the concentration
of capital and predominance of capitalists simultaneously facilitated the
188 © The European State System

creation of military force and inhibited the seizure of states by specialists in
coercion. For centuries the maritime states of the zone enjoyed great economic
and political power. Finally, however, they found themselves hedged in or
conquered by large land-based states that drew large armies from their own
populations.

In between lay those states — notably France, Britain, and the later Prussia —
that combined substantial sources of domestic capital with landlord—cultivator
relations facilitating the creation of massive armed force. Their superior ability
to sustain armies from their own resources eventually made them dominant
over other sorts of states. The activity of building armies, furthermore, turned
them early into national states.

The Iberian peninsula provides an interesting composite of all three
experiences: a Catalonia, dominated by Barcelona, that acted much like a city-
state so long as Mediterranean trade flourished, a Castile building military
might on a warrior nobility and a subjugated peasantry but drawing on foreign
riches to hire mercenaries, a Portugal sharply divided between Lisbon and its
profoundly rural hinterland, other combinations yet in Valencia, Andalusia,
Navarre, and elsewhere. But then all states were more composite than my
simple typology demands: Britain with its England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland,
and overseas possessions; Prussia with its eventual stretch from rural
Pomerania to citified Rhineland, the Ottoman Empire with its span sometimes
reaching from Persia to Hungary via the trading Mediterranean islands,
the various Habsburg empires and their successors, scattered over most of
Europe’s climes and economies. The distinction between coercion-intensive,
capital-intensive, and capitalized-coercion paths of state formation captures a
significant part of the geographic and temporal variation, but not all of it.

Why, despite obvious interests to the contrary, did rulers frequently accept the
establishment of institutions representing the major classes within the populations that
fell subject to the state’s jurisdiction? Monarchs were playing the same game — the
game of war and competition for territory — under vastly different conditions.
The more expensive and demanding war became, the more they had to bargain
for its wherewithal. The bargaining produced or fortified representative
institutions in the form of Estates, Cortes, and eventually national legislatures.
Bargaining ranged from co-optation with privilege to massive armed repression,
but it left behind compacts between sovereign and subjects. Although rulers of
states such as France and Prussia managed to circumvent most of the old
representative institutions for several centuries, those representative institutions
or their successors eventually acquired more power vis-a-vis the crown as
regular taxation, credit, and payment for the national debt became essential to
the continued production of armed force. '

Why did European states vary so much with respect to the incorporation of urban
oligarchies and institutions into national state structure? On the whole, urban
institutions became durable elements of national state structure where — and to
The European State System 189

the degree that - concentrated capital prevailed. That happened for two
reasons: first because strong clusters of capitalists long had the incentive and
the means to block any attempt by non-capitalist landlords at accumulating
coercive power in their vicinities; second, because as the scale and expense of
war expanded rulers who had access to credit and a commercialized, easily
taxable, economy gained great advantages in the conduct of war, a fact which
gave considerable bargaining power to major trading cities and their
commercial oligarchies.

At one extreme, the weakness of capital in Poland facilitated mastery of
landlords over the state, to such a degree that kings never acquired effective
priority over their nominal subjects. With the partial exception of Gdansk,
Polish nobles squeezed their cities dry. At the other extreme, the strength of
capital in the Dutch Republic practically reduced the national government to a
federation of city-states. Nevertheless, the immense commercial power of those
federated city-states gave them the means of forming navies and hiring armies
with great rapidity. In state-capital regions, rulers subordinated cities to the
state and used them as instruments of rule, but also employed their capital and
capitalists in the production of armed force; states did not generally incorporate
urban institutions and oligarchies into the national structure as such, but
bargained out forms of representation that gave them considcrable power.

Why did political and commercial power slide from the city-states and city-empires of
the Mediterranean to the substantial states and relatively subordinated cities of the
Atlantic? Our review of the millennium from ggo to 1990 puts that important
shift into perspective, and raises doubts about the neat succession of single
hegemony from, say, Venice to Portugal to Britain. Perhaps we can award the
palm to Great Britain for part of the nineteenth century (and thus help explain
the relative absence of major European wars between 1815 and 1914). But
before then at least two powerful states were always contending for dominance
in Europe; none of them ever made it. On the commercial side, the expansion
that became evident in the later fifteenth century impinged on a wide range of
European urban areas; it supported a Renaissance whose center remained the
city-states of northern Italy, but whose ramifications reached Germany,
Flanders, and France, as well as a Reformation whose initial focus was the cities
of southern and central Germany. Venice, Genoa, Ragusa, and other
Mediterranean city-states, furthermore, continued to prosper, if not to prevail,
into the eighteenth century.

Yet the centers of commercial and political gravity certainly moved northwest
after the fifteenth century. First the overland and coast-hugging commercial
exchanges of Europe with the cities of the East shriveled as a consequence of
nomadic invasions, disease, and eventually the European establishment of high-
seas itineraries to Asia around Africa. Then the mutually-reinforcing Atlantic
and Baltic trades enriched Castile, Portugal, France, England, and the
Netherlands more than the rest of Europe. All those states drew on their new
190 6. The European State System

wealth to build military power, and used their military to seek out new wealth.
The ability to make large armies, big ships, long voyages, and overseas
conquests gave them great advantages over Mediterranean city-states whose
own waterways were limited by Muslim powers.

Why did city-states, city-empires, federations, and religious organizations lose their
importance as prevailing kinds of state in Europe? Throughout the history of
European states, warmaking and protection led to extractive activity, which
entailed bargaining with those who held the means of war and protection. That
bargaining sometimes led to further involvement of states in production,
distribution, and adjudication. It always created some form of state structure,
variable according to the economy and configuration of classes within which it
occurred.

In their own ways and places, city-states, city-empires, federations, and
religious organizations all thrived in Europe until the sixteenth century; indeed,
empires of one kind or another still predominated in Europe at Charles V’s
abdication in 1557. Then national states began to gain priority. They did so for
two related reasons: first, commercialization and capital accumulation in larger
states such as England and France reduced the warmaking advantages of the
small mercantile states and second, war expanded in scale and cost, partly as a
function of the increased ability of the larger states to milk their economies, or
their colonies, to pay for armed force. They won at war. The efforts of the
smaller states to defend themselves either transformed, absorbed, or combined
them into national states.

Why did war shift from conquest for tribute and struggle among armed tribute-takers
to sustained battles among massed armies and navies? Remember the transitions
from patrimonialism to brokerage to nationalization to specialization. What
drove those transitions? Successful tribute-takers found themselves in indirect
control of extensive lands and populations, whose administration and exploitation
— especially in time of war with other major powers — created durable state
structure. Those populous states that managed to incorporate substantial
capital and capitalists into their preparations for war first built armies and navies
through brokerage, and then incorporated the armed forces into state structure
through nationalization, followed by specialization. At each stage, they had the
means of acquiring and deploying the most effective military technology on a
much larger scale than their neighbors. Since war pays off on effectiveness
rather than efficiency, they gave smaller neighbors hard choices: mount the
same sort of military effort at great cost, accept conquest, or find a safe
subordinate niche. National states drove out the other forms of war.

To sum up: What accounts for the great variation over time and space in the kinds
of states that'have prevailed in Europe since 1p 990, and why did European states
eventually converge on different variants of the national state? Why were the directions
of change so similar and the paths so different? European states started in very
different positions as a function of the distribution of concentrated capital and
The European State System 191

coercion. They changed as the intersections of capital and coercion altered.
But military competition eventually drove them all in the same general
direction. It underlay both the creation and the ultimate predominance of the
national state. In the process, Europeans created a state system that dominated
the entire world. We live within that state system today. Yet the world outside of
Europe resembles Europe no more than superficially. Something has changed
in the extension of the European state system to the rest of the earth — including
the relationship between military activity and state formation. Knowledge of the
European experience helps identify some worrisome peculiarities of the con-
temporary world. The next (and final) chapter worries about those peculiarities.
7

Soldiers and States in 1990

POLITICAL MISDEVELOPMENT

As recently as twenty years ago, many scholars thought that Third World states
would recapitulate the Western experience of state formation. The idea of
“political development,” now largely abandoned, epitomized the conception of
a standard track along which states could roll toward the terminus of full
participation and effectiveness — the model of participation and effectiveness
being, of course, one or another of the existing Western states. The confidence
of political developmentalists shattered with the emergence of clear alternative
models such as China, Japan, Korea, and Cuba, the embarrassing failure of
existing development schemes to anticipate the actual experiences of Third
World states, resistance by Third World leaders and scholars to the
condescension of Western academic advice, turns to Realpolitik in the great
powers’ treatment of Third World states, and disputes among Western scholars
themselves as to the proper reading of past experience (see Evans and Stephens
1989). Along with “modernization,” “educational development,” and other
well-meaning but obfuscatory slogans, political development is fast disappearing
from the analytical lexicon.

As misconccived as the old analyses now seem, it was not utterly stupid to
suppose that non-Western states would undergo some of the same experiences
as their Western counterparts and end up looking much more like them. As
recent colonies of various Western powers, a majority of newly independent
states began their careers with formal organizations traced on Western lines
and incorporating significant parts of the colonial apparatus. Western-educated
state leaders: sought self-consciously to install administrations, parliaments,
parties, armies, and public services of Western inspiration.

What is more, they said so; Third World leaders declared that they would
modernize their countrics, develop them politically. Major Western powers
Soldiers and States in19g0 193

assisted them actively, lending experts, models, training- programs, and funds.
So long as Japan was reeling from its losses in World War II and China
was consumed with its internal struggles, no other models were obviously
available. The choices seemed to run from Soviet-type socialism to American-
style capitalism, with no viable paths of state formation beyond cither extreme.
The entire range recapitulated one version or another of European—
American experience. Speaking of Southeast Asia in 1960, Lucian Pye
declared that:

the dominant theme of Southeast Asia is the effort of the leaders of these new countries
to create modern nation-states out of their transitional societies. These leaders have
committed their peoples to the task of establishing representative institutions of
government and developing more productive modes of economic life. Although
enthusiasm for these goals has not been lacking, it is difficult to estimate their chances of
being realized, for it is still hard to discern even the outlines of the political and social
systems that are evolving in Southeast Asia. The possibility of failure is great, and
leaders and citizens can be troubled with self-doubts. Already the tendency toward more
authoritarian practices is widespread: for example, armics are coming to play roles that

were originally reserved for democratic politicians.
(Pye 1960: 65-6)

Note the language: it speaks of constructing something whose characteristics
are well known in a situation that is poorly understood, and menacing to the
enterprise. The “something” to construct was an effective national state on a
Western design. To be sure, Pye saw the possibility that something quite
different might emerge in Southeast Asia, even that Southeast Asian Icaders
might press for something different. Most leaders of newly independent states
actually declared that they sought a third way, at least vaguely socialist,
somewhcre between the American Scylla and the Russian Charybdis. But the
existing Western states defined the range of choice. With varying degrees of
dogmatism and perspicacity, political developmentalists said exactly that.

Even historically sophisticated analysts such as Cyril Black promulgated
models featuring successive stages of political development. Black distinguished
no fewer than seven different concrete paths of modernization, those illustrated
by the United Kingdom, the United States, Belgium, Uruguay, Russia, Algeria,
and Liberia, in that order (Black 1966: go—4). But he argued that all his varied
instances passed through four stages: a challenge of modernity, a consolidation
of modernizing leadership, an economic and social transformation, and then
the integration of society. Previous history, in his analysis, affected exactly how
any particular society faced these challenges. But eventually all the European
cases he examined arrived at something like societal integration after crossing
the three previous thresholds in the same order.

The plausible collective reasoning had a great flaw. It supposed that a single
standard process of state formation existed, that each state passed through the
same internal process more or less separately, that Western experience
194 Soldiers and States in 1990

exemplified the process, that contemporary Western states had generally
reached the end of the process, and that the problem was one of social
engineering on a very large scale. The effort to put those suppositions to the
test in the construction of “modern” African, Asian, Latin American, or Middle
Eastern states immediately raised doubts. Major powerholders resisted or
distorted the transformation of existing governmental organization, officials
used state power for their own ends, political parties became vehicles of ethnic
blocs or patron—client chains, state-led enterprises collapsed, charismatic
leaders suppressed Western-style electoral politics, and many more features of
Third World states challenged the Western models.

Western models? In fact, the standard treatments of “political development”
also misconstrued the Western experience on which they ostensibly drew. On
the whole, they presented it as a conscious problem-solving process that passed
through a series of standard internally-generated stages and finally produced
mature, stable states. For A.F.K. Organski (1965: 7), the stages were:

1_ the politics of primitive unification;
2 the politics of industrialization;

3 the politics of national welfare;

4. the politics of abundance.

Organski’s characteristic scheme compressed a great deal of Third World
experience into its first stage, but then delineated a path that clearly led toward
the existing European world and its extensions.

Similarly, a great many political analysts thought that the transition to
modernity passed from one condition of equilibrium — traditional society, or
something of the sort - to another, superior, modern cquilibrium. In between,
according to this line of argument, lay the turbulence of rapid social change.
Because social change was occurring much more rapidly in the twentieth
century than before, new states were experiencing greater stresses than their
European predecessors. Thus Third World states ran the risk of simultaneous
foreign and domestic conflict, each stimulating the other (see Wilkenfeld 1973).
Eventually, however, they would learn to contain conflict and achieve stable
government of a modern kind. So, at least, taught much of the literature on
political development.

Since the 1960s, a clearer reading of Western experience has made the
inadequacy of those suppositions obvious. This book has borrowed greedily
from the subsequent fund of knowledge, and has reinvested the accumulation
in a reinterpretation of Western states’ history. In earlier chapters, we have seen
how widely the trajectories of European state formation varied as a function of
the geography of coercion and capital, the organization of major powerholders,
and pressure from other states. We have examined how a long series of unequal
struggles among rulers, other powerholders, and ordinary people created
Soldiers and States in1990 195

specific state institutions and claims on the state. We have noticed how much
the eventual organizational convergence of European states resulted from
competition among them, both within Europe and in the rest of the world. We
have witnessed the profound impact of war, and preparation for war, on other
features of state structure. All these observations lead to the conclusions —
vague but helpful — that Third World state formation should be distinctively
different, and that the changed relations between coercion and capital should
provide clues as to the nature of that difference.

In what ways should contemporary experience differ from that of the
European past? After centuries of divergences among capital-intensive,
coercion- intensive, and capitalized-coercion paths of state formation, European
states began to converge a few centurics age; war and mutual influence caused
the convergence. Although shared colonial experience imposed common
properties on many Third World states, however, no great homogenization has
so far occurred among them. On the contrary. Any student of European state
formation can hardly help noticing the variety of today’s Third World states.
Variety marks any category that includes both immense, ancient China and tiny,
brand-new Vanuatu, both wealthy Singapore and dirt-poor Chad; we are
unlikely to generalize successfully about such a heterogeneous set of
experiences. Not all the states of the Third World, furthermore, are “new”
states, by any stretch of the imagination. China and Japan-stand among the
world’s oldest continuously existing states, Siam/Thailand is centuries old, and
most Latin American states acquired formal independence during the
Napoleonic Wars. They stand with states formed since 1945 chiefly in their
recent acquisition of full membership in the state system that European
struggles created and defined.

Look more closely, however: exactly what is heterogeneous about Third
World states? Not so much their organizational structures as relations between
citizens and states. Formal organizational characteristics of the world’s states
have, in fact, converged dramatically over the last century or so; the adoption of
one Western model or another has become a virtual prerequisite for recognition
by prior members of the state system. The present 160-odd recognized states
cover a much narrower organizational range than the 200-odd European states
of 1500, which included city-states, city-empires, federations, kingdoms,
territorial empires, and more. Except for relatively centralized federations and
quite attenuated kingdoms, those once-abundant political forms have all but
disappeared. After 1500, both the pressures of large-scale warmaking and the
negotiations of large-scale peacemaking drove all European states toward a
new organizational form: the national state. The drift from “internal” to
“external” state formation which prevailed in Europe has continued into our
own time, and imposed a common definition on states in very diverse parts of
the world. Contemporary state structures, in the narrow sense, resemble each
other in featuring courts, legislatures, central bureaucracies, field administrations,
196 Soldiers and States in 1990

standing armies, spccialized police forces, and a panoply of public services;
even the differences among socialist, capitalist, and mixed economics fail to
override these common properties.

Yet such formally similar organizations do not work at all in the same
manner. The differences lic in both the internal operation of superficially
indistinguishable courts, legislatures, bureaux, or schools and the relations
between governmental agencies and citizens. In the European experience,
states took forms that mediated between the exigencics of external war and the
claims of the subject population; to some degrec, each state’s organization
adapted to local social and economic conditions. As existing national states
sculptured newcomers in their own image, local adaptation occurred instead in
relations between citizens and states. These days the difference between
coercion-intensive, capital-intensive, and capitalized-coercion settings affects
the formal structure of states much less than it used to, but affects relations
between citizens and states even morc. In that regard, the contemporary world
remains extremely diverse.

Does the Third World exist? Certainly Latin American, Middle Eastern, and
East Asian states differ greatly with respect both to internal organization and to
position within the world system of states. The justification for beginning with
such a crude, composite category rests on the fact that states in lower-income
regions of the world have long endured under the formal control of Europe and
its extensions, have commonly adopted European or American models of
formal organization, find themselves caught in superpower struggles over which
they can exert little control, and constitute an uncasy but recurrent pool for
alliances with newcomers to the state system (Ayoob 1989). In extending to the
non-European world, the state system did not simply remain the same; the
entrance of scores of independent states from Asia, Africa, and Latin America
transformed the system in ways that a comparison with previous European
experience can illuminate.

We still have something to gain, then, from the comparison of contemporary
Third World experience with that of national states for which a long record is
already available. At a minimum, that comparison will help us take two useful
steps: (1) to discard ideas about state formation that have already proven
themselves faulty before wasting time applying them to contemporary
experience; (2) to sharpen our sensc of what is distinctive, and what familiar, in
the processes of state formation, transformation, and deformation now
occurring in the poorer parts of the world.

Reflecting on European experience, what might we expect to find happening
in the contemporary world? Given the diversity of state formation within
Europe, we have no reason to anticipate a single trajectory of change. But we
might reasonably extrapolate from Europe to:

+ significant influence of the relative distributions of coercion and capital on
the paths of state formation;
Soldiers and States in 1990 197

+ distinctively different directions of change in the presence and absence of
significant clusters of cities;

+ strong effects of war and preparation for war on the creation and alteration

of state structure;

mediation of those effects through (a) fiscal structure and (b) the sources of

arms and military personnel;

* civilianization of state power through the creation of central bureaucracies,
increasing reliance on credit and taxation for the purchase of military
means, and bargaining with the subject population over those means;

* continuation of the trend from “internal” to “external” determination of
the organizational forms of states.

In a world so different from that in which most European states took shape, to
be sure, these remain no morc than orienting hypotheses. Yet they improve
considerably on the old notion that Third World states would somehow
recapitulate the idealized experience of the most effective Western national
states.

THE IMPACT AND HERITAGE OF WORLD WAR II

What, then, distinguishes state formation in the contemporary world from its
counterparts in the past? Although twentieth-century war takes a deadlier toll
than ever, war has changed significantly in character. Large-scale civil wars,
often aided and abetted by great powers, have become much more common in
the world since 1945 than they were in European experience. The threat of
nuclear arms and other technical menaces has compounded the likely costs of a
major war. The formation of a bipolar state system on a nearly global scale
affected the politics, and the military prospects, of most states. On the principle
that the number of relations among states increases geometrically as the
number of states increases arithmetically, the sheer proliferation of connected
but nominally independent states greatly complicated the state system.

World War II transformed the state system and the states within it. As
citizens of belligerent states, as inhabitants of battle zones, or both, most of the
world’s people felt the war’s impact. The war broke all records for killing, for
destruction of property, and for displacement of populations. By dropping
atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the United States introduced into
warfare the first weapons in history with the potential to annihilate all humanity
in a few days.

We can reasonably place the start of World War II in 1938 (when Japan and
Russia began to fight while Germany annexed Poland and dismembered
Czechoslovakia) or in 1939 (when Germany invaded Poland and then the rest
of Czechoslovakia). In either case, Japan’s surrender in 1945 marks a relatively
198  Soldters and States in 1990

neat end to the war. Perhaps fifteen million deaths in battle and another twenty-
five million as a direct result of war made World War II by far the most
destructive belligerency in human history. Powers sustaining at least a thousand
battle deaths included Bulgaria, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada,
Ethiopia, Poland, USA, USSR, Belgium, Brazil, China, Yugoslavia, the
Netherlands, Rumania, Italy, New Zealand, France, South Africa, Greece,
Norway, Mongolia, Japan, Germany, Hungary, and Finland (Small and Singer
1982: 91). The war left Japan, important parts of China, and much of Europe
devastated.

As the war ended, two states towered over all the rest: the USA and the
USSR. The United States had suffered relatively light losses (408 thousand
battle deaths as compared, for instance, with Germany’s 3.5 million) during
World War II but had mobilized enormous industrial capacity after a
debilitating depression. It is not surprising that the United States, an industrial
colossus grown even more muscular in war, seized a dominant position in the
world system of states. The rise of the Soviet Union is the greater puzzle. The
USSR had endured terrible privations in the war (7.5 million battle deaths,
perhaps 20 million in total fatalities, and 60 percent of industrial capacity lost)
but had built up a formidable state organization in the process (Rice 1988). No
doubt that enhanced state capacity, and the extension of Soviet control to other
eastern European states, helps account for the other pole of the bipolar world.
Almost immediately the former allies turned to an enmity that blocked a general
peace settlement for the first time in four centurics. As a result, losers of the
war such as Japan and Germany long endured the victors’ military occupation,
and only slowly regained membership in the state system. In fact, the victors
and the vanquished only settled the war piecemeal, in occupations, provisional
international agreements, partial treaties, and de facto recognitions. The war’s
complexity and scale, plus its bipolar outcome, overwhelmed the capacity of the
international system to produce the sort of general settlement that had ended
major European wars since 1503.

The postwar process of state formation distinguished itself from its
predecessors especially in the wholesale transformation of Western colonies
into formally independent states. The situation favored European withdrawal:
the USSR had no colonies in the major areas of European colonization, and the
United States had few, while the European powers were preoccupied with
recovery from the ravages of war. At a dizzying pace, dependencies demanded
and won recognition as autonomous entities. In 1960 alone the Belgian Congo
(now Zaire), Benin, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Congo, Cyprus, Gabon, Cote d’lvoire, Madagascar, Mali, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Somalia, Togo and Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso) all joined the
United Nations shortly after receiving recognition as independent states.

At the same time the Soviet Union and, especially, the United States,
extended the networks of their military bases, military assistance programs, and
Soldiers and States in1gg0 199

intelligence facilities throughout the world (Eden 1988). In East Asia, for
example, the United States substituted its own military power for that of a
demilitarized Japan, reorganized and ran the South Korean military, and
subsidized China’s KMT forces both in their losing mainland battles and in
their retreat to control of Taiwan (Cumings 1988, Dower 1988, Levine 1988).
Between 1945 and 1984, furthermore, the United States pumped $13 billion of
military-economic aid into South Korea and another $5.6 billion into Taiwan,
as compared with a total for all Africa of $6.89 billion and all Latin America of
$14.8 billion (Cumings 1984: 24).

For the most part, European powers relinquished their overlordships with
remarkably little travail. With the exception of the Algerian struggle for
independence and the early stages of the Indochinese conflicts, the bitterest
battles occurred where more than one group claimed the right to rule the new
state, where a segment of the liberated population demandcd its own state, and
where the division among the claimants incited extensive great power
intervention; China, Palestine, Malaya, Kenya, Cyprus, Aden, Borneo, Korea,
Vietnam, the Philippines, Ruanda, Angola, and Mozambique provide the
obvious examples. The United Nations undertook to register and manage the
entry of new members into the international system of states.

For the period since 1945, we can therefore take the membership of the
United Nations at any point in time as an approximation of the world’s state
system. The approximation is imperfect: Switzerland, South Korea, North
Korea, Taiwan, Monaco, Tuvalu, and a few other units behave like states but
do not belong, while the Byelorussian and Ukrainian republics (until the recent
stirrings of nationalism, wholly owned subsidiaries of the USSR) belong as
concessions to the power the Soviet Union wielded at the end of World War II.
But in general, the organization includes the world’s important states, and has
absorbed new states as they have achieved a measure of autonomy in
international affairs.

Figure 7.1 presents the geographic distribution of UN members from the
organization’s founding in 1945 to 1988. The story is obvious: the UN started
out with a large majority of states from Europe and the Americas — the old
European state system and its extensions, minus the major losers of World War II
and plus a few important states outside of the West. The numbers of states
from Europe and the Americas increased modestly as European peace
settlements fell into place and as Caribbean states began acquiring independence
and international recognition. But after 1955 Asian states entered the UN at a
faster rate than those of the West. From 1960 onward African states dominated
the new entries.

The new entrants, on the average, were following coercion-intensive paths to
statehood. The departing colonial powers left little accumulated capital behind
them, but bequcathed to their successor states military forces drawn from and
modeled on the repressive forces they had previously established to maintain
200 Soldiers and States in 1990

180-

1704 KEY « Africa
too. ° Asia/Pacific
140-4 1 Europe
130-4 ao Americas
120-

110-
100
90-
80-

Number of States

0 TTTTTTTrrTrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrry rr rrr r rrr rr terre rrr

1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984

Figure 7.1 Membership of United Nations by geographic region, 1945-88.

their own local administrations. Relatively well equipped and trained armed
forces then specialized in control of civilian populations and in combat against
insurgents rather than interstate war. Once Europeans dismantled their own
governmental apparatus, the armed forces, the churches, and Western
corporations were frequently the most effective organizations operating in the
state’s territory. The armed forces, furthermore, had some distinctive
characteristics: their senior ranks filled rapidly with men who had previously
occupied subordinate positions in colonial armies. Often, continuing a pattern
of recruitment established by colonial powers, they drew disproportionately on
one linguistic, religious, and/or regional population, and therefore became the
instrument or the site of sharp ethnic rivalries. Up to 1966, for example, the
Nigerian army held itself aloof from manifest division by region or ethnicity.
But with the military coup d’état of January 1966, fissures began to show. In
July, a coalition of officers from the north led another coup, and acted quickly to
expel Ibos (who came especially from Nigeria’s Eastern Region) from the army
and power. Soon (May 1967) the east, as Biafra, broke into open rebellion, and
one of Africa’s bloodiest civil wars began (Luckham 1971: 17-82).

Except where charismatic national leaders deliberately held them in check,
Third World armies commonly resisted civilian control. Senior officers
frequently felt, and said, that they knew better than mere politicians what the
country’s destiny required, and how to maintain order on the way to fulfilling
that destiny. To the extent that their states generated revenues by selling
commodities on the international market, bought arms overseas, and received
Soldiers and States in1990 201

military aid from great powers, furthermore, the armed forces enjoyed
insulation from reliance on taxation and conscription authorized by civilian
governments.

How far the military of exporting countries were able to maintain autonomy,
however, depended on the alliances they formed (or failed to form) with major
elements of the ruling class, and on the success of the export program. In
Bolivia, the encapsulation of tin tycoons, who lived handsomely on export
income and established few strong tics within the country, madé them
vulnerable to military seizure of state power and of tin revenues (Gallo 1985).
In Taiwan, a quintessential police state under Jiang Jie-Shi (Chiang Kai-Shek),
the great success of the industrial export program eventually diverted the
military from their preparations to invade the Chinese mainland, reduced their
control over policy and day-to-day governmental operations, and surrounded
them with powerful civilian officials (Amsden 1985).

What is more, the character of war changed significantly after 1945. Despite
the near-disappearance of wars among Western powers, lethal combat actually
became more frequent in the world as a whole. Table 7.1 shows the trend since
1893, expressed as thousands of battle deaths in wars involving at least a
thousand battle deaths in a given year. The totals fluctuate sharply from one
period to the next. Yet the figures show several trends clearly: the concentration
of deaths in the periods of general war, the stabilization or decline of
“extrasystemic” wars as more and more states entered the international state
system, the irregularly increasing prominence of civil wars as the origin of
deaths in battle. The number of new civil wars rose from about ten thousand
battle deaths per year at the century’s start to a hundred thousand deaths per
year between 1937 and 1947, then fluctuated around the hundred-thousand
mark over the next three decades.

With the twentieth century, battle deaths underestimated more and more the
damage done by war. The bombing and shelling of civilian settlements

Table 7.1 Battle deaths in wars involving at least a thousand battle deaths in a given
: year, 1893-1980

Locus of war

Period Interstate —_ Extrasystematic Civil ‘Total Percent civil
1893-1903 30 96 112 238 47.1
1904-1914 8,860 ° 270 9,130 3.0
1915-1925 161 83 506 750 67.5
1926-1936 213 ° 955 1,168 81.8
1937-1947 16,292 100 1,161 17,553 6.6
1948-1958 1,913 59 372 2,344 15.9
1959-1969 1,250 ° 1,830 3,080 59.4
1970-1980 78 73 820 g2r 89.0

Source: Small and Singer 1982: 134, 263
202 Soldiers and States in 1990

destroyed increasing numbers of non-combatants, not to mention their means
of livelihood. During and after wars, states began to displace or even expel
populations as never before. And the deliberate attempt to kill entire
populations — genocide and politicide — has turned from the rare, appalling
aberration that it once seemed to a standard technique of government. Between
1945 and 1987, deliberate mass killing of civilians by agents of states probably
caused from 7 million to 16 million deaths throughout the world, more than
died in the direct engagements of international and civil wars (Harff and Gurr
1988).

Civil wars that occurred after 1945 sometimes arose from general struggles
among classes for state power. More often they sprang from the claims of
particular religious, linguistic, and territorial groups for autonomy or for control
of an existing state. In this limited sense, nationalism has become more salient
in wars as the world as a whole has settled into a complete map of stable,
mutually-exclusive state territories; the powerholders of excluded nationalities
see their chances slipping away from them.

At the same time, great powers have intervened increasingly in civil wars,
seeking alignment and cooperation of those who control the state by assuring
that the sympathetic faction wins. During the 1970s, substantial civil wars
began in Angola, Burundi, Cambodia, Guatemala, Iran, Jordan, Lebanon,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Philippines, Rhodesia, and Sri Lanka; in only one of
them (Guatemala) did outside powers refrain from intervening in a substantial
way (Dunér 1985: 140). When 1980 ended, wars were raging in the Philippines,
Angola, Guatemala, Afghanistan, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Cambodia,
Mozambique, and Peru. In most of these cases, the United States, the Soviet
Union, or South Africa was at least marginally involved. Although the 1980s
offered some respite by comparison with previous decades, the destructiveness
of the Iran-Iraq war (perhaps a million battle deaths) and the continuation of
other struggles into the decade makes it unlikely that the completion of the next
interval in 1991 will establish a downward trend.

Available weaponry promised new levels of destructiveness, as the proliferation
of nuclear arms threatened the whole world with extinction. At the moment, the
USA, the USSR, the United Kingdom, France, China, and India definitely
have their own nuclear weapons. In addition to them, West Germany, Israel,
Brazil, Argentina, Pakistan, and Japan are processing plutonium, which brings
them at least within striking distance of nuclear military capacity. The other
ostensibly non-nuclear states that did not sign the 1968 nuclear non-
proliferation treaty — and therefore remain active candidates for nuclear
capacity — include Spain, Israel, Chile, Cuba, and South Africa. About 10
percent of the world’s recognized states, including its greatest powers, then,
either deploy nuclear arms or retain the right to do so. War will not become
more benign as time goes on. (A. J. P. Taylor ends his otherwise chatty How
Wars End with a chilling reminder of the nuclear threat: “However, do not
Soldiers and States in1990 203

worry. The Third World War will be the last”: Taylor 1985: 118.) In the
meantime, non-nuclear wars proliferate.

The continued rise of war couples with a fixation of international boundaries.
With a few significant exceptions, military conquest across borders has ended,
states have ceased fighting each other over disputed territory, and border forces
have shifted their efforts from defense against direct attack toward control of
infiltration. Armies (and, for that matter, navies and air forces) concentrate
increasingly on repression of civilian populations, combat of insurgents, and
seizures of power. As a consequence, governments become more unstable as
their borders become more secure. Because those who control states define
whole populations as their enemies, wars generate refugees at a huge rate
(conventional estimates set the number of refugees in the world at 8 million
toward 1970 and 10.5 million toward 1980: Zolberg 1981: 21).

If the end of World War II began a new era for worldwide war and peace, the
1960s brought the largest transition so far within that era. During the early
1960s, decolonization and entry of new states into the international system
accelerated, civil wars greatly increased in destructiveness and in their share of
all wars, military power consolidated in Latin America, Asia, and the Middle
East, and military struggles for control of African states multiplied rapidly. The
Cuban missile crisis confirmed the rough strategic equality of the United States
and Soviet Union, as well as stabilizing their claims to mutually exclusive zones
of influence around their own frontiers. Above all else, military men became
increasingly involved in struggles for state power. Let us therefore focus on the
place of military power in Third World states.

THE ASCENT OF MILITARY MEN

Although writing on the Third World’s military was always more tentative and
divided than analyses of political or economic development, there too Western
analysts commonly adopted an implicit model of the “mature” polity. In such a
polity, they supposed, impeccably professional military men occupied a
significant but clearly subordinate place; the model followed directly from the
experience of most European states during the last few centuries of state
formation. The analyst’s job was then to chart the path that would or could lead
from the present condition of the military in Indonesia or the Congo to the
condition appropriate for stable democracy. That job entailed the further task
of accounting for deviations from the favored path — in particular, the puzzling
way in which many colonial territories gained formal independence blessed with
ostensibly democratic and representative governments, yet quickly moved to
military rule.

Most analysts thought, with Edward Shils, that “Military rule is one of the
several practicable and apparently stable alternatives when parliamentary,
204 Soldiers and States in 1990

democratic regimes falter. The inherited and the newly engendered obstacles
over which these regimes have been stumbling are more determinative than the
aspirations of the military elites of these states, although the latter are not
unimportant” (Shils in Johnson 1962: 9). Thus political development and
military development merged into the same problem. Both ideas have now
dissolved in skepticism, contradiction, and despair.

In Third World regions such as Africa and South Asia, a student of Western
history cannot help noticing apparent disjunctions between the existence of
Western-looking twentieth-century armies, on the one hand, and the prevalence
of military politics reminiscent of the Renaissance, between the apparatus of
representative government and the arbitrary use of state power against citizens,
between the installation of apparently conventional bureaucracies and the
widespread use of governmental organization for individual gain. These
disjunctions are more visible in states that have recently escaped from colonial
rule than in the rest of the Third World. Contrary to the apparent teaching of
European history, the growth of big government, arbitrary rule, and militarization
now seem to be going hand in hand.

Thirty years ago, Samuel Huntington argued that civilian control over the
military occurred through two different processes, one unstable and one stable.
The unstable process was a power struggle in which one civilian group or
another subordinated the military to a governmental institution, a constitution,
or a particular social class; Huntington gave it the odd name of “subjective”
control. “Objective” control, in his eyes, resulted from maximizing military
professionalism and recognizing an independent military sphere outside of
politics. “Historically,” said Huntington, “the demand for objective control has
come from the military profession, the demand for subjective control from the
multifarious civilian groups anxious to maximize their power in military affairs”
(Huntington 1957: 84-5). Paradoxically, civilians who sought to increase their
own power by interfering in military professionalization thereby promoted
military seizure of power. A pro-military ideology, low military political power,
and high military professionalism, by this argument, promote civilian control,
while anti-military ideology, high military political power and low military
professionalism promote military control.

The insertion of military political power into the explanation of military
control introduces an element of circularity into the argument, but we can break
the circle by checking the factors Huntington considers to promote political
power: personal affiliation of the military with other powerful groups, resources

‘placed directly under the control of the officer corps, hierarchical interpenetra-

tion of the officer corps with civilian power structures, prestige and popularity
of the officer ‘corps and its leaders. Thus we would expect an officer corps to
have relatively little political power if it recruited chiefly from outside the ruling
classes, had few non-military resources at its disposal, held few non-military
offices, and had little popular following.
Soldiers and States in19g0 205

Huntington wrote in a time of optimism about the professionalization of
Third World armies and the strengthening of civilian control. Five years after
Huntingdon, the Spanish-Mexican writer Victor Alba continued the note of
optimism in his declaration that Latin American militarism:

has arrived at the penultimate phasc in its history. In its final stage it will disappear. That
epoch may be near. Encouraged by the increased possibilities of legislative and
diplomatic action and the growing concern of international organizations, powerful
elements in Latin America have made the obliteration of militarism their major

preoccupation.
(Alba in Johnson 1962: 165-6)

The millennium, however, has dragged its feet. Despite dramatic containment
of the military in Brazil and Argentina, the weakening of Chile’s Pinochet
regime, and the faltering of Alfredo Stroessner’s personalistic rule in Paraguay,
nine of the 24 larger Latin American and Caribbean states still accord extensive
power and autonomy to their armed forces. Behind the scenes, furthermore,
the militaries of South America still constitute a political force to reckon with.

Treated as a prediction made thirty years ago, Huntington’s analysis indicates
that in so far as pro-military ideologies have arisen, military political power has
declined, and military professionalism has increased in different parts of the
world, civilian control should have become more effective. If, on the other
hand, military control has actually become more widespread, then we should
find that anti-military ideologies have gained, military political power has risen,
and military professionalism has declined. Something in those predictions looks
wrong: military control has increased in the world’s states over the last thirty
years, but while military political power, by Huntington’s standards, has surely
expanded, anti-military ideology does not seem to have become more prevalent,
and military professionalism has almost certainly grown. To clarify what has
happened, we should look at the place of militarizing states in the world’s
system of states.

TODAY’S MILITARY IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

Starting in the sixteenth century and ending only very recently, Western states
incorporated the rest of the world into their system through colonization,
elaboration of commercial ties, and direct negotiation. Most recent entrants
joined the system as independent actors through decolonization, and therefore
arrived with administrative structures, fiscal systems, and armed forces
designed on Western lines; titles, perquisites, and uniforms of the former
colonies reflect those national influences. Yet reproducing a table. of
organization provides no guarantec that the new state will behave like the old.
Nowhere is that clearer than in the behavior of the Third World’s military. The
206 Soldiers and States in 1990

armies of poor countries resemble those of rich countries in many regards. But
on the whole they intervene in domestic political life far more directly and
frequently, and with more obviously damaging consequences for rights of
citizens. Why should that be?

Think back to the central paradox of European state formation: that the
pursuit of war and military capacity, after having created national states as a sort
of by-product, led to a civilianization of government and domestic politics. That
happened, I have argued, for five main reasons: because the effort to build and
sustain military forces led agents of states to build bulky extractive apparatuses
staffed by civilians, and those extractive apparatuses came to contain and
constrain the military forces; because agents of states bargained with civilian
groups that controlled the resources required for effective warmaking, and in
bargaining gave the civilian groups enforceable claims on the state that further
constrained the military; because the expansion of state capacity in wartime
gave those states that had not suffered great losses in war expanded capacity at
the ends of wars, and agents of those states took advantage of the situation by
taking on new activities, or continuing activities they had started as emergency
measures; because participants in the war effort, including military personnel,
acquired claims on the state that they deferred during the war in response to
repression or mutual consent but which they reactivated at demobilization; and
finally because wartime borrowing led to great increases in national debts,
which in turn generated service bureaucracies and encouraged greater state
intervention in national economies.

In a cartoon history of Europe, the story would appear in four panels. In the
first panel, the king wears armor and carries a sword, recruiting and
commanding his own army and navy, which maintain personal loyalty to his
service. In the second, the king bears glorified military garb, but contracts with
a condottiere for the hire of mercenaries to fight his battles. In the third panel,
the king, fitted out in a grand costume utterly unsuitable for fighting wars,
consults with generals and ministers of war who find their places in a complex,
civilian-dominated structure. In the last scene we see a king (who may now be a
president or prime minister in.disguise) sporting a business suit and negotiating
not only with his staff but also with duly constituted representatives of major
civilian interests and of the population at large. (The four panels bear the
familiar subtitles Patrimonialism, Brokerage, Nationalization, and Specialization.)
To be sure, the comic-book version of civilianization describes different
national experiences with varying verisimilitude; it fits German experience
better than Dutch or Russian. But it will do as a schematic summary of
civilianization in European states.

Another general feature of European state formation deserves our attention.
Relations with other states played a significant part in the formation of any
particular state, if only because wars and war settlements significantly affected
the state’s structure and boundaries. Nevertheless, the organizational structures
Soldiers and States in1990 207

of the first national states to form took shape mainly as a consequence of
struggles between would-be rulers and the people they were trying to rule. As
the European state system solidified, however, whole sets of states began to
decide the outcomes of wars, and therefore the organizational structures of
states that emerged from the wars. Thus Napoleon’s forces drastically
reorganized states as they conquered, and the Congress of Vienna redrew the
map to include a previously nonexistent kingdom of the Netherlands plus a
greatly-reshaped Prussia, Sardinia, Bavaria, Baden, and Austria. Europe moved
from relatively “internal” to relatively “external” processes of state formation.

That shift toward the external continued into the twentieth century. Only a
glance at twentieth-century processes of state formation reveals that they are
triply external: many new national states formed as colonial possessions of other
states, especially European states; many built their governing institutions under
the influence of another, much greater, power; and concerts of nations — the
United Nations being their latest embodiment — have ratified and to some
extent sustained their existence as separate members of the international state
system. One consequence is a decreasing flexibility of state boundaries in the
twentieth century. Except as a part of a general peace settlement negotiated by
many states, it becomes decreasingly likely that conquest will lead to a major
redrawing of any state’s perimeter. These days Guatemala claims all of Belize
and Venezuela claims some of Guyana, but other states of the Americas will not
tolerate a territorial grab in either case. Although wars, guerrilla and otherwise,
continue to occur quite frequently, many states face no serious external military
threat. That means many armies have little prospect of going to war. They
specialize in internal control. .

Third World militaries have drawn specifically on European or American
models, aid, and training to a far larger degree than European states intervened
in the formation of each other’s armies. In Latin America, for example, before
World War II France and Germany trained many of the officers of Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, and Peru. After the war, the United States took over the
task (Nunn 1971). This external intervention gave Latin American militaries
exceptional maneuverability vis-a-vis their potential rivals and chosen enemies.

In Europe, the external imposition of state forms occurred without obvious
impact on the stability of regimes. Most of the states formed out of the ruins of
the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires had, it is true, unsteadier holds on
stable democracy than their northern neighbors, and one might argue a
connection between late national state formation and vulnerability to fascism in
Germany and Italy. But in northern Europe, the late independence of Finland,
Norway, and the Baltic republics did not stop them from establishing relatively
durable regimes (see Alapuro 1988).

In the world since 1945, however, the relationship between external
imposition and instability seems to have increased. Where the ability of rulers to
draw revenucs from commodity cxports or from great-power military aid has
208 Soldiers and States in 1990

allowed them to bypass bargaining with their subject populations, large state
edifices have grown up in the absence of significant consent or support from
citizens. Lacking strong ties between particular state institutions and major
social classes within the population, those states have become more vulnerable
to forcible seizures of power and abrupt changes in the form of government.
Among the world’s poorer states that were already independent in 1955, for
example, higher shares of government expenditure in Gross National Product
(arguably an outcome of external influence) predicted more frequent regime
changes during the next two decades, just as more frequent regime changes
between 1950 and 1960 predict higher shares of government expenditure in the
subsequent fifteen years (Thomas and Meyer 1980). These circumstances
invite military buildup, and military bids for power.

Most likely the relationship between external influence and_ political
instability is curvilinear, with instability highest at intermediate and/or changing
levels of external control. That between external influence and military control,
on the other hand, is quite direct. The extreme form of external influence is
military occupation; as long as it lasts, the occupied regime tends to stay in
place. World War II differed from previous general wars by not ending in a
general settlement; it left military occupations in Germany, Austria, Japan,
Korea, and elsewhere to drag on for years. During the postwar years, the great
Western powers — incomparably, the USSR and the USA —- maintained
unprecedented numbers of troops abroad. In 1987, 29 states officially stationed
troops within some other state’s territory. The USA had 250,000 troops in
West Germany, 54,000 in Japan and 43,000 in South Korea, while the Soviet
Union deployed 380,000 in East Germany, 110,000 in Afghanistan, 65,000 in
Hungary, and 60,000 in Czechoslovakia. The Soviet Union led the occupiers:

USSR: 730,090 troops abroad
USA: 492,500

Vietnam: 190,000

United Kingdom: 89,500
Fran¢e: 84,450

Cuba: 29,250

The surprises are Vietnam (with an estimated 140,000 troops in Cambodia and
another 50,000 in Laos) and Cuba (with 27,000 in Angola and other forces
scattered in Congo, Nicaragua, and Yemen: Sivard 1988: 12-13). Although
dominant states, sometimes sent troops in to forestall or reverse transfers of
power, on the whole their presence greatly reduced the odds for further
changes of regime.
Soldiers and States in1gg0 209

MILITARY BUILDUP

The military investments of the world’s states are increasing apace. After the
demobilization following World War II, military expenditure has risen
dramatically on a per capita basis, especially in the Third World. Between 1960
and 1987, with corrections for inflation, per capita military spending increased
by almost 150 percent, while GNP per capita rose about 60 percent (Sivard
1988: 6). In the world’s richer countrics, however, military budgets actually
declined from about 6.9 percent of GNP in 1960 to about 5.5 percent in 1984;
in poorer countries, the percentage has risen from 3.6 to 5.6 percent; the poor
world is now spending a larger share of its meager income on arms and armies
than the rich world spends of its much more ample income. (“Rich countries”
include Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
East Germany, Finland, France, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Luxemburg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Rumania, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the USSR, the United Kingdom, the United States, and
West Germany. “Poor countries” include all other states.)

World regions vary considerably in their devotion to military expenditure.
Table 7.2 provides details. In per capita expenditures for 1984, the world’s
leading spenders were North America, the Warsaw Pact countries and the
Middle East, while in proportion of GNP spent on the military the Middle East
left the rest of the world far behind. The champions in this dubious contest
were Iraq, with an estimated 38.5 percent of GNP devoted to military activity,
Oman, with 27.9 percent, Israel, with 24.4 percent, Saudi Arabia, with 22
percent, North and South Yemen, with 16.9 and 15.1 percent, Syria, with 14.9

Table 7.2 Military expenditure and military power in world regions, 1972-86

Military expenditure Military expense as Percent of states under
Region per capita (US$) percent of GNP military control

1972 1978 = 1984 t972,—'s«a978—Ss 98419781983 1986
North America 346 468 935 6.3 49 6.1 0.0 0.0 0.0
Latin America 12 22 31 1.9 1.5 16 54.2 §4.2 37.5
NATO Europe 108 237 280 3.8 3.6 3.8 71 7A 7
Warsaw Pact 204 311 631 9.0 8.2 9.6 0.0 8614.3 14.3
Other Europe 56 121 181 2.8 2.3 2.4 0.0 0.0 0.0
Middle East 55 250 441 12.2 12.2 17.9 25.0 37.5 37.5
South Asia 4 5 9 4.0 2.8 345 §0.0 50.0 50.0
Far East 12 30 34 3.3 2.7 2.8 62.5 62.5 56.2
Oceania 98 156 276 30 2.4 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Africa 7 22 30 3.0 3.6 39 52.3 51.1 64.4
World 58 97 161 5.4 45 5.6 38.3 401 408

Source: Ruth Leger Sivard, World Military and Social Expenditures, 1974, 1981, 1983 and 1988
editions
210 Soldiers and States in 1990

percent, and Iran, with 14.6 percent; only at that point does the list break out of
the Middle East to reach Angola, the USSR, Mongolia, Libya, Nicaragua, and
Ethiopia. Examining 60 Third World countries in 1960, 1970, and 1980, Su-
Hoon Lee found that the strongest predictors of rising military expenditure
were, first, involvement in interstate wars and, second, dependence on foreign
trade (Lee 1988: 95-111). The finding underscores the vulnerable positions of
Middle Eastern states, where oil and warfare cross.

Similarly, armed forces have remained fairly constant in number throughout
the rich parts of the world since 1960 even if expenditure per soldier, sailor or
airman has skyrocketed, while in poorer countries troops have roughly doubled
in number since 1960 (Sivard 1986: 32). In 1960, 0.61 percent of the world’s
population served in the military; by 1984, the figure had declined slightly to
0.57. In poor countries, however, the proportion had risen from 0.39 to 0.45;
the richer countries still have higher proportions of troops under arms, but
those proportions are dropping while the poorer countries creep up. Between
1964 and 1984, for example, Guyana’s military forces (excluding police) rose
from o.1 to 1.8 percent of the entire population (calculated from Danns
1986: 113-14); similar expansions occurred elsewhere as former colonies
moved from the rudimentary forces of order left by the departing imperial
powers to their own full-fledged armies, militias, and navies. The Middle East
now leads the world in proportion of military to civilian population, followed by
the Warsaw Pact countries and North America. The individual champions
include Vietnam (2.1 percent), Iran (2.4), Syria (2.7), Iraq (3.5), and Israel
(4.3); 4.3 percent means one person in twenty-three, including women, men,
and children. Such a level approaches the intense militarization of Sweden in
the early seventeenth century.

The world pattern of arms flows, moreover, has shifted significantly over the
last quarter-century. The sheer volume of exports has expanded rapidly,
multiplying from about $2.5 billion in 1960 to $37.3 billion in 1983 (Sivard
1986: 32). Spurred by great power military aid, arms are flowing increasingly to
the Third World. From a system in which major shipments of arms went chiefly
from one part of the Western world to another has evolved a system in which
rich countries export to poor countries. In 1965, the poorer parts of the world
were receiving about 55 percent of all international arms shipments; by 1983,
the proportion was 77 percent. (True, Brazil and Israel were then beginning to
compete actively in the world arms market, and Argentina was beginning to
build a serious arms industry of its own, but none of them had yet challenged
the arms-sale dominance of the United States, the Soviet Union, France, or
Britain.) At that point, Middle Eastern countries were importing some $106
worth of arms per capita each year, as compared with $19 in Oceania, and
$11 in NATO Europe. In fact, Middle Eastern states, many of which could
pay with oil, were receiving about half of all arms shipped to the Third
World.
Soldiers and States intggo 211

Yet the Middle East was not alone in buying war. Richard Tanter sums up
for the rest of Asia:

There is no other part of the earth which has experienced greater suffering from
organized violence: of the 10.7 million people throughout the world who died from war-
related causes between 1960 and 1982, almost half were Asian. Even after the end of the
second Indochina war in 1975, armaments are still flowing into the region, and at levels
as high as, or usually higher than before. Moreover, military governments in Asia have
become the norm rather than the exception, and they have achieved a greater
penetration of the social fabric than in earlier times. The weapon systems imported into
the region from the industrialized producers and the increasing number of domestically
produced sophisticated weapons are of ever greater destructive capability.

(Tanter 1984: 161)

Between 1972 and 1981, among all Asian states outside the Middle East, only
Burma’s military expenditure, in constant dollars, declined; military spending
increased by at least half, in constant dollars, in the two Koreas, Taiwan,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka and
Bangladesh. In Asia and elsewhere, the scale of military activity is increasing
along almost every dimension.

SOLDIERS IN POWER

With growing military establishments, is the process of civilianization that
European experience might lead us to expect continuing? We have some
indications that it is not. Suppose we call “military control” the presence of any
of these: key political leadership by military officers, existence of martial law,
extrajudicial authority exercised by security forces, lack of central political
control over the armed forces, or occupation by foreign military forces (Sivard
1986: 24; for a more sophisticated set of criteria, but also one that is harder to
apply empirically, see Stepan 1988, 93-127). The absence of all of these
elements constitutes civilian control of the state; civilianization occurs when any
of these happens:

decline in political leadership by military officers;

end of martial law;

curbing of security forces’ extrajudicial authority;

increase of centralized control over armed forces;

end of occupation by foreign military forces.
In the Middle East, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and the Arab Republic
of Yemen meet the test of military control; in Latin America, Chile, Colombia,

EI Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay; in
Europe, Turkey and perhaps Poland alone. As the lists show, the criteria
212 Soldiers and States in 1990

include a number of states that do not have military government in the strict
sense of the term, and rest on debatable judgments about the power and
autonomy of the armed forces. In Guatemala, for example, an elected civilian
government has nominally ruled since 1985. At the Indian center of Nebaj,
however, a religious worker told Stephen Kinzer: “There is a mayor here, therc
are councilors, and therc is a legal apparatus. But there is never any doubt that
the army has precedence. No one who is elected here has authority over anyone
in uniform. Elections have no impact here” (Kinzer 1989: 34). Most of the
Latin American instances fall into this gray zone: formal democracy, military
power. If we tightened the standards, however, the trends and regional
distributions of military states would not change substantially.

The term “military control,” to be sure, applics to many different kinds of
regimes. Thomas Callaghy denics that Zaire, despite being led by General
Mobuty, lives under military rule. He claims that differences between military
and civilian heads of state matter little as compared to the common properties
of the “authoritarian, organic-statist administrative state drawing heavily on a
centralist and corporatist colonial tradition that is held together, often loosely
and in an unstable fashion, by strong personalistic rulership” that is becoming a
major African type (Callaghy 1984: 45). Yet he concedes that military men have
exceptional opportunities to seize power in Africa. “These distinctly early
modern, weakly institutionalized military forces,” he reports, “are, however,
relatively powerful in the African context of early modern states and societies”
(Callaghy 1984: 44). Thus in Africa as elsewhere in the Third World military
expansion seems to promote rather than deter military rule. The process is not
procecding as it did in Europe.

By the standards I laid down earlier, about 40 percent of the world’s states
now live under military control, and the proportion is slowly rising. Variations
from region to region arc dramatic: in Latin America about 38 percent of all
governments are military, and this proportion declining (after a rapid rise in the
1960s and early 1970s); 38 percent in the Middle East, up from 25 percent in
the 1970s; a stable 50 percent in South Asia, a mildly fluctuating 60 percent in
the Far East, 64 percent and rising in Africa. Military control, of one variety or
another, has become the standard form of government in much of the Third
World, notably in South Asia, East Asia, and Africa. The proportion of states
under military control in a region correlates with the recency of decolonization
in that region. Many recent states have known little but military rule since they
gained, or regained, their sovercignty. Ghanaians have now lived under military
control for 18 of their 30 years of independence, and have experienced four
major coups in the process.

Not all military states, however, are new states. Most Latin American states,
including those governed by soldiers, have existed as formally independent
units since the carly ninctcenth century; in fact, they antedate the majority of
European states. Again, old Thailand provides a textbook case of military rule.
Soldiers and States in19g0 213

Siam, as it then was called, stood out in the 1930s for its military government.
The military overthrew the monarchy in 1932, and have run the state most of
the time since then. Of the 50 years from 1932 to 1982, military officers served
as prime ministers for 41; during that time Siam/Thailand went through ninc
successful coups and seven morc abortive ones; the coups and coup attempts
concentrate disproportionately in the period since 1945 (Chinwanno 1985:
114-15). With gencrous assistance from the United States, the Thai military
have built up their strength in the name of anti-communism. Between 1972 and
1982 the armed forces increased from about 30,000 to about 233,000 — a
sevenfold expansion — not including an estimated 500,000 reserves and
600,000 paramilitary forces (Chinwanno 1985: 115). The forces run numerous
rural development programs and promote the formation of paramilitary groups
to combat Communist guerrillas.

Once the Thais were unusual. But by now, many other states have caught up
with Thailand. Using criteria similar to Ruth Sivard’s, Talukder Maniruzzaman
(1987: 221-2) has calculated for 61 Third World states the proportion of all
years of independence between 1946 and 1984 during which they had military
government. The leaders run as follows:

80-100 percent: China/Taiwan, Thailand, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Algeria,
Egypt, Zaire, Burundi, Syria

60-79 percent. Paraguay, Sudan, Upper Volta, Argentina, Benin, Central
African Republic, Togo, Equatorial Guinea, Guatemala, Iraq, Pcople’s
Republic of Congo, Mali, Burma, Republic of Korea, Brazil, Somalia,
Bangladesh, Yemen Arab Republic

40-59 percent: Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Ghana, Indonesia, Grenada, Honduras,
Madagascar, Bolivia, Panama, Dominican Republic, Libya, Kampuchea, Suri-
name, Niger

Maniruzzaman has omitted such cases as Haiti, where the Duvalier family not
only assumcd military titles but also used public and private armics to terrorize
the civilian population; he therefore underestimates the prevalence of military
control. The average Third World state has spent more than half its years of
independence since 1946 in the hands of soldicrs.

As military control rose, the frequency of coups d’état rose in the Third
World. Figure 7.2 conveys the main messages: an increase from eight or ten
attempted military coups, about half of them successful, somewhere in the
world during the 1940s to about double the number, and similar success rates,
during the 1970s. Unlike civil wars, coups usually occurred without manifest
involvement of outside powers. Over the forty years, foreign powers intervened
to promote about 7 percent of all coup attempts, and to deter another 4 percent
(David 1987: 1-2). The figures mean, of course, that almost go percent of the
world’s coups occurred mithout substantial forcign intervention.
214 Soldiers and States in 1990

26-
24-
22-| of e Successes
20- R
18- p

14- a! u

12-4 )
10-

Key a Attempts

Number of Coups

0 TRrTPTTTTrrrrrrrr rr rrr er re PPT TT PTT TTT Tre

1943 1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988

Figure 7.2 Miftary coups, 1944-87.

Goups multiplied in part because independent states multiplied. Figure 7.3,
which compares the numbers of attempted and successful coups to the number
of UN members year by year, shows that the per-state frequencies ran higher
before the entry of numerous Asian and African states in the 1960s than

357

30- Key a Attempts

e Successes

Coups/100 States
= [ye] nN
a oO on
! I !

=
oO
i
G
G
G
c

(4,)
l
ci

0

0 TTTTTT PPP rrr rir rrr rrrrrrrrrtrrrrrrrrrrr rrr ser

1943 1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983

Figure 7.3. Coups per 100 states, 1944-87.
Soldiers and States in1ggo 215

60-5
50-4
40-

30-4

Attempts/100 states

20-

105

0 i ss

1944 1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1989
Figure 7.4 Coup attempts per 100 states, Africa 1944-87.

afterward. Figures 7.4 to 7.6 specify what was happening: in Latin America, the
Middle East, and Asia, coups swung wildly around an average of one each year
for every three states until about 1964, then settled down to one each year per
five or ten states after that. In Africa, however, coups rose in frequency from
none whatsoever during the period of continued European control to higher

60-
50-
40-
30-

20

Attempts/100 states

10

0 PYITTTP PP rrrrrrrrirrrrrrrrrr ri rrrrrrrrrrrryT rd

1944 1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984

Figure 7.5 Coup attempts per 100 states, Latin America 1944-87.
216 Soldiers and States in 1990
60-

50-
40- -
30-4

20-

Attempts/100 states

10-

OTT TTT TTT TT
1944 1949 1954 1959 1964 1969 1974 1979 1984

Figure 7.6 Coup attempts per 100 states, Asia and Middle East 1944-87.

frequencies of coups per state than clsewhere in the Third World from 1959
onward. This does not mean, however, that the rising frequency of coups is a
statistical mirage. On the contrary: it means that the states entering the United
Nations after 1960 were disproportionately vulnerable to military coups.

Unsurprisingly, the geography of coups corresponds to the geography of
military rule. From 1980 through 1987, the world’s coup attempts occurred in
Spain, North Yemen, South Yemen, Egypt, Bahrein, Syria, Lebanon, Libya,
Bangladesh, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, North Korea, Bolivia,
Suriname, Argentina, Haiti, Guatemala, Panama, Grenada, Sudan, Mauritania,
Equatorial Guinea, Liberia, Gambia, Central African Republic, Seychelles,
Ghana, Zimbabwe, Chad, Somalia, Kenya, Upper Volta, Tanzania, Togo,
Swaziland, Cameroons, Niger, Lesotho, Nigeria, Guinea-Bissau, the Comores,
Guinea, and Uganda; military insurgents actually seized power in South
Yemen, Bangladesh, the Philippines, Argentina, Suriname, Guatemala, Bolivia,
Grenada, Panama, Haiti, Central African Republic, Ghana, Chad, Upper
Volta, Nigeria, and Guinea — a disproportionate concentration of coups, and
especially of attempts, in Africa.

Whether the apparent fall-off in attempts and successes after 1980 represents
a definitive change still remains to be seen. So far the net effect of changes since
World War II has been a massive increase in the share of the world’s independent
states controlled morc or less directly by military men. Maniruzzaman’s counts
show that returns from military to civilian rule were fewer than military coups in
every interval from 1946 to 1981, and that they balanced at six each in 1982-4.
In Latin America, a shift to civilian control of states seems to be following the
Soldiers and States in19go 217

decline in the frequency of military coups (itself the result of the installation of
relatively stable military regimes) that began in the rg6os. Latin America has
gone through three stages since World War II: a period of constant struggles for
state power, resulting in a net increase in militarization (1945 to early 1960s); a
period of relatively stable military rule (1960s to late 1970s); and a period of
partial reduction in military power (since 1980). Given repeated premature
announcements of civilianization in Latin America, we can have no confidence
that the reversal since 1980 will continue (Rouquié 1987: 2-3). States in Asia,
Africa, and the Middle East, in any case, appear to have settled into more stable
forms of military rule; so far the decline in coup frequencies docs not bespeak
liberation from military control.

Third World states have, then, militarized extensively since World War II;
with the exception of Latin America, we have no strong signs that the trend is
reversing, and a process of civilianization setting in. If so, the world has
something to worry about: not only because it means our old ideas about the
“maturing” of national states with experience are wrong, not only because of the
risk that a war in the Third World will involve nuclear arms or lead to a great
power confrontation, but also because military control and state violence
against citizens go hand in hand.

Consider official violence against citizens, in the form of torture, brutality,
kidnappings, and political killings. In the Third World as a whole, according to
Ruth Sivard’s ratings, half of all military-controlled states “frequently”
employed violence against their citizens, while only a fifth of non-military states
did so. The differences are stronger in Latin America, the Middle East, and the
Far East than in South Asia and Africa. Similarly, restrictions on the right to
vote are -significantly more common in military than in non-military Third
World states. The relationship, furthermore, looks like cause and effect: when
the military gain power, civil and human rights fail. Anyone who values political
representation and the protection of citizens against abuses of state power
should worry about world-wide militarization.

HOW DID THE MILITARY GAIN POWER?

If, after centuries of civilianization in the European state system, the states that
have joined the system recently are moving toward military rule, what might
explain the shift? Let us be clear: given the variety of Third World states, no
single explanation will account in detail for the rise of military power in each
country. For sub-Saharan Africa, Samucl Decalo denies that the strength and
coherence of the military has anything to do with their great propensity to bid
for national power; on the contrary, he argues, “many African armies [consist
of ] a coterie of distinct armed camps owing primarily clientelistic allegiance to a
handful of mutually competitive officers of different ranks seething with a
218 Soldiers and States in 1990

variety of corporate, ethnic and personal grievances” (Decalo 1976: 14-15),
with internal competition driving them to attempt coups, while Maxwell Owusu
(1989) inserts Ghana’s post-independence coups in a long tradition of populist
rebellions against unworthy chiefs. Ruth Collier points out, however, that the
African military seized power more often in states where one faction imposed
one-party rule on others, or a multi-party system representing numerous
ethnicities appeared at independence than where one-party dominance grew up
through electoral successes prior to independence (Collier 1982: 95-117). The
coexistence of multiple patron-client chains and ethnic fragmentation apparently
makes African states vulnerable to military power, but within the limits set by
national coalitions and parties.

In any case, such an explanation holds less weight in much of South Asia,
Latin America, and the Middle East. Concerning Latin America, according to
J. Samuel Fitch:

A growing consensus has emerged regarding the preconditions for military coups.
Coups occur when military officers believe a crisis situation exists. Public disorders and
public opinion hostile to the government, threats to the military’s institutional interests,
violations of the constitution by civilian presidents, evident inability of the incumbent
administration to manage a serious economic crisis, or a significant “Communist threat”
will increase the military’s sense of crisis. Personal ambitions and personal ties may
influence individual officers, but the decision to stage a military coup is generally an
institutional decision, reflecting the collective evaluation of government performance
within the upper ranks of the armed forces as a whole.

(Fitch 1986: 27-8)

On a world scale, then, we can only hope to identify conditions that made
military power easier or more probable before turning to the particular histories
of states and regions for the examination of precise paths to military hegemony.
Three main possibilities come to mind.

First, civilian-dominated institutions might be failing with sufficient frequency
in the Third World that the military take over by default. Twenty-five years ago,
Western political analysts who noticed the increased intervention of armies in
Third World civilian politics leaned toward that explanation.

Second, the disproportionate support that outside powers give to Third World
military organizations might be lending those organizations extra strength vis-a-
vis their competitors within their own states. Radical critics of American military
assistance programs often articulate that explanation.

Third, thé process of negotiation and containment of the military that
occurred widely in the West may not be occurring, because states acquire their
military means from great powers outside the state, in return for commodities
or political subordination. Or all three could be happening at once.
Soldiers and States in19g0 219

We lack reliable evidence on which of the three is occurring. A careful analysis
of military intervention in politics within 35 African states between 1960 and
1982 indicates that these factors promoted intervention:

domination of the army by a single ethnic group;

high military expenditure combined with frequent sanctions against govern-
ment opponents;

absence of political pluralism;

low electoral turnout before independence;

low proportion of the population in agriculture;
rapid increase in the population of the capital city;
slow increase in industrial jobs and in GNP;

low proportion of exports to GNP;

decreasingly diversified commodity exports.
(Johnson, Slater and McGowan 1y84: 635)

Despite the miscellaneous character that infects many such statistical searches
for causes, the list sounds some recurrent themes. More than anything else, it
portrays a combination of military'autonomy and economic crisis as favorable to
military involvement. The authors themselves conclude that “social mobilization”
favors military intervention and “political participation” works against it. “It
would appear,” they remark, “that in states where influentials have internalized
the rules of the capitalist world economy and thereby coped relatively well with
the very harsh international economic environment of the last 10 years, these
states have lessened their peripherality to a degree, strengthened their civilian
structures somewhat, and experienced less military interventionism than states
whose influentials have not coped as well” (Johnson, Slater and McGowan
1984: 636). Although each of these factors deserves discussion in its own right,
none of them sheds much light on the historical process by which states become
more or less vulnerable to military takeovers.

Let us be clear. Characteristic schisms within states vary fundamentally from
one world region to another, and the actual alliances between ambitious military
men and groups within the civilian population vary accordingly. Ethnic
cleavages matter a great deal in contemporary African and South Asian states,
but much less so within contemporary Latin American states. Religious
divisions, within and outside Islam, enter most major conflicts in the Middle
East. Where military rule already prevails, furthermore, competition within the
armed forces themselves frequently produces bids for state power. Argentina’s
attempted coup of 15 April 1987 and thereafter represented one segment of the
army’s resistance to prosecution for human rights violations under the
220 Soldiers and States in 1990

preceding military dictatorship (Bigo ct al. 1988: 56-7), Fiji’s coup of 14 May
1987 occurred “expressly to protect the special interests of Fiji’s indigenous
Fijian community” against the electoral power of the islands’ Indian near-
majority (Kelly 1988: 399), and Burundi’s coup of 3 September 1987 pitted one
army faction against another (Bigo et al. 1988: 65). At this level, every military
regime and every attempted military seizure of state power depends on local
social structure and previous history. If we can’t explain the courses of
particular military regimes without particular histories, however, we can still
reasonably ask whether some world-wide changes since 1945 have made
military bids for power more feasible and attractive throughout the world, and
therefore help explain the world-wide increase in military regimes.

So far we don’t know if any of the three hypothetical processes — failure of
civilian institutions, external support for the military, minimization of negotiations
between state and citizens — is really occurring in the contemporary world. We
should be finding out. But contrasts between the recent experiences of Third
World states and the conditions that civilianized Europe suggest an important
speculation about what might be happening in Africa, the Middle East, and
much of Asia. Here is the speculation: the creation of a bipolar, then incipiently
tripolar world system of states since World War II has intensified the
competition among great powers for the allegiance of Third World states, and
the tendency to leave no part of the Third World neutral. That competition
induces the great powers, especially the United States and the Soviet Union, to
provide arms, military training, and military advice to many states.

In return, the great powers, or major interests within them, receive
commodities such as oil, political support in the world arena and, sometimes,
profits from the sale of arms. In those states, military organizations grow in size,
strength, and efficacy while other organizations stand still or wither. The
relative viability of military organizations makes them attractive to ambitious but
impecunious young men, so the military divert talent from business, education,
and civilian public administration. The military thus find it easier and easier to
seize control of the state, and civilian rulers find it more and more difficult to
check them. One form or another of pretorianism — oligarchical, radical, or
mass, to use Samuel Huntington’s labels — emerges. Militarization prevails.

Is the speculation credible? The experience of countries for which we have
detailed postwar political histories give it some support. Extreme cases include
Taiwan and the two Koreas, where the massive support of foreign powers for
the local military produced steely control of the national economies, until the
very success of economic expansion began to undermine military hegemony
(Amsden 1985, Cumings 1984, 1988, Deyo, Haggard and Koo 1987, Hamilton
1986). In South Korea, for example, Park Chung-Hee, a former officer in the
Japanese occupation army, seized power in 1961. Park dcliberatcly set out to
establish a Japanese-style “rich country and powerful military” (Launius
1985: 2). He was able to do so for two main reasons: because Korea had lived
Soldiers and States intggo 221

from 1907 to 1945 as a tightly-controlled Japanese colony, whose Korean
officials had easily moved into positions of power within the new regime, and
because the American occupying army — which remains in Korea today —
backed the plan, and participated in the containment of opposing workers and
students.

The revolutionary redistribution of land that occurred when North Korea
occupied South Korea during the summer of 1950 had liquidated landlords as
another possible source of opposition to military hegemony (Cumings 1989:
12), Although South Korea has gone through several brief periods of nominal
democracy under American auspices, the 1961 coup d’état put the military
definitely in the saddle. Under military control and American sponsorship,
South Korea built a low-wage, export-oriented cconomy aimed especially at
Japanese and American markets. In similar ways, although with less economic
success, the Soviet Union has maintained a military presence and supervision in
such satellites as the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, and Czecho-
slovakia.

Except possibly for Panama, Cuba, and Honduras, direct foreign control of
the national military, and thus of the state, does not approach East Asian
extremes in Latin America. Latin American states have sustained their own
strong tradition of military intervention in politics since they wrenched
themselves independent of Spain and Portugal almost two centuries ago.
Durable political regimes, however, became more prevalent during the 1960s
and 1970s. They took two rather different forms: the personalistic, clientelistic
rule of a Stroessner in Paraguay or a Somoza in Nicaragua, and the
“institutional” control by the military that prevailed in post-Péron Argentina
and post-Vargas Brazil.

For some time before the 1960s the United States had held many Caribbean
and Central American states in “military tutelage,” feeling free to send the US
Marines to maintain or restore regimes it preferred (Rouquié 1987: 117-28).
Up to that point, however, neither American capital nor American military aid
extended very deeply into the rest of Latin America. The very frequent South
American coups d’état attracted little direct US intervention. With the Cuban
revolution and incipient Soviet-Cuban cooperation, the Kennedy administration
began to redefine its Latin American policy; beginning in 1962, American
military aid
became more intensive and better institutionalized than before. American military
planning became more structured and the relations between the Latin American armies
and that of the metropole grew closer. The U.S. Army had military missions of varying
importance in nincteen countries of the subcontinent and their presence was often an
integral part of the agrecments for the sale or loan of military equipment.

(Rouquié 1987: 132)
American military aid to Latin America rose from about $40 million per year in
1953-63 to about $125 million per year in 1964-7 (Rouquié 1987: 131). That
222 Soldiers and States in 1990

presence helped reduce the frequency of military seizures of power in Latin
America by reinforcing those military regimes that already held power. Not
until the end of the 1970s, when the United States began to withdraw its
support for resident militaries, did a minor trend toward civilianization set
in.

Brazil is an obvious case in point. Although the military had hovered over
civilian politics from the army’s overthrow of the Brazilian Empire in 18869, it
did not seize direct, durable control over the state until the “April Revolution”
of 1964. But then military-dominated regimes opened Brazil to American
capital, American military aid, and Brazilian-American cooperation in the Cold
War. Military control continued to 1985. In 1982 regional elections, opposition
leaders took key provincial governorships, and in 1984 a moderate opponent of
military power, Tancredo Neves, won the Brazilian presidency. Demilitarization
began, but with significant compensating gains for the military: an expanding
domestic arms industry, and an increase in the national military budget. The
United States did not intervene directly in Brazilian civilianization, but its
increased concern for human rights and its decreased readiness to prop up
declining militaries surely helped set the stage.

Neighboring Suriname arrived at military rule within five years of its
independence from the Netherlands, but its soldiers declared themselves
socialists (Sedoc-Dahlberg 1986). From independence in 1975 to the military
coup of 1980, Suriname’s three major political parties represented its dominant
ethnic groups: Hindustani, Creole, and Javanese. But when a force of 600
troops led by sergeants seized control of the state after a series of labor disputes
within the army, the new government began receiving substantial aid from
Cuba, and aligning its politics with Cuba’s. At the same time the military
expanded their numbers, organizing a People’s Militia of some 3,000 troops for
internal control, and maintaining about 1.4 percent of the entire population
under arms, more than three times the world average for low-income states.
Brazilian leaders, alarmed by the presence of a leftist state on their flank, began
an arrangement in 1983 by which “Suriname would sell rice and alumina to
Brazil in exchange for arms shipments sufficient to allow Suriname’s army to
double in size,” (Sedoc-Dahlberg 1986: 97), and Suriname would also
moderate its social policies. The combination of aid from Cuba and Brazil
served to increase the military’s room for maneuver within Suriname, allowing
them to rule without a broad social base.

Libya followed yet another path to military rule (Anderson 1986: 251-69).
Italian imperialism made a single territory of hostile and distinctly different
Tripolitania and Cyrenaica. Sanusi leader Idris, who became king at
independence in 1951, drew support chiefly from Cyrenaica; his cooperation in
the Allied effort to oust Italy from North Africa gave him a decisive political
advantage over his Tripolitanian rivals. No well-defined national state emerged
in independent Libya. Instead, overlapping extended families governed through
Soldiers and States in1990 223

patronage. Oil revenues enriched them, allowed the construction of a measure
of infrastructure, and permitted the king and his satraps to rule without
building a substantial central bureaucracy. The small Royal Libyan Army
formed from units that had fought with the British in World War II, but were
overshadowed by provincial security forces drawn from tribal populations and
by the presence of American and British military bases. Despite the Anglo-
American presence, captain Mu’ammar al-Qadhdhafi led a successful coup
d’état in 1969. Indeed, control over oil revenues made it possible for Qadhdhafi
to expel the British and Americans, root out most of the old rulers, Islamize and
Arabize the state, undertake a program of assistance to nascent revolutionary
regimes elsewhere, and yet to continue his predecessor’s avoidance of bulky
central structure. The transformed state gingerly began a courtship with the
Soviet Union and a campaign of opposition to American power. A kind of
nationalism, then, bolstered a fragile state and justified military rule.

In South Korea, an American occupation directly shaped the postwar
state. In Brazil, changing American orientations toward Latin American
militaries conditioned political shifts but by no means governed the history of
military power. Libya moved to a military regime despite an American military
presence. Conditions and consequences of military power obviously vary
significantly from one part of the Third World to another. Great power
competition and intervention play no more than supporting parts in any
particular coup and in the maintenance of any particular military regime. But
alterations in relations of Third World states to great powers and to each other
seem to have contributed importantly to changes in the overall rhythms of
military control in the world as a whole. To that extent, the state system as such
has made a difference.

If great power confrontation and intervention in national militaries has the
influence this analysis gives it, one path toward civilianization seems clear. It
has two branches: either a reduction in the great power competition to build up
the military strength of the Third World states or an insulation of the target
states from that competition. It involves the promotion of bargaining between
the state’s civilian institutions and the bulk of its citizens. The creation of
regular systems of taxation, equitably administered and responsive to the
citizenry, would probably speed the process. So would the opening of viable
career alternatives to military service. It is possible, as Alfred Stepan (1988: 84-5)
argues, that Brazil’s mounting of a major arms export industry will have the
paradoxical effect of reducing the autonomy of its generals, and thus speeding a
kind of democracy through the accretion of civilian bureaucracies, vested
interests, and bargains with the civilian population; more generally (and, one
might hope, less belligerently), the growth of government involvement in
expanding production of goods and services is likely to promote civilianization.
Not by any means a recapitulation of the European experience; these days,
presumably, we can escape some of the cruelty of that experience. But yet a set
224 Soldiers and States in 1990

of opportunities that a sober reflection on European state formation makes a bit
less obscure.

ENVOI

To be sure, my treatment of these questions has peculiar overtones. It returns,
despite all my earlicr protestations, to a form of intellectual colonialism, to the
presumption that if European states worked their ways to civilianization of
public life, so could and should today’s Third World states — if only they or
their patrons would let the European process unfold. It neglects the geopolitical
variation among regions that makes such a difference to military—civil relations:
the constant threat of direct American military intervention in Central America
or the Caribbean, the centrality of oil to many Middle Eastern economies, the
wide reach of South Africa within the states to its north, the industrial
expansion of Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan as a factor in the politics of their
neighbors. It forgets ethnic fragmentation and strife as promoters of military
power. My attempt to place contemporary militarization in historical perspective
runs the risk of shining so bright a beam that it actually obscures its subject’s
subtleties, wipes out its actual pattern of light and shade. My defense is simple:
we need to be aware that the rise of military power in Third World states is not
simply a natural phase of state formation, one that previous experience tells us
will pass gradually as states mature.

In any case, contemporary militarization is not the only important subject on
which the study of European state formation sheds light. The process deserves
attention for its own sake, simply because the formation of a European system
of national states profoundly affected the lives of all Westerners, and of most
non-Westerners as well. This book has, I hope, shown the great contingency of
European state formation, indecd of the national state’s ultimate triumph over
other forms of political organization. Only the great sixteenth-century
expansion in the scale and expense of international wars (which was, to be sure,
an outcome of rivalries among European states as well as their interaction with
Turks and Chinese) gave national states a definitive advantage over the
empires, city-states, and federations that prevailed in Europe up to that time.

Nor did Europeans follow a single path to the national state. As a function
of the relative predominance of concentrated capital and concentrated coercion
in different parts of the continent, three partly distinct patterns of transforma-
tion — coercion-intensive, capital-intensive, and capitalized-coercion — marked
out deeply different experiences for rulers, landlords, capitalists, workers,
and peasants alike. Along the way, most states that once existed disappeared,
and the rest underwent fundamental changes in form and action. In regions and
periods where capitalists held the upper hand, states commonly fragmented,
resisted centralization, and gave a large scope to formal institutions representing
their dominant classes. Before the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century growth
Soldiers and States intggo 225

of huge citizen armies, such states mobilized casily for warfare (especially naval
warfare), yct created relatively little durable state structure as they did so.

Landlord-dominated regions, in contrast, more often produced bulky,
centralized states as the sheer effort of squeezing the means of war from
uncommercialized economies created extensive administrations and far-
reaching compacts between rulers and thcir landed allics. At the extreme, as in
the case of Poland over four or five centurics, the weight of landlords swamped
royal power and promoted immobility or collapse.

In between the capital-intensive and coercion-intensive paths of state formation,
a more even balance of capital and coercion guaranteed class struggle, but in a few
cases such as France and Great Britain opened the way to formation of a national
state having the capacity to create and sustain massive armed force. Those few
survivors set the standard of war for all other states, playing disproportionate
parts in the imposition of the European state system, and the European variety
of national state, on the rest of the world. Since World War II, the once-
European system of national states has claimed control over the entire carth.
Because the system originated in Europe, the close examination of European
history helps us understand the origins, character, and limits of the
contemporary world system.

How long will the system last? We see some signs that the era of formally
autonomous states is passing: the stalemate of the United Nations, the
displacement of rapidly shifting alliances by durable military—economic blocs,
the formation of market-linked ensembles such as the EEC and COMECON,
the internationalization of capital, the rise of corporations whosc capital is
everywhere and nowhere, demands for autonomy and nationality within existing
states that could eventually reduce them to crumbs of the former cake, the shift
toward internal concerns by the United States and the Sovict Union, the
activation of nationalities within the USSR, the achievement of substantial
world power by an essentially demilitarized state — Japan — the promise or threat
that China will cxtend its enormous organizational, demographic, and
ideological power into the rest of the world. The state system Europeans
fashioned has not always existed. It will not endure forever.

Its obituary will be hard to writc. On one side, we see the pacification of
European civil life and the fashioning of morc or less representative political
institutions, both by-products of a state formation driven by the pursuit of
military might. On the other side, we notice the rising destructiveness of war,
the pervasive intervention of states in individual lives, the creation of
incomparable instruments of class control. Destroy the state, and create
Lebanon. Fortify it, and create Korea. Until other forms displace the national
state, neither alternative will do. The only real answer is to turn the immensc
power of national states away from war and toward the creation of justice,
personal security, and democracy. My inquiry has not shown how to accomplish
that gigantic task. It has, however, shown why the task is urgent.
References

Abel, Wilhelm, 1966 Agrarkrisen und Agrarkonjunktur. Eine Geschichte der Land- und
Ernahrungswirtschaft Mitteleuropas seit dem hohen Mittelalter. Hamburg and Berlin:
Paul Parey.

— 1974 Massenarmut und Hungerkrisen im vorindustriellen Europa. Hamburg and
Berlin: Paul Parey.

Aberg, Alf, 1973 “The Swedish Army, from Lutzen to Narva” in Michael
Roberts, ed., Sweden's Age of Greatness, 1632-1718. New York: St Martin’s.

Abu-Lughod, Janet, 1987 “Did the West Rise or Did the East Fall? Some
Reflections from the Thirteenth Century World System,” Working Paper 50,
Center for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social Research.

— 1989 Before European Hegemony. New York: Oxford University Press.

Adelman, Jonathan R., 1985 Revolution, Armies, and War: A Political History.
Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner.

Adelmann, Gerhard, 1979 “Die landlichen Textilgewerbe des Rheinlandes vor
der Industrialisierung,” Rheinische Vierteljahrsblatter 43: 260-88.

Agren, Kurt et al., 1973 Aristocrats, Farmers, Proletarians. Essays in Swedish
Demographic History. Uppsala: Almqvist and Wiksell. Studia Historica Upsaliensia,
47- .

Aguero, Felipe, 1984 “Social Effects: Military Autonomy in Developing Countries,”
Alternatives 10: 75-92.

Alapuro, Risto, 1976 “Regional Variation in Political Mobilization. On the
Incorporation of the Agrarian Population into the State of Finland, 1907-1932,”
Scandinavian Journal of History 1: 215-42.

—1985 “Interstate Relationships and Political Mobilization in the Nordic
Countries: A Perspective,” in Risto Alapuro et al., eds, Srnall States in
Comparative Perspective. Essays for Erik Allardt. Oslo: Norwegian University Press.

1988 State and Revolution in Finland. Berkeley, California: University of
California Press.

Alestalo, Matti and Stein Kuhnle, 1984 “The Scandinavian Route. Economic,

References 227

Social and Political Developments in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden,”
Research Report no. 31, Research Group for Comparative Sociology, University
of Helsinki.

Ames, Edward and Richard T. Rapp, 1977 “The Birth and Death of Taxes: A
Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic History 37: 161-78.

Amsden, Alice H., 1985 “The State and Taiwan’s Economic Development,” in
Peter Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeyer and Theda Skocpol, eds, Bringing the State
Back In. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Anderson, Lisa, 1986 The State and Social Transformation in Tunisia and Libya,
1830-1980. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Anderson, M. S., 1988 War and Society in Europe of the Old Regime 1618-1789.
London: Fontana.

Anderson, Perry, 1974 Lineages of the Absolutist State. London: NLB.

Andrén, Anders, 1989 “States and Towns in the Middle Ages: The Scandinavian
Experience,” forthcoming in Theory and Society.

Andrews, Kenneth R., 1984 Trade, Plunder and Settlement. Maritime Enterprise and
the Genests of the British Empire, 1480-1630. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Antoine, Michel, 1970 Le Conseil du Roi sous le régne de Louis XV. Geneva: Droz.

Apter, David and Nagayo Sawa, 1984 Against the State. Politics and Social Protest in
Japan. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Ardant, Gabriel, 1965 Théorie sociologique de l’impét. Paris: SEVPEN. 2 vols.

— 1975 “Financial Policy and Economic Infrastructure of Modern States and
Nations,” in Charles Tilly, ed., The Formation of National States in Western Europe.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Arrighi, Giovanni, 1985 ed., Semiperipheral Development. The Politics of Southern
Europe in the Twentieth Century. Beverly Hills, California: Sage.

Artéus, Gunnar, 1982 Krigsmakt och Samhiille i Frihetstidens Sverige. Stockholm:
Militarhistoriska Forlaget.

1986 Till Militarstatens Forhistoria. Krig, professionalisering och social forandring
under Vasasénernas regering. Stockholm: Probus.

Attman, Artur, 1986 American Bullion in the European World Trade, 1600-1800.
Géteberg: Kungl. Vetenskaps- och Vitterhets-Samhillet.

Aubert, Jacques and Raphaél Petit, 1981 La police en France. Service public. Paris:
Berger-Levrault.

—et al., 1979 L Etat et la police en France (1789-1914). Geneva: Droz.

Aydelot, Philippe, Louis Bergeron and Marcel Roncayolo, 1981 /ndustrialisation et
croissance urbaine dans la France du XIXe siécle. Paris: Centre de Recherches
Historiques, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales.

Ayoob, Mohammed, 1989 “The Third World in the System of States: Acute
Schizophrenia or Growing Pains?” International Studies Quarterly 33: 67-
79:

Bade, Klaus J., 1982 “Transnationale Migration und Arbeitsmarkt im Kaiserreich.
Vom Agrarstaat mit starker Industrie zum Industriestaat mit stérker agrarischen
Basis,” in Toni Pierenkemper and Richard Tilly, eds, Historisch Arbeitsmarktforschung.

228 References

Entstehung, Entwicklung und Probleme der Vermarktung von Arbeitskrafi. Gottingen:
Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Badie, Bertrand, 1980 Le développement politique. Paris: Economica. 2nd edn.

— and Pierre Birnbaum, 1979 Sociologie de /’Etat. Paris: Grasset.

Bai, Shouyi, 1988 ed., Précis d'histoire de Chine. Beijing: Foreign Language
Publishing House.

Bairoch, Paul, 1977 Taille des villes, conditions de vie et développement économique.
Paris: Editions de Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales.

— 1985 De féricho a Mexico. Villes et économie dans Uhistoire. Paris: Gallimard.

Baker, Brenda J. and George G. Armelagos, 1988 “The Origin and Antiquity of
Syphilis,” Current Anthropology 29: 703-37.

Ballbé, Manuel, 1983 Ordén ptiblico y militarismo en la Esparia constituctonal (1812-
1983). Madrid: Alianza Editorial.

Barfield, Thomas J., 1989 The Perilous Frontier. Nomadic Empires and China.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Barnett, Corelli, 1974 Britain and Her Army, 1509-1970. A Military, Political and
Social Survey. Harmondsworth: Penguin. First published in 1970.

Batchelder, Ronald W. and Herman Freudenberger, 1983 “On the Rational
Origins of the Modern Centralized State,” Explorations in Economic History 20: 1-
13.

Bates, Robert H., 1988 “Lessons from History, or the Perfidy of English
Exceptionalism and the Significance of Historical France,” World Politics 40:
499-516.

Baxter, Douglas Clark, 1976 Servants of the Sword: Intendants of the Army, 1630-70.
Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press.

Baynham, Simon, 1986 ed., Military Power and Politics in Black Africa. New York: St
Martins.

Bean, Richard, 1973 “War and the Birth of the Nation State,” Journal of Economic
History 33: 203-21.

Becker, Marvin B., 1966 “Economic Change and the Emerging Florentine
Territorial State,” Studies in the Renaissance 13: 7-39.

— 1988 Cwility and Society in Western Europe, 1300-1600. Bloomington,
Indiana: Indiana University Press.

Beer, Francis A.. 1974 How Much War in History: Definitions, Estimates,
Extrapolations and Trends. Beverly Hills, California: Sage Publications. Sage
Professional Papers, International Studies Series, 02-030.

Beer, Samuel H., 1974 Modern Political Development. New York: Random House.

Beik, William H., 1985 Absolutism and Society in Seventeenth-Century France.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bendix, Reinhard, 1977 Nation-Building and Citizenship: Studies of Our Changing
Social Order. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. Revised edn.
Berend, Ivan, 1988 “The Place of Hungary in Europe: On the Identity Concept of
the Intelligentsia between the Two World Wars,” paper presented to the
Conference on Models of Development and Theories of Modernization in

Eastern Europe Between the World Wars, Rackeve, Hungary.
References 229

——1982 The European Periphery and Industrialisation 1780-1914. Budapest:
Akademiai Kiado.

— and Gyérgy Ranki, 1977 East Central Europe in the igth and 20th Centuries.
Budapest: Akademiai Kiado.

Berg, Maxine, Pat Hudson and Michael Sonenscher, 1983 eds, Manufacturer in
Town and Country before the Factory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Best, Geoffrey, 1982 War and Society in Revolutionary Europe, 1770-1870. London:

Fontana.

Bethell, Leslie and Ian Roxborough, 1988 “Latin America between the Second
World War and the Cold War: Some Reflections on the 1945-8 Conjuncture,”
Journal of Latin American Studies 20: 167-89.

Bigo, Didier, 1988 Pouvotr et obéissance en Centrafrique. Paris: Karthala.

Gaétan de Capele, Daniel Hermant and Nicolas Regaud, 1988 “Les
conflits intermittents: Les coups d’état, les litiges frontaliers,” Etudes Polémo-
logiques 46: 53-75.

Binney, J. E. D., 1958 British Public Finance and Administration 1774-92. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Birnbaum, Pierre, 1988 States and Collective Action: The European Experience.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bisson, Thomas N., 1966 “The Military Origins of Medieval Representation,”
American Historical Review, 71: 1199-218.

Black, Cyril, 1966 The Dynamics of Modernization. New York: Harper and Row.

Black, Jeremy, 1987 ed., The Origins of War in Early Modern Europe. Edinburgh:
John Donald.

Blechman, Barry and Stephen S. Kaplan, 1978 Force without War. U.S. Armed
Forces as a Political Instrument. Washington DC: Brookings Institution.

Blickle, Peter, 1988 Unruhen in der standischen Gesellschaft, 1300-1800.
Munich: Oldenbourg. Enzyklopddie Deutscher Geschichte, vol. 1.

Blockmans, Wim P., 1978 “A Typology of Representative Institutions in Late
Medieval Europe,” Journal of Medieval History 4: 189-215.

—— 1988a “Alternatives to Monarchical Centralisation: The Great Tradition of
Revolt in Flanders and Brabant,” in Helmut Koenigsberger, ed., Republiken und
Republikanismus im Europa der Friihen Neuzeit. Munich: Oldenbourg.

—— 1988b “La répression de révoltes urbaines comme méthode de centralisation
dans les Pays-Bas bourguignons,” in Rencontres de Milan (ter au 3 octobre 1987):
Milan et les Etats bourguignons: deux ensembles politiques princiers entre Moyen Age et
Renaissance (XIVe-XVle s.). Louvain: Centre Européen d’Etudes Bourguignonnes
(XIVe-—XVle s.).

—— 1988c “Patronage, Brokerage and Corruption as Symptoms of Incipient State
Formation in the Burgundian-Habsburg Netherlands,” in Antoni Maczak, ed.,
Klientelsysteme im Europa der Frithen Neuzeit. Munich: Oldenbourg.

—1988d “Princes conquérants ct bourgeois calcylateurs. Le poids des réseaux
urbains dans la formation des états,” in Neithard Bulst and Jean-Philippe Genet,
eds, La ville, la bourgeoisie et la genése de l'état moderne. Paris: Editions du Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique.

230 References

Blok, Anton, 1974 The Mafia of a Sicilian Village, 1860-1960. A Study of Violent
Peasant Entrepreneurs. New York: Harper and Row.

Blom, Grethe Authén, 1977 ed., Urbaniseringsprosessen i norden. Oslo: Universitets-
forlaget. 3 vols.

Blum, Jerome, 1964 Lord and Peasant in Russia from the Ninth to the Nineteenth
Century. New York: Atheneum.

—1978 The End of the Old Order in Rural Europe. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.

Boelcke, Willi A., 1967 “Wandlungen der dorflichen Sozialstruktur Wahrend
Mittelalter und Neuzeit,” in Heinz Haushofer and Willi A. Boelcke, eds, Wege
und Forschungen der Agrargeschichte. Frankfurt a/Main: DLG Verlag.

Boéhme, Klaus-Richard, 1983 “Schwedische Finanzbiirokratie und Kriegsfiihrung
1611 bis 1721,” in Goran Rystad, ed., Europe and Scandinavia: Aspects of the
Process of Integration in the 17th Century. Lund: Esselte Studium.

Bohstedt, John, 1983 Riots and Community Politics in England and Wales, 17g0-
1810. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Bois, Paul, 1981 “Apercu sur les causes des insurrections de !’OQuest a l’époque
révolutionnaire,” in J.-C. Martin, ed., Vendée-Chouannerie. Nantes: Reflets du
Passé.

Boli-Bennett, John, 1979 “The Ideology of Expanding State Authority in National
Consttutions, 1870-1970,” in John W. Meyer and Michael T. Hannan, ed.,
National Development and the World System. Educational, Economic, and Political
Change, 1950-1970. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

—— 1980 “Global Integration and the Universal Increase of State Dominance,
1910-1970,” in Albert Bergesen, ed., Studies of the Modern World System. New
York: Academic Press.

Bond, Brian, 1983 War and Society in Europe, 1870-1970. Leicester: Leicester
University Press.

Bosher, J. F., 1970 French Finances, 1770-1795. From Business to Bureaucracy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bossenga, Gail, 1988a “City and State: An Urban Perspective on the Origins of the
French Revolution,” in Keith Michael Baker, ed., The French Revolution and the
Creation of Modern Political Culture. 1. The Political Culture of the Old Regime.
Oxford: Pergamon. .

1988b “La Révolution francaise et les corporations: Trois exemples lillois,”’
Annales; Economies, Sociétés, Ctvilisations 43: 405-26.

Boswell, Terry, 1989 “Colonial Empires and the Capitalist World-Economy: A
Time Series Analysis of Colonization, 1640-1960,” American Sociological Review
54: 180-96.

Boxer, C. R., 1965 The Dutch Seaborne Empire: 1600-1800. New York: Knopf.

— 1969 The Portuguese Seaborne Empire: 1415-1825. New York: Knopf.

Boyd, Andrew, 1987 An Atlas of World Affairs. London: Methuen. 8th edn.

Brady, Jr, Thomas A., 1985 Turning Swiss. Cities and Empire, 1450-1550.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

References 231

Braudel, Fernand, 1979 Civilisation matérielle, économie, et capitalisme, XVe-XVIle
siécles. Paris: Armand Colin. 3 vols.

Braun, Rudolf, 1960 /ndustrialisterung und Volksleben. Zurich: Rentsch.

— 1975 “Taxation, Sociopolitical Structure, and State-Building: Great Britain
and Brandenburg-Prussia,” in Charles Tilly, ed., The Formation of National States
in Western Europe. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

1978 “Early Industrialization and Demographic Change in the Canton of
Zurich,” in Charles Tilly, ed., Historical Studies of Changing Fertility. Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Brenner, Robert, 1976 “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in
Pre-Industrial Europe,” Past and Present 70: 30-75.

1977 “The Origins of Capitalist Devclopment: A Critique of Neo-Smithian
Marxism,” New Lefi Review 104: 25-92.

—1985 “The Agrarian Roots of European Capitalism,” in T. H. Aston
and C. H. E. Philpin, eds, The Brenner Debate. Agrarian Class Structure and
Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Brewer, John, 1989 The Sinews of Power. War, Money and the English State, 1688-
1783. New York: Knopf.

Brewer, John D. et al., 1988 The Police, Public Order and the State. Policing in Great
Britain, Northern Ireland, the Irish Republic, the USA, Israel, South Africa and China.
New York: St Martins.

Brower, Daniel, 1977 “L’Urbanisation russe a la fin du XIXe siécle,” Annales;
Economies, Sociétés, Civilisations 32: 70-86.

Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, 1981 The War Trap. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
University Press.

— 1988 “The Contribution of Expected Utility Theory to the Study of
International Conflict,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 18: 629-52.

Bulst, Neithard and Jean-Philippe Genet, 1988 eds, La ville, la bourgeoisie et la genése
de |’Etat moderne (XIle-XVIIle stécles). Paris: Editions du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique.

Biinger Karl, 1987 “Concluding Remarks on Two Aspects of the Chinese Unitary
State as Compared with the European State System,” in Stuart Schram, ed.,
Foundations and Limits of State Power in China. Published for European Science
Foundation by School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London,
and The Chinese University Press, Chinese University of Hong Kong.

Burke, Peter, 1986 “City-States” in John A. Hall, ed., States in History. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.

—— 1988 “Republics of Merchants in Early Modern Europe,” in Jean Baechler,
John A. Hall and Michael Mann, eds, Europe and the Rise of Capitalism. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.

Busch, Otto, 1962 Militarsystem und Sozialleben im alten Preussen 1713-1807: Die
Anfange der sozialen Militarisierung der preussisch-deutschen Gesellschaft. Berlin: de
Gruyter.

232 References

Callaghy, Thomas M., 1984 The State-Society Struggle. Zaire in Comparative
Perspective. New York: Columbia University Press.

Calvert, Peter, 1970 A Study of Revolution. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Cameron, Iain A., 1977 “The Police of Eighteenth-Century France,” European
Studies Review 7: 47-75.

Cammack, Paul, 1988 “Dependency and the Politics of Development,” in
P. F. Leeson and M. M. Minogue, eds, Perspectives on Development. Cross-
disciplinary Themes in Development Studies. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.

Canak, William L., 1984 “The Peripheral State Debate: State Capitalist and
Bureaucratic-Authoritarian Regimes in Latin America,” Latin American Research
Review 19: 3-36.

Carsten, F. L., 1954 The Origins of Prussia. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Carter, F. W., 1972 Dubrovnik (Ragusa), A Classic City State. London: Seminar
Press.

Carver, Michael, 1980 War since 1945. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Centre de la Méditerranée Moderne ct Contemporaine, 1969 Villes de l'Europe
méditerranéenne et de l'Europe occidentale du Moyen Age au XIX¢e siecle. Saint-Brieuc:
Les Belles Lettres. Annales de la Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines de
Nice, nos. 9-10.

Chandler, Tertius and Gerald Fox, 1974 3000 Years of Urban Growth. New York:
Academic Press.

Chapman, Herrick, 1988 “The French State in the Era of the Second World War:
A Look at the Recent Scholarship,” Working Paper 63, Center for Studies of
Social Change, New School for Social Research.

Charlesworth, Andrew, 1983 ed., An Atlas of Rural Protest in Britain, 1548-1900.
London: Croom Helm.

Chase-Dunn, Chris, 1989 Global Formation: Structures of the World-Economy.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Chesnais, Jean-Claude, 1981 Histoire de la violence en Occident de 1800 a nos jours.
Paris: Robert Laffont.

Chevalier, Bernard, 1982 Les bonnes villes de France du X1Ve au XVle siécle. Paris:
Aubier Montaigne.

Chinwanno, Chulacheeb, 1985 “Militarization in Thai Society,” in Peter Wallensteen,
Johan Galtung and Carlos Portales, eds, Global Militarization. Boulder,
Colorado: Westview.

Chisolm, Michael, 1962 Rural Settlement and Land Use. London: Hutchinson
University Library.

Chittolini, Giorgio, 1989 “Cities, ‘City-States’ and Regional States in North-
Central Italy,” forthcoming in Theory and Society.

Chorley, Katherine, 1943 Armies and the Art of Revolution. London: Faber and
Faber.

Choucri, Nazli and Robert C. North, 1975 Nations in Conflict. San Francisco:
Freeman.
References 233

Church, Clive H. 1981 Revolution and Red Tape. The French Ministerial Bureaucracy
1770-1850. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Cipolla, Carlo, 1965 Guns, Sails, and Empires: Technological Innovation and the Early
Phases of European Expansion, 1400-1700. New York: Pantheon.

— 1976 Before the Industrial Revolution. European Society and Economy, 1000-1700.
New York: Norton.

Claessen, Henri J. M., 1984 “The Internal Dynamics of the Early State,” Current
Anthropology 25: 365-79.

1985 “From the Franks to France - The Evolution ofa Political Organization,”
in Henri J. M. Claessen, Pieter van de Velde and M. Estellie Smith, eds,
Development and Decline. The Evolution of Sociopolitical Organization. Massachusetts:
Bergin and Garvey.

— 1988 “Changing Legitimacy,” in Ronald Cohen and Judith D. Toland, eds,
State Formation and Political Legitimacy. New Brunswick: Transaction. Political
Anthropology, vol. VI.

Clark, Sir George, 1969 “The Social Foundations of States,” in F. L. Carsten, ed.,
The New Cambridge Modern History, vol. 5: The Ascendancy of France, 1648-88,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Clark, Gordon L. and Michael Dear, 1984 State Apparatus. Structures and Language
of Legitimacy. Boston, Massachusetts: Allen & Unwin.

Clark, Samuel, 1984 “Nobility, Bourgeoisie and the Industrial Revolution in
Belgium,” Past and Present 105: 140-75.

Clausewitz, Carl von, 1968 (Anatol Rapoport, ed.) On War. Harmondsworth:
Penguin. First published in 1832.

Clayton, Anthony, 1988 France, Soldiers and Africa, London: Brassey’s Defence
Publishers. ;

Coale, Ansley J. and Susan Cotts Watkins, 1986 eds, The Decline of Fertility in
Europe. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Cobb, Richard, 1970 The Police and the People. London: Oxford University Press.

Cohn, Jr, Samuel Kline, 1980 The Laboring Classes in Renaissance Florence. New
York: Academic Press.

Cohen, Youssef, Brian R. Brown and A. F. K. Organski, 1981 “The Paradoxical
Nature of State Making: The Violent Creation of Order,” American Political
Science Review 75: go1-10.

Collier, David, 1979 ed., The New Authoritariantsm in Latin America. Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Collier, Ruth B., 1982 Regimes in Tropical Africa. Changing Forms of Supremacy,
1945-1975. Berkeley, California: University of California Press.

Collins, James B., 1988 Fiscal Limits of Absolutism. Direct Taxation in Early
Seventeenth-Century France. Berkeley, California: University of California
Press.

Comninel, George C., 1987 Rethinking the French Revolution. Marxism and the
Revisionist Challenge. London: Verso.

Connelly, Owen, 1965 Napoleon's Satellite Kingdoms. New York: Free Press.

234 References

Contamine, Philippe, 1984 War in the Middle Ages. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. French
version published in 1980.

Cornette, Joél, 1988 “Le ‘point d’Archiméde’. Le renouveau de la recherche sur
l’Etat des Finances,” Revue d'Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine 35: 614-29.

Cornwall, Julian, 1977 Revolt of the Peasantry 1549. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.

Corrigan, Philip, 1980 Capitalism, State Formation and Marxist Theory. Historical
Investigations. London: Quartet Books.

——and Derek Sayer, 1985 The Great Arch. English State Formation as Cultural
Revolution. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Corvisier, André, 1976 Armées et soctétés en Europe de 1494 4 1789. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.

Cox, Robert W., 1987 Production, Power, and World Order. Social Forces in the Making
of History. New York: Columbia University Press.

Cozzi, Gaetano and Michael Knapton, 1986 La Repubblica di Venezia nell’eta
moderna. Dalla guera di Chioggia al 1517. Turin: UTET.

Cronin, James E., 1988 “The British State and the Second World War,” Working
Paper 64, Center for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social Research.

Crosby, Alfred W., 1986 Ecological Imperialism. The Biological Expansion of Europe,
goo-1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Cumings, Bruce, 1984 “The Origins and Development of the Northeast Asian
Political Economy: Industrial Sectors, Product Cycle, and Political Consequences,”
International Organization 38: 1-40.

1988 “Korea and the War Settlement in Northeast Asia,” Working Paper 65,
Center for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social Research.

— 1989 “The Abortive Abertura: South Korea in the Light of Latin American
Experience,” New Left Review 173: 5-32.

Curtin, Philip D., 1984 Cross-Cultural Trade in World History. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Cusack, Thomas R. and Wolf-Dieter Eberwein, 1982 “Prelude to War: Incidence,
Escalation and Intervention in International Disputes, 1900-1976,” /nternational
Interactions 9: 9-28.

Dann, Otto, 1983 “Die Region als Gegenstand der Geschichtswissenschaft,”
Archiv fiir Sozialgeschichte 23: 652-61.

and John Dinwiddy, 1988 Nationalism in the Age of the French Revolution.
London: Hambledon.

Danns, George K., 1986 “The Role of the Military in the National Security of
Guyana,” in Alma H. Young and Dion E. Phillips, eds, Militarization in the Non-
Hispanic Caribbean. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner.

David, Steven R., 1987 Third World Coups d’Etat and International Security.
Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Dawson, Philip, 1972 Provincial Magistrates and Revolutionary Politics in France,
1789-1795. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Decalo, Samuel, 1976 Coups and Army Rule in Africa. Studies in Military Style. New
Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

References 235

Dekker, Rudolf, 1982 Holland in beroering. Oproeren in de 17de en 18de eeu. Baarn:
Amboeken.

Dent, Julian, 1973 Crisis in Finance: Crown, Financiers, and Society in Seventeenth-
Century France. Newton Abbot: David and Charles.

Dessert, Daniel, 1984 Argent, pouvoir, et société au Grand Siécle. Paris: Fayard.

Dewey, Horace, 1988 “Russia’s Debt to the Mongols in Suretyship and Collective
Responsibility,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 30: 249-70.

Deyo, Frederic, Stephan Haggard, and Hagen Koo, 1987 “Labor in the Political
Economy of East Asian Industrialization,” Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars
19: 42-53.

Deyon, Pierre, 1979a “L’Enjeu des discussions autour du concept de ‘proto-
industrialisation’,” Revue du Nord 61: 9-15.

— 1979b “La diffusion rurale des industries textile en Flandre francaise la fin
de l’Ancien Régime et au début du XIXe siécle,” Revue du Nord 61: 83-95.
— 1981 “Un modéle a l’épreuve, le développement industriel de Roubaix de

1762 a la fin du XIXéme siécle,” Revue du Nord 63: 59-66.

Dickson, P. G. M., 1967 The Financial Revolution in England. A Study in the
Development of Public Credit, 1688-1756. London: Macmillan.

Diehl, Paul F. and Gary Goertz, 1988 “Territorial Changes and Militarized
Conflict,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 32: 103-22.

Dijk, H. van, 1980 Wealth and Property in the Netherlands in Modern Times.
Rotterdam: Centrum voor Maatschappijgeschiedenis.

Dix, Robert, 1983 “The Varieties of Revolution,” Comparative Politics 15: 281-93.

Dobb, Maurice, 1963 Studies in the Development of Capitalism. London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul. Rev. edn.

Dodgshon, Robert A., 1987 The European Past. Social Evolution and Spatial Order.
London: Macmillan.

Dohaerd, Renée et al., 1983 Histoire de Flandre des origines a nos jours. Brussels:
Renaissance du Livre.

Donia, Robert J., 1981 Islam under the Double Eagle: The Muslims of Bosnia and
Hercegovina, 1878-1914. New York: Columbia University Press for Eastern
European Monographs, Boulder, Colorado.

Dower, John W., 1988 “Japan: Legacies of a Lost War,” Working Paper 66, Center
for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social Research.

Downing, Brian M., 1988 “Constitutionalism, Warfare, and Political Change in
Early Modern Europe,” Theory and Society 17: 7-56.

Doyle, Michael W., 1986 Empires. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.

Doyle, William, 1986 The Ancien Regime. Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey:
Humanities Press International.

Duchacek, Ivo D., 1986 The Territorial Dimension of Politics. Within, Among, and
Across Nations. Boulder, Colorado: Westview.

Duffy, Michael, 1980 ed., The Military Revolution and the State, 1500-1800. Exeter:
University of Exeter. Exeter Studies in History, 1.

Dunér, Bertil, 1985 Military Intervention in Civil Wars: the 1970s. Aldershot:
Gower.
236 = - References

Dunford, Michael and Diane Perrons, 1983 The Arena of Capital. New York:
St Martin’s.

Dunn, John, 1972 Modern Revolutions. An Introduction to the Analysis of a Political
Phenomenon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

DuPlessis, Robert S. and Martha C. Howell, 1982 “Reconsidering Early Modern
Urban Economy: The Cases of Leiden and Lille,” Past and Present 94: 49-84.

Durandin, Catherine, 1989 Révolution a la Francaise ou a la Russe. Polonais, Roumains
et Russes au XIXe siécle. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Eckhardt, William, 1988 “Civilian Deaths in Wartime,” forthcoming in Bulletin of
Peace Proposals, 20 (1989).

Eden, Lynn, 1988 “World War II and American Politics,” Working Paper 68,
Center for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social Research.

Egret, Jean, 1962 La pré-Révolution francaise. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France.

Eisenstadt, S. N., 1963 The Political Systems of Empires. The Rise and Fall of the
Historical Bureaucratic Societies. Glencoe, New York: Free Press.

Elias, Norbert, 1982 Power and Civility. New York: Pantheon. The Civilizing
Process, vol. 2.

Elliott, J. H., 1963 Imperial Spain, 1469-1716. London: Arnold.

—1970 The Old World and the New, 1492-1650. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Elton, G. R., 1975 “Taxation for War and Peace in Early-Tudor England,” in
J. M. Winter, ed., War and Economic Development: Essays in Memory of David Joslin.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Evans, Eric J., 1983 The Forging of the Modern State. Early Industrial Britain, 1783-
1870. London: Longman.

Evans, Peter and John D. Stephens, 1989 “Studying Development since the Sixties:
The Emergence of a New Comparative Political Economy,” Theory and Society
17: 713-46.

Faber, J. A. et al., 1965 “Population Changes and Economic Developments in the
Netherlands: A Historical Survey,” 4. 4. G. Bijdragen 12: 47-114.

Fernandez Albaladejo, Pablo, 1989 “Cities and the State in Spain,” forthcoming in
Theory and Society.

Fijnaut, Cyrille, 1980a “Les origines de lappareil policier moderne en Europe de
l'Ouest continentale,” Déviance et Société 4: 19-41.

1980b “Die ‘politische Funktion’ der Polizei. Zur Geschichte der Polizei als
zentralen Faktor in der Entwicklung und Stabilisierung politischer Machtstrukturen
in West-Europa,” Kriminologisches Journal 12: 301-9.

Finer, Samuel E., 1975 “State- and Nation-Building in Europe: The Role of the
Military,” in Charles Tilly, ed., Ze Formation of National States in Western Europe.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

— 1982 “The Morphology of Military Regimes,” in Roman Kolkowicz and
Andrzej Korbonski, eds, Soldters, Peasants, and Bureaucrats: Civil-Military
Relations in Communist and Modernizing Regimes. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.

References 237

Fischer, Dietrich, 1985 “Defense without Threat: Switzerland’s Security Policy,”
in Peter Wallensteen, Johan Galtung and Carlos Portales, eds, Global Militarization.
Boulder, Colorado: Westview.

Fitch, J. Samuel, 1986 “Armies and Politics in Latin America: 1975-1985,” in
Abraham F. Lowenthal and J. Samuel Fitch, eds, Armies and Politics in Latin
America. New York: Holmes & Meier.

Flora, Peter et al., 1983, 1987 eds, State, Economy, and Society in Western Europe
1815-1975. A Data Handbook. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag. 2 vols.

Fontenay, Michel, 1988a “Corsaires de la foi ou rentiers du sol? Les chevaliers de
Malte dans le ‘corso’ méditerranéen au XVIle siécle,” Revue d'Histoire Moderne et
Contemporaine 35: 361-84.

1988b “La place de la course dans l’économie portuaire: L’exemple de
Malte et des ports barbaresques,” Annales; Economies, Soctétés, Civilisations 43:
1321-47.

Forrest, Alan, 1975 Society and Politics in Revolutionary Bordeaux. London: Oxford
University Press.

Fourastié, Jean, 1966 “Observazioni sui prezzi salariali dei cereali e la produttivita
del lavoro agricolo in Europa dal XV al XX secolo,” Rivista Storica Italiana 78:
422-30.

Frank, André Gunder, 1978 World Accumulation, 1492-1789. New York: Monthly
Review Press.

Frankfort, Henri et al., 1946 The Intellectual Adventure of Ancient Man. An Essay on
Speculative Thought in the Ancient Near East. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fréche, Georges, 1974 Toulouse et la région Midi-Pyrénées au siecle des Lumiéres (vers
1670-1789). Paris: Cujas.

Freedman, Paul, 1988 “Cowardice, Heroism and the Legendary Origins of
Catalonia,” Past and Present 121: 3-28.

Fremdling, Rainer and Richard Tilly, 1979 eds, Industriqlisierung und Raum. Studien
sur regionale Differenzierung im Deutschland des 19. Jahrhunderts. Stuttgart: Klett-
Cotta.

Friedmann, David, 1977 “A Theory of the Size and Shape of Nations,” Journal of
Political Economy 85: 59-78.

Fueter, Edward, 1919 Geschichte des europaischen Staatensystems von 1492-1559.
Munich: Oldenbourg.

Gallo, Carmenza, 1985 “The State in an Enclave Economy: Political Instability in
Bolivia from 1900 to 1950,” unpublished doctoral dissertation in sociology,
Boston University.

Garcin, Jean-Claude, 1988 “The Mamluk Military System and the Blocking of
Medieval Moslem Society,” in Jean Baechler, John A. Hall and Michael Mann,
eds, Europe and the Rise of Capitalism. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Garmonsway, G. N., 1953 tr. and ed., The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. London:
J. M. Dent.

Genet, Jean-Philippe and Michel Le Mené, 1987 eds, Genése de /’état moderne.
Prélevement et Redistribution. Paris: Editions du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique.

238 References

Gerth, H. H. and C. Wright Mills, 1946 eds, From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Geyer, Michael, 1988 “Society, State, and Military Apparatus in Germany, 1945-
1955,” Working Paper 67, Center for Studies of Social Change, New School for
Social Research.

Giddens, Anthony, 1985 The Nation-State and Violence. Berkeley, California:
University of California Press.

Gillis, John, 1970 “Political Decay and the European Revolutions, 1789-1848,”
World Politics 22: 344-70.

Gilpin, Robert, 1981 War and Change in World Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

— 1988 “The Theory of Hegemonic War,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History
18: 591-614.

Gledhill, John, Barbara Bender and Mogens Trolle Larsen, 1988 eds, State and
Society. The Emergence and Development of Social Hierarchy and Political Centralization.
London: Unwin Hyman.

Gokalp, Iskander and Semih Vaner, 1985 “De l’empire a la république: regards sur
la Turquie,” Cahiers du Groupe d'Etudes sur la Turquie Contemporaine 1: 92-102.

Goldstein, Joshua S., 1988 Long Cycles. Prosperity and War in the Modern Age. New
Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

Goldstone, Jack A., 1986 “Introduction: The Comparative and Historical Study of
Revolutions,” in Jack A. Goldstone, ed., Revolutions. Theoretical, Comparative, and
Historical Studies. San Diego, California: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Gooch, John 1980 Annies in Europe. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Gran, Thorvald, 1988a “War Settlement in Norway,” Working Paper 61, Center
for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social Research.

— 1988b “A Critique of State Autonomy in Norway,” unpublished doctoral
dissertation in public administration and organization theory, University of
Bergen.

Greene, Thomas H., 1974 Comparative Revolutionary Movements. Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Greer, Donald, 1935 The Incidence of the Terror during the French Revolution.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Grew, Raymond, 1978 ed., Crises of Political Development in Europe and the United
States. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

1984 “The Nineteenth-Century European State,” in Charles Bright and
Susan Harding, eds, Statemaking and Social Movements. Ann Arbor, Michigan:
University of Michigan Press.

Greyerz, Kaspar von, 1989 “Portuguese conversos on the Upper Rhine and the
converso community of sixteenth-century Europe,” Social History 14: 59-82.

Guénée, Bernard, 1985 States and Rulers in Later Medieval Europe. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.

Gugler, Josef, 1982 “The Urban Character of Contemporary Revolutions,” Studies
in Comparative International Development 17: 60-73.

References 239

Guillerm, Alain, 1985 La pierre et le vent. Fortifications et marine en Occident. Paris:
Arthaud.

Guilmartin, Jr, John F., 1988 “Ideology and Conflict: The Wars of the Ottoman
Empire, 1453-1606,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 18: 721-48.

Gurr, Ted Robert, 1981 “Historical Trends in Violent Crime: A Critical Review of
the Evidence,” Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of Research 3: 295-353.

— 1986 “Persisting Patterns of Repression and Rebellion: Foundations for a
General Theory of Political Coercion,” in Margaret P. Karns, ed., Persistent
Patterns and Emergent Structures in a Waning Century. New York: Praeger Special
Studies for the International Studies Association.

——and Desmond S. King, 1987 The State and the City. London: Macmillan.

Gutmann, Myron P., 1980 War and Rural Life in the Early Modern Low Countries.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

1988 “The Origins of the Thirty Years’ War,” Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 18: 749-70.

Hagen, William W., 1988 “Capitalism and the Countryside in Early Modern
Europe: Interpretations, Models, Debates,” Agricultural History 62: 13-47.

Haimson, Leopold and Charles Tilly, 1989 eds, Strikes, Wars, and Revolutions in an
International Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hair, P. E. H., 1971 “Deaths from Violence in Britain: A Tentative Secular
Survey,” Population Studies 25: 5-24.

Hale, J. R., 1967 “International Relations in the West: Diplomacy and War,” in
G. R. Potter, ed., The New Cambridge Modern History. Vol. 1: The Renaissance,
1493-1520. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1968a “Armies, Navies, and the Art of War,” in G. R. Elton, ed., New

Cambridge Modern History, vol. 2: The Reformation 1520-1559.. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

1968b “Armies, Navies, and the Art of War” (sic), in R. B. Wernham, ed., New
Cambridge Modern History, vol. 3: The Counter-Reformation and Price Revolution,
1559-1610. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

— 1979 “Renaissance Armies and Political Control: The Venetian Proveditorial
System 1509-1529,” Journal of Italian History 2: 11-31.

— 1983 Renaissance War Studies. London: Hambledon Press.

—1985 War and Society in Renaissance Europe, 1450-1620. New York:
St Martin’s.

Halicz, Emanuel, 1987 “The Polish Armed Forces and War, 1764-1864,” in
Stephen Fischer-Galati and Béla K. Kirdly, eds, Essays on War and Society in East
Central Europe, 1740-1920. Boulder, Colorado: Social Science Monographs.

Hall, Peter and Dennis Hay, 1980 Growth Centers in the European Urban System.
London: Heinemann.

Hamilton, Clive, 1986 Capitalist Industrialization in Korea. Boulder, Colorado:
Westview.

Hamilton, Earl J., 1950 “Origin and Growth of the National Debt in France and
England,” in Studi in onore di Gino Luzzato, vol. 2. Milan: Giuffré.

240 References

Harding, Robert R., 1978 Anatomy of a Power Elite: The Provincial Governors of Early
Modern France. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

Harff, Barabara and Ted Robert Gurr, 1988 “Toward Empirical Theory of
Genocides and Politicides: Identification and Measurement of Cases since
1945,” International Studies Quarterly 32: 359-71.

Hart, Marjolein ’t, 1984 “In Quest for Funds: State and Taxation in Eighteenth-
Century England and France,” paper presented to the Workshop on the Politics
of Taxation, European Consortium for Political Research, Salzburg.

1985 “Hoe de staat zijn raison d’étre verloor. Staat en revolutie in Frankrijk
1775-1789,” Mens en Maatschaptj 1985: 5-25.

— 1986 “Taxation and the Formation of the Dutch State, 17th Century,” paper
presented to the Viaams-Nederlandse Sociologendagen, Amsterdam.

— 1987 “Salt Tax and Salt Trade in the Low Countries,” in Jean-Claude
Hocquet, Le Roi, le Marchand et le Sel. Villeneuve d’Ascq: Presses Universitaires
de Lille.

— 198ga “Credit and Power. State Making in Seventeenth Century Netherlands,”
unpublished doctoral dissertation in history, University of Leiden.

—1989b “Cities and Statemaking in the Dutch Republic, 1580-1680,”
forthcoming in Theory and Society.

Haskins, Charles Homer, 1915 The Normans in European History. Boston,
Massachussetts: Houghton Mifflin.

Headrick, Daniel R., 1981 The Tools of Empire. Technology and European Imperialism
in the Nineteenth Century, New York: Oxford University Press.

Hechter, Michael and William Brustein, 1980 “Regional Modes of Production and
Patterns of State Formation in Europe,” American Journal of Sociology 85: 1061-
94.

Henning, Friedrich-Wilhelm, 1977 “Der Beginn der modernen Welt im agrarischen
Bereich,” in Reinhart Koselleck, ed., Studien zum Beginn der modernen Welt.
Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.

Heper, Metin, 1985 “The State and Public Bureaucracy: A Comparative and
Historical Perspective,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 27: 86-110.
Hermant, Daniel, 1987 ed., “Les coups d’Etat,” Etudes Polémologiques 41: entire

issue.

Hernandez, Francesc and Francesc Mercadé, 1986 eds, Estructuras Sociales y
Cuestion Nacional en Espana. Barcelona: Ariel.

Hespanha, Anténio Manuel, 1986 “Centro e Periferia nas Estructuras Administrativas
do Antigo Regime,” Ler Histiria 8: 35-60.

— 1989 “Cities and the State in Portugal,” forthcoming in Theory:and Society.

Hinrichs, Ernst, Eberhard Schmitt and Rudolf Vicrhaus, 1978 eds, Vom Ancien
Régime zur Franzdsischen Revolution. Forschungen und Perspektiven. Gottingen:
Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Hirst, Derek, 1986 Authority and Conflict. England, 1603-1658. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

Hitchins, Keith, 1988 “Rumanian Peasantism: The Third Way,” paper presented

References 241

to the Conference on Models of Development and Theories of Modernization in
Eastern Europe Between the World Wars, Rackeve, Hungary.

Hobsbawn, E. J., 1987 The Age of Empire 1875-1914. New York: Pantheon.

Hocquet, Jean-Claude, 1982 Le sel et la fortune de Venise. Lille: Université de Lille
Ill. 2 vols.

Hohenberg, Paul and Frederick Krantz, 1975 eds, Transition du féodalisme a la
société industrielle: l'échec de V'Italie de la Renaissance et des Pays-Bas du XVIle siécle.
Montreal: Centre Interuniversitaire d’Etudes Européennes.

——and Lynn Hollen Lees, 1985 The Making of Urban Europe, tooo-1850.

Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Holsti, K. J., 1985 The Dividing Discipline. Hegemony and Diversity in International
Theory. Boston, Massachusetts: Allen & Unwin.

Holton, R. J., 1986 Cities, Capitalism and Civilization. London: Allen & Unwin.

Hood, James N., 1971 “Protestant—Catholic Relations and the Roots of the First
Popular Counterrevolutionary Movement in France,” Journal of Modern History
43: 245-75.

— 1979 “Revival and Mutation of Old Rivalries in Revolutionary France,” Past
and Present 82: 82-115.

Horowitz, Donald L., 1980 Coup Theories and Officers’ Motives. Sri Lanka in
Comparattve Perspective. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Houweling, Henk and Jan G. Siccama, 1988 “Power Transitions as a Cause of
War,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 32: 87-102.

Howard, Michael, 1976 War in European History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hunt, Lynn, 1978 Revolution and Urban Politics in Provincial France. Troyes and
Reims, 1786-1790. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

1984 Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution. Berkeley, California:
University of California Press.

Huntington, Samuel P., 1957 The Soldier and the State. The Theory and Politics of
Civil-Military Relations. New York: Vintage.

— 1968 Political Order in Changing Societies. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
University Press.

—— and Jorge I. Dominguez, 1975 “Political Development” in Fred I. Greenstein
and Nelson W. Polsby, eds, Handbook of Political Science. Reading, Massachusetts:
Addison-Wesley. Vol. III, 1-114.

Hutchful, Eboe, 1984 “Trends in Africa,” Alternatives 10: 115-38.

Immich, Max, 1905 Geschichte des europaischen Staatensystems von 1660 bis 1789.
Munich and Berlin: Oldenbourg.

Ingrao, Charles W., 1987 The Hessian Mercenary State. Ideas, Institutions, and Reform
under Frederick II, 1760-1785. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Israel, Jonathan I., 1982 The Dutch Republic and the Hispanic World. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Jackman, Robert W., 1976 “Politicians in Uniform: Military Governments and
Social Change in the Third World,” American Political Science Review 70: 1078-

97-

242 = References

—1978 “The Predictability of Coups d’Etat: A Model with African Data,”
American Political Science Review 72: 1262-75.

Janos, Andrew, 1988 “The Rise and Fall of Civil Society. The Politics of
Backwardness on the European Peripheries, 1780-1945,” paper presented to the
Conference on Models of Development and Theories of Modernization in
Eastern Europe Between the World Wars, Rackeve, Hungary.

Janowitz, Morris, 1964 The Military in the Political Development of New Nations.
Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

and Jacques Van Doorn, 1971 eds, On Military Intervention. Rotterdam:
Rotterdam University Press.

Jelavich, Charles and Barbara, 1977 The Establishment of the Balkan National States,
1804-1920. Seattle, Washington: University of Washington Press.

Jervis, Robert, 1988a “Realism, Game Theory, and Cooperation,” World Politics
40: 317-49.

— 1988b “The Political Effects of Nuclear Weapons,” International Security
13: 80-90.

Jespersen, Leon, 1985 “The Machtstaat in Seventeenth-century Denmark,”
Scandinavian Journal of History 10: 271-304.

Jessenne, Jean-Pierre, 1987 Pouvoir au village et Révolution. Artois 1760-1848. Lille:
Presses Universitaires de Lille.

Johnson, John J., 1962 ed., The Role of the Military in Underdeveloped Countries.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Johnson, Thomas H., Robert O. Slater and Pat McGowan, 1984 “Explaining
African Military Coups d’Etat, 1960-1982,” American Political Science Review
78: 622-40.

Johnston, R. J., 1982 Geography and the State. New York: St Martin’s.

Jones, Colin, 1980 “The Military Revolution and the Professionalization of the
French Army Under the Ancien Regime,” in Michael Duffy, ed., The Military
Revolution and the State, 1500-1800. Exeter: University of Exeter. Exeter Studies
in History, no. 1.

Jones, D. W., 1988 War and Economy in the Age of William III and Marlborough.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Juillard, Etienne and Henri Nonn, 1976 Espaces et régions en Europe Occidentale.
Paris: Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique.

Kann, Robert A., 1980 A History of the Habsburg Empire, 1526-1918. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press. First published in 1974.

Keeney, Barnaby C., 1947 Military Service and the Development of Nationalism
in England, 1272-1327,” Speculum 4: 534-49.

Kellenbenz, Hermann, 1975 ed., Agrarisches Nebengewerbe und Formen der Reagrar-
isierung im Spatmittelalter und 19./20. Jahrhundert. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer.

— 1976 The Rise of the European Economy. An Economic History of Continental
Europe from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century. London: Wiedenfeld and
Nicolson.

— 1981 “Marchands de I’Allemagne du Sud, médiateurs entre le Nord-Est et

References 243

POccident européen,” in Actes du Colloque Franco-Polonais d'Histoire. Nice:
Laboratoire d’Histoire Quantitative, Université de Nice.

Kelly, John Dunham, 1988 “Fiji Indians and Political Discourse in Fiji: from the
Pacific Romance to the Coups,” Journal of Historical Sociology 1: 399-422.

Kennedy, Gavin, 1974 The Military in the Third World. London: Duckworth.

Kennedy, Paul, 1987 The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers. Economic Change and
Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000. New York: Random House.

Kennedy, William, 1964 English Taxation 1640-1799. An Essay on Policy and
Opinion. New York: Augustus Kelley. First published in 1913.

Keohane, Robert O., 1986 ed., Neorealism and its Critics. New York: Columbia
University Press.

and Joseph S. Nye, Jr. 1975 “International Interdependence and Integration,”
vol. VIII, 363-414 in Fred I. Greenstein and Nelson W. Polsby, eds, Handbook of
Political Science. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

Kettering, Sharon, 1986 Patrons, Brokers, and Clients in Seventeenth-Century France.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Kick, Edward L., 1983 “World-System Properties and Military Intervention-
Internal War Linkages,” Journal of Political and Military Sociology 11: 185—-
208.

— and David Kiefer, 1987 “The Influence of the World System on War in the
Third World,” International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy 7: 34-48.

Kidron, Michael and Dan Smith, 1983 The War Atlas, Armed Conflict —Armed Peace.
New York: Simon and Schuster.

Kiernan, V. G., 1973 “Conscription and Society in Europe before the War of
1914-18,” in M. R. D. Foot, ed., War and Society: Historical Essays in Honour and
Memory of J. R. Western, 1928-1971. London: Elek Books.

Kim, Kyung-Won, 1970 Revolution and International:-System. New York: New York
University Press.

Kindleberger, Charles P., 1984 A Financial History of Western Europe. London:
Allen & Unwin.

Kinzer, Stephen, 1989 “Guatemala: What Has Democracy Wrought?” New York
Times Magazine, March 26, 1989: 32-4, 50-1.

Klare, Michael T. and Cynthia Arnson, 1981 Supplying Repression. U.S. Support for
Authoritarian Regimes Abroad. Washington DC: Institute for Policy Studies.

Klaveren, Jacob van, 1960 “Fiskalismus — Merkantilismus — Korruption: Drei
Aspekte der Finanz- und Wirtschaftspolitik wahrend des Ancien Regime,”
Vierteljahrschrift fiir Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte 47: 333-53.

Kirchheimer, Otto, 1965 “Confining Conditions and Revolutionary Breakthroughs,”
American Political Science Review 59: 964-74.

Kliot, Nurit and Stanley Waterman, 1983 eds, Pluralism and Political Geography.
London: Croom Helm.

Koblik, Steven, 1975 Smweden’s Development from Poverty to Affluence, 1750-1970.
Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press.

Kohut, Zenon E., 1988 Russian Centralism and Ukrainian Autonomy. Imperial

244 References

Absorption of the Hetmanate, 1760s-1830s. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
for the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute.

Konvitz, Joseph W., 1985 The Urban Millennium: The City-Building Process from the
Early Middle Ages to the Present. Carbondale, Illinois: Southern Illinois University
Press.

Korpi, Walter, 1983 The Democratic Class Struggle. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.

Krasner, Steven D., 1978 Defending the National Interest. Raw Materials Investments
and U.S. Foreign Policy. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

— 1985 Structural Conflict. The Third World Against Global Liberalism. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.

Krekic, Barisa, 1972 Dubrovnik in the 14th and 15th Centuries: A City Between East
and West. Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.

— 1987 ed., Urban Society of Eastern Europe in Premodern Times. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.

Kriedte, Peter, 1982 “Die Stadt im Prozess der europaischen Proto-Industrialisierung,”
in Pierre Deyon and Franklin Mendels, eds, Proto-Jndustrialisation: Théorie et
réalité. Lille: Université des Arts, Lettres, et Sciences Humaines.

1983 Peasants, Landlords and Merchant Capitalists. Europe and the World

Economy, 1500-1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hans Medick and Jurgen Schlumbohm, 1977 Industrialisierung vor der
Industrialisierung. Gemerbliche Warenproduktion auf dem Land in der Formationsperiode
des Kapitalismus. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Kula, Witold, 1960 “Secteurs et régions arriérés de I’économie du capitalisme
naissant,” Studi Storici 1: 569-85.

Kyle, Jorgen, 1988 “Peasant Elite? A Case Study of the Relations between Rural
Society and the Swedish Assignment System in the Eighteenth Century,” in
Magnus Morner and Thommy Svensson, eds, Classes, Strata and Elites. Essays on
Social Stratification in Nordic and Third World History. Goteborg: Department of
History, University of Goteborg. Report No. 34.

Lachmann, Richard, 1987 From Manor to Market. Structural Change in England,
1536-1640. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.

Ladero Quesado, Miguel Angel, 1970 “Les finances royales de Castille a la veille
des temps modernes,” Annales; Economies, Sociétés, Crvilisations 25: 775-88.

Ladewig Petersen, E., 1983 “War, Finance and the Growth of Absolutism: Some
Aspects of the European Integration of 17th Century Denmark,” in Goran
Rystad, ed., Europe and Scandinavia: Aspects of the Process of Integration in the 17th
Century. Lund: Esselte Studium.

Lane, Frederic C., 1958 “Economic Consequences of Organized Violence,”
Journal of Economic History 18: 401-17.

— 1966 “The Economic Meaning of War and Protection,” in Venice and History:
The, Collected Papers of Frederic C. Lane. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins
University Press. Originally published in 1942.

— 19734 Venice, a Maritime Republic. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

References 245

——1973b “Naval Actions and Fleet Organization, 1499-1502,” in J. R. Hale,
ed., Renaissance Venice. London: Faber and Faber.

Lang, James, 1979 Portuguese Brazil. The King's Plantation. New York: Academic
Press.

Langer, William L., 1969 Political and Social Upheaval, 1832-1852. New York:
Harper and Row.

Lapidus, Ira, 1967 Muslim Cities in the Later Middle Ages. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

1973 “The Evolution of Muslim Urban Society,” Comparative Studies in
Society and History 15: 21-50.

Laqueur, Walter, 1968 “Revolution,” /nternational Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences
13: 501-7.

Larson, Reidar, 1970 Theories of Revolution, from Marx to the First Russian
Revolution. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell.

Launius, Michael A., 1985 “The State and Industrial Labor in South Korea,”
Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars 16: 2-10.

Lebrun, Francois and Roger Dupuy, 1987 eds, Les résistances a la Révolution. Paris:
Imago.

Lee, Su-Hoon, 1988 State-Building in the Contemporary Third World. Boulder,
Colorado: Westview.

Le Goff, T. J. A. and D. M. G. Sutherland, 1984 “Religion and Rural Revolt in the
French Revolution: An Overview,” in Janos M. Bak and Gerhard Benecke, eds,
Religion and Rural Revolt. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Léon, Pierre, Francois Crouzet and Raymond Gascon, 1972 eds, L 'Industrialisation
en Europe au XIXe siécle. Cartographie et typologie. Paris: Editions du Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique.

Lepetit, Bernard, 1982 “Fonction administrative et armature urbaine: Remarques
sur la distribution des chefs-licux de subdélégation en France 4 la fin de Ancien
Régime,” Institut d'Histoire Economique et Sociale de l'Université de Paris I,
Recherches et Travaux, 11: 19-34.

1988 Les villes dans la France moderne (1740-1840). Paris: Albin Michel.

Levack, Brian P., 1987 The Formation of the British State. England, Scotland, and the
Union, 1603-1707. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Levi, Margaret, 1983 “The Predatory Theory of Rule,” in Michael Hechter, ed.,
The Microfoundations of Macrosociology. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Temple
University Press.

—— 1988 Of Rule and Revenue. Berkeley, California: University of California
Press.

Levine, David, 1987 Reproducing Families. The Political Economy of English Population
History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Levine, Steven, 1988 “War Settlement and State Structure: The Case of China
and the Termination of World War II,” Working Paper 62, Center for Studies of
Social Change, New School for Social Research.

Levy, Jack S., 1983 War in the Modern Great Power System, 1495-1975. Lexington,
Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky.

246 References

—— 1989 “The Causes of War: A Review of Theorics and Evidence,” forthcoming
in Philip Tetlock et al., eds, Behavior, Society, and Nuclear War. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Lewis, Archibald R., 1988 Nomads and Crusaders A.D. 1000-1368. Bloomington,
Indiana: Indiana University Press.

——and Timothy J. Runyan, 1988 European Naval and Maritime History, 300-
1500. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press.

Lewis, Gwynne, 1978 The Second Vendée: The Continuity of Counter-Revolution in the
Department of the Gard, 1789-1815. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

and Colin Lucas, 1983 eds, Beyond the Terror. Essays in French Regional and
Social History, 1794-1815. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lewis, John Wilson, 1974 ed., Peasant Rebellion and Communist Revolution in Asia.
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.

Lindegren, Jan, 1985 “The Swedish ‘Military State’, 1560-1720,” Scandinavian

Journal of History 10: 305-36.

Lindner, Rudi Paul, 1981 “Nomadism, Horses and Huns,” Past and Present g2: 3-19.

—— 1983 Nomads and Ottomans in Medieval Anatolia. Bloomington, Indiana:
Research Institute for Inner Asian Studies, Indiana University.

Livet, Georges and Bernard Vogler, 1983 eds, Pouvoir, ville, et société en Europe,
1650-1750. Paris: Ophrys.

Liéwy, Michael, 1989 “Internationalisme, nationalisme et anti-impérialisme,”
Critique Communiste 87: 31-42.

Luard, Evan, 1987 War in International Society. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale
University Press.

Lucas, Colin, 1973 The Structure of the Terror. The Example of Claude Javogues and
the Lotre. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

1988 “The Crowd and Politics between Ancien Régime and Revolution in
France,” Journal of Modern History 60: 421-57.

Luckham, Robin, 1971 The Nigerian Military. A Sociological Analysis of Authority ©
Revolt, 1960-1967. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

— 1981 “Armament Culture,” Alternatives 10: 1-44.

Liidtke, Alf, 1980 “Genesis und Durchsetzung des modernen Staates: Zur Analyse
von Herrschaft und Verwaltung,” Archiv fiir Sozialgeschichte 20: 470-91.

Luterbacher, Urs and Michael D. Ward, 1985 eds, Dynamic Models of International
Conflict. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner.

Lynn, John 1984 The Bayonets of the Republic. Motivation and Tactics in the Army of
Revolutionary France, 1791-94. Urbana, Illinois: University of Illinois Press.

— 1989 “Introduction: The Pattern of Army Growth, 1445-1945,” unpublished
paper, University of Illinois Champaign- Urbana.

Lyons, G. M., 1961 “Exigences militaires ct budgets militaires aux U.S.A.,” Revue
Frangaise de Sociologie 2: 66-74.

Lyons, Martyn, 1980 Révolution et Terreur a Toulouse. Toulouse: Privat.

Mackie, J. P., 1964 A Flistory of Scotland. Baltimore: Penguin.

Mack Smith, Dennis, 1968a 4 /Jistory of Sicily. Medieval Sicily, 800-1713. London:
Chatto & Windus.

References 247

— 1968b A History of Sicily. Modern Sicily after 1713. London: Chatto
& Windus.

McNeill, William H., 1964 Europe’s Steppe Frontier, 500-1800. Chicago, Illinois:
University of Chicago Press.

— 1976 Plagues and Peoples. Garden City, New York: Anchor/Doubleday.

—— 1982 The Pursuit of Power. Technology, Armed Force and Society since A.D. tooo.
Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

Maland, David, 1980 Europe at War, 1600-1650. Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman
and Littlefield.

Mallett, M. E., 1974 Mercenaries and their Masters. Warfare in Renaissance Italy.
Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield.

——and J. R. Hale, 1984 The Military Organization of a Renaissance State. Venice,
c. 1400 to 1617, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mandel, Robert, 1980 “Roots of the Modern Interstate Border Dispute,” Journal
of Conflict Resolution 24: 427-54.

Maniruzzaman, Talukder, 1987 Military Withdrawal from Politics. A Comparative
Study. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger.

Mann, Michael, 1986 The Sources of Social Power. I. A History of Power from the
Beginning to A.D. 1760. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

—— 1988 States, War and Capitalism. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Maravall, José Antonio, 1972 Estado Moderno y Mentalidad Social (Siglas XV a XVII).
Madrid: Revista de Occidente. 2 vols.

Margadant, Ted, 1979 French Peasants in Revolt. The Insurrection of 1851. Princeton,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

—1988a “Towns, Taxes, and State-Formation in the French Revolution,”
paper presented to the Irvine Scminar on Social History and Theory, April
1988.

— 1988b “Politics, Class, and Community in the French Revolution: An Urban
Perspective,” paper presented to conference on Revolutions in Comparison,
University of California, Los Angeles, 1988.

Markoff, John, 1986 “Contexts and Forms of Rural Revolt. France in 1789,”
Journal of Conflict Resolution 30: 253-89.

1985 “The Social Geography of Rural Revolt at the Beginning of the French
Revolution,” American Sociological Review 50: 761-81.

— and Silvio R. Duncan Baretta, 1986 “What We Don’t Know About the Coups:
Observations on Recent South American Politics,” Armed Forces and Society 12:
207-35.

Martin, Jean-Clément 1987. La Vendée et la France. Paris: Le Scuil.

Martines, Lauro, 1988 Power and Imagination. City-States in Renaissance Italy.
Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. First published in
1979.

Marx, Karl, 1970-1972 Capital. A Critique of Political Economy. London: Lawrence
and Wishart. 3 vols.

Maschke, Eric and Jurgen Sydow, 1974 eds, Stadt und Umland. Protokoll der X.
Arbeitstagung des Arbeitskreises fiir sudwestdeutsche Stadtgeschichts forschung. Stuttgart:

248 References

Kohlhammer. Veréffentlichungen der Kommission fiir Geschichtliche Lande-
skunde in Baden-Wiirttemberg, Reihe B, 82.

Mauersberg, Hans, 1960 Wirtschafis- und Sozialgeschichte sentraleuropaischer Stadte
in neurer Zeit. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Mayer, Arno, 1981 The Persistence of the Old Regime. New York: Pantheon.

Mendels, Franklin, 1978 “Aux origines de la proto-industrialisation,” Bulletin du
Centre d'Histoire Economique et Sociale de la Région Lyonnaise 2: 1-25.

— 1980 “Seasons and Regions in Agriculture and Industry during the Process of
Industrialization,” in Sidney Pollard, ed., Region und Industrialisierung: Studien sur
Rollen der Region in der Wirtschaftsgeschichte der letzten swei Jahrhunderte.
Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Merrington, John, 1975 “Town and Country in the Transition to Capitalism,” New
Left Review 93: 71-92.

Meyer, David R., 1986a “System of Cities Dynamics in Newly Industrializing
Nations,” Studies in Comparative International Development 21: 3-22.

——1986b “The World System of Cities: Relations Between International
Financial Metropolises and South American Cities,” Social Forces 64: 553-81.

Meyer, Jean, 1983 Le poids de |'Etat. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

—et al., 1983 Etudes sur les villes en Europe Occidentale. Paris: Société d’Edition
d’Enseignement Superieur. 2 vols.

Meyer, John W., 1980 “The World Polity and the Authority of the Nation-State,”
in Albert Bergescn, ed., Studies of the Modern World-System. New York: Academic
Press.

Michaud, Claude, 1981 “Finances et guerres de religion en France,” Revue
d'Histoire Moderne et Contemporaine 28: 572-96.

Midlarsky, Manus, 1986 ed., Inequality and Contemporary Revolutions. Denver,
Colorado: Graduate School of International Studies, University of Denver.
Monograph Scries in World Affairs, vol. 22, book 2.

Migdal, Joel, 1974 Peasants, Politics, and Revolution. Pressures toward Political and
Social Change in the Third World. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press.

Miller, Edward, 1975 “War, Taxation, and the English Economy in the Late
Thirteenth and Early Fourteenth Centuries,” in J. M. Winter, ed., War and
Economic Development. Essays in Memory of David Joslin. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Milward, Alan S. and S. B. Saul, 1973 The Economic Development of Continental
Europe, 1780-1870. London: Allen & Unwin.

Mitchell, B. R., 1975 European Historical Statistics 1750-1970. New York:
Columbia University Press.

Moberg, Carl-Axel, 1962 “Northern Europe,” in Robert J. Braidwood and
Gordon R. Willey, eds, Courses tomard Urban Life. Archeological Considerations of
Some Cultural Alternates. Chicago, Ulinois: Aldine.

Modelski, George, 1978 “The Long Cycle of Global Politics and the Nation-
State,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 20: 214-35.
References 249

——and William R. Thompson, 1988 Seapower in Global Politics, 1494-1993.
Seattle, Washington: University of Washington Press.

Mollat, Michel, and Philippe Wolff, 1973 The Popular Revolutions of the Late Middle
Ages. London: Allen & Unwin.

Moore, Jr Barrington, 1966 Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Boston,
Massachusetts: Beacon.

Moote, A. Lloyd, 1971 The Revolt of the Judges: The Parlement of Paris and the
Fronde. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Moraw, Peter, 1989 “Cities and Citizenry as Factors of State Formation in the
Roman-German Empire of the Late Middle Ages,” forthcoming in Theory and
Society.

Mosca, Gaetano, 1939 The Ruling Class (Elementi di Scienza Politica). New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Moul, William Brian, 1988 “Balances of Power and the Escalation to War of
Serious Disputes among the European Great Powers, 1815-1939: Some
Evidence,” American Journal of Political Science 32: 241-75.

Mueller, John, 1988 “The Essential Irrelevance of Nuclear Weapons,” /nternational
Security 13: 55-79.

Munford, Lewis, 1961 The City in History. Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its
Prospects. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

——1970 The Myth of the Machine. The Pentagon of Power. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.

Nef, John U., 1952 War and Human Progress. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Nelkin, Dorothy, 1967 “The Economic and Social Setting of Military Takeovers in
Africa,” Journal of Asian and African Studies 2: 230-44.

Nicholas, David M., 1968 “Town and Countryside: Social and Economic Tensions
in Fourteenth-Century Flanders,” Comparative Studies in Society and History
10: 458-85.

Nichols, Glenn O., 1987 “Intermediarics and the Development of English
Government Borrowing: The Case of Sir John James and Major Robert
Huntington, 1675-79,” Business History 29: 28-46.

Nicolas, Jean, 1985 ed., Mouvements populaires et conscience sociale, XVIe-XIXe siécles.
Paris: Maloine.

Nilsson, Sven A., 1988 “Imperial Sweden: Nation-Building, War and Social
Change,” in Sven A. Nilsson et al., The Age of New Sweden. Stockholm:
Livrustkammaren.

North, Douglass C., 1981 Structure and Change in Economic History. New York:
W. W. Norton.

—— and Robert Paul Thomas, 1973 The Rise of the Western World. A New Economic
History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nunn, Frederick M., 1971 “The Latin American Military Establishment: Some
Thoughts on the Origins of its Socio-Political Role and an_ Illustrative
Bibliographical Essay,” The Americas 28: 135-51.
250 ~©References

O’Donnell, Guillermo, 1972 Modernizactén y autoritarismo. Buenos Aires: Paidos.

—— 1980 “Comparative Historical Formations in the State Apparatus and Socio-
economic Change in the Third World,” International Social Science Journal
32: 717-29.

Olson, Mancur, 1982 The Rise and Decline of Nations. Economic Growth, Stagflation,
and Social Rigidities. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

Oquist, Paul, 1980 Violence, Conflict, and Politics in Colombia. New York: Academic
Press.

Organski, A. F. K., 1965 The Stages of Political Development. New York: Knopf.

——and Jacek Kugler, 1980 The War Ledger. Chicago, Illinois: University of
Chicago Press.

Osterberg, Eva and Dag Lindstrom, 1988 Crime and Social Control in Medieval and
Early Modern Swedish Towns. Stockhom: Almqvist & Wiksell. Studia Historica
Upsaliensia, 152.

Owusu, Maxwell, 1989 “Rebellion, Revolution, and Tradition: Reinterpreting
Coups in Ghana,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 31: 372-97.

Ozouf-Marignier, Marie-Vic, 1986 “De l’universalisme constituant aux intéréts
locaux: le débat sur la formation des départements en France (1789—-1790),”
Annales; Economies, Sociétés, Civilisations 41: 1193-1214.

Paddison, Ronan, 1983 The Fragmented State. The Political Geography of Power.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Palmer, Stanley H., 1988 Police and Protest in England and Ireland 1780-1850.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pamlenyi, Ervin, 1975 ed., A History of Hungary. London: Collet’s.

Parker, Geoffrey, 1972 The Army of Flanders and the Spanish Road, 1567-1659.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

— 1973 “Mutiny and Discontent in the Spanish Army of Flanders 1572-1607,”
Past and Present 58: 3-37.

—1975 “War and Economic Change: The Economic Costs of the Dutch
Revolt,” in J. M. Winter, ed., War and Economic Development. Essays in Memory of
David Joslin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1976 “The ‘Military Revolution,’ 1560-1660 — a Myth?” Journal of Modern
History 48: 195-214.

— 1988 The Milttary Revolution. Military Innovation and the Rise of the West,
1500-1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Parker, William and Eric L. Jones, 1975 eds, European Peasants and their Markets.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Parkinson, C. Northcote, 1957 Parkinson’s Law and Other Studies in Administration.
Boston, Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin.

Parry, J. H., 1961 The Establishment of the European Hegemony, 1415-1715. Trade
and Exploration in the age of the Renaissance. New York: Harper and Row. Third
edition.

— 1966 The Spanish Seaborne Empire. New York: Knopf.

Patten, John, 1973 Rural—Urban Migration in Pre-Industrial England. Oxford: School
of Geography. Occasional Papers, No. 6.

References 251

Peacock, Alan T. and Jack Wiseman, 1961 The Growth of Public Expenditure in the
United Kingdom. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Pepper, Simon and Nicholas Adams, 1986 Firearms and Fortifications. Military
Architecture and Siege Warfare in Sixteenth-Century Siena. Chicago, Illinois:
University of Chicago Press.

Perlmutter, Amos, 1981 Political Roles and Military Rulers. London: Frank
Cass.

Petitfrére, Claude, 1988 “The Origins of the Civil War in the Vendée,” French
History 2: 187-207.

Pitcher, Donald Edgar, 1972 An Historical Geography of the Ottoman Empire from
Earliest Times to the End of the Sixteenth Century. Leiden: Brill.

Platzhoff, Walter, 1928 Geschichte des europaischen Staatensystems 1559-1660.
Munich and Berlin: Oldenbourg.

Plumb, J. H., 1967 The Origins of Political Stability. England 1675-1725. Boston,
Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin.

Poggi, Gianfranco, 1978 The Development of the Modern State. Stanford, California:
Stanford University Press.

Polisensky, Josef V., 1978 War and Society in Europe, 1618-1648. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Pounds, Norman J. G., 1973 An Historical Geography of Europe 450 B.C.-A.D. 1330.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

— 1979 An Historical Geography of Europe, 500-1840. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

and Sue Simons Ball, 1964 “Corc-Areas and the Development of the
European States System,” Annals of the Association of American Geographers
54: 24-40.

Powers, James F., 1988 A Soctety Organized for War. The Iberian Municipal Militias in
the Central Middle Ages, 1000-1284. Berkeley, California: University of California
Press.

Pryor, John H., 1988 Geography, Technology, and War. Studies in the Maritime History
of the Mediterranean 649-1571. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pullan, Brian, 1971 Rich and Poor in Renaissance Venice. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Pye, Lucian, 1960 “The Politics of Southeast Asia,” in Gabriel A. Almond and
James S. Coleman, eds, The Politics of the Developing Areas. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.

Quester, George H., 1975 “The World Political System,” vol. VIII, 199-246 in
Fred I. Greenstein and Nelson W. Polsby, eds, Handbook of Political Science.
Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley.

Raeff, Marc, 1983 The Well-Ordered Police State. Social and Institutional Change
through Law in the Germanies and Russia, 1600-1800. New Haven, Connecticut,
Yale University Press.

Rambaud, Placide and Monique Vincienne, 1964 Les transformations d'une société
rurale. La Maurienne (1561-1962). Paris: Armand Colin. Ecole Pratique des
Hautes Etudes (Vle Section), Centre d’Etudes Economiques, Etudes et
Mémoires, 59.

252 References

Ramsay, G. D., 1975 The City of London in International Politics at the Accession of
Elisabeth Tudor. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

— 1986 The Queen's Merchants and the Revolt of the Netherlands. Manchester:
Manchester University Press.

Rapoport, David C., 1982 “The Praetorian Army: Insecurity, Venality, and
Impotence,” in Roman Kolkowicz and Andrzej Korbonski, eds, Soldiers, Peasants,
and Bureaucrats: Crvil—Military Relations in Communist and Modernizing Societies.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Rasler, Karen A. and William R. Thompson, 1983 “Global Wars, Public Debts,
and the Long Cycle,” World Politics 35: 489-516.

——198s5a “War Making and State Making: Governmental Expenditures, Tax
Revenues, and Global Wars,” American Political Science Review 79: 491-507.
1985b “War and the Economic Growth of Major Powers,” American Journal

of Political Science 29: 513-38.

1988 “Defense Burdens, Capital Formation, and Economic Growth. The
Systemic Leader Case,” Journal of Conflict Resolution 32: 61-86.

— 1989 War and Statemaking: The Shaping of the Global Powers. Boston,
Massachusetts: Unwin Hyman.

Ratajczyk, Leonard, 1987 “Evolution of the Polish Armed Forces, 1764-1921,” in
Stephen Fischer-Galati and Béla K. Kirdly, eds, Essays on War and Society in East
Central Europe, 1740-1920. Boulder, Colorado: Social Science Monographs.

Redlich, Fritz, 1964-1965 The German Military Enterpriser and His Work Force.
Wiesbaden: Steiner. 2 vols. Vierteljahrschrift fiir Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte,
Beiheften 47, 48.

Reinhard, Marcel, André Armengaud and Jacques Dupaquier, 1968 Histoire
générale de la population mondiale. Paris: Montchrestien.

Renouard, Yves, 1958 “1212-1216. Comment les traits durables de |’Europe
occidentale moderne se sont définis au début du XIlle siécle,” Annales de
l'Université de Paris 1958: 5-21.

Reuter, Timothy, 1978 “Introduction” to Timothy Reuter, ed., The Medieval
Nobility. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Reynolds, Susan, 1984 Kingdoms and Communities in Western Europe, goo-r00.
Oxford: Clarendon Press,

Rian, Oystein, 1985 “State and Society in Seventeenth-century Norway,”
Scandinavian Journal of History 10: 337-63.

Rice, Condoleezza, 1988 “The Impact of World War II on Soviet State and
Society,” Working Paper 69, Center for Studies of Social Change, New School
for Social Research. ‘

Ringrose, David R., 1983 Madrid and the Spanish Economy, 1560-1850. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.

Roberts, Michael, 1979 The Swedish Imperial Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Robinson, E. A. G., 1969 ed., Backward Areas in Advanced Countries. London:
Macmillan.

References 253

Roider, Karl, 1987 “Origins of Wars in the Balkans, 1660-1792,” in Jeremy Black,
ed., The Origins of War in Early Modern Europe. Edinburgh: John Donald.

Rokkan, Stein, 1975 “Dimensions of State Formation and Nation-Building: A
Possible Paradigm for Research on Variations within Europe,” in Charles Tilly,
ed., The Formation of National States in Western Europe. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.

——and Derek W. Urwin, 1982 eds, The Politics of Territorial Identity. Studies in
European Regionalism. Beverly Hills, California: Sage.

Roksandic, Drago, 1988 “Agrarian Ideologies and Theories of Modernization in
Yugoslavia, 1918-1941,” paper presented to the Conference on Models of
Development and Theories of Modernization in Eastern Europe Between the
World Wars, Rackeve, Hungary.

Romano, Salvatore Franceso, 1963 Storia della mafia. Milan: Sugar.

Roscoe, Paul B. and Robert B. Graber, 1988 eds, “Circumscription and the
Evolution of Society,” special issue of American Behavioral Scientist 31: 403-511.

Rosenau, James N., 1970 The Adaptation of National Societies: A Theory of Political
System Behavior and Transformation. New York: McCaleb-Seiler.

Rosenberg, Hans, 1958 Bureaucracy, Aristocracy, and Autocracy. The Prussian
Experience 1660-1815. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Rosenberg, Harriet G., 1988 A Negotiated World: Three Centuries of Change in a
French Alpine Community. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Rosenberg, William G. and Marilyn B. Young, 1982 Transforming Russia and China.
Revolutionary Struggles in the Twentieth Century. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Rothenberg, Gunther E., 1988 “The Origins, Causes, and Extension of the Wars of
the French Revolution and Napoleon,” Journal of Interdisciplinary Listory
18: 771-94.

Roubaud, Frangois, 1983 “Partition économique de la France dans la premiére
moitié du XIXe siécle (1830-1840),” Institut d'Histoire Economique ct Sociale
de l'Université de Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne. Recherches et Travaux 12: 33-
58.

Rouquié, Alain, 1987 The Military and the State in Latin America, Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.

Rule, James B., 1988 Theories of Crvil Violence. Berkeley, California: University of
California Press.

Ruloff, Dieter, 1985 Wie Kriege beginnen. Munich: C. H. Beck.

Russell, Conrad S. R., 1982 “Monarchies, Wars, and Estates in England, France,
and Spain, c. 1580-c. 1640,” Legislative Studies Quarterly 7: 205-20.

Russell, D. E. H., 1974 Rebellion, Revolution, and Armed Force. New York: Academic
Press.

Russell, Jocelyne G., 1986 Peacemaking in the Renaissance. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania:
University of Pennsylvania Press.

Russell, Josiah Cox, 1972 Medieval Regions and their Cities. Newton Abbot: David &
Charles.
254 References

Russett, Bruce, 1970 What Price Vigilance? The Burdens of National Defense. New
Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

Rystad, Goran, 1983 ed., Europe and Scandinavia: Aspects of the Process of Integration
in the 17th Century. Lund: Esselte Studium.

Sales, Nuria, 1974 Sobre esclavos, reclutas y mercaderes de quintos. Madrid: Ariel.

— 1986 “Servei militar i societat: la desigaultat enfront del servei obligatori,
segles XVII-XX,” L ‘Aven¢ 98: 721-8.

Scammell, G. V., 1981 The World Encompassed. The First European Maritime Empires
c. 800-1650. London: Methuen.

Schama, Simon, 1975 “The Exigencies of War and the Politics of Taxation in the
Netherlands 1795-1810,” in J. M. Winter, ed., War and Economic Development.
Essays in Memory of David Joslin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schevill, Ferdinand, 1963 Medieval and Renaissance Florence. New York: Harper
Torchbooks, 2 vols. First published in 1936.

Schissler, Hanna, 1978 Preussische Agrargesellschaft im Wandel. Wirtschaftliche,
gesellschaftliche und politische Transformationsprozesse von 1763 bis 1847. Gottingen:
Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.

Schmal, H., 1981 ed., Patterns of European Urbanization since 1500. London: Croom
Helm.

Schmoller, Gustav, 1896 “Die Epochen der Getreidehandelsverfassung und -
politik,” Schmollers Jahrbuch 20: 695-744.

Schram, Stuart R., 1985 ed., The Scope of State Power in China. Published for
European Science Foundation by School of Oriental and African Studies,
University of London and the Chinese University Press of Hong Kong.

— 1987 ed., Foundations and Limits of State Power in China. Published for
European Science Foundation by School of Oriental and African Studies,
University of London and the Chinese University Press of Hong Kong.

Schultz, Patrick, 1982 La décentralisation administrative dans le département du Nord
(1790-1793). Lille: Presses Universitaires de Lille.

Schulze, Hagen, 1987 ed., Nation-Building in Central Europe. Leamington Spa:
Berg.

Schumpeter, Joseph, 1955 /mperialism, Social Classes. New York: Meridian.

Schwartz, Robert M., 1988 Policing the Poor in Eighteenth-Century France. Chapel
Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press.

Scott, James, 1985 Weapons of the Weak. Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New
Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

Scott, William, 1973 Terror and Repression in Revolutionary Arseaitee New York:
Barnes and Noble.

Searle, Eleanor, 1988 Predatory Kinship and the Creation of Norman Power, 840-
1066. Berkeley, California: University of California Press.

Sedoc-Dahlberg, Betty, 1986 “Interest Groups and the Military Regime in
Suriname,” in Alma H. Young and Dion E. Phillips, eds, Militarization in the
Non-Hispanic Caribbean. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner.

Segal, Daniel A., 1988 “Nationalism, Comparatively Speaking,” Journal of Historical
Sociology 1: 301-21.
References 255

Shennan, J. H., 1974 The Origins of the Modern European State, 1450-1725.
London: Hutchinson University Library.

Shils, Edward, 1962 Political Development in the New States. The Hague: Mouton.

Shue, Vivienne, 1988 The Reach of the State. Sketches of the Chinese Body Politic.
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.

Sid-Ahmed, Mohamed, 1984 “Trends in the Middle East,” Alternatives 10: 139-
60.

Sivard, Ruth Leger, 1974-1988 World Military and Social Expenditures. Washington,
DC: World Priorities. Annual publication.

Skinner, G. W., 1964 “Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China,” Journal of
Asian Studies 24: 3-43.

—1977 ed., The City in Late Imperial China. Stanford, California: Stanford
University Press.

— 1985 “The Structure of Chinese History,” Journal of Asian Studies 44: 271-
92.

Skocpol, Theda, 1979 States and Social Revolutions: A Comparative Analysis of France,
Russia, and China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Small, Melvin and J. David Singer, 1982 Resort to Arms. International and Civil Wars,
1816-1980. Beverly Hills, California: Sage.

Smith, Adam, 1910 The Wealth of Nations. London: Dent. 2 vols. First published in
1778.

Smith, C. T., 1967 An Historical Geography of Western Europe before 1800. London:
Longmans.

Smith, Carol A., 1976 “Analyzing Regional Systems,” in Carol A. Smith, ed.,
Regional Analysis. Vol 2: Social Systems. New York: Academic Press.

Sorokin, Pitirim A., 1962 Social and Cultural Dynamics. III. Fluctuation of Social
Relationships, War, and Revolution. New York: Bedminster. First published in
1937.

Spuler, Bertold, 1977 Rulers and Governments of the World. London: Bowker. 3
vols.

Steensgaard, Niels, 1974 The Asian Trade Revolution of the Seventeenth Century.
Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press.

—1981 “Asian Trade and World Market: Orders of Magnitude in ‘The Long
Seventeenth Century’,” in Actes du Colloque Franco-Polonais d'Histoire. Nice:
Laboratoire d’Histoire Quantitative, Université de Nice.

Stein, Arthur A., 1978 The Nation at War. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins
University Press.

— 1988 “War Settlement, State Structures, and National Security Policy,”
Working Paper 60, Center for Studies of Social Change, New School for Social
Research.

——and Bruce M. Russett, 1980 “Evaluating War: Outcomes and Consequences,”
in Ted Robert Gurr, ed., Handbook of Political Conflict: Theory and Research. New
York: Free Press.

Stepan, Alfred, 1988 Rethinking Military Politics. Brazil and the Southern Cone.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

256 = References

Stinchcombe, Arthur L., 1963 “Institutions of Privacy in the Determination of
Police Administrative Practice,” American Journal of Sociology 69: 150-60.

— 1983 Economic Sociology. New York: Academic Press.

Stoessinger, John G., 1974 Why Nations Go to War. New York: St Martin’s.

Stohl, Michael, 1976 War and Domestic Political Violence. The American Capacity for
Repression and Reaction. Beverly Hills, California: Sage.

Stoianovich, Traian, 1970 “Model and Mirror of the Premodern Balkan City,”
Studia Balcanica. III. La Ville Balkanique XVe-XIXe siécle, 83-110.

— 1981 “Mode de production maghrébin de commandement ponctuel,” in Actes
du Colloque Franco-Polonats d'Histoire. Nice: Laboratoire d’Histoire Quantitative,
Université de Nice.

— 1989 “The Segmentary State and La Grande Nation,” in Eugene D. Genovese
and Leonard Hochberg, eds, Geographic Perspectives in History. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.

Stone, Bailey, 1981 The Parlement of Paris, 1774-1789. Chapel Hill, North
Carolina: University of North Carolina Press.

Stone, Lawrence, 1947 “State Control in Sixteenth-Century England,” Economic
History Review 17: 103-20.

— 1965 The Crisis of the Aristocracy, 1558-1641. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

1983 “Interpersonal Violence in English Society, 1300-1980,” Past and
Present 101: 22-33.

Strayer, Joseph, 1970 On the Medieval Origins of the Modern State. Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Sundin, Jan and Eric Soderlund, 1979 eds, Time, Space and Man: Essays in
Microdemography. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wilksell International.

Sutton, F. X., 1959 “Representation and the Nature of Political Systems,”
Comparative Studies in Society and History 2: 1-10.

Tanter, Richard, 1984 “Trends in Asia,” Alternatives 10: 161-91.

Taylor, A. J. P., 1985 How Wars End. London: Hamish Hamilton.

Taylor, Peter J., 1981 “Political Geography and the World-Economy” in Alan
D. Burnett and Peter J. Taylor, eds, The Politics of Territorial Identity. New York:
Wiley.

Taylor, Stan, 1984 Social Science and Revolutions. New York: St Martin’s.

Tenenti, Alberto, 1967 Piracy and the Decline of Venice, 1580-1615. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.

Thee, Marek, 1984 “Militarization in the United States and the Soviet Union: The
Deepening Trends,” Alternatives 10: 93-114.

Therborn, Goran, 1978 What Does the Ruling Class Do When It Rules? London:
NLB.

Thibon, Christian, 1987 “L’ordre public villageois: le cas du Pays de Sault (1848-
1914),” in Société de la Révolution de 1848 et des Révolutions du XIXe Steécle,
Maintien de Vordre et polices en France et en Europe au XIXe siécle. Paris: Créaphis.

Thomas, George M. and John W. Meyer, 1980 “Regime Changes and State Power
in an Intensifying World-State-System,” in Albert Bergesen, ed., Studies of the
Modern World System. New York: Academic Press.

References 257

—,——,,Francisco O. Ramirez and Jeanne Gobalct, 1979 “Maintaining
National Boundaries in the World System: The Rise of Centralist Regimes,” in
John W. Meyer and Michael T. Hannan, eds, National Development and the World
System. Educational, Economic, and Political Change, 1950-1970. Chicago, Illinois:
University of Chicago Press.

Thompson, I. A. A., 1976 War and Government in Habsburg Spain 1560-1620.
London: Athlone Press.

— 1982 “Crown and Cortes in Castile, 1590-1665,” Parlements, Estates and
Representation 2: 29-45.

Thompson, William R., 1988 On Global War. Historical-Structural Approaches to
World Politics. Columbia, South Carolina: University of South Carolina Press.
and Gary Zuk, 1986 “World Power and the Strategic Trap of Territorial

Commitments,” /nternational Studies Quarterly 30: 249-67.

Tilly, Charles, 1983 “Flows of Capital and Forms of Industry in Europe, 1500-
1900,” Theory and Society 12: 123-43.

— 1984 “Demographic Origins of the European Proletariat” in David Levine,
ed., Proletarianization and Family Life. Orlando, Florida: Academic Press.

—1985a “War and the Power of Warmakers in Western Europe and Elsewhere”
in Peter Wallensteen, Johan Galtung and Carlos Portales, eds, Global Militarization.
Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.

—1985b “War Making and State Making as Organized Crime” In Peter Evans,
Dietrich Rueschemeyer and Theda Skocpol, eds, Bringing the State Back In.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

—— 1986 The Contentious French. Cambridge: Belknap.

— Louise A. Tilly and Richard Tilly, 1975 The Rebellious Century, 1830-1930.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Tilly, Louise A., 1971 “The Food Riot as a Form of Political Conflict in France,”
Journal of Interdisciplinary History 2: 23-57.

Timberlake, Michael, 1985 ed., Urbanization in the World-Economy. Orlando,
Florida: Academic Press.

Torres i Sans, Xavier, 1988 “Guerra privada y bandolerismo en la Catalufia del
Barroco,” /fistoria Social 1: 5-18.

Torsvik, Per, 1981 ed., Mobilization, Center-Periphery Structures and Nation-
Building. A Volume in Commemoration of Stein Rokkan. Bergen: Universitetsforlaget.

Tracy, James D., 1985 A Financial Revolution in the Habsburg Netherlands. Renten and
Renteniers in the County of Holland, 1515-1565. Berkelcy, California: University
of California Press.

Treasure, Geoffrey, 1985 The Making of Modern Europe 1648-1780. London:
Methuen.

Trexler, Richard C., 1980 Public Life in Renaissance Florence. New York: Academic
Press.

Trotsky, Leon, 1965 History of the Russian Revolution. London: Gollancz. 2 vols.

Tucci, Ugo, 1981 “Entre Orient et Occident: L’Age vénitien des épices,” in Actes
du Colloque Franco-Polonais d'Histoire. Nice: Laboratoire d’Histoire Quantitative,
Université de Nice.

258 References

Turner, Bryan S., 1988 “Religion and State Formation: A Commentary on Recent
Debates,” Journal of Historical Sociology 1: 322-33.

Ultee, Maarten, 1986 ed., Adupting to Conditions. War and Society in the Eighteenth
Century. Alabama: University of Alabama Press.

Urlanis, B. Ts., 1960 Voin't i narodo-naselenie Evrop'i. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo
Sotsial’no-ekonomicheskoy literatur’i.

Van Creveld, Martin, 1977 Supplying War. Logistics from Wallenstein to Patton.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

— 1989 Technology and War From 2000 B.C. to the Present. New York: Free Press.

Vaner, Semih, 1987 “The Army,” in Irvin C. Schick and Ertugrul Ahmet Tonak,
eds, Turkey in Transition: New Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press.

Verhulst, Adriaan, 1989 “The Origins of Towns in the Low Countries and the
Pirenne Thesis,” Past and Present 122: 3-35.

Vilar, Pierre, 1962 La Catalogne dans l'Espagne moderne. Recherches sur les fondements
économiques des structures nationales. Paris: SEVPEN. 3 vols.

Vovelle, Michel, 1987 ed., Bourgeaistes de province et Révolution. Grenoble: Presses
Universitaires de Grenoble, 1987.

Vries, Jan de, 1973 “On the Modernity of the Dutch Republic,” Journal of Economic
History 33: 191-202.

— 1974 The Dutch Rural Economy in the Golden Age, 1500-1700. New Haven,
Connecticut: Yale University Press.

— 1973 “On the Modernity of the Dutch Republic,” Journal of Economic History
33: 191-202.

—1976 The Economy of Europe in an Age of Crisis, 1600-1750. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

—1978 “Barges and Capitalism. Passenger transportation in the Dutch economy,
1632-1839,” A. A. G. Bijdragen 21: 33-398.

— 1984 European Urbanization, 1500-1800. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Wakeman, Jr, Frederic, 1985 The Great Enterprise. The Manchu Reconstruction of
Imperial Order in Seventeenth-Century China. Berkeley, California: University of
California Press. 2 vols.

Waldmann, Peter, 1989 Ethnischer Radikalismus. Ursachen und Folgen gewaltsamer
Minderheitenkonflikte. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.

Waley, Daniel, 1969 The Italian City-Republics. New York: McGraw-Hill. World
University Library.

Walker, Mack, 1971 German Home Towns. Community, State, and General Estate
1648-1871. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.

Wallensteen, Peter, Johan Galtung and Carlos Portales, 1985 eds, Global
Militarization. Boulder, Colorado: Westview.

Wallerstein, Immanuel, 1974-1988 The Modern World System. 3 vols. New York,
and Orlando, Florida: Academic Press.

— 1979 The Capitalist World-Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Waltz, Kenneth N., 1979 Theory of International Politics. New York: Random House.
References 259

— 1988 “The Origins of War in Neorcalist Theory,” Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 18: 615-28.

Watkins, Susan Cotts, 1989 From Provinces into Nations. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.

Watson, J. Steven, 1960 The Reign of George III, 1760-1815. Oxford: Clarendon
Press. Oxford History of England, vol. 12.

Webber, Carolyn and Aaron Wildavsky, 1986 A History of Taxation and Expenditure
in the Western World. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Weber, Max, 1972 Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Tiibingen: Mohr. Fifth edition.

Wedgewood, C. V., 1964 The Thirty Years War. London: Jonathan Cape. First
published in 1938.

Wendt, Alexander E., 1987 “The Agent-Structure Problem in International
Relations Theory,” /nternational Organization 41: 335-70.

Werner, Ernst, 1985 Die Geburt einer Grossmacht — die Osmanen (1300-1481).
Vienna: Bohlhaus.

Wheatcroft, Andrew, 1983 The World Atlas of Revolutions. London: Hamish
Hamilton.

Whitney, Joseph B. R., 1970 China: Area, Administration, and Nation Building.
Chicago: Department of Geography, University of Chicago. Research Paper 123.

Wickham, Chris, 1988 “The Uniqueness of the East,” in Jean Baechler, John
A. Hall and Michael Mann, eds, Europe and the Rise of Capitalism. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.

Wijn, J W., 1970 “Military Forces and Warfare 1610-1648,” in J. P. Cooper, ed.,
The New Cambridge Modern History. Vol. 4: The Decline of Spain and the Thirty Years
War, 1609-48/s59. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wilkenfeld, Jonathan, 1973 ed., Conflict Behavior and Linkage Politics. New York:
David McKay.

Wilson, Charles, 1968 The Dutch Republic and The Civilisation of the Seventeenth
Century. New York: McGraw-Hill. World University Library.

Winberg, Christer, 1978 “Population Growth and Proletarianization. The Trans-
formation of Social Structures in Rural Sweden During the Agrarian Revolution,”
in Sune Akerman, ed., Chance and Change. Social and Economic Studies in Historical
Demography in the Baltic Area. Odense: Odense University Press.

Winter, J. M., 1986 The Great War and the British People. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Witt, Peter-Christian, 1987 ed., Wealth and Taxation in Central Europe. Leamington
Spa: Berg.

Wong, R. Bin., 1983 “Les émeutes de subsistances en Chine et en Europe
Occidentale,” Annales; Economies, Sociétés, Civilisations 38: 234-58.

——and Peter C. Perdue, 1983 “Famine’s Foes in Ch’ing China,” Harvard Journal
of Asiatic Studies 43: 291-332.

Wright, Quincy, 1965 A Study of War. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago
Press. Revised edn. _

Wrigley, E. A., 1969 Population and History. New York: McGraw-Hill.

——and R. S. Schofield, 1981 The Population History of England, 1541-1871. A
Reconstruction. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
260 ~=—- References

Wyczanski, Andrzej, 1981 “La frontiére de lPunité curopéenne au XVIéme siécle:
Liens — cadres — contenu,” in Actes du Colloque Franco-Polonais d'Histoire. Nice:
Laboratoire d’Histoire Quantitative, Université de Nice.

Wyrobisz, Andrezej, 1989 “Power and Towns in the Polish Gentry Commonwealth:
The Polish-Lithuanian State in the 16th and 17th Centuries,” forthcoming in
Theory and Society.

Young, Alma H. and Dion E. Phillips, 1986 eds, Militarization in the Non-Hispanic
Caribbean. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner.

Zagorin, Perez, 1982 Rebels and Rulers, 1500-1660. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 2 vols.

Zimmerman, Ekkart, 1983 Political Violence, Crises and Revolutions, Cambridge:
Schenkman.

Zinnes, Dina, 1980 “Why War? Evidence on the Outbreak of International
Conflict,” in Ted Robert Gurr, ed., Handbook of Political Conflict. New York: Free
Press.

Zolberg, Aristide, 1968 “The Structure of Political Conflict in the New States of
Tropical Africa,” American Political Science Review 62: 70-87.

— 1978 “Belgium” in Raymond Grew, ed., Crises of Political Development in
Europe and the United States. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

—— 1980 “Strategic Interactions and the Formation of Modern States: France
and England,” International Social Science Journal 32: 687-716.

— 1981 “International Migrations in Political Perspective,” in Mary M. Kritz,
Charles B. Keely, and Silvano M. Tomasi, eds, Global Trends in Migration. Theory
and Research on International Population Movements. Staten Island, New York:
Center for Migration Studies.

—— 1987 “Beyond the Nation-State: Comparative Politics in Global Perspective,”
in Jan Berting and Wim Blockmans, eds, Beyond Progress and Development. Macro-
Political and Macro-Societal Change. Aldershot: Avebury.
Index

Absolutism, 10
adjudication
as state activity, 54, 97, 98
Adriatic Sea, 143-4, 146, 151-2
Africa
military coups in, 1944-87, 215
military power in, 217-18
agriculture, 18, 19, 48
state intervention in, 119
see also food supplies
Alba, Victor, 205
Aldeni, Guildo, 128
American Revolution, 168
Anderson, M. S., 81-2
Anderson, Perry, 10
Andorra, 47
Aragon, 62, 77, 79, 132
Ardant, Gabriel, 54, 129-30
Argentina, 219-20
aristocracy, 10
armed forces
transfer from civilians to state, 68-70
armies, 53, 54-5
distinguished from navy, 56
distinguished from police, 56, 75-6
geographical distribution of, 125-6
mercenary, 80-4, 106
nationalization of, 103, 114-15
percentage of populations in, 210
size of, 78-9; post-1960, 210
standing, 46, 83, 106°
supply to, 81
see also coercion; military control;

military expenditure; military
personnel; military power; war

arms trade, 210

Artois, 111-12

Asia

coup attempts per 100 states,

1944-87, 216

Augsburg, War of the Leage of, 168

Austria, 146, 150, 151, 169

Babylon, 1
Baden, ‘Treaty of, 168
Badie, Bertrand, 7
Balkans, Ottoman rule in, 104-5, 106
Balsac, Robert de, 84
Bank of England, 157
Barcelona, 62, 101, 102, 150
bargaining

between rulers and population, 53, 63,

64, 94, 99-103, 188

see also brokerage
battle deaths, statistics, 67, 73, 74, 201
Becker, Marvin, 68
Belgium, 169, 181-2
Berlin, 18
Birnbaum, Pierre, 7
Black, Cyril, 193
blocs, 3
Blum, Jerome, 140
Bohemia, 61
Bolivia, 201
Bosnia, 106
Brandenburg, 22-3, 30, 57, 183
262 Index

Brandenburg-Prussia, 22, 25, 57, 117,
152
Brazil, 91, 93, 222, 223
Breda, Treaty of, 168
Britain, 7, 23, 76, 168, 183, 188
administrative apparatus, 157
armed forces, 157-8
capital-coercion relations in, 151-60,
159
as commercial power, 155-6
direct rule in, 158
East India Company, 149
in eighteenth century, 157
empire, 92-3
explorers, 156
income tax, 103
national debt, 75
in nineteenth century, 158
Norman invasion of, 154
Parliament, 155, 157
Revolution of 1688, 153, 157
Scandinavian invasions of, 153
trade, 149, 155
see also England; Scotland; Wales
brokerage, 29, 53, 122, 190
rebellions in era of, 100, 186-7
wars in era of, 185
Buda, peace of, 162
budgets, national, 74
buffer zones, 70-1, 184
Bulgaria, 138
bureaucracies, development of, 62, 75,
89, 94, 117
Burgundy, duchy of, 174
Burundi, 220
Byzantine Empire, 144, 146, 147

Cabot, John, 156
Calabria, 25
Callaghy, Thomas, 212
Canute, King, 153
capital
and coercion, 16-20, 56-8; see also
capitalized-coercion areas
concentration in cities, 49-50
state control of, 53
and urban growth, 17-18, 19
and warmaking, 85-6
capital-intensive areas, 15, 28, 30, 130,
132-3, 143-51, 150-1, 187-8
bargaining in, 100
class organization in, 58

peasantry in, 152
State activity in, 99
capitalism, 10, 17
capitalists, 17
and state revenue, 85-6
capitalized-coercion areas, 30, 132, 133,
136, 137, 151-60, 153, 188
peasantry in, 152
State activity in, 99
Carpathian Basin, 44
Castile, 54, 62, 77, 92, 131, 152, 188,
375
Catalonia, 30, 69, 77, 79, 101, 102,
188
Cateau-Cambrésis treaty, 98, 164
Catherine the Great, 139, 142
Charles I, king of England, 156-7
Charles II, king of England, 157
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, 31, 55,
74, 78, 79
Charles VIII, king of France, 77
Charles XI, king of Sweden, 136
Charles XII, king of Sweden, 136
China, 3, 71-2, 160, 171
Chinese Empire
commercial and administrative
hierarchies in, 127-8
compared with Europe, 129-30
food supply in, 129
church lands, 119
cities
and agriculture, 18, 19
and capital accumulation/concentra-
tion, 17-18, 49-50, 132, 191
as central places, 51-2
demographic impact of, 48-9
growth of, 13, 17-18, 19, 49-51, 132
health in, 18
interaction with states, 2, 51-4, 58-61
in market hierarchies, 60, 131-2
origin of, 2
relationship with hinterland, 131-2
types of, 132
in urban networks, 51-2
and war financing, 86
see also city-empires; city-states; urban
oligarchies
city-cempires, 64, 65
decline of, 190
city-states, 2, 21, 31, 64, 65
decline of, 189-90
civil wars, 186, 201, 202
civilianization of government, 122, 206,
211
Clark, Gordon, 10
class organization
and coercion, 27-8
and state formation, 58
class structure
and state organization, 100, 102
class struggles
and state formation, 26-7
Clausewitz, Carl von, 82-3
coercion, 19-20, 51, 53
and capital, 16-20, 56-8; see also
capitalized-coercion areas
concentration of, 54-8
state control of, 68-70
and state formation, 130-1
see also armies, coercion-intensive
areas; war
coercion-intensive areas, 15, 28, 30, 130,
132-43, 151, 187
bargaining in, 100
class organization in, 58
peasantry in, 152
state activity in, 99
collective action, popular, 99-103
Colleoni, Bartolemeo, 80
Collier, Ruth, 218
commerce see trade
condottieri, 80, 122, 149
Constantinople, 48
Cordoba, 48
coups, military
attempts per 100 states, 1944-87, 215
per 100 States, 1944-87, 214
in Third World, 213-17
Crimean War, 169
Crusades, 145
Curtin, Philip, 52
customs revenues, 88

Dalmatia, 144, 145, 152

Dear, Michael, 10

debt, national, 74-5

Decalo, Samuel, 217

Denmark, 57, 133-4, 135, 136, 139, 164

devolution of power, 24-5

diplomatic missions, established in
Europe, 164

direct rule

and homogenization within states,

115-16

Index 263

and repression, 115
transition to, 103-7, 114-15
direct taxes, 87
distribution, 97, 120
state intervention in, §4, 119
doges, 147
Drake, Sir Francis, 156
Dubrovnik see Ragusa
Dutch East india Company, 70, 149
Dutch Republic, 30, 31, 53-4, 60, 62,
76, 94, 150, 167, 183, 189
empire, 92-3
fiscal policies, 89-90
see also Holland; Netherlands

Eckhardt, William, 72
economic change, and state formation,
5-6
economy, 33
Edward I, king of England, 154, 155
Edward III, king of England, 155
Egypt, 24
Elias, Norbert, 85
Elliott, J. H., 75
embassies, established in Europe, 164
empires, 24, 31, 167-8, 205
European, 91-5, 128
in postwar period, 198-9
tribute-taking, 21, 65, 87
England, 30, 61, 64, 66, 70, 76, 132, 153
food supply, 119-20
navy, 81-2
Parliament, 155
seafarers, 156
in seventeenth century, 156-7
in sixteenth century, 156
state formation, 154-5
tenth to twelfth centuries, 153-4
trade, 155-6
troops under arms 1500-1980, 79
twelfth to sixteenth centuries, 154-6
see also Britain
Ethelred, King, 153
ethnic minorities, 3
Europe
toward AD 400, 39
in 990, 38-40
in 1490, 45-6
in 1990, 42-3
administrative hierarchies in, 128-9, 130
cities see cities
commercial hierarchies in, 128-9, 130
264 Index

connections between states in, 161-5

diplomatic missions established in, 164

empires, 91-5

geographic variation in state formation,
187-8

great powers see great powers

national states in, 43-4, 46

number of states: in 1490, 45; in
nineteenth and twentieth centuries,
46

ratio of cities to states in, 51

size of states in, 46-7

state clusters in 990, 162-3

state systems in, 4-5, 162, 164-5,
172-4

urban centres in, 47-8

urban column in, 133

urbanization in, 13, 17-18, 19, 47-51

urban population in, 50

European Economic Community, 3
extraction by state, 97, 98

federations, 21, 52, 65
decline of, 190
Fiji, 220
Finland, 133, 134, 136
firearms, 76
Fitch, J. Samuel, 218
Flanders, 19, 132, 155
Florence, 25, 26, 65, 66, 78, 80, 131,
151, 175
in thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
163
flows, payments on, 87, 88
food supplies, state intervention in,
118-20, 129
Foucault, Michel, 68
France, 7, 23, 26, 30, 64, 66, 76, ror,
122, 159, 167, 168, 169
direct rule in, 107-8
division of land forces, 125-6
national debt, 74
navy, 81
police, 109-10
taxation, 74
troops under arms 1500-1980, 78, 79
war financing, 87
see also French Revolution
Francis I, king of France, 74
Frank, André Gunder, 11
Frederick II, king of Hesse, 82
Frederick I], king of Sicily, 142

French Revolution, 107-14
and the bourgeoisic, 108, 111-12, 114
cities during, 109
counter-revolutionary movements

during, 112-13

farmers during, 111
police force during, 110

Fueter, Eduard, 172-3

Fuggers, 86-7

galley ships, 149, 150
Genoa, 21, 30, 64, 65, 78, 90, 131, 146
genocide, 202
geography, and state activity, 125-6
geopolitical analyses of state formation,
g-Io
Germany, 59
and transition to direct rule, 114
Ghana, 218
Glendower, Owen, 155
grain seizures, 129
Granada, 40, 45, 92
great powers
from fifteenth century to present,
170-81
Levy’s list of, 170-1
Modelski—’Thompson list of, 170-1
wars between see under war

Habsburgs, 78, 81, 167, 168, 171

Hale, J. R., 42, 77-8

Hammurabi, 1, 2

Hanover, house of, 157

Hanseatic League, 22, §2, 134, 135

Hauteville, Roger de, 25

Hawkwood, Sir John, 80

health, in cities, 18

Henry II, king of England, 154

Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor, 163

Henry VII, king of England, 156

Henry VIII, king of England, 103, 156

Hesse-Cassel, 82 ;

hierarchies, administrative and
commercial, 127-30

Hohenberg, Paul, 51

Holland, 58, 64, 89, 115, 168

Holy Roman Empire, 61, 65, 166-7, 173

homicide rates, 68

homogenization of populations, 106-7,
115-16

human rights, 217
Hungary, 44-5, 61, 66, 132, 145, 146,
152, 187
Huntington, Samuel, 7, 204

Iberia
in fifteenth century, 77
see also Portugal; Spain
Immich, Max, 173
imperialism see empires
income tax, 87, 88
India, 168
indirect rule, 24-5, 103-6
indirect taxation, 87
industrialization, 120
instability, political and external
influence, 208-9
Intercursus Magnus, 155
international relations
geopolitical analyses of, g—10
Marxist analyses of, 10-11
statist analyses of, 6
Ireland, 153, 155, 157, 158
Italy, 19, 61, 160
city-states, 48, §g—60, 143-4;
conquered by France and Spain,
77-8; diplomatic missions, 164;
mercenaries employed by, 80
in fifteenth century, 77
Kingdom of, 169
state formation in, 136
Ivan III (the Great), Tsar of Russia, 140
Ivan IV (the Terrible), Tsar of Russia,
140

Jagellonica, Katerina, 165
James I, king of England, 156
Japan, 93-4

Javogues, Claude, 112

Jericho, 2

Jews, 107

Johann ITI, king of Sweden, 165
Junkers, 105

Kennedy, Paul, 7-8
Kiev, 137, 138

kin groups, 71

Kinzer, Stephen, 212
Korea, South, 220-1, 223

Lagash, 2
Latin America
civilianization in, 216-17

Index 265

coup attempts per 100 states,
1944-87, 215
military power in, 205, 207
United States intervention in, 221-2
Laud Chronicle, 153
League of Nations, 4
Lees, Lynn, 51
Lefebvre, Georges, 111
Levy, Jack, 72, 165, 170
Libya, 222-3
Liechtenstein, 47
Lithuania, 139
Loire, 112
Lombardy, 78, 144
Louis XI, king of France, 77
Louis XII, king of France, 69
Louis XIII, king of France, 101
Louis XIV, king of France, 168
Luxemburg, Duchy of, 182

Machiavelli, Niccold, 78, 151
Mack Smith, Dennis, 142
McNeill, William, 8
Madrid, 18, 131
Magna Carta, 154
Magyars, 44
Malta, Knights of, 54
Mamluks, 24
Maniruzzaman, Talukder, 213
Mare, Nicolas de la, 119
Marxism, 10
Mary Queen of Scots, 156
Mccklenburg, 22
Mediterranean Sea, 64-5, 144-5
mercenarics, 80-4, 106
merchants
political power of, 130, 151
see also trade
Mesopotamia, 1, 2
Messina, 59
Middle East, coup attempts per 100
States, 1944—87, 216
migration, from country to city, 48-9
Milan, 65, 78
military control, 204
and human rights, 217
states under, 211-13
military expenditure, 51, 62-3, 74-5
decline in, 122, 123-4
and military power in world regions,
1972—86, 209
266 = Index

as a percentage of state budget 1850-
1975, 124
as proportion of GNP, 209; in 1984,
124
military personnel
as percentage of male population aged
20-44, 123
see also armed forces
military power, 8
conditions favoring, 218-19
military service, percentage of total
population in, 123
militias, 55
minorities, ethnic, 3
Modelski, George, 170
Monaco, 47
monetization, and taxation, 87-9
Mongols, 21, 71-2, 138, 140, 142
Moore, Jr. Barrington, 12
Moscow, 138, 139
Mumford, Lewis, 12, 13-14
model of urbanization, 13
Minster, Sebastian, 165
Muslim states
in 990, 44
see also Ottoman Empire

Naples, 77, 78
Napoleon Bonaparte, 21, 114, 116, 150
national states, 2—3, 15, 21, 22, 160
development of, 58
dominance of, 182-3
relationship with cities, 60
nation-states, 3
nationalism, 63, 116-17
nationalization, 29, 53, 122, 190
rebellions in era of, 186-7
wars in era of, 185-6
navies, 76
mercenaries employed in, 81-2
Netherlands, 19, 90, 152, 174, 181-2,
187
troops under arms 1500-1980, 79
see also Dutch Republic; Holland
New Delhi, 4
Nice, 169
Nigeria, 200
nomadic tribes, 138
Normans, 154
conquest of Sicily, 163
Norsemen, 153
Norway, 133, 136

state expenditure as a percentage of
GDP, 1875-1975, 121
Novgorod, 65, 139
nuclear weapons, 202-3

Olson, Mancur, 7-8
Organski, A. F. K., 195
Ottoman Empire, 24, 31, 40-1, 78, 145,
152, 169, 171-2, 188
indirect rule in, 104-5, 106
Venice defeated by, 161-2
Owusu, Maxwell, 218

Palermo, 118
papal nuncios, 164
Parkinson, C. Northcote, 4
Pas-de-Calais, 111-12
patrimonialism, 29, 53, 74, 122, 190
bargaining between authorities and
people in era of, gg- 100
wars in era of, 184-5
peace settlements, 166-70
peasantry, 23, 152
Peter the Great, 139, 141
Philip Il, king of Spain, 55, 75, 79
Piedmont, 78
Pitt, William, 103
Platzhoff, Walter, 173
Po Valley, 132
Poland, 59, 66, 100, 130, 132, 137-8,
139, 152, 165, 189
police forces, 75-6, 115, 119
geographical distribution of, 125-6
Pomerania, 22
Portugal, 62, 76, 131, 149, 171, 183, 188
empire, 91-2
militarization of government in, 124-5
production, 97, 98, 120
by the state, 54, 118
property rights, 100
protection, as state activity, 96, 97, 98
Protestantism, 61
proveeditori, 149 ;
Prussia, 22-3, 33-4, 57, 70, 76, 105,
106, 119, 122, 129, 139, 159, 168,
188
food supply, 119
see also Brandenburg-Prussia
Pye, Lucian, 193

Ragusa (Dubrovnik), 146, 150
Rastatt, 168
Ravenna, 143

rebellions, 100-1, 186-7

Reformation, Protestant, 61, 107

refugees, 203

religion, 61, 65, 190

rents, 87

representation, 64, 102, 188

resources, extraction by the state, 97, 98,
131

revenues, governmental, categories, 87

revolutions, 186

see also rebellions

Rhineland, 132

Richard II, king of England, 155

Rokkan, Stein, 12-13

Rosenau, James, 9-10

Rosenberg, Hans, 117

Russell, J. G., 47

Russia, 30, 65, 78, 138, 139-42, 152,
160, 165

San Marino, 47
Savoy, 78, 168, 169
Savoy-Piedmont, 98
Scammell, G. V., 147
Scandinavia, 59
paths of state formation in, 133-7
Scandinavian Union, 135
Scotland, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157
Sephardim, 107
Serbia, 106
under Ottoman rule, 24
Seven Years’ War, 168
Sforza, Francesco, 65
Sforza, Ludovico, 77
Shils, Edward, 203
Sicily, 25, 59, 69, 118, 142-3, 152, 163
Sistova, peace of, 105
Skinner, G. William, 127, 130, 160
Smith, Adam, 51, 159
social infrastructure, 31
social services, state expenditure on, 121
socialist states, 31, 98
sovereignty, fragmented, 21, 31, 40, 41,
187
Soviet Union, 3, 139-40, 198
military expenditure, 124
Spain, 64, 89, 115, 159, 171
armed forces, 55-6 .
breakup of empire, 21
conquest of Muslims in, 20
empire, 21, 92

Index 267

food supply, 120
Jews in, 107
militarization of government, 124-5
navy, 81
state revenues in sixteenth century, 79
troops under arms 1500-1980, 78, 79
war with Holland, go
Spanish Succession, War of the, 168
specialization, 29, 53, 122, 190
wars in era of, 186
state activity, 96-9
expansion of, 114-16
geographical distribution of, 125-6
state boundaries, in twentieth century,
207
state formation
alternative conceptions of, 6
alternative paths of, 62-6
and commercial impact of cities,
48
and demographic impact of cities,
48-9
and economic change, 5—6
and European city systems, 48-9
external influences on, 181, 206-8
geopolitical analyses of, g—10, 11
mode of production analyses of, 10-11
in nineteenth century, 63
statist analyses of, 6-9, 11
war and, 20-8, 183-7, 191, 206
world-system analyses of, 11
state growth, alternate conditions of, as
functions of accumulation and
concentration of coercion, 23
state institutions, broadening of functions
of, 118
statemaking, as state activity, 96, 97
state organization
and class structure, 100, 102
war and, 57-8
state structures
contemporary, 195-6
State system, 4, 23, 162
European: 1870-1918, 178;
development of, 164-5; hierarchy
model of, 174-5; members of, from
fifteenth century, 172-4
states
definition of, 1-2
emergence of, 2
major activities of see state activity
national see national states
268 Index

relationship with cities, 2, 58-61
systems of see state system
statist analyses of state formation, 6—9
Stepan, Alfred, 223
stocks, payments on, 87, 88
Suleyman the Magnificent, 31, 78
Suriname, 222
Sweden, 64, 107, 133, 135, 165, 167,
183
state formation in, 27
troops under arms 1500-1980, 79
Switzerland, 152
mercenaries, 79-80, 82
syphilis, 77

Taiwan, 201, 220
Tatars, 21, 138
taxation, 74-5, 79, 98-9
categories of, 87, 88
direct, 87
indirect, 87
and monetization of economy, 87-9
resistance to, 100-1
and surveillance, 87-8
war and, 84-6
Tenenti, Alberto, 150
Teutonic Knights, 22, 33-4, 57, 165
Thailand, 212-13
Third World
armed forces in, 199-200
conditions favoring military power in,
218-20
coups in, 213-17
and great power competition, 220-4
militarization, and great power
competition, 220-4
military governments in, 212-13
military power in, 203-8, 216-23
political instability in, 207-8
state formation in, 192-7

Thirty Years’ War, 101, 122, 128, 166-7

Thompson, William, 9, 170
tolls, 88
trade, 52-3, 64-5, 132, 189-90
empires and, g1-5
Transylvania, 57
tribute-taking empires, 21, 65, 87
Trieste, 146, 151
Tudors, 69 .
Turkey, 44-5, 169
war with Venice, 161-2

Ukraine, 141-2
United Nations, 198, 199-200
membership by geographic region,
1945-88, 200
United States, 198, 199
intervention in Latin America, 221-2
military expenditure, 124
Ur, 2
urban networks, 51, 52
urban oligarchies, 188-9
urbanization, 13, 49-51
and capital accumulation/concentra-
tion, 17-18, 19, 132
periods in, 49
Utrecht, Treaty of, 168

Valencia, 79
Vasa, Gustav, 135
Vatican Palace, 4
Venice, 52, 59, 64, 76, 78, 80, 90, 160,
183, 187
and Byzantine Empire, 144, 145
conquered by Austria, 150
decline of power, 149-50
doges in, 147
fiscal system, 148, 149
galleys used by, 149, 150
as maritime power, 143-7
oligarchy in, 147
population, 146
Scuole Grandi, 148, 149
state regulation of commercial activity
in, 148
trading activity, 144-7, 149
war with Ottoman Empire, 161-2
wars in fourteenth century, 148-9
Verbéczi, Istvan, 45
Vienna, Congress of, 169
Vietnam War, 180
Vikings, 134, 137, 138
violence, interpersonal, 68
Vries, Jan de, 48, 50

Wales, 154, 155
Waley, Daniel, 148
Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland, 80-1
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 11
war, 8, 9, 62-3, 70-6
1880-1899, 179
battle death statistics, 67, 73, 74, 201
changes in scale of, 190
conditions for, 71
war (cont.):

in era of brokerage, 185

in era of nationalization, 185-6

in era of patrimonialism, 184-5

in era of specialization, 186

European, 1495-1975, 175-6

European great power: 1495-1514,
175-6; 1655-74, 177-8; 1790-
1809, 178; magnitude of, 1500-
1975, 73; since fifteenth century,
165-6

financing by state, 84—7

geopolitical analyses of, 9

great power, 67-8, 72-4

incidence of, 67, 72, 74

intensity of, 72

interstate, 1956-75, 179-80

Marxist analyses of, 10

national debts and financing of, 89-90

post-1945, 201-2
settlements, 166-70
as state activity, 96, 97, 98

Index 2609

and state formation/transformation,
20-8, 183-7, 191, 206
and state organization, 28-30, 57-8,
75
state production of means of, 84
and state structure, 14, 15
and taxation, 84-6
see also armies; coercion
Wars of the Roses, 155
Weber, Max, 70 :
Westphalia, ‘T'reaty of, 61, 167
William of Orange, 157
Wong, R. Bin, 129
world system analyses of state formation,

II
World War I, 179

peace settlements after, 169
World War II, effect on state system,

197-203

Zaire, 212
Studies in Social Discontinuity
General Editor Charles Tilly, The New School for Social Research

Studies in Social Discontinuity began in 1972 under the imprint of
Academic Press. In its first 15 years, 53 titles were published in the series,
including important volumes in the areas of historical sociology, political
economy, and social history.

Revived in 1989 by Basil Blackwell, the scries will continue to include
volumes emphasizing social changes and non-Western historical experience as
well as translations of major works.

Published:

The Perilous Frontier
Nomadic Empires and China
Thomas J. Barfield

Regents and Rebels
The Revolutionary World of an Eighteenth-Century Dutch City
Wayne Ph. te Brake

Nascent Proletarians
Class Formation in Post-Revolutionary France
Michael P. Hanagan

Coercion, Capital, and European States, an 990-1990
Charles Tilly

In preparation:

Modern French Anti-Semitism
A Political History
Pierre Birnbaum

Coffee, Contention, and Change
in the Making of Modern Brazil
Mauricio Font

Social Evolutionism
A Critical History
Stephen K. Sanderson

Rites of Revolt
The War of the Demoiselles in Ari¢ge, France (1829-1831)
Peter Sahlins
