ISSN: 0306-6150 (Print) 1743-9361 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/fjps20
Book reviews
Constantine Tsoucalas
To cite this article: Constantine Tsoucalas (1979) Book reviews, , 7:1, 122-128, DOI: 10.1080/03066157908438096
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/03066157908438096
Published online: 05 Feb 2008.
Submit your article to this journal
Article views: 15
View related articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fjps20


Book
Reviews Constantine Tsoucalas*
Modern Greece. Facets of Underdevelopment by Nicos P. Mouzelis. London: Macmillan, 1978. Pp. xiii+222; index. £10.
Nicos Mouzelis' collection of essays is undoubtedly amost important contribution to the
meagre body of works on modern Greek social and economic history. Indeed, although
in appearance only relatively homogeneous—the eight essays contained in the book
have been written over a long period of time and cover a vast spectrum of subjects—it
covers a very serious gap. It is probably the first major attempt to interpret the overall
development of modern Greek society within die broader context of the articulation of
the Greek social formation within the international capitalist system.
The introduction of the key concepts of articulation of modes of production, under
development and dependent integration permits the author to insert his analysis within
a rigorous methodological framework and to elaborate alargenumber of propositions. If
they are not always totally new, they have not previously been sufficiently argued as
integral components of a coherent argument about a long term process of historical
development. In achieving this, Mouzelis' work is invaluable. It is all the more so as he
was obliged to cope with a great number of preliminary difficulties. The first of these difficulties is the objective inadequacy of published or accessible
sources on modern Greek economic and social history. This poses serious and often even
insoluble problems. Material is not only dispersed and discontinuous but alsounreliable
and, often, contradictory. The second difficulty, the paucity of serious analytical works on crucial questions, is
also a serious handicap. At least up to very recently, most interpretations of modern
Greek society have been characterised either by unmitigated empiricism, or by an
equally unhelpful insistence on using the 'universal' Marxist periodisations elaborated
for European history. According to the latter, it is only after the Second World War that
Greece has been saved from her 'feudal' past, while an undefined 'semi-feudalism' still
lurks in the background. The accumulation of capital, the labour movement, the
dominant forms of social mobility, the structure and functions of the Greek State are but
a few of the questions about which we are almost completely in the dark. Finally, some objective particularities of modern Greek development have rendered
synthetic assessments even more difficult. I am mainly referring to the ambiguity of a
central State which covered only a small fraction of its nationals, and at that the poorest
and less developed among them. Furthermore, comparative research is rendered all the
more puzzling as a number of geographical, economic and cultural specificities have
distinguished Greece from her immediate Balkan and Near Eastern surroundings ever
since 1830. These include the early creation of a commercial bourgeoisie, and of a
precociously westernised State, die maritime Vocation' of Greeks, the large and immensely
rich diaspora closely linked to a stagnating fatherland, and die early economic and
cultural integration of the Greek social formation within the Western system. Mouzelis' contribution is thus all the more significant in mat he simultaneously and
successfully manages to overcome all these preliminary difficulties. He has painstakingly * University ofVincennes.


Book Reviews 123
assembled a vast amount of empirical material, he has critically assessed and situated the main mystifying influences in modern Greek social thought, and he has succeeded in integrating paricular aspects into a convincing and coherent general interpretative framework. His main ideological adversary is the positivist-empiricist school of thought prevailing in Greece, as elsewhere, in the form of the neo-evolutionist and gradualist conceptions of underdevelopment as a simple retardation. Indeed, the simplified expressions of the 'catching-up with the West' notions in works treating of modern Greece as well as in the political ideologies that have made full use of them, are dealt with convincingly. In this respect, the two theoretical essays (chapters 2 and 3) are essential for the internal cohesion of the argument. They provide the general conceptual framework that runs throughout the book, as well as the unifying link that permits the author to examine a series of partial problems in a new light. And despite the fact that the very novelty of some of the questions raised renders the formulation of definite answers difficult, there is no doubt that Mouzelis' contribution is essential in a considerable number of points. In fact, one of the greatest qualities of the work is the subtlety with which he approaches the problems and the balanced and concise formulation of his interpretations, even when they are proposed only as tentative explanations. The links between the rural and the urban world, the role of the army, the importance of the diaspora, the mechanisms of State intervention, the cultural parochialism and underdevelopment, are only a few of the questions raised within the context of a rigorous and well defined periodisation. In all these points the questions are treated within the broader problematic of the articulation of modes of production. It is thus that many aspects that have been up to now elusive, have reached the stage of mature formulation. I cannot possibly enter into the countless issues raised in detail. There are, however, a number of points upon which I have some disagreements with Mouzelis. They mainly refer to some theoretical standpoints but have implications in the way a number of concrete questions are dealt with. In the first place, I do not think that the notion of'Neomarxism' used by Mouzelis in juxtaposition to Althusserain Marxism is sufficiently elaborated. Indeed, while Mouzelis justly criticises some of the unacceptable results of dogmatic Marxist approaches. Althusser is hardly alone in separating his standpoint from official and mechanistic Marxist interpretations that have dominated the ideologies of most communist parties at lest until recently. If the prefix 'neo' is chosen to denote recent Marxist work on underdevelopment it can only be confusing, inasmuch as the Vast majority of serious scholars of Marxist inspiration have never departed from the fundamental concepts of Marx. If there is something new in this developmental literature it is more the object of research (the dependent and underdeveloped social formations) than the methodology. But that has nothing to do with the development of Marxist thought as such. Indeed, it is only after the Second World War that under the combined effect of decolonisation and quantitatively assessed economic development that the problem of underdevelopment became a major issue, both for Marxist and for non-Marxist thinkers. Thus, the distinguishing of neo-Marxism from Althusserian Marxism in Mouzelis' analysis serves not so much the identification of a definite 'Neomarxist' school of thought as a distancing from Althusserian theorising. I do not want to enter, at this point, into the argument against Althusserian Marxism, for it is, I believe, largely irrelevant as far as the concrete issues are concerned. But I would like to underline a certain anti-theoretical tendency that underlies the whole of Mouzelis' work, and has at times serious implications in the way concrete problems are assessed. A good example is provided by Mouzelis' assessment of Nicos Poulantzas' analysis of the rise and fall of the colonels' regime. Poulantzas focuses mainly on the conflict


124 TheJournal of Peasant Studies
between the various fractions of the bourgoisie after 1960. Mouzelis is perfectly right in
rejecting Poulantzas' analysis in so far as insufficient evidence is advanced in order to
support a largely speculative thesis. However, Poulantzas' approach is not criticised on
the basis of his 'Athusserianism' which is according to Mouzelis 'constitutionnaly
incapable of dealing with social change'. For, if anything, Pulantzas' proposes a fully
'dynamic' explanation and insists on the role of 'actor oriented' classes and class
fractions as the main agents of social transformation. Mouzelis' criticism is thus not
methodological but empirical. Contrariwise, when Mouzelis tries to assess the same events himself he errs on the
opposite side. And this time the shortcomings are not empirical but methodological in
nature. Mouzelis rightly criticises those *who try to establish direct links between the
role of big capital and the emergence and fall of the dictatorship'. Direct links areindeed
not only very difficult to establish but alsousually prove verylittle for anybody whodoes
not accept conspiratorial interpretations of history. But that does not mean that there
are no links at all. Mouzelis of course acknowledges the links and accepts that the coup
was 'bourgeois' in its 'general class character'. But he also maintains that the 'Greek
bourgeoisie was not the creator of the coup'. It is exactly at this point that the question of theory intervenes. For the very notion of
'creators' of the coup is obviously ambiguous. A collective entity like aclas can hardly be
the physical author of a prommciamento. But to the extent that one accepts the fundamental
role of class conflict, it is the 'objective' links and interests that underlie political
developments. This does not imply that the questions raised by Mouzelis are not
legitimate. They are, and what he has to say is fundamentally correct. But his general
reluctance to depart from an 'impossible' factual evidence, leads him to the gradual
abandonment of the principles he started off with. In a crucial paragraph where he
provides his overall explanation for the coup he imperceptibly slips from one level of
interpretation to another. The basic class confrontation, he says in short, has been
resolved through the political stabilization of a 'triarchy' in the form of an alliance
between Throne, Army and Parliament. When the latter was threatened, a shift of
power within the State reestablished the challenge system of repressive controls, in the
form of the coup of 1967. This is on the whole undoubtedly true. But it is also largely
inadequate. For if it is true that 'the links between developments of the class structure
and the abolition of repressive parliamentarianism are much more complicated than
simplistic ready made formulas would suggest' (p. 131) it is also true that if one posits
class analysis as the most pertinent method for providing explanations for social change,
it is these complicated and far from obvious linkages that should constitute the main
object of enquiry. But it is at this point that Mouzelis hesitates. After having postulated
the 'bourgeois' general character of the coup, he leaves the issue largely pending. Thus,
in a sense, if Poulantzas' thesis fails for lack of sufficiently substantiated arguments,
Mouzelis' analysis remains insufficient for all hisflawlessand meticulous documentation.
In fact, the 'intricate game of class actors' is left largely unconsidered. This is to a large degree the result of Mouzelis' anti-theoretical position that results
sometimes in an eclectic approach to the problems. Indeed his statement that 'class
analysis should not constitute the exclusive but the major research strategy' (p. 54) is
fully acceptable inasmuch as middle range approaches using empiricist or functionalist
methodologies often provide indispensable foundations for the illustration of class
conflicts. But 'alternative' research strategies are, from a Marxist point of view, com
plementary and never substitutes. Furthermore, the very conceptual tool of empirical
methodologies should be carefully scrutinised and cannot be uncritically transformed
into usable components of a class analysis. My disagreement with Mouzelis stems from his tendency to be too dependent on the


Book Reviews 125
by definition, inadequate material. He is, consequently, led to depart from his original problematic whenever the paucity of ascertainable evidence does not permit the construction of a fully coherent image. This is undoubtedly the result of fundamental intellectual honesty. But it occasionnaly results in his abandonning analysis where it is most needed. For in many cases, insufficient evidence can be made to lead not to a discarding of the problem itself but to the formulation of large range hypotheses which, despite the inadequacy of factual material, can suggest, if only as a heuristic tool, further fields of research. Another example of the same type of self-imposed limitation is the way Mouzelis uses the term clientelism. Once more his analysis of the establishment and reproduction of clientele networks in Greece is concise, well argued and fully convincing. However, the distinction established between clientelist politics and class politics (and consequently the shift from the one to the other form) tends towards detatching the former from any class determination whatsoever. Yet, 'clientelism' does obviously not develop in a social void, and even if it is true that, generally speaking, political conflict in precapitalist social formations reflects class conflicts only indirectly,—by opposition to 'class' politics —the problem of class foundations remains an open issue. But it is one thing to reject preestablished class determinations and quite another to neglect the however indirect links that exist between the class structure and political organisation. In fact, Mouzelis slips towards the second course, though he is perfectly conscious of the issue: for he takes pains to reject both the 'economistic' version of Marxism, according to which political practices are considered as immediate reflections of class places and the ahistorical simplifications of empiricism, (pp. 66-67) But inasmuch as the indirect class content of clientelism is only stated but never analysed, the functionalist sufficiency of 'clientelism' as an accomplished and self-evident political form tends to be revived. Indeed, Mouzelis seems to try to define a 'middle of the way' approach avoiding all 'extremism'. But the difference of Marxism and empiricism is not a difference of degree. The two methods are conceptually and theoretically incompatible. From a Marxist point of view there can be no intrinsically specific form of clientelist politics as opposed to class politics. Politics always correspond to the underlying class structure though the links between them are always indirect and concrete. Even in the highly organised mass societies of today, political action is hardly a direct and obvious reflection of a given form of class conflict. Thus, if clientelism is defined as a form of political organisation developed along vertical as opposed to horizontal lines, the analysis of the concrete forms of cleavages is not sufficient. The main question refers to the specific factors circumscribing the forms of clientelistic organisation which can only be sought in the development of class relations. Thus, clientelism in Greece has taken fundamentally different forms than in, for example, Latin America or in Southern Spain. These differences can only be interpreted in terms of the differences in the underlying class structure. The existence of large landownership, the relationship between the ruling class and the State, the social role of the State in the process of distribution of the economic surplus are all important factors in the determination of the concrete forms of clientelist politics. Another point I wish to stress refers to the very centre of Mouzelis' problematic, the notion of underdevelopment, closely linked with the thesis of anti-evolutionism and misgrowth that underlies the entire book. Mouzelis' demarche is on the whole not only fundamentally correct: it also provides insightful observations that prove conclusively the fallacious character of all conceptualisations trying to situate a linear and gradualist interpretation of Greek development. The history of modern Greece coincides, indeed, with the cumulative effects that the integration of Greece into the international capitalist system has had upon the development of the internal articulations and disarticulation of


126 TheJournal of Peasant Studies
the relevant modes of production. In his general statements Mouzelis states the problem
with exemplary clarity. Once more, however, he tends to revert to positions he has
previously criticised. His analysisof the 'disarticulating' effects of dependent integration is
stated in terms of a polarisation between precapitalist (simple commodity) branches
with low productivity and backward technology and capitalist (industrial) branches
with high productivity and advanced technology. The process of disarticulation is then examined mainly in terms of the negative links
and articulations between the two well defined sectors. And this is treated on the basisof
the effective construction of capitalist 'enclaves' within a largely precapitalist social
formation. Though not false in itself this approach can be misleading. Indeed, the
polarisation between two non-integrated sectors that develop antagonistically is not so
far from the classical polarisation between 'tradition' and 'modernity' which easily
develops into the problematic of'modernisation' with all its evolutionist and gradualist
backcurrents. This is, of course, not Mouzelis' position. He is carefully on his guard
against such interpretations of development. However, the adoption of the 'enclave'
problematic is not without consequences. If used indiscriminately to denote any kind of
negative articulation, this approach tends to neglect the fact that the penetration of
capitalism often leads to the preservation of precapitalist forms that are closely articulated
and integrated within the dominant capitalist forms. Furthermore, die general use of
the 'enclave' problemetic may lead to a simplification of die phenomena of dependance
and underdevelopment. Indeed, as Cardoso and Faletto have pointed out die multiplicity
and variety of the concrete forms of integration of dependent formations into the world
market is such diat any endeavour to isolate the pre-established iron laws of under
development is doomed to failure. In any case the 'enclave' form is definitely not the most current form of dependent
integration. Indeed, one can only speak of enclaves stricto sensu when invested capital
comes almost exclusively from abroad, profits are exported, die products are destined
for foreign markets, and the only effective articulation with the internal market consists
in the paying of wages and taxes, and die utilisation of raw materials. If this form is not
rare in countries widi overspecialised economies under the direct control of foreign
capital, it is certainly not the case of Greece, where industrial development has gone
along widi die expansion of the domestic market and has always maintained close and
complex links with die rest of the economy. I do not wish to argue with Mouzelis at this
point, all die more so diat he is perfecdy conscious of diis when he describes, concisely
and accurately, die main lines of capital accumulation in Greece, (p. 118f.) However,
the very choice of die conceptual framework is not widiout consequences. Thus, his
insistence upon speaking of enclaves, incapable of transferring their 'dynamism and
high productivity' to die backward sectors of the economy leads him to a number of
errors. For both agriculture and small scale industry (inapdy considered as functioning
widiin die simple commodity mode of production) are far from being dormant remnants
from anodier age. They have bodi developed spectacularly in die last two decades.
Indeed, productivity in agriculture in die post 1955years has grown at very high rates,
(die annual rate was 2.8 per cent between 1954-1964 and 6.8 per cent between
1961-1971, certainly among die highest in Europe). This does not impair Mouzelis' more general considerations about growing inequalities
and structural disarticulations in the Greek economy. Neidier high concentration of
capital nor growing income inequalities nor die overinflation of die tertiary and parasitic
sectors are, however, due to die 'enclave' form of industrial capitalism. It is die entire
system of inner articulation of productive branches diat is being rapidly transformed.
The 'backward' sectors of die economy are, in fact, undergoing a process of radical
transmutation widi the result, diat the entire system of class relations has shifted


Book Reviews 127
significantly. Thus, even if the problematic of 'dualism' were not in itself inadequate (which it is in my opinion) the Greek economy is in no sense dualistic. It should be also noted that the same problematic leads Mouzelis to posit that the 'specific disarticulation between capitalist and non-capitalist modes of production in peripheral social formations' refers to a type of capital accumulation whose dynamism is based on a class configuration within which the working classes are more exploited than in the West. (p. 147) This, in itself, is debatable. Indeed, the only way to quantify exploitation is to establish the differential rates of surplus value, which implies a rigorous definition of the costs of production. The debate on this point is far from closed, the issue depending on whether the socially necessary costs of reproduction of the labour force should be established on a national (Bettelheim) or on a universal basis (Emmanuel). Only within the latter argument can lower salaries 'compensate' for much higher productivities, and lead to the postulate of higher exploitation of workers in underdeveloped economies. But that has nothing to do with the internal class configuration of underdeveloped countries, nor with the forms of disarticulation between capitalist and precapitalist sectors. In any case it is not on a (minor within our context) point that I wish to argue with Mouzelis. What is more important is the eventual implications of this quantitative distinction. For by insisting on 'more' exploitation, as well as on 'more' manipulation and 'more' ideological disorientation, one runs the risk of returning to the linear and gradualistic approaches to development. The same is true as far as the problematic of 'misallocation' of economic, political and cultural resources is concerned. To underline that the allocation is less effective and satisfactory from the point of view of the majority of the people, is only acceptable as a sweeping descriptive judgement. This last problematic, leading directly to questions about the degree of the misallocation of resources, can once more be confusing. It is the very definition of capitalism that implies an allocation of resources 'unsatisfactory' from the point of view of the majority of the people, whether in metropolitian or in peripheral social formations. And the question of the 'effectiveness' of resource allocation can only be raised within the problematic of a given type of development, i.e. the capitalist Way of development. This of course, does not imply that the allocation of resources is equally equivalent or unsatisfactory in all capitalist countries. I only wish to underline the need or a rigorous definition of the criteria of misallocation. If unspecified, the notion of misallocation may indeed implicitly lead to an uncritical adoption of the notion of a 'natural' of optimising of resource allocation by means of a 'mental' and objective mechanism, i.e. the 'ideal' developed capitalist market. We cannot attribute such intentions to Mouzelis. But the presence of such conceptualisations can lead to the obscuring of an otherwise clear cut and sound argument. Even more flagrantly, the 'enclave' problematic seems to me inappropriate for coping with problems of culture and ideology. Mouzelis' account of what he considers as the most striking characteristic of political and cultural practices in Greece i.e. the formalism prevailing in all spheres of culture, is original and, in many respects, brilliant. His account of the Sixaepris and of the language question as objective displacement mechanisms shifting away the attention of the masses from sustantial issues is undoubtedly fundamentally correct, though perhaps insufficiently elaborated. Yet once more the 'ericlave' notion lurks in the background and contributes to the blurring of the issue. There is no doubt that the massive importating of Western political and cultural institutions in the early nineteenth century and the dubious amalgamam that resulted from its fusion with the indigenous culture, has marked Greece ever since. But it is very doubtful whether one can speak about the permanent survival of the disarticulation between dominant culture and live popular tradition, as of two different and independent entities. For both


128 TheJournal of Peasant Studies
'dominant' and 'popular' culture have been equally distorted with respect to their
original forms. The rontation between 'Greekness' and 'Europeanism' has marked
Greek cultural life for a century and a half. But 'Europeanism' in Greece could only
develop in a diluted and distorted form, while 'Greekness' islargely rationalised through
imported ideological lenses. It is thus, I believe, misleading to speak of a 'pure'
autachthornous popular culture opposed to a purely imported 'dominant' culture that
remains in an 'enclave' form. To the extent that twopoles can be separated they are both
determined by the 'development of cultural underdevelopment'. It is not so much the
disarticulation between two polarised cultural subsystems pursuing divergent and
incompatible routes that marks modern Greek culture, as the impact of dependency on
all ideological subsystems. To different degrees and in unpredictable ways, all cultural and ideological practices
are thus deformed in respect to their original and idealised and therefore 'impossible'
forms. In this sense it is, I think, more interesting to pursue the analysis in terms of the
(by definition indirect and complex but nevertheless fundamental) class content of the
cultural polarisation. Indeed, to the extent that both 'subsystems' can only be distorted
approximations of a dependent and inhibited national reality, dieir inner articulation
(and disarticulation) can be interpreted correctly only if they are examined in the lightof
their contribution to the constituting of the constantly shifting social equilibria. As
Mouzelis himself stresses, imported political and ideological institutions neither destroy
nor integrate positively pre-capitalist superstructural forms. But that does not mean
that 'cultural imperialism' remains in an enclave form. It is the very process of
dependent integration that leads to the utter triviolising ofindigenous cultural features.
With respect to the book as a whole, however, the points raised by no means imply
that I disagree with Mouzelis' analysis. If I have argued with some of the theoretical
preconditions of the argument, it is on the contrary because I am fully convinced of the
pertinence and accuracy of the general outline proposed. By clearly stating the general
main issues underlying a century and a half of modern Greece's development, Mouzelis
has contributed enormously to a debate that has up to now been largely blocked. In fact,
it is only on the basis of coherent and closely argued general appreciations, of which
Mouzelis' work is a pioneering example, that Greeks will be able to pose the most
burning real political problem: for, as is remarked in the closing words of the book, 'the
development of Greece is not a question of imitating or catching up with the West; it isa
question of transcending the contradictions of both peripheral and metropolitan capitalism
by finding and following new developmental strategies'.
Printed in Great Britain by Cheney & Sons Ltd.. Banbury. Oxon.