On the Problem of Political Clientalism
In Greece in the Nineteenth Century
by CONSTANTINE TSOUCALAS
Introdtictory Observations
Research into the social function of the political parties in Greece
during the nineteenth century must still, to a large degree, face the
uncertainties of a terra incognita. A series of basic problems, which refer
as much to the parties' structure and foundation as to the representative
relationship which joins the party apparatus with its base, still remains
at the level of general description. The secure, pragmatic base which
would allow the political scientist, the sociologist and the historian to
progress to a deeper analysis of the parties, and the political life of the
country in the past century in general, is almost completely absent.
The purpose of this article is not to fill these gaps, but simply to
state several more general problems and to formulate a series of hypotheses
prompted by the relatively recent incursion of the term, "political
clientalism," which has been used repeatedly in the past few years to
characterize the Greek political system as it was crystallized during the
nineteenth century. The definition of clientalism as a basic scientific
category of political science originates from the continued effort of
political scientists to broaden and define the subject matter of their field
by studying the problems of countries or regions that are outside the
traditional zones of stabilized state power and articulated political thought.
The concept of political relations as "patron-client" relations within the
framework of a "system" of more general "dientage" relationships
derives from social anthropology.) It is based on indisputable evidence
that in most primitive or "underdeveloped" societies political power is
crystallized in a system of personal relationships Thus, the formal and
institutionalized aspects of the organization of the polity — when they
exist — here appear as simple legal-institutional varnishes which have no
relation to reality.
Although there are as many definitions of clientalism as there are
theoreticians who have devised them, one that is generally accepted
defines a clientage relationship as one of voluntary bipolar exchange
between the social bearers of unequal social and economic power based
on the mutual obligation of granting certain different services, without
1See Lucy Maiz, "Clientship in East Africa," Cahiers d'Etudes Africaines, no. 6, 1961.


6 JOURNAL OF THE HELLENIC DIASPORA
this network of obligations becoming codified in a legal or institutionalized
system with corresponding sanctions. 2
Within this abstract definition which, if interpreted widely, can
include almost all atypical relationships between unequal social bearers,
the meaning may have significant "heuristic" ranges. Originally used
within the framework of an empirical and inductive attempt to systematize
social phenomena, beginning with the examination and classification of
personal relations and proceeding to the research of wider social processes,
the scientific arrangement of standardized individual behavior within the
context of political power undoubtedly contributed to the deeper
understanding of the structure of the "political."
Nevertheless, the elevation of the definition of clientalism to a general
"category" is not only methodologically unacceptable, but involves
completely mistaken bases of generalization. To the degree that dientage
relationships are made autonomous and are considered to be primary and
self-existent characteristics of the political organization of a society, the
inductive comparison of abstract traits of different social orders leads
to the formation of more general categories which bear no relation to
reality. The detachment of the researcher from the specific historical
dimension of social phenomena, and the concealment of social factors
which determine their origin and development, leads to significant
omissions. Thus, the inner organization of the system remains unresearched,
and the analysis is exhausted with the description of epiphenomena which
are arbitrarily considered to be the sole "essence" of political relations,
isolated completely from the more general system of social relations in
which they occur.
In this manner, interpretations which refer to the totality of
concrete historical processes that are at the base of social behavior are
avoided, and thus the matter of the latter's appearance or disappearance
in history is ignored.
It is on this base that the current functionalist concept of "dientage"
as an "encounter" between two complementary functional needs is
modeled. This encounter is articulated in such a manner as to strengthen
the internal cohesion of the social system, which generally has the inherent
tendency to "give birth" to functional mechanisms which are useful for
its maintenance and reproduction.
These interpretative bounds are particularly disorienting because
they arbitrarily dissociate "political" behavior from the other levels of
the social process. The establishment of some categories and typologies
as general range categories permits the concealment of the interconnections
and mediations between social phenomena, thus limiting the object of
scientific inquiry
Building on the studies of social analysts such as Robert Merton,
2See, for example, J. D. Powell, "Peasant Society and Clientalist Politics,"
American Political Science Review, vol. 64, no. 2, 1970; Robert R. Kaufmann, "The
Patron-Client Concept and Macropolitics: Prospects and Problems," Comparative
Studies of Society and History, 1973.


The Problem of Political Clientalism in Greece 7
numerous contemporary political scientists submitted to the temptations
of the functionalist approach. The basic principle of this trend in political
science is that the innate tendency of every system to reproduce itself
(excluding the immanent inclination to disorganization) leads to the
appearance and continuation of stabilizing mechanisms which remove
social malfunctions, transforming, to the degree possible, the various
disjunctive contradictions into active connecting integrals. On the basis
of this, standardized behavior — in this case, the "clientage relationship" 
is considered to be a functional solution of the system (automatic or
organized) to problems which may lead to social eruptions or to a
heightening of the contradictions. From this perspective, the partisan
state, political exchange and the personalization of political relations
are mainly understood as a result of the "encounter" between the
contradictory and complementary "needs" of the political personnel on
the one hand, and the electoral "base" on the other.
Unfortunately, these "truisms" predominate in significant elements of
political science. Of course, the very description of political epiphenomena
is not only useful but necessary. Though the analytical descriptions of
Thiersch, About, Gobineau, and Thouvenel (which describe vividly day
to day political life in Greece during the last century) continue to have
undiminished value as documents, however, more recent analytical studies,
such as those of Jean Meynaud, 3 Keith Legg,' or the brilliant monograph of
John Campbell,' can, on the contrary, be misleading. Although they are valu
able, there is a degree to which the interpretation they propose appears as a
logically complete construct which restricts the problem to the functional
manifestations of political behavior. Especially in the case of Keith Legg,
who is not content to describe clientage relations, but must construct on
their foundation a wider interpretative "model" of modern Greek society,
the misleading consequences of the functionalist approach become apparent.
Especially since, in their primary expression, the theoretical evaluations
of the phenomenon of clientalism (and "patronage") do not particularly
refer to the political level, but are intended as conceptualizations of the
various forms of atypical articulation of unequal social bearers in societies
where the institutionalized "particular" forms of construction of political
power are either completely absent or severely weakened. In fact, both in
primitive societies and in many peripheral societies where "clientage"
neworks have been located and studied, the social hierarchies that are
observed do not constitute an institutionalized political base on which
formal political power is exclusively built. It is for that reason that we
must especially emphasize the—often imperceptible—"slip" in meaning
that occurs when the definition of clientage is used exclusively for the
analysis of political power or party relations. In this way, it is easy to
define out the institutional framework of political life, which is also
'Jean Meynaud, Les Forces Politiques en Grace, Lausanne, 1965. *Keith Legg, Politics in Modern Greece, Stanford, California, 1969. 'John Campbell, Honour, Family and Patronage, Oxford, 1964.


8 JOURNAL OF THE HELLENIC DIASPORA
a result of concrete political and social stuggles. Furthermore, starting from
a "heuristic" tool of analysis of social behavior, clientalism now acquires
the status of a "category" of political science on the base of which further
formalistic standardizations will be attempted. This permits a series of
characteristic "subtractions," involving not only the subtraction of the
formal institutional framework and the factors that contributed to its
formation, but the subtraction of the economic base in general, specifically,
the development of the predominant mode of collecting and distributing
the economic surplus. Finally, there is the subtraction of class conflicts and
the manner in which they are expressed in the political sphere.
It would also be useful here to examine certain expressions of the
"clientage" relationship which have been emphasized by most commen
tators on Greek political life. On the one hand, there is the general mal
function of the governmental mechanism, expressed in the nepotism, cor
ruption, political exchange, "rousfeti," and "favlokratid' which have char
acterized the Greek state from its birth. On the other hand, there is the
fact that Greek political parties did not develop into parties of "prin
ciple" with concrete political and social aspirations. These characteris
tics, which were considered to be the "quintessence" of the clientage
system, summarize the negative dimensions of Greek public life that all
critical reformers have wanted to uproot. At this point, it should be men
tioned that the emphasis placed on these dimensions is supported by the
logical and ideological prerequisite of a priori alignment toward the
specific model of bourgeois political structures as they developed in
Europe. Thus, the fact that political life in Greece is not aligned with the
formal principles which supposedly govern its functions determines, to a
large degree, the manner in which political phenomena are understood.
However, the assumption of the supreme "justness" of European models
leads to an analytical conceptualization of "deviations," "distortions," and
"retardations." In this manner, empirical analysis is refracted through a
series of deforming evaluations which aim at permanently juxtaposing in
stitutional functions with a "correct" and "healthy" reality of political
existence. The enormous levelling power of the "universality" of cultural
models of European thought still pervades the entirety of the ideological
order; and if contemporary political science seems to have freed itself of
the "demonologies" of the previous generation, the temptations of political
jargon persist, and constantly threaten the objectivity of interpretative sys
tematization. Avoiding both evaluative judgments and the functionalist approach,
I will attempt to suggest an interpretative framework for analyzing the
origin and development of so-called clientage relations, indicating certain
basic historical causes for their appearance. Though the development of
political life is not defined deterministically of course, a number of factors
rooted in specific conditions which characterized the modern Greek nation
from its birth constitute the necessary preconditions for this eventual de
velopment. There are two factors, in my opinion. which set the framework
for the development of political life and established the boundaries of


The Problem of Political Clientalism in Greece 9
clientage relations. On the one hand we have the structure of the ruling
class and, on the other, the nature of state institutions. Both factors lead
directly to the unique social role of the Greek state—a social role to which
clientage relations are clearly connected.
The Formation of the Ruling Class in Greece After 1830
Perhaps the basic characteristic of Greek society after the liberation
from the Turks was the lack of a stabilized ruling class. In a country which
was almost exclusively rural, and which continued to be, to a large degree,
a dosed domestic economy, the rural surplus did not become an object
of appropriation by one specific social class on the basis of an articulated
system of exploitative relations. The defeat of the kotzabasidhes, who, due
to Capodistrias's resistance, succeeded only marginally in appropriating
the national lands and becoming large landowners, was of decisive im
portance for the subsequent development of the country's social struc
tures. Greece would remain, at least until the annexation of Thessaly, a
country where the predominance of small and medium family cultivation
of agriculture was almost complete.'
At the same time, with the establishment of the independent state,
the major structural forms of the noble classes, which had begun to
crystallize during the last years of Turkish rule, were weakened. With the
destruction of the communities, the decline of the first organized handi
crafts, and the absence of liquid capital, the traditional noble classes,
whose lands did not suffice to secure them the economic base of a per
manent, class-determined dominion, were found stripped of the power to
reproduce themselves automatically. Thus, their reorientation toward other
social realms appeared imperative, the more so because many of them had
lost a large part of their property in the struggle. Their major "capital"
became their family and personal authority, through which, in any event,
they had managed to maintain at least some control over the temporary
centers of political decisionmaking.
A second political defeat of the local nobility sealed and com
pleted the first. After a fierce struggle which lasted for ten years, localism
was forced to yield before the demands associated with the construction
of a powerful centralized state. If Capodistrias, its creator, paid with his
life for his dedication to the principle of the unity of the state, the arrival
of Othon demolished the last illusions of all those who may have hoped
to construct autonomous family fiefdoms in the destroyed provinces. From
the beginning it was apparent that the consolidation of local political power
was mediated through the intervention of the central authority. Thus, the
complete retreat of the "independent" provincialism of the kotzabasidhes,
who, with an exceptional class realism, redirected their ambitions and
methods, is a fact worth taking note of. Greece is one of the few countries
ØKtbo-ca6 BapyOnoulog, Ta dypostices Trp66)outet crshv TAA65a, Athens, 1965.


10 JOURNAL OF THE HELLENIC DIASPORA
which has never known a separatist or autonomist movement. After their
failure to become large landowners, the notables failed again in their
attempt to perpetuate their power as pashas or beys by right of inherit
ance. The creation of the central state together with the predominance of
small propertyholding and cultivation left open the problem of the structure
of political and economic power.
The Significance of the "Premature" Establishment of the Parliamentary System
The very institutional formation of the state system had, on the
other hand, very serious consequences. The liberal and egalitarian con
cepts of the French revolution had prevailed from the first revolutionary
constitutions. Furthermore, even at that time, the claims for universal
suffrage and a democratic organization of the nation had penetrated
widely. The authoritarian period of the Bavarians (the "Vavarokratian
did not last long. Only thirty-five years after the liberation, Greece be
came the first European country to permanently enact universal suffrage.
The Constitution of 1864 is, in this respect, the most highly developed
constitutional charter in Europe. And although most countries, during the
second half of the nineteenth century, were characterized by continuous
political conflict over the right to vote—something which, in any event,
was achieved only in stages—universal suffrage was realized in Greece
especially early and without any particular difficulties.
It should be emphasized at this point that even the Constitution of
1844 had only minor limitations on the right to vote. Indeed, although in
most European nations that right was limited to those who owned prop
erty or exercised an independent trade or profession—thus succeeding in
excluding the "dangerous" masses of workers and dependent peasants
from political access—in Greece, where both workers and landless peasants
were marginal, almost all of the male population was considered "inde
pendent" and therefore had the right to register in the election lists. If
then, electoral limitations in Europe protected the monopoly of political
power by the bourgeoisie and landowners, the unique Mass composition
of Greece did not permit the formation of a similarly "limited" par
liamentary democracy. The absence of a structured bourgeoisie rendered
impossible a liberal "democracy of notables" analogous to those which
were created in most Western European countries.
In any case, the rate at which universal suffrage was established in
1864 is quite characteristic. Even though many conservative intellectuals
and a significant portion of the Second National Assembly opposed the
extension of democracy, their objections seemed to be mainly of a the
oretical nature and were not developed as a defense of an already stabilized
political balance. From its enactment, the entirety of the political world
accepted universal suffrage as a firm constitutional principle which was
never to be questioned again. Thus, independent of the real substance of


The Problem of Political Clientalism in Greece 11
popular power, it is a fact that from 1864—and to large degree since
1844—the right to vote constituted the most important permanent mecha
nism of participation in political life and the most fundamental element
of the legitimation of government.
From what has been said, there follows a situation which at first
glance appears to be contradictory. On the one hand, modem Greek
society is characterized by the absence, or at least by the meagerness, of a
ruling dass with well-formed interests which essentially aims at the de
fense, consolidation and extension of stable social and economic mecha
nisms which permit it to collect and eventually accumulate—in the form
of capital—the economic surplus. In other words, we are speaking of the
meagerness of a well-articulated "society of citizens."
On the other hand, we observe an especially premature institu
tionalization of bourgeois state structures which were based on the models
derived from the French revolution. This does not mean, of course, that
the "premature" introduction of liberal institutions constitutes an "ir
regularity" in relation to some imaginary process which would have to be
followed by the evolution of institutional development as a mechanistic
reflection of socioeconomic development. In any case, in both the nine
teenth and twentieth centuries, there are numerous examples of the pure
transfer of institutions, not only in newly-created states, but in established
states as well. It is not a matter, therefore, of a "deviation" from a presum
ably "correct" development which would be a part of the (inconceivable)
unhindered evolution of the national destiny. On the contrary, what should
be emphasized is that the "imported" state structures are, inevitably, in
capable of performing the same social functions they did in the nations
where they originated because they express completely different social
realitiIens.their abstract sense, the liberal and egalitarian political orders of
Western Europe expressed the necessity of the bourgeoisie to manufacture
and guarantee a "lawful order," thus ensuring the maintenance of the
external terms of reproduction of the system of predominant productive
relations, institutionally protecting, in this manner, the established mecha
nisms for the appropriation of surplus production. The creation and protec
tion of the national market, the liberation or creation of the wage labor
market, and the institutionalization of free trade (delivered from pre
capitalist restrictions, uncertainties and threats), find their political ex
pression in the liberal bourgeois organization of the state, which, in the
form of a "democracy of notables," tends toward the long-range safe
guarding of the owners' intrests.
The situation in Greece in 1832 was completely different. The bour
geois state was not able to promote the interests of the bourgeois society
of citizens for the simple reason that the mechanisms for capital accumula
tion were in an embryonic state. However, the Greek state could also not
realize the beginning of a total national "bourgeois revolution" with a
programmed intervention "from above," as happened in Prussia under
Bismarck, Japan under the Meiji, or to a lesser degree, Russia under


12 JOURNAL OP THE HELLENIC DIASPORA
Witte. Even if such ideas were not entirely absent from Greece after
1880, the limited area and population of the Greek kingdom, in com
bination with the exceptionally low degree of development of the produc
tive forces, made such a process objectively impossible.
Thus the nineteenth century in Greece is marked, if not by the con
tradiction, at least by the lack of coincidence between the level of social
and economic development and that of official institutions. The entire
function—or "malfunction"—of the political system is associated, I think,
with this lack of coincidence. Hence, at this point, it is useful to isolate
two primary expressions of the phenomenon which we have analyzed:
the manner in which the body of the political personnel was formed and
the manner in which the state mechanism was rooted.
State, Riding Class and Political Personnel
I have already spoken of the impossible position of the traditional
ruling strata, which managed neither to become large landowners nor to
oppose the creation of the central state which issued the final blows to
localism. Under these conditions, it was perhaps natural that the kotza
basidhes (who, after their initial hesitation, played a very serious role in
the revolutionary struggle—even though they may have been "dragged"
into it) turned en masse toward the "conquest" of the state apparatus.
The reasons for this mass redirection are numerous. Under the conditions
which existed after the liberation, the state machinery was not only a
vehicle of political power, but was, at the same time, the most important
social mechanism for the collection and distribution of the economic sur
plus. This phenomenon is not confined to Greece: in countries where pre
capitalist forms of production predominate, and where at the same time
large propertyholding plays a secondary role in the landownership system,
it is logical that taxation should constitute one of the basic—and often the
most basic—forms of appropriating the agricultural surplus and dividing
it among the non-productive strata. Often, in countries where conditions
of a closed economy exist, the imposition of taxation in the form of
money has been utilized as a means of compulsory financing of the econ
omy, indispensable for the creation of stable mechanisms needed for the
appropriation of the economic surplus. In Greece, this problem has not
been studied seriously as yet. Though the transfer of value from the
direct producers of the countryside to the non-productive strata of the
cities passes through various mechanisms which become consolidated to
the degree that the commercialization of production and the financing
of the economy continue, it is certain that taxation, in its various aspects,
continued to play a primary role in Greece throughout the nineteenth cen
tury. Thus, the absence of stabilized forms of class exploitation auto
matically led to the extension of "state" forms of gathering the surplus.
This phenomenon is, of course, not new. We encounter it in the Ottoman
Empire, as well as in all of the social formations associated with "Asiatic


The Problem of Political Clientalism in Greece 13
despotism." In all of these countries, the ruling class is, by definition,
attached to the bearers of state power, who derive their authority—and
their "office"—from the will of the despot or governor. In countries
where, on the contrary, private property is recognized and protected by
law and where, in general, the capitalist form of production predominates,
other private "non-state" methods of appropriating the economic surplus
have appeared and consolidated themselves. The state is separated from
the sphere of the "society of citizens," and acquires the competence to
protect the "lawful order." In this case, the role of the state in the process
of collecting the surplus tends to shrink. From the beginning of the nine
teenth century to the beginning of the twentieth century, taxation in
Western countries gathered only what was necessary for the financing of
indispensable state functions—as in the famous "false expenditures" of
capital which are subtracted from the surplus value so as to ensure the
external terms of production.
In Greece, a country endowed with bourgeois institutions, yet still
dominated by precapitalist modes of production, the methods of collect
ing the surplus were many. The total role of the state in this process can
be inferred from the indications we are given by the relation of the state
budget to the national income. Such an examination, of course, meets with
the special difficulties of estimating the national income in the nineteenth
century, statistical data being not only dispersed, but to a large degree
erroneous. We have only a series of estimates which have been made ac
cording to arbitrary or dubious criteria. The general tendencies, however,
are clear. Thus, around 1840, state expenditures must have represented
from 20% to 30% of the national income (although the average for
state expenditures during the period 1833-1840 was 17.5 million drach
mas, while the national income was estimated to be from 60 to 80 million
drachmas),T gradually decreasing to 15% around 1880. Given the low
degree of financing of the economy, the share of the state from the be
ginning appears to be enormous, while its gradual decrease only reflects
the late appearance of other forms of collecting and utilizing the surplus.
The enormity of the state share of the surplus was emphasized by Aristides
Economou, who, from the floor of Parliament in 1886, estimated (and
perhaps exaggerated) the ratio of state revenues to national income to
be 31%, in contrast to 12% for Great Britain, 8% for England, and
6% for Belgitun.8
It is evident, therefore, that the participation of the state in the
total process of division of the surplus was exceptionally large in relation
to the total level of the country's development. It is on this basis, I think,
that the attempts of the traditional ruling strata to attain control of the
'See the study on Charilaos Trikoupis which was published in the lo-ropia TOO `Entpracoil "E8vous, Tap.oc IA', Te6x1 1-5, Athens, 1977. For the estimates on the national income, see Ktorycil Momabcp, `1-1 kOvtKij Kai KotvwviKil cruveiaricrq ashy `004.8a, Thessaloniki, 1972, pp. 165-169. Also, A. 'Av8psdal, "Epya, Tep.oq B', Athens, 1939, p. 529. 8A. Oixovdp,ou, Tpeis 'Avkiparrot, Athens, p. 448.


14 JOURNAL OP THE HELLENIC DIASPORA
state apparatus should be interpreted. This control assured them preferen
tial access to the decisionmaking centers concerned with the division of
the surplus. Beyond any other avenues which it opened, the profession of
higher state functionary was also economically desirable. Hence, it is not
at all strange that the upper levels of the state apparatus received salaries
which automatically lifted them to the summit of the social and economic
hierarchy. Indeed, with the exception of those who derived their incomes
from the Greek colonies—and who, therefore, from an economic stand
point, cannot be considered part of the Greek social structure—there were
few Greeks whose incomes exceeded the salaries received by ministers
(10,000 drachmas a year around 1880), generals and colonels (8,300
and 7,000 drachmas respectively), and admirals and higher court officials
(7,000 drachmas a year), not to mention the incomes of certain special
employees such as High Commissioner of Thessaly Zannas (18,000
drachmas) or Ambassador Valaoritis (48,000 drachmas). If we consider
that the average annual income of the country's ten largest landowners,
until the annexation of Thessaly, did not exceed 30,000 drachmas a year,°
and that the lawyers who surpassed this could be counted on the fingers
of one hand even in 1892, 10 the economic strength of the higher and
highest level civil servants is clear. Aristides Economou, for example, as
a chief justice of the court of first instance receiving a salary of 400
drachmas a month, paid 30 drachmas rent for a large house in which he
lived comfortably and had three servants," although a few years earlier,
in 1874, there were no more than three industrial units that had an annual
productive value of more than 100,000 drachmas (a sum which includes
liquidation of debts). A few years earlier, the country's largest cotton
thread factory had a clean profit of 6,000 drachmas a year," a sum that
was 30% Less than the ministerial salary. Even the large currant trade did
not, begin to yield substantial profits until after 1880. Thus, in this man
ner, the new rulers of the state machinery (which was formally organized
on the foundation of bourgeois liberal and egalitarian concepts) continued,
in some way, to play the same political role they had under Turkish rule:
they were the operational intermediaries between the "base" and the in
visible and "impersonal" political authority.
Another point should be made here. If we focus our attention on the
"conquest" of the state apparatus, we notice that, from the beginning, the
Greek ruling class was dissociated from agricultural activities. If, in the
beginning of the nineteenth century, land revenues constituted a sig
nificant source of the income of the notables who formed the core of the
ruling class, it was not enough, as we have seen, to assure them a per
manent economic predominance. In any case, the relative "stability" of
'Kwa' Moostixp, op. cit., p. 252.
"Bickford Smith, Greece under King George, London, 1893. 11A. Ohcovdpou, op. cit., p. 132.
. •Avacmccooito6Xou, `Icrropict Worticitc 6toptixavIac, Töp.oc
Athens, 1947, p. 330.


The Problem of Political Clientalism in. Greece 15
small propertyholding created such conditions as to make it only mar
ginally possible to supplement the expansion of the relatively extended
estates through the economic expropriation of the small landowners. The
large landowners quickly redirected their attention to other areas such as
the purchase of real estate in the cities, the export trade, commercial naviga
tion, and usury.
Furthermore, the objective weakness of the large estates' expansion
had another parallel result which—indirectly and over the long run
strengthened the political power of the notables. The gradual orientation
of the ruling class toward areas of activity which did not have a direct
relation to agriculture decisively influenced the forms of class struggle
which were conducted in the countryside. Failing to extend their economic
base through the control of productive agricultural activities, the notables
no longer had direct conflicting interests with the small landowners. This
was the case not only because the role they played in agricultural produc
tion was, in the final analysis, of secondary significance, but primarily
because they quickly shifted the center of their interest from the area of
agricultural production to various non-agricultural economic activities in
order to consolidate their power.
Thus, making the control and monopoly of the state apparatus the
foundation of their economic power, and using this position of power
within the framework of basically non-agricultural speculative activities,
the "tzakia" were able to systematically cultivate their local political base
without confronting apparent and insurmountable conflicts of interest with
their countrymen. In this manner, a large number of the families of the
notables and local chieftains have maintained their political influence in
the countryside until today.
translated from the Greek by Kali Loverdos with Phyllis R. Craig
Part Two of this essay will appear in the forthcoming issue.