T h e
G r e e k
T r a g e d y




| Constantineicles, aye and sociologist, was borninAthens iin 1937.'He studied law, philosophy,
D estssiber 1967 and is oir rarelyin Paris. At the
es moment he is collaborating with the French National -Centre of Scientific Research (CNRS), and is lecturer ~ in Political Sociology in the Experimental University _ Centre of Vincennes in Paris.




ne|Greek Tragedy :


N
"Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England 
Penguin Books Inc., 7110 Ambassador Road, Baltimore, Maryland 21207, USS.A. Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia
First published 1969
Copyright © Constantine Tsoucalas, 1969
Made and printed in Great Britain by C. Nicholls & Company Ltd Set in Linotype Times
This book is sold subject to the condition r that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, a be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which itis \ i published and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser


1 2 3
*4 m5 6 7 8
. Contents
INTRODUCTION 9
The Emergence of Independent Greece (1821-1909) 15
The Creation of the Bourgeois State (1909-22) 28
The Failure of Democracy (1922-40) 41
Resistance (1940-44) 57
Liberation (March—December 1944) 70 December 1944. The Turning Point (1944-6) 85 Civil War (1946-9) _ 102
The Aftermath of the Civil War and the Liberal Failure (1949-52) 114
Conservative‘ Stability’ Social and Economic (1952-63) 127
Conservative Supremacy — Political (1952-63) . 141 Foreign Powers and the Cyprus Problem (1952-64) 153
The Rise of the Liberal Forces (1959-63) __- 166 ‘The Centre Union in Power (1963-5) 180
King’s Coup or Colonels’ Coup? (1965-7) 192


1
>
(we
w
>
Z
? wieVeg, ea
J ©Kastoria
Grammos Mts | pas: ; ei ntaiee peeatet yh Mt Dre Sipe) ile
loannina THESSALY a EPIRUS .


;Imbros7% L,
| = Tenedos Aghios \ (Bozca)
o Ffstratios ©
’
Y Yaros (Youra) 
Doe 4 Can, !
8e/ Rhodes




_DictTaAtorsuips do not come out of the blue. The military © coup of 21 April 1967 may indeed have come as a shock to inernational opinion. But for the Greek people military dictarship had for long been a conceivable, even probable, turn of events. The object of this book is to provide an explanation of the origins of these events and of the constellation of social, olitical and international forces which made them possible. An adequate understanding of the forces currently at work n Greece requires considerable probing into their sources d historical evolution. Yet this book is not meant as a hisical narrative. The aim is not to tell the story but to provide framework for its interpretation. Hence the treatment of periods and subjects is not uniform. Emphasis is rather directed to a few highly selected recent periods when intense socio-political activity produced important shifts which modified the underlying structure. The new trends thus set provide turn an explanation for the system’s further evolution. At each major turning point special attention must be given to the terrelation between domestic Greek forces and the influence f the dominant international power blocs. More so than in the e of other countries, this interplay of national and internanal factors is of oo importance for understanding dern Greece. PANN ii
ae Greek diateNatio the Balkan Wars of 1912-13 the achievementsof the Liberal Party and its foreign
ith Britain, set the stage for the eventual struggle between
ym the Second World War: occupation, poetetanee
ws X pen ii ‘ * g ripe eh
ht and Left and for the Process of o Saanuiee involve- i
- For‘it is the turmoil of the 1944-9 period Vise oy


tion. It is in fact with a striking degree of directness that the outcome of the civil war of twenty years before led to the
power since. Most of the book is Bomectoha with tracing the i chain from the one upheaval to the other. ‘The colonels’ regime as such is not, however, analysed:The
ation and put forward then programmes. Numerous Rebeca - governments have openly condemned the regime and its policies, ;
and Mr Harold Wilson has used the word ‘bestialities’ poe
describe them; The information on which these attacks are based its plentiful — but it is not adequate for a more onal |2 view of how the dictatorship functions as a socio-political system. We simply do not know enough about the internal = ~ evolution of the junta ifn power, about the existence or sie ;


ares«ie the eet of post-war years: strong governing tht, meek decorative Centre, and (by definition) ‘danger
: The existence of dictatorship is, of course, not by itself enough to nullify the forces just cited. But it can certainly ontain them for a long time. The new regime is a manifestaion of a technical possibility inherent in all modern societies, _ by virtue of an enormously increased and perfected system of coercion. A modern, internationally protected totalitarian movement of fascist inspiration (whatever name it might find esirable in given circumstances) does not necessarily need yhat its pre-war counterparts depended on to conquer and 1old power — namely, a large and politically conscious popular aseorganized intoa party. The mere inertia of the mass of population, be it of skilful manipulation or of repression irof both, might suffice to keep a small clique in power, so ig‘as it controls a determined body holding the material | ans of coercion. Thus, the repeated assertion by the dicta- |
r ibe? for. it probably means: ‘Welook forward to the | ne when the people are persuaded or manipulated into not wing any more.’ Meanwhile, an elaborate repressive arsenal
nder the:bictasotsti. ‘The economic recession which. iar aced the Bcom of the years before the coup doensem
11


“time. The economic situation is however likelbyps ne _ tremely critical. Red A number of measures taken by the allele seiedety _ cate that they are seriously trying to build a permanent po structure. The control of all trade unions, syndicates and collective bodies from above; the newly defined role of there- ligious authorities as makers of ideology; the appointment of _/ government * commissioners’ in public organizations and pr: vate corporations alike; the decision-making role allocated to ‘representatives of the producing classes’, naturally appoin: ' ted by the government — all this recalls the corporate state of _ Mussolini and Salazar. _ Perhaps more to the point, the new constienianals defini_ tion.of the armed forces as a body placed above. and beyond the political sphere, and their enhanced’ status as guarantors of the regime, shows that those who have seized power by the sword intend to go'\on living by it. Yet, if the institutional framework is more or less apparent, there is only sparse .0Louie of how the newly integrated elements of the politieal system really function. And inevitably, the more obscu the actual political decision-making is, the more mystifying tyand myth-loaded are the institutional changes. ‘Te the inte: tions of the country’s new rulers are, manifest, their truepos tion within their- own system is unknown.


tm t must at present be said that the forces which will a] the future of Greece are still unknown.
ecific information, one fact is abundantly clear. The regime ill lacks a stable base of domestic support which could enable
Insure it against attacks from ‘below’. Hence the need for
hronic dependence on foreign - which means American 
aily bread’, contains the seeds of danger and uncertainty. ou only receive unqualified support while you-are necessary » the supporters. In the present explosive Middle Eastern
robably incisive to military if not political ears. But internaonal life is subject to change and a time may come when the ick of a strong domestic basis would seriously impair the in
odern imperialism are not rigidly economic. The new government has in fact offered unprecedented adantages to foreign capital (which, incidentally, has not for e time being manifested any great eagerness), But Greece 0 restricted a market and so poor a source of raw materials iat, however welcome (on both sides) foreign economic
It is in this, context that the attitude of the Greek people
y the peasants.ica at the riskof‘seeming pessi- 
lowever, the matter does not stop here. Despite the lack of 7
to function freely, and has not even secured the massive pathy, or the frustration of its potential enemies, which could
ee ermanent repressioinn all fields of activity. Hence also its 
ipport. The last element, while providing the regime with its 
tuation, Papadopoilos’s threat of ‘aprés moi le déluge’ is”
_ ternational bargaining power of the regime. The standards of
factor of critical importance. An organized and coherent position against a government which can claim only the possession of the brute meansof power provides a strong ~ for outsiders to place a bet on. It reduces the negotiat- power of the regime to nil. It might even, given the circumnces, precipitate an international interest to terminate the _
domination might be, the decisive factors must be political — | ‘strategic. And these might be modified even in the USA. 
:;


Kt
whichever way thedominant in Sanihon
jetsOs But niaNe for the first time it now isa neilEuropean problem as well. In so far aste paren



CHAPTER 1
The Emergence of Independent Greece (1821-1909)
; In almost a century and a half of modern Greek history, ' foreign intervention or foreign support has almost always been responsible — to a greater or lesser extent — for the birth and outcome of every crisis. Domestic social and political _ forces have never been able to develop or function autonoq mously. The Greek people have thus been powerless to take their destinies into their own hands: most flagrantly so when | there was the most to win or lose. For, whatever the strategic and diplomatic line-up, Greece could not escape international attention because of her geographical situation. As a pawn of | Western diplomacy when the Ottoman Empire was breaking ' up, as a naval base essential for the control of the Dardan, elles, as a bastion of the ‘Free World’ in its attempt to stop the 9 expansion of Communism, or as one of the very few secure bases for the strategic control of the ever-unstable Middle _ East, Greece has always had to pay the price for the international interest she has provoked. ' To capture the essence of this continuous interaction be_ tween internal evolution and foreign intervention, we must » survey the development of Greece. that contains the origins of _ the present. It is difficult to pin down the historical and cultural charac_ ter of the Greek nation — Balkan but not Slav, Near Eastern -but not Moslem, European but not Western. It may or may - not be possible to trace a racial, cultural and national con‘tinuity from the classical period through the Byzantine Empire to modern Greece; the undoubted fact is that the origins of the modern social and economic structure are deeply rooted in the long period of Ottoman rule. _ The Byzantine Empire was never a national state. If the lienic element was culturally preponderant, especially in the © period, the Empire was always a formless conglomeration
i; 15


did the Greeks acquire a definite consciousness of natior al identity distinguishing them from the other ethnic groups of the Balkan peninsula and Anatolia. This sharp national co’ ‘i “sciousness contrasted with the lack of physical separation be tween Greeks and other groups, for the éver- changing ‘geographical distribution of the various Balkan nationalities _ was far from homogeneous’ Except for the islands and the southern part of the peninsula, where the population was mainly Greek, and for the regions north of the Aimos mountains, where the Slav element was dominant, the great bul of the Balkans was inhabited by a heterogeneous mixture o Greeks, Serbs, Bulgarians, Wallachians, Rumanians, “Alba- ; | _ nians and of course Turks — the Greek element being more - concentrated in the towns and along the coasts, and the Slavs becoming more numerous in the mountains and plains of the _ interior. Greek predominance was greatest in Constantinople | \ and the few large commercial and cultural centres of the Ott - man Empire: Salonica, Ioannina, Adrianople, Philippoupolis, lassi, Smyrna, Alexandria. The Ottoman ideology, with its rigid social divisions, maintained a disdainful attitude to mereantile activities; this enabled the Greeks, and to a less degree other minority groups like the Jews and the Arme-_ mians, virtually to monopolize business life. The Greek community of Constantinople, consisting of the remnants of the oo aristocracy and of the emerging groups of banker
: Pianariot: however, was not confined to the financial sph _ They were often called upon to play a significant political Ksadministrative part in the Ottoman power system— both in the ~ i capital, where they soon rose to extremely prominent. positio’ons _ and in the provinces, where they were often entrusted with | ~ ernmental functions, sometimes even on a hereditary ba
16


in decisive victories which led to a political stalemate. By 827 the revolution — which had been restricted to the Aegean
thei (Sterea Hellas)—was nearly expiring. t was then that the intervention of the foreign powers beie decisive. The atrocities committed during the war and a “romantic aura of the Hellenic past had greatly excited ternational public opinion. Popular pressure and diplomatic terests converged for once, and the great powers decided ke the situation in hand. Russia, France and ‘Great in destroyed —the -Turkish-Egyptian’ fleet at Navarino 8 ) and thus secured: Greek independence. | ‘ see how important these powers were in ensuing penne Jook briefly at the policies which they pursued. Rus- i policy was based on the idea of creating a large Balkan _ Sreco-Slavstate under her protection, to ensure her a strong- is
Most of the population of the Balkans was Slav, and all ed to the Christian Orthodox faith; these were the two i


ex that the growing cca foes cae he its disintegration unavoidable in the long run, Great B it _ favoured the creation of an independent Greek state whi _ would, however, be politically and economically dependento Britain, and therefore openly antagonistic to the other ethnic groups in the Balkans. The Protocol of London (1830) through which Greek independence was finally recognized was a victory for British policy. The decision to install an absolute monarchy was aimed at the replacement of the firs’ Greek Governor, Ioannis Kapodistrias, an ex-minister of the _ Tsar .and naturally inclined towards Russian conceptions, Meanwhile, the restriction of.the independent state’s boun- daries to a very small area, inhabited by a comparatively _ homogeneous population, made the new-born State absolutely ; dependent on foreign (that is British) economic and diplo- matic’ support, ,and eventually led to antagonism between © _. Greeks and Slavs. Thus, for more than a century, the Balkan > peninsula was to be the most turbulent spot in Europe and_ the scene of continual struggles between interventionist powers. The idea of a federation uniting the Christian peoples of the European provinces of the Ottoman Empire, who had - > been living in relative harmony with one another for four cen- turies, was shelved. Britain, Russia, France, Austria and later | _» Germany fought over the future of these provinces; their . peoples paid and are still paying the bill.. After independence, the social and economic structure of Greets ‘remained basically unchanged. The semi-feudal sys-tem prevailing under the Ottoman regime disappeared; but | the land owned by Turkish feudal lords, amounting to about half the cultivated area of the country, passed in the main int - the hands of the local chiefs and notables. These chieftai _had played a significant role during the Ottoman period. The had been entrusted with considerable administrative and representational powers, especially in those villages which h e, _ been granted a certain degree of autonomy. After an ambi


vhenUiidsien dette was proclaimed. Under pressure from the © hieftains, Kapodistrias hesitated to distribute the land among impoverished peasants. When Kapodistrias was murdered amembers of one of the most powerful clans, and when King Otto’ Wittelsbach, second son of King Ludwig I of Bavaria, was ced on the throne, the antiquated social structure was safeded. It was to take almost a century to achieve the necessa reforms and solve the land problem. his, then, is Greece in 1832: a small country, utterly devastated after a terrible war lasting almost ten years, with a 95 pecent peasant population and an archaic, semi-feudal strucre. The new state is not even the centre of Hellenism. No ity of any importance is included within its boundaries. Its ¢ ral, religious and economic centres are all abroad. Out of. a otal of three million Greeks, barely 700,000 are living in the eek state. When Athens became the second capital of the ¢c untry (after Nauplia) it was a miserable village with no more n 5,000 inhabitants — hardly to be compared with Constan-. ople, the symbol of national and religious regeneration, a the Patriarchate, centre of the Phanariots and the 


of skilful demagogy, in the name of the sade unityno sary to make the dream come true. Time after time the reali tion of this dream is successfully called upon to divert pu attention from the incapacity or unwillingness of the ru groups to take the measures required by the permanentlyf trating internal situation. It is true that the glorification o ‘Hellenic’ values, which constitutes the cultural parallel t the ‘Great Idea’, did much to develop national unity and consciousness. The mystifying power of the notions of “Eternal Greece’ and ‘cultural unity of the Greek people’, however, resulted iin serious ideological distortions which have | _ yet to be completely dissipated. For not only did the mystical orientation towards classical antiquity constitute a major obstacle to a realistic and DEPEI national outlook; it also j led. to the imposition of a ‘pure’ language, reintroducing q grammatical elements of ancient Greek, completely strange to ~ the spoken idiom and to a certain extent incomprehensible to the common people. The contradiction between official and ‘spoken language dominated the second half of the century and»4 became the main cultural issue. The educational obscurantism ¥ which persists up to the present day is to, a large extent due to” the fact that conservative political forces have managed to identify the ‘purity’ of the language, symbol of the eternity of | the nation, with the conservation of retrograde and mysti_ fying educational and cultural values. : id The international repercussions of the ‘Great Idea’ were’ even more far-reaching. Uncontrolled and intransigent mat ionalism led to chauvinism and pushed the country into conflict with the similarly motivated neighbouring Balkan a countries, a conflict which haunts Balkan relations to the present day. Imperialist antagonism between the powers, a especially between Britain and Russia, did much to agerav | .the problem. Throughout the nineteenth century the pow ee. continued to instigate or to repress the outbursts of t : diplomacy, and not hesitating to use direct military interve - tion. When, at the outbreak of the Crimean War (1853)
20
aYrEy"


( shea to beunder economic Date by the powers. ‘Meanwhile, the evolution of the socio-economic structures ‘the country was extremely slow. The absolute monarchy of K. g Otto, surrounded by a large Bavarian court, was charac- . terized by total disregard of the real needs and aspirations of the Greeks. Both the common people, who lived in a state of solute misery, and the leading strata, who had emergedduring and after the revolution (landowners, notables and military leaders), were intensely dissatisfied. The Bavarian dministration had installed an undisguised despotism and aled in complete separation from the- indigenous forces. This ate of affairs was only slightly modified by the revolution of _ 844, which resulted in the promulgation of the first Greek * nstitution. The limitations imposed on the monarch’s ab
the three major parties openly representing the interests of foreign ‘protectors’ (characteristically named the English, French and Russian parties respectively) were openly and quivocally directed towards acquiring the royal favour.
‘some progress is visible. A new political generation emerged | d the first signsof early capitalist development were manifest. If industrial activity was still extremely limited, the boom e merchant navy, tripled since 1838, and the spectacular : rowth of commerce resulted in the creation of a rising bour- isie. Though the main centres of economic and cultural :
growing. A considerable amount of Greek-owned capital ; invested in the country and began to constitute a strong, eof attraction for Greeks abroad. This trend gathered ee
lute powers were’ nominal, and therefore the machinations ee:
Atiis only after the ending of economic control in 1860 that
were still abroad, the prestige of the national state — :


forced by ce pone adent state ofgold: or ‘hot war (there _ frequent outbursts of liberation movements) which m ~ Greco-Ottoman relations throughout the century. — oy The Bavarians were generally hated, and the emerging po: tical forces were backed by Britain, suspicious of Ot vacillating foreign policy. He was dethroned in 1862. The new _ king was Prince George Gliicksburg of Denmark. The change _ marked a definite shift of Greek policy from the Russian to - the British orbit. As a gesture of friendship, the British-occupied Ionian islands were handed to Greece in 1864. As the decaying Ottoman Empire grew unable to resist the impact of 4 internal and external pressures, Britain based her policy on i strengthening Greece against her Slav neighbours. Whenever -4 the Balkan peoples tended to unite against the Sultan, Britain imposed a veto, for she was still haunted by the nightmare of a Balkan federation under Russian influence. In 1867 the Greek Prime Minister signed a treaty with Serbia, Rumania and Montenegro declaring that the future of the Balkans should be considered an internal Balkan affair; the British put pressure on King George and the government was immediately di - missed. Again, on the eve of the Russo-Turkish war in. 1877, _ Greece was forced by Britain to turn down Serbian proposals for a common offensive against Turkey. When, however, at the end of the war, the treaty of San Stefano strengthened the Slav states to a considerable extent at the expense of Greec not only did the British insist on a revision of the treaty and finally obtain a considerable curtailment of the Slav territori: gains through the treaty of Berlin (1878), but moreover, during subsequent negotiations with Turkey, they insisted on the ces- _ sion of Thessaly and a part of Epirus to Greece(1881). Thu not only was the territorial balance successfully maintained ~ against Russia; Britain also postponed an eventual Balkan _ coalition through the intensification of inter-Balkan cnet any - resulting from the treaties. 1 The period after 1864, when ‘the Aust democratic Cons tion was promulgated, and especially from 1875 to }


ad ithe period with his Duneanding personality and held yh fer,with minor interruptions, for twenty years. His great ae was an porrrevedently ambitious programme of
ere laid, a series of ports suitable for large steamships were structed, and the Corinth Canal was opened. The civil ser, Army: and Navy were completely reorganized. The rets of this thorough modernization of the infrastructure were rapidly felt. The merchant fleet reached a total of 400,000 tons by 1895, commerce flourished, and several large banks opened their doors and created the basis for a modern edit system. The country entered a phase of rapid overall economic development. Industrial production also made pross: industrial potential, measured in horsepower, was nty times greater in 1889 than in 1867. However, Greece was still far from being an industrialized country. Despite spectacular growth, development had a commercial and financial emphasis. The urban proletariat was still “ah only at the turn of the century did the number
ec) unions were still too weak, small and scattered for Pen. olitical and social effect to be more than marginal. The class
be forces, of eri Trikoupis was the Snel resentative. Both the industrial and the financial bour- _ sie backed the liberal movement, while conservatism was. don theold syne class of: saree)landowners. They owned :
vee)


extremely inegalitarian, except for a poll-tax, a remnant of
lic expenses. Trikoupis ‘therefore turned to borrowing from 
could not organize themselvés as a goneSee force, although a number of peasant revolts took place in the 1880s and were violently suppressed. On the whole, the peasants 
remained under the influence of the landlords and local not- a __ ables. Only toward the end of the century did the demand forland reform become so widespread as a be a political factor = _ of national importance, t ie;
Faced with opposition, Trikoupis heated to put. through land reform. Here he made a grave mistake. For not only did this prolong the underdevelopment of Greek agriculture; it also permitted the survival of the landowners as a separate a ' powerful class, which eventually resulted in the failure of the ~ liberal movement and his government’s downfall. _ The most important failure of Trikoupis, however, occurred in financial policy. The great increase in public expenditure due to the multiplication of public works was not covered by reorganization of the taxation system, which remained or- 4 _ ganized on a feudal basis. Taxes’ were mainly indirect and
the feudal Turkish system. There was no property or income | tax. Revenue, although increasing, was not able to cover ‘outaa
domestic and foreign capital. But the large, mainly British, loans which he obtained from abroad only aggravated the F situation. For not only were the loans provided at a consider- Y able discount from nominal value; they were only given when _ guaranteed by the cession of important branches of the state -revenues. This led to the point where repayment of the foreign = debt consumed more than 40 per cent of the government’s revenues. Increasing economic dependence naturally led -to stronger political dependence. Even if he had desired it, Trikre oupis could not have possibly escaped from the cletene of British protection. ' non ~The dependence on domestic capital, which finance is public expenses to an equal degree, proved to be even”


deadly ttothe liberal Soa Private Greek capital conolled more and more of the state’s sources of revenue. Thus the financiers flourished on the difficulties of the liberal state -which they were themselves trying to build on the political _ level. Unwilling to transform their banking and commercial - mentality, the ascending financial world defeated its‘own purposes. While the domestic capital interests of the time refused _ to take the risks of contributing to the effective industrial and _ economic development of the country, they demanded the fulfilment of the state’s legal obligations to the letter. The _ effect of the combined external and internal pressures was that Trikoupis was obliged to declare a state of national bank_ ruptcy (1893). Two years later, he was out of power. The fall of Trikoupis, who, like many other Greek statesmen, was to die in self-imposed exile, marks the failure of the first serious attempt by the Greek liberal bourgeoisie to take over and create a modern state. The social strata that had helped the liberals to come to power retreated to at least tem- _ _ porary conservatism. The workers, and even more so the _ peasants, suffered severely from the regular increases in taxa_ tion imposed to cope with growing financial difficulties. Mean_ while, the hesitancy manifested towards the problem of land f redistribution prevented the creation.of a new class of support for the liberal policies. Through the loss of its natural allies, }the progressive Greek bourgeoisie lost the support necessary to confront successfully the traditional political establishment of vested landed interests. | The conservatives thus returned to power after the fall of Trikoupis. The period from 1895 to 1907 saw a substantial .setback iin Greece’ s economic development. Foreign trade fell :,in yolume and domestic commiercial activity declined. The “new government could not solve the problem of the external debt, and a’state of permanent depression set in. Faced with J ing popular discontent, the government had recourse to the Great Idea’. Public opinion was aroused; in 1897, despite . economic*depression and a total lack of military preparations, © government was pushed into declaring war on Turkey. It ok only a few weeks for the Turkish Army, reorganized


under the direction of German organized and demoralized Greek Army:‘under Constantine and to invade Greek territory, me
_ mo resistance. ryt 2 ES a It was only because of strong ingernatonan heh British _ — pressure that Greece suffered no more than insignificant te ~ ritorial losses. German influence in the Ottoman Empire, grow- 7 ing since the Treaty of Berlin in 1878, had produced new anxieties for Britain. Since the final dismemberment of Ottoman power could not be far off, a weakening of Greece, the : _ only stable representative of British interests in the Balkans, could be fatal. The key question was that of the future of Macedonia, the heart and military centre of the peninsula, and the scene of an intense diplomatic, propaganda and military struggle between all the Balkan nationalities, each putting forward historical, demographic and diplomatic arguments aah claim the whole area for themselves. in But if the defeat had no territorial results, its moral impact a was enormous. Known to everyone as ‘the shame of 1897’, it~ - was the turning-point which led to the abandonment of the© _ ‘Great Idea’ in its pure form. In view of the glaring contradiction between the conservative government’s professed aim of rebuilding ‘historic Hellas’ and the incapacity and weakness of the Greek state, it was understood on all sides that profound structural reforms were needed» before another _ military venture could be made. Discontent was deepest in the ranks of the Army. Junior officers in particular held the politi:cal world iin general to blame for the frustration of all national _aspirations. The monarchy too was called into question, for the King and his sons were held responsible for the incom_ petence and demoralization of the Army command,
i aO.
served a precarious balance for the decade after oe But anti-Royalist feeling in the Army was intensified by t ie poets attitude in the crisis of 1905, when Cretan
26


The Emergence of Independent Greece (1821-1909)
of liberal ideas which were again in ascendancy, the growing ‘dissatisfaction in the Army took the form of a secret society, under the name of the ‘Military League’, mainly made up of junior officers of bourgeois origin. In cooperation with a group of young radical politicians, this group presented an ultimatum demanding the immediate reorganization of the Army, a new constitution limiting the power of the King to intervene in politics, the ousting of the royal family from the Army command and a radical purge of the administrative apparatus. The ultimatum was rejected and the Union of Officers proclaimed a revolution (1909). The revolution of 1909 marks the end of an era. As we shall see, the bourgeois ascendancy is thereby consolidated. The last remnants of feudalism will be dissipated. Greece is entering a new phase.


CHAPTER 2
The Creation of the Bourgeois State (1909-22) ae
THE military revolt of 1909 did not have an explicit ideological and political content. It was the culmination of a long processof discontent and exasperation against the leading political factions and the Palace. Its demands were founded on the - nationalist aspirations of the young officers, which seemed irrevocably nullified by the incompetence and selfishness of_. the governing oligarchy. Yet the military ultimatum of Colonel - Zorbas achieved much more than it had aimed for. Backed by | the overwhelming majority of the middle classes, who found _ in the revolution a sudden chance for a radical modification © of the system, the. military revolutionaries discovered that ‘ _ they had not only imposed their moderate demands, but va had in reality become the only organized power in the country. King George I, with considerable political foresight, did not try to intervene and the political oligarchy of the clans, _- which had ruled over Greece for almost a century, found itself _ denuded of all authority. oF Their control over the country had been based on the monoi poly they exercised over the political parties. Growing unrest _ since 1900 had already given birth to a number of progressive and socialist-oriented movements. But whereas these move- ments were still in their infancy, the military revolution. had 4 }served as a catalyst for the virtually universal opposition which had been ready to explode, but had up to te failed through _ lack of an inspired leadership. ( ; That this underlying class antagonism between the Fai caste and the ascending bourgeoisie had not previously take open and defined political forms can be partly explained bj th fact that there was no formal feudal system in Greec
28


had changed radically. ‘The thiddle classes had been further _ Strengthened, especially under the impetus of the booming "mefchant navy: and the rapid development of the banking "system; the example of the Young Turks’ revolution which ; had overthrown the Sultan onlya year ago had revived the __ hopes of the radicals; and the economic policy of the succes“sive governments had become more and more oppressive for _ both the middle classes and the peasants. The successive tax _ increases on essential goods put the main burden on the wor_kers and the middle classes, who had‘ by now begun to organize in commercial guilds and unions. In March 1909 thousands of shopkeepers had violently demonstrated, in ‘Athens and Piraeus, against the unequally distributed taxation. On 14 September a huge rally of over 50,000 (out of a population of under 200,000) shook Athens. While declaring _ their full confidence in the ‘revolution’, the Athenians went, _ beyond the officer’s intentions. The demands for a system of | progressive income taxation, the protection of production, the transformation of the civil service into a body of true public _ servants by the abolition of the spoils system rampant till then, an improvement in the workers’ standard of living, and a ban _ OM usury as a criminal offence expressed the class antagonism _ that had been politically silent for so long. At the same time, _ the organization of the workers had been strengthenebdy the creation of numerous trade unions, and the discontent among ES the peasants had been growing since 1898, when the crisis in the currant trade, which had constituted a staple export, had 3 ‘reduced large strata of the agrarian population to misery. Un_ rest was especially strong in Thessaly, where the demand for agrarian reform of the large ‘estate-system’, inherited from
1905 and 1910, which had been bloodily repressed. Thus when the Military League entrusted the political
young Cretan lawyer who had distinguished himself during the |
“ 2k Greek tonnage rose from 8,241 in 1875 to 893,650 in 1915.
ae
ee
var
the Turks, led to a series of violent peasant revolts, between _
leadership of the new movement to Eleftherios Venizelos, a _


die geoisie found itself in power so sudden established political formation to take advantage of the situc __ tion. This proved to be all to the good. Venizelos, who had been _ €alled in precisely to fill the political gap, was quickly surroun ae _ ded by talented and radical young intellectuals who represen' ted ideas, tendencies and aspirations that had been fermenting _in the frustrated middle classes for a long time. $ The elections of 1910 were a triumph for the new Liberal — % Party. Venizelos formed his first cabinet, which consisted — a almost entirely of new men. A period of intense reconstruction and, radical reform thus began. The bourgeois intellectuals would attempt what they had been dreaming of for a long ; time: the construction of a modern Dec on the West- A ' ern European model, MA The prerequisite for the reform programme of the Liberals "Was a constitutional reform. The constitution of 1864 was fully revised, individual liberties guaranteed, and the fealuagDse tions of a ‘State of Law’ were laid. However, though some of the formal prerogatives of the monarchy were curtailed, the ‘f real powers of the King remained ambiguous, a fact which was to have explosive consequences. m On this institutional framework, Venizelos launched’aniim- tt pressive legislative programme. Land reform was the most i_d
urgent and difficult problem. A constitutional amendment (1911) was promulgated authorizing expropriation with com- pensation > though not without bitter opposition from the still ' powerful landowner class. The medieval agrarian system of the Ionian islands was abolished (1912) and agricultural co_ operatives were formed for the first time. Social legislation. was equally radical. Low wages were exempted from confis- _ _ cation in cases of debt (1909), the trade union federations of Athens and Piraeus were recognized (1910), Sunday was made a oneal rest day (1910), a new and rapid procedure was


u - contracts. Finally a compulsory general labour ‘ urance scheme was introducediin 1914. The fiscal system was also reorganized on a more equitable basis. Progressive taxation of income was introduced in 1911 and death duties were reorganized and greatly increased in 1914. If, however, the legislative framework set up by Venizelos’s government was unprecedented in scale and progressive in outlook, some of this legislation took many years to bear fruit. For example, bitter opposition from the landowners ran parallel to Venizelos’s own hesitancy in the adjournment of effective land redistribution, a fact which, later on, contributed to the abandonment of Venizelos by large masses of _ peasants whose aspirations he had not lived up to. For the time being, however, the shortcomings of Venizelos’s policy _ were not yet apparent. The new spirit he had managed to conyey in all sectors of governmental activities had given the country a new self-confidence. It should be stressed that the reinforcement of the country’s military forces had also received the highest priority. Under British and French supervision, both the Army and Navy were fundamentally reorganized and strengthened. Thus, when _ the Balkan Wars of 1912-13 broke out, Greece, under Venizelos, found herself strong enough to cope with them. First in * coalition with Serbia, Montenegro and Bulgaria against Tur
Teal
key and subsequently with Serbia against Bulgaria, the Greek | “Army was victorious. Crown Prince Constantine led the Greek aiarmies into Salonica, and after the treaty of Bucarest (1913); ~ which put an end to the wars, Greece acquired Crete, Epirus,
islands, except for Imbros and Tenedos, the two gates to the Hellespont straits.
31
_ But this triumphant hour of Hellenism was not to last long.

‘most of Macedonia (including Salonica) and the Aegean \


% tie esecampaigns ‘he had led, he indulg: sabotage of the Prime Minister’s policies. From th 1 there were two rival centres of political power. When the First World War broke out in 1914, diotetic! considerations added to the undercurrents of strife that had ey _. been lurking between the two men. Constantine, who was married to the Kaiser’s sister, was strongly pro-German. But he | could not openly press towards entering the war on the central powers’ side, as both Turkey and Bulgaria, the main enemies _- of Greece, were on the German side already. He therefore - opted for neutrality, which brought him to an open clash with Venizelos, who had decided to enter the war on the side of the Allies. Believing in the final victory of the Western powers, particularly in British naval supremacy in the Mediterranean, BY and hoping for further Greek territorial gains, Venizelos insisted on clinging to the Greek-Serbian alliance of 1913 according to which Greece should assist Serbia if the latter were attacked by Bulgaria. A Bulgarian attack against Serbia being imminent, Venizelos was for full cooperation with - Britain and France, who were offering an alliance. The King, ©: however, was adamant against it. Venizelos therefore resigned, but won the subsequent general election (1915) and was re- — ( _ turned to office. Five months later, however, he was once more _ obliged to resign by the King’s blatant refusal to accept the _ government’s policy. Secretly the King had already been in touch with the Kaiser, and had even let the Bulgarian ambas_ sador know that his country had nothing to fear from Greece ~ whatever happened: This flagrant misuse of the King’s constitutional authority led to Serbia being overrun, while Venizelos could do nothing except denounce the King and his duplicity. By now Constantine was reigning practically as a dictator through a series of puppet governments, and fierce - repression against the Venizelists set in. Venizelos. conse. quently refused to take part in the forthcoming election (1916) and pursued an extra-parliamentary opposition. In the meantime the military situation of the Allies had


: ation ofthe BourgeoisState(1909-22)
rt,land the iaihae of the Gallipoli expedition made the opening of a Balkan front all the more urgent. On the other hand Constantine was under continuous pressure by his wife and the Kaiser to enter the war on Germany’s side, or at least to remain benevolently neutral. In spite of all the Allied threats and interventions, he surrendered the strategic fort of Rupel on the Greco-—Bulgarian border to the Bulgarians. In September he even authorized the Bulgarians to enter the port of _Kavalla on the Aegean, and ordered the Greek division gar_risoned there to surrender.’ _ This convinced the Allies that more dynamic measures would have to be taken. Venizelos, who had departed in rage to his native island, was encouraged to proclaim a revolution, and to establish a rival government in Salonica (October 1916). Immediately, additional Allied troops landed in Salonica in great numbers. Anglo-French troops also landed in Athens with Constantine’s grudging consent but were obliged to depart when the royal troops put up an unexpected resistance. Consequently a blockade was imposed and Constantine “was. finally obliged to abdicate in favour of his second son, Alexander (June 1917), thus enabling Venizelos to return to Athens iin triumph. This defined Venizelos’ s relation to the Allies and especially ‘toBritain. Throughout his political career Venizelos was to adhere faithfully to his firm principle in foreign, policy: his belief that Greece’s interests are permanently associated with Britain, whose advice he never ceased to follow. His subsequent attitude towards the monarchy was to a very great extent dictated by Britain, whose only objection towards monarchy ‘in, Greece’ was in the person of Constantine. And when in the _mid-thirties violent unrest seized the Cypriots, who demanded nion with Greece (Cyprus was promised to Greece during the first war as it was later to be promised by implication during | the second), Venizelos, who had fought for many years for he union of Crete with Greece, flatly refused to sponsor the aspirations of the Cypriot people. But thisis looking forward.
33 \
Ayyear and a half later, the war ended. The Allied victory : ‘) abled reece fo fulfil all her territorial desires.an the Treaty as


of Imbros and Tenedos, went to Greece whe was also .entrusted with the administration of Smyrna and a large chunk of its Anatolian hinterland. The triumph of Venizelos’s policy was total. But the price Greece had to pay was incommensurably large. The feud that had begun as a personal dispute be- tween Venizelos and Crown Prince Constantine back in 1912 had by now developed into a national ‘schism’ of extreme bitterness that was to dominate the social and political life the country between the two wars. Persecution and open terrorism of opponents in both camps _ resulted in an insurmountable gap. The question of the regime, that is monarchy versus republic, blurred all other issues and superseded the grave social problems which had originally been _ its cause. f 5 Foreign-policy issues dominated the 1920 general election. The Royalists, with the slogan of ‘small but honourable Greece’, preached demobilization and peace, while the Liberals cam- © _ paigned for the new ‘Greater Greece’ spanning two continents and five seas. Eight years of continuous mobilization and j fighting had had their effect on the war-weary people. While » retaining his strength among the liberal bourgeoisie and the, | working class of the larger towns, Venizelos suffered a heavy' setback among the peasants and lost the election. The unfortunate accidental death of King Alexander, a few weeks beforethe election, added to the difficulties by posing the problem of the succession. The Royalists, who formed the new goverp:, -a ment, held a plebiscite which led to the return of King SRE 4 stantine—to the discomfort of the Allied powers. The government was faced at once with the Be of | enforcing the Treaty of Sévres, which had created “Greater ; _ Greece’ at the expense of Turkey. Especially delicate was the q situation in the hinterland of Smyrna, where the Greek ad-~ ministration had to cope with a hostile Turkish majority, Under the spell of the image of ‘Greater Greece’, the Royal- . ists reversed their own platform and continued Venizelos’s_ dynamic foreign policy. But — openly distrusted by the Allie a whose interests had by now switched — they were left alone:
34 > ea


es Ate Penal
e igs‘3o tthe BoursecisStatce(19t09-2222)
siesibily: rising alderPatactaphe esas inspired leader_ ship. The morale and efficiency of the Army had been greatly reduced by the purges of most Venizelist elements, so the attempt to launch a general offensive against Kemal’s stronghold” in Ankara ended in disaster. In August 1922, the Greek Army _ was smashed and fied in disorder before the Turks, who pursued its remnants into the sea, slaughtered thousands. of Greeks, and finally set fire to Smyrna in the midst of indescrib_able chaos. Hundreds of thousands of Greeks were forced to flee to the neighbouring islands or the Greek mainland. It was the end of 2,500 years of Greek supremacy on the Aegean coast of Asia Minor — and of the ‘Great Idea’. This disaster was to have profound and lasting effects on the nation’s life. The immediate result was a revolution, staged _by a number of Republican officers under Colonel Plastiras. The King had to abdicate once, more — this time in favour of his son, George II — and to go into exile, where he died a few _ months later. The revolutionary government and the Venizelists, now back in favour, ‘carried out a new purge against mem‘bers of the Royalist clique, who were held responsible for the disaster.’ Six of the most prominent personalities, including _ex-Premier Gounaris, were executed after a summary trial. _ The ‘schism’ between Venizelos.and Royalists had been sanctioned with blood, thus feeding fanatical controversies for _ two more decades. ! The Asia Minor disaster led to the treaty of Lausanne 1923), which was to draw the final frontier of Greece. Greece lost Eastern Thrace, the islands of Imbros and Tenedos, and, of course, Smyrna and the Anatolian provinces. Most imporfant however was the clause stipulating the obligatory exshange of populations between Turkey and Greece. Over a million and a half Greeks were to be transferred from Ana‘olia to Greece. The enthnologic and political map of the Near East would be greatly modified. f en years of war had resulted in the creation of a country 
aetheItalians in 1947, ;
35,
Apart |from the addition of the Dodecanese, which was ceded to. Bas


doubled*® and the population grew even more . spectacularly + The 1,500,000 refugees, whose social and economic integration was to constitute the greatest and most urgent problem of the country, changed the population structure completely. The urban population was greatly augmented, especially in the Athens district and the few large towns, where a numerous 4 urban proletariat was created for the first time. Hundreds of thousands of refugees formed belts of misery around the main cities, unemployed, moneyless. and homeless, thus creating a_ permanent furnace of social and political turmoil. Another important result of the flood of refugees, and the obligatory population exchange, was the complete transformation of the ethnic composition of Macedonia. The departure of the Mos- ha lems, and the deliberate policy of the Liberal governments who installed Anatolian peasants in the abandoned plots, resulted in the total domination of the Greek element in an area where ethnological heterogeneity had given rise to repeated international imbroglios.® Yet, despite all these changes, Greece remained a pre- . dominantly agrarian country. So land reform was still the most urgent socio-economic problem, and the arrival of the refugees merely accentuated it. In the newly acquired provinces of Macedonia and Thrace, as in Thessaly earlier, the Ottoman feudal system of big estates prevailed. Fear of social 
3. Rising from 63,211 square kilometres in 1912 to 130,199 square kilometres in 1922. 4. Rising from 2,631,952 inhabitants in 1907, to 5 016,889 in 1920 and - 6,204,674 in 1928 after the refugee influx had been completed. . 5. Thus while in 1908 only 24 per cent of the population lived in ‘towns _of over.5,000 inhabitants, the percentage had risen to 27 per cent in 1920 and to 33 per cent by 1928. Greater Athens grew from 452,919 inhabitants Ay in 1920 to 801,622 in 1928. 6. Whereas in 1912 the Greeks represented onl 42.6 per cent of inet Macedonian population as opposed to 39.4 per cent of the Moslems, ; 9.9 per cent of the Bulgarians and 8.1 per cent of miscellaneous groups
_ cent and in Thrace 35 per cent of the total population. * ee
36 
~
(especially Jews), by 1926 the Greeks had reached 88.8 per cent, the Mos- :7 lems had all left, and the Bulgarians and Jews had fallen to 5.1 per cent and 6.1 per cent respectively. In Macedonia the refugees represented 45eae 4,


‘revolution and dananig ae pressure combined to hasten and reform. Venizelos in 1917, and the revolutionary government in 1923, decreed the expropriation of practically all large estates ‘(public, private or Church-owned) and their distribution to landless peasants.’ However, resistance by the landowners combined with the slowness and inefficiency of the overstaffed and bureaucratic civil service to delay’ the process of reform, which was completed only in 1937. Thus the whole inter-war period was marked by the peasants’ endless struggles to overcome legal, administrative and economic obstacles. _ This partly explains the vehemence with which Greek peasants clung to their privately owned small plots, and their reluctance to consider other, more radical solutions of the land a _problem. The very low ratio of arable land to total area, and __ the consequent rural over-population,® led to the creation of extremely small plots, totally insufficient for adequate subsistence.’ The widespread parcelling-out of these plots added to the economic plight of the peasants.” The surplus population had been relieved by mass emigration to the United States, but this was drastically restricted by the new US immigration law of 1922. Thus, agrarian under-employment was in__tensified and contributed, by keeping the capital-labour ratio’ -extremely low, to pe pc aasing the very low productivity of agriculture. There was another reason for the lack of any significant capital investment in agriculture: there were no large agria cultural units of production to introduce modern techniques. Although collective cooperatives were introduced and
a 7. Ultimately. over 1,200,000 hectares, amounting to 38 per cent of the arable land of the country, were thus distributed. : ' 8. It was estimated that 50 per cent of the rural population was ‘surplus’, i.e. more than needed in view of the prevailing type of production.
tares, 36 per cent were of 10-30 hectares, 24 per cent of 30-100 hectares, -and ‘only 4 per cent over 100 hectares. 0. In 1929, each peasant owned an average of 5.6 pieces of land, sometimes at considerable distances from one another. It has been estimated t the peasant produced enough to feed between 1.5 and 2 persons. = Pa 1. The yearly average of Greek emigrants to the USA was 25,000 tween 1901 and 1910, and 12,000 between 1920 and'1930. ! {
37
aa Thirty-six per cent of the agricultural units were smaller than 10 hec- | i


- encouraged, they did not agge to dominate the scenef.eSesall and middle-sized units, cultivated by the owner and his family, remained the norm. This impeded the creation of a separate class of landless agricultural workers,” and contributed to a pronounced conservatism of the peasantry which was to cats of great political significance. The organization of agricultural credit could have functioned as an important impetus for the modernization of Greek agriculture. The scarcity, of peasant-owned capital being forbidding, it was only through the state that the Greek peasants could hope to acquire the funds to purchase fertilizers and mechanical instruments that would lead to an in_ crease in productivity. State credit was also needed to free them from the usurers, who, if they could not deprive them of the land, which was proclaimed to be under certain conditions unalienable, effectually squeezed them to the bone. But the creation of the Agricultural Bank in 1929 proved insufficient to cope with the problem. Though a large number of peasants profited from loans,® the Bank’s funds were inadequate and the amounts lent were therefore far too small to finance a new productive structure. Thus, many peasants became economically dependent on the state and were always demanding. moratoria or postponements for the small sums which they owed and could not repay. Hence in turn a political. dependence of peasants on local politicians developed. To the present day, the relationship between peasants and representatives of the government has had feudal-aristocratic undertones. The peasant could hope for nothing better than a small loan, the abrogation of an old debt, or a moderately good Price for | his product. The\urban scene had also changed drastically after the war. The long years of fighting, the influence of the Russian Revo-' lution, and especially the tragic conditions of the urban refu- _ gees, led the working class to organize on a more radical basis. He
12. In 1928 only 6 per cent of the agrarian population was landless sid . worked as labourers of unowned land. 13. In 1932 one-fourth of land cultivators had been given ieee averre aging 3,368 drachmas. ;
38


November 1918, 14 and the Greek Socialist Party a week later. In 1922 it adhered to the Comintern, and two years later it became the Communist Party of Greece. The rapid rise of proletarian consciousness necessarily had political repercus_ sions. It contributed to the gradual ossification of the Liber_ als, who feared a more radical critiqu'eof the foundations of society, even if this critique did not, for a long time, take alarming dimensions in terms of the actual political forces that stood behind it. For despite the miserable economic conditions, the Communists failed to acquire a significant follow
force throughout the inter-war period. This can only be partly explained by the Comintern directive urging the creation of a confederate Balkan state, in which Macedonia and Thrace would be detached from Greece and form separate states (1924). The main reason for the restricted appeal of the Commun_ ists must rather be sought in the social background of the. majority of the refugees. Indeed, the bulk of the urban Ana- tolian Greek population, which had been transformed into a lumpenprolateriat around Athens had previously constituted h the solid middle classes of the main towns of Asia Minor and _ Bulgaria. Despite their destitute condition, most of them had - never relinquished their bourgeois mentality. They were also
years when they fruitlessly waited for reparations, housing and status. It was only later on, and to the extent that they were gradually integrated as industrial workers in Greek - society and had consequently abandoned their dream of reconquering the status they had lost, that they started to act and function as a working class. During the inter-war years of
i of which they had created their little world of non-integrated
heir own situation had helped to create.
39
‘The Gen ‘al Brestration of Trade Gaieaehwas ereatodain
ing among the refugees, and remained a marginal political 
ably manipulated by the Venizelist officials during the long L
petitioners, served as a brake for the social movement which ©
i 14, Represnting214 unions with 60, 000members, out of a total of 336,
political and social upheaval the very destitution, in the midst _


_- prises Avie under five workers.® Famili ybetorganizatio : also impeded the development of strong social movements except in the few large enterprises and in the public services. _ Although industry developed rapidly up to the Second World _| War, heavy industry never took root. The working class con- tinued throughout the period to be numerically weak, for the ‘most part unorganized, and to a significant degree under the ~ _ patronizing influence of the employers. Greece was. still an - agrarian and underdeveloped country. ty bes
_ 15. In 1920 out of2,213 industrial units, employing a total of 130,777
workers, 1,188 employed between 1 and 5 workers, 743 between 6 and 25°
and only 282 over 25 workers. In 1928 only 33 per cent of the population _ were salary or wage earners of any kind. Sixty-one per cent worked on their — p - Own account and 6 per cent were employers. In the same year 68 per cent still worked in primary’production, 15 per cent in industry of all kinds, _ mines and transport, and the remaining 17 per cent in trade, public services
and services of all kinds. It is finally significant that notwithstanding the
__ large and over-swollen civil service, only 5.5,employees, workers and wage
earners correspond to 1 employer. ‘ ee


CHAPTER 3
The Failure of Democracy (1922-40)
THE military revolution of 1922 saved the country from the total chaos that had resulted from the Asia Minor débdcle. The radical officers who had assumed control managed to reOrganize the Army and impose discipline within a very short period of time, thus discouraging the Turks from continuing an aggressive policy. The Treaty of Lausanne (1923), the negotiation of which was again carried out by Venizelos, consoli- dated the peace. But the intense political feud between - Royalists and Venizelists was to take on disastrous dimensions. The anti-dynastic fervour of the revolutionary government, which had been only slightly moderated after the dethroning of Constantine, was intensified after an unsuccessful army putsch under General Metaxas, the only Royalist leader still free (October 1923). As a result of that putsch the question of monarchy or republic was open again. But the Venizelists themselves were by now splitting. In the absence of Veniz_ los, who (except for one brief period) did not return to active politics until 1928, the lack of any other undisputed leadership enabled the centrifugal forces which had been lurking to manifest themselves acutely. The Left, under Papanastassiou, who represented a continuation of the radical, mildly socialist, _ moyement which had emerged ‘during 1909, and was quickly swallowed by the Venizelist tide, sided with the vehemently anti-Royalist officers against the bulk of the Liberals, who were following Venizelos’s instructions. He, again deferring to British wishes, was reluctant to contemplate any change of <=| ‘tegime. This split had serious repercussions on the subsequent evolution of the Liberals. The Republicans did not win a f majority in the elections of December 1923, which were won _ _by the moderate Liberals after a Royalist abstention; but, two _ days after the election, an ultimatum of the Revolutionary % Committee representing the army obliged King George to
41


: Butthe flagrant idiorenGon of he ‘Kem on: behalf of politi_ eal faction, particularly regarding an issue which could and_ should have been settled by popular vote, was to have lasting effects on political life. It inaugurated a series of Army interventions, putsches and pronunciamentos which deeply dues _ ted the new republic’s frail foundations. Between 1924 and 1928 there were ten Prime Ministers, i three general elections, and eleven military coups or pronun-ciamentos. A military dictatorship was imposed and subse- i quently overthrown by another military coup. The President of the Republic was deposed once and resigned twice, only to “revoke his resignation. The active presence of the Army on the political scene imposed an unwanted alliance on the left- wing Republicans, now the only politically articulate force for
every shade — having repeatedly intrigued with the Army, used
progress. Thus, with the compliance of virtually the entire political world, a kind of parallel power was created, courted and recognized by all parties and factions. Greek politicians of ~
it, and formed alliances with it — accepted it as the supreme i _arbiter, whose ‘will’ was a fully recognized partof the system, ) The very forces that had fought for a republic, and had finally _ succeeded (if by dubious methods) in creating it, NOW con- 
_ armed forces.
tributed to maintaining a permanent putschist tradition in the 
The turmoil was self--perpetuating, since the Army was | naturally purged after each successful or unsuccessful putsch. The hundreds of purged officers, who were a powerful pressure :
commissions restored and were’a constant source of unrest.
* fought for its control. < 4)
time‘dominantly anti- Royalist, and as a rule Republican, ji a ver resence and menace undermined the structures itaspiri
yp rg
group, or rather many pressure groups, wanted to get their 5
Throughout the inter-war period the Greek Army remained | the object of interminable strife between the‘factions who |
If this putschist element in the Army remained for a long “7


popular eae as a permanent state of
Cae Thus, Army intervention was accepted as an intrinsic _
as, the majority of the middle classes reacted, at least in the > beginning and before its openly fascist character had beme manifest, with more pense than outrage.
gradual conservatism which was to permeate the progresforces that had abandoned the Liberals in 1922. The proessives’ alliance with the ultra--Republican generals on the 4 issue of the republic finally led them ‘to political subjugation to a military faction, whose radicalism was centred on unconditional Opposition to the monarchy. The establishment of the republic naturally deprived the officers of the single issue which united them. Their interventionist threats were consequently devoid of any specific ideological or political content, d very soon they split into numerous factions, some of which ibsequently turned Royalist. in the indescribable chaos hich was to prevail until 1928, when Venizelos, driven by his mM uncontrollable ambition and by his successors’ inability Unite themselves around a substitute leader, returned to e politics. The radical Republicans who had separated | the Venizelists in order to pursue a more progressive policy thus found themselves entangled in an alliance which fas not based on any ideological or programmatic substance. order to extricate themselves they had to choose their u d. But instead of trying to ally themselves with the ent socialist labour movement which, if still very small, 1oW growing rapidly, they chose to return to a series of nst ble coalitions with the Liberals, who were enabled to npose their conservative policies. mportant constitutional issues which dominated the political world eee the republican Constitution was promulgated
’s definite break with the nascent worker
oo E .


oelena): formed ebasanuiiie pany stephenin and assume! a _ the practical leadership of the labour unions. But the gap be- ‘tween them and the other progressive political forces quickly_ became wider, as the Comintern’s relentless attacks against all shades of bourgeois parties (including all agrarian move-ments) not only prevented effective coalitions of progressive forces, but also greatly facilitated the open persecution they were subjected to-from the day they were founded. ; ' The first historic chance for the creation of a strong social_ democratic movement had thus been lost. The protests of _ Papanastassiou against the domestic policies of the Venizelists _ became more and more feeble. By the beginning of the thirties, the ‘Democratic Union’ asthe left-wing Liberals were is called, had been transformed into a faction of the Liberal Iie ‘3 Party, totally subjected to the latter, and incapable of presenting a plausible alternative to Venizelos. But the disappearBN ance of the Left implied that the remaining political groups were more or less in agreement about fundamental social. _ issues. The gradual disappearance of the landowner class and ~ of their political counterparts virtually eliminated policy _ differences between the Liberals and the Populists. (Conserva-~.__ tives), the latter representing the forces that had developedout of the old Royalist clique. However, the schism between _ Venizelists and Populists was still so deeply entrenched, both © in popular opinion and in the political world, that the an_ tagonism between these two main groups remained alive even though the social causes that had given rise to it had long since ‘disappeared. Thus, with the political struggle detached from _ reality, the issues which were truly significant were plunged_ - into silence. The relative weakness of the labour movement, | _ and the lack of any organized opposition from the Left, com-» _ pletely blurred the real social issues. iy _ The middle classes, whose ascendancy had given rise tothe Liberal movement, were by now strongly entrenched in the _ social and political structure. Industrial activities were still | P marginal, and throughout the inter-war period Greek a capital was very reluctant to assume the task eeCents i


uropean colonial interests in the Near East. The total decay the Ottoman Empire and the Egyptian Khedivate during
bypowers to impose upon them a quasi-colonial status. It was the _ Greek merchants and bankers who were the major beneficiaries of this development, and between 1880 and 1910 colossal fortunes were made in the Mediterranean periphery. If the 1922 crisis eradicated the Greek element from Turkey and Bulgaria, their position remained unchallenged in Egypt and to a certain extent in Rumania, where the most influential A Greek financiers continued to make their fortunes. Typically, 'Many of the closest advisers of Venizelos in the economic
_ helps to explain Venizelos’s automatic obedience to British and French diplomatic interests. It also provides a deeper understanding of the reluctance of Greek capital to centre its __interests upon domestic development. While the political - foundations of the ‘Great Idea’ had been completely de- stroyed, the international context enabled the. Greek boureoisie to continue thriving beyond Greek frontiers. Thus the peculiar evolution of the Greek ruling class allowed the revival _ of some of the ideological tenets which had been created dur- _ ing the nineteenth century. Not surprisingly, therefore, the ‘main preoccupatioonf the bourgeois liberals was a monetary _ Stabilization which would enable merchant capitalism to deelop undisturbed. A natural consequence of this was that the tuling classes came to cooperate equally with both the Liberals nd thePopulists. © The refugee influx, however, created an enormous problem employmenantd social integration. Even though it repre-_ ted 3 bonus of skilled labour, industrialization did not :
Bane the refugee Soveneat from joining hands with the tlabourmovement. The Communist Party, for its Pats
45
and banking field belonged to this group. This undoubtedly _


_ was unable to‘puis the despair of the refugee masse it insisted on a dogmatic proletarian line, which was. hardly acceptable to the bulk of the refugees whose hopes were deliberately flattered by the Liberals. i Thus when Venizelos returned to politics in 1928, to ead for four and a half years over the longest and most stable government of the inter-war period, the internal structure of the republic was already frail. His immense prestige, especially among the refugees, brought about a regroupment of the _ Liberal and’ Republican forces, while the Populists had not yet been able to recover from the revolution of 1922 and the \ discredit they had suffered after the Asia Minor disaster. Yet, despite the lack of any serious opposition, Venizelos was con- _ fronted by difficulties which rapidly proved unsurmountable. The integration of the refugees was the dominant economic - problem. The extremely low productivity of agriculture only © became graver when 800,000 additional farmers were added to - an already overcrowded countryside. Huge capital investment ~ was needed in order to develop new arable land and to finance the new farming units. Although a considerable additional - arable area was brought into cultivation, productivity rose very slowly. Problems of readjustment of the uprooted peasants, the extremely bad crops of the years 1929-31 and the - rapid fall in international demand for luxury agricultural products, which constituted Greece’s main. exports, contributed to the intensification of the agricultural problems and to the growing trade deficit.’ _ Equally urgent was the problem ry, housing the numerous refugees in urban areas. The aid of international capital was
1. Thus between 1929 and 1934 the gross trade of Greece declined by | 21.5 per cent in quantity and by 70.5 per cent in prices. By 1934 exports a had fallen to 280 million francs representing less than half the value of - imports. The Greek export gap, which was created by the sharp fall in demand for tobacco and currants in 1929-32, was subsequently covered iin’ part by the deliberate policy of Germany, who managed to create a zone of
; political significance in 1938. Germany imported 43 per cent/of Greek
> War. bes
_ virtual German monopoly in trade, a fact that was to have considerable a
exports, almost tripling the share of German trade beforeoe First World a
”|


in securing large fareigt l\oans, ai the world crisis. This, ¥ however, in combination with the Hoover moratorium on war i4 indemnities, which Greece was due to receive, weighed heavily _ on the foreign debt. By 1932 it amounted to 100 dollars per q person (more than the per capita income), and its servicing _ required between 40 and 50 per cent of the national budget. _ The international crisis worsened the impasse, and partial national bankruptcy was proclaimed in 1932, a fact which strengthened the pressure of foreign creditors. Under these conditions rapid industrialization proved img possible. The dependence of Greek industry on imported | q capital goods aggravated the unfavourable trade balance. q Private Greek capital: was mainly oriented towards light in_ dustry on a very small scale. The only ventures of any impor___ tance were undertaken by foreign, mainly British, firms.’ q Venizelos’s failure: to implement structural changes in the
‘
id
ny
Greek economy finally led to his downfall. By then the liberal _ bourgeoisie, who constituted his main support, had become _prematurely ossified, both socially and politically, and findqing itself on the defensive against the rising tide of working class pressure. Naturally, this disarray found its political counterpart in the lack of a decided and firmly oriented leadership. The failure of Venizelos and the crisis that followed only aggravated the confusion of the leading strata. Hence renewed Army interventions and prospective ‘strong men’ were not universally deplored, and parallel centres of decision in the Army and the political system were allowed to evolve almost | dependently of one another. The return of Venizelos in 28 had only temporarily averted the political crisis. His >wnfall four years later precipitated it. e yf Pheinconclusive results of the 1932 elections, which irene the fallof the Liberal government, had another effect of key
2. This was only a prelude to what was to become one of the fundaental characteristics of the Greek economy after the Second World War. 1 enormous Greek-owned capital was profitably invested abroad, lack ca ital iin the country obliged (and still obliges) Greece to depend on


"importance. For ae rst axe ie Communi vi xceeded i 5 per cent, which, added to the 6 per cent. of the ne ly formed ; Radical Agrarian Party, gave rise to considerable panic. Dur-ing 1932 a large number of strikes’ had been met by growing police violence, and the persecution of left-wing elements and labour leaders was intensified on the basis of a law of totalitarian inspiration ‘For the Protection of the Social Regime’, passed by Venizelos in 1929. Although the labour movement was still lacking in organization, unemployment (by 1934 there were 180,000 unemployed) had taken on alarming dimensions. The situation in the countryside was no better. The tobacco workers in Macedonia and the currant producers in the Peloponnese had been deeply affected by the international economic crisis which had curbed the demand for their products. Numerous agricultural demonstrations were violently dispersed and, until 1933, unrest among the peasants was. con- : tinuous. ° The shift towards the Populists that had taken place in the 1932 elections was a sign that the Liberal star was fading. Popular discontent and the fierce demagogic attacks of the - Populists led to a temporary stalemate between the two main political groups. After many months of unstable coalitions, during which the in--fighting reached new heights, the Populists _ managed to form a government under Tsaldaris (1933), and the ui % idea of restoring the monarchy was revived for the first time _ in many years. The worsening climate was marked by an at_ tempt on the life of Venizelos and by government efforts to shield police officers who appeared to be implicated. A new paroxysm was set off by an unsuccessful Venizelist coup led by General Plastiras. A wave of purges against Venizelists in - the Army and the civil service was inaugurated. Both major ‘4 : groups were contending for control of the Army, creating their own organizations within it and making no secret of © _ their eventual intention to proclaim a dictatorship. ‘The |) oy struggle was sharpened by growing international tension’ and =the need to strengthen the ee Hitherto, under the pressure


rethen’a BBticpoofEee riintion: iat now this was doomed. ‘His personality and the symbolic connotations of his name defeated his intentions. The Populists, now in power, were _ Steadily infiltrating and taking over the state machinery which ( had been in the hands of their opponents for twelve years. Having lost one election, the Liberals now realized that they _ were being ejected from the Establishment and began to fear their permanent exclusion. - The Venizelist answer came with the military coup of 1 y March 1935. A part of the Army, still vehemently republican, bi proclaimed a revolution with Venizelos’s blessing. Its suppression under the able' direction of Kondylis, an ex-Venezelist General who had turned Royalist, marked the end of the Liberals’ power. Over 1,000 officers were purged from the Army, some being executed. The civil service was thoroughly _cleansed and Venizelos left the country, this time never to / return. ; _ The Populists were thus firmly entrenched. The Liberals’
the terrorism practised against Venizelists, ex-Republicans and of course Communists.‘ The ultra-Royalists now had complete control of the armed forces. Feeling that the Populists ere too moderate, they decided to act. The Royalist section of the Army, under General Papagos, supported Kondylis and — through a pronunciamento — brought about the return
rime Minister. A farce of a plebiscite was held, rigged to the xtent that the votes recorded were much in excess of the regis- | tered number of voters. It was announced that 98 per cent of electorate had opted for the monarchy. George promptly ‘iyed on 25 November. The republic was no more. The Liberals reacted mildly. Having lost control of the state
ssphorus, great-great-grandson of Satan. A well- ova maniac thieciad e. He married a viper.’
49
abstention in the next election (June 1935) merely intensified 
of King George II \against the will of Tsaldaris, the Populist ,
4;
‘2


nA ee yh Geen Aree
TREY GAT TUR
eye op
the King could serve as a symbol for thereconciliatdhle of the two big political forces, a reconciliation which he had been urging in vain since the 1920s. Also, as titular head of the armed forces, the King could put a brake on the putschist tradition in an Army now totally controlled by the Royalists. In this new world, Venizelos hoped to emerge as the natural © leader. The bulk of the Liberals followed their chief. Only a fraction of the Venizelist forces, among whom were Papanastassiou and Papandreou, defied Venizelos’s instructions. But _ neither they nor the Communists, who also reacted vigorously, had the strength or the following to influence the course of events. ' c ~ The restoration of the monarchy paved the way to dictatorship. Contrary to Venizelos’s hopes, the King did not act as a peacemaker between the rival forces. True, he immediately got rid of Prime Minister Kondylis (who had organized the _ rigged plebiscite), announced an’amnesty and appointedanonparty government under Professor Demertzis. But he did not manage to free himself from the tutelage of the militaryclique which had put him on the throne. The ensuing general _ election (1935) was inconclusive. Neither party won an absolute majority, and the balance was held by fifteen Communist members. When a secret agreement between the Communists and the Liberal leader Sophoulis came to light, the Army under Papagos — declared that it would not tolerate a govern- ment resting on Communist votes. Sophoulis gave in and supported another ‘extra-parliamentary’ government under - Demertzis (March 1936). But the Vice-Premier and Minister - of War was General Metaxas, leader of the unsuccessful coup . of 1923, and well known ever since 1915 for. his totalitarian
5. Significantly, no trouble arose.in the Army. The purge had been com- ~ plete and effective. From now on, except for a short period in the Second World War, the Army was to beultra-Royalist to the core. The effects of the purge that followed the 1935 coup were permanent. A national Army had become a royal Army. The bulk of the officer corps, who in their own _way had fought for years for the republic, were rendered impotentB.ut they had one more role to play in history: they made up almost the\ of the trained personnel in the resistance to German occupation in 1
50


deas. On 13,April Demertzis suddenly died, and was promptly \ “replaced. by Metaxas. Almost the entire political world challenged the legitimacy of the King’s choice, but in vain. Populist and Liberals began at long last to discuss forming a _ coalition, but took no immediate action. A strange coincidence 4 transformed the political picture: Venizelos, Tsaldaris, Kon-dylis and the two ex-Presidents of the Republic, Koundou_~riotis and Zaimis, all died within a few months, leaving the arena open for all kinds of readjustments, It has been suggested, but not yet proved by written evi_ dence, that the King’s choice of Metaxas was favoured by the ©
man in Greece. Evénts were hastened by an internal crisis. In May 1936, a general strike in Salonica was suppressed with : unprecedented brutality. Thirty workers were killed and over 300 wounded by Metaxas’s police. A nation-wide general "strike was therefore proclaimed for 5 August. Metaxas seized _ his chance: hundreds of labour leaders were arrested and _ deported. The Populists and Liberals made up their minds to _ x react. On 22 July, they announced that they had agreed to form a coalition government and asked the King to dismiss 
to take office. But it was already too late. On 4 August, Met_axas proclaimed martial law and suspended the main pro_ Visions of the constitution. Monarchy had beenaan oe _ into Crown-sponsored dictatorship. i i __ The hesitant and ambivalent policies of the Liberals. during the Restoration crisis had sapped the potential for a vigorous esistance. Most Liberal leaders had repeatedly shown their plicit distrust of parliamentary government. Venizelos had asked. for a non-party government; Papanastassiou had urged collective government’, favouring a constitutional amend
ey
British, obliged by the death of Venizelos to find a new strong)
a Metaxas, who did not enjoy the confidence of Parliament. They Vy _ would wait until October, however, for their new government 
ment to oblige the parties to coalesce and govern in co- Be peeticn! even Plastiras, the leader of the 1922 revolution, oe


Premier, even agreed tosci with Metaxas in imposing totali\tarianism ‘for a limited period’. ; ‘ So it is not surprising that neither Liberal nor Populists tried to rouse popular resistance to Metaxas. Protests were addressed to the King; all hopes of changing the situation were vested in his good intentions. The death of Papanastassiou in November 1936 deprived the Republicans of their last dynamic leader. It was only by the middle of 1937 that serious resistance was envisaged by a number of Republican ~ politicians. By that time it was too late, since Metaxas had secured complete backing from the King and had established a fascist state structure which had seriously narrowed the margin of possible activities. Thus the only organized force that tried to react to dictatorship was the Communist Party. But the systematic persecutions they had been subjected to since| March had seriously affected their capabilities. Unsuccessful in bringing about a general uprising of the non-Communist democratic forces, and too weak to hope to overthrow the regime on their own,
‘Communists’ were éventually arrested and deported. Four and a half years of relentless persecution resulted in the Communists’ underground organizations being virtually smashed, . If a few small cells managed to survive, they were no threat to the dictatorship. It was only after the defeat and the German occupation had shattered the repressive mechanism of the dictatorship and had allowed the Communist leadership to emerge from prisons and concentration camps that an efficient organization was rapidly rebuilt. For the_time being, what was left of them was obliged to remain hidden andineffective. _ All forces that could potentially be effectivhead been neutralized. The ‘Third Greek Civilization’ was there to stay. _ Metaxas’s state was above all a police state. Though the dictator did not totally control the armed forces, who remained on the whole faithful to the King, he completely reorganized the police and security services on a fascist ssnay
52
‘they were persecuted pitilessly by the growing secret police. According to an estimate of Metaxist propaganda, 50,000 ~


nf tion ‘of the agrarian fedebations and systematic peneentel ‘" and imprisonment of dissidents effectively silenced all oppo; - sition. The domestic policy of Metaxas was absolutely haphazard. “His confused demagogy was based on a combination of morala istic, mildly socialist tenets with open totalitarian elements. Inhis Plan for a Regime he wrote:
Two important matters: 1. The form of society. A labour society. No Greek is allowed not to work, All non-workers who live out of their revenues shall be deprived of their political rights. They shall be, from the point of view of civil _ ‘ _ law, under tutelage. Labour can consist in spiritual work. But work it _ must be. Except for the unemployed, the old and the sick. : ac Ownership. It shall be considered as a function within society. ... - Ownership and freedom of wealth exist, but they shall obligatorily be for the good of the collectivity. That means that the State can take wealth over when it is not administered for the good of the collectivity. To this confused populism is added undiluted chauvinism. _ The youth organizations are told:
ik What are the aims of this organization? King! King! Country! _ earth hamish Rebirth of Greece and the Fourth of August Yan
‘yaaa it,eee we id not have the Fourth of August reuine! you | = to what ee fell Monarchy, Teligion, country, family and ah
Zweig, France, Gorki, Dostoevski and Darwin were banned, among a The:Greekclassical eon was censored and Sophocles’ rian (cc 4


eight.hour eu a gave the workers a two-week annual vacation and took various other measures for the benefit of the - working classes. But these measures were never implemented by the employers. The ban on strikes made all actual protest ineffective; and the growing dependence of the regime on industrial capital struck from Metaxas’s hands the weapons which he had probably intended, originally at least, to use. Employers, in fact, did well out of Metaxas. Though the built-in structural defects of Greek industry were intensified, private profit soared. The increase in wages was counterbalanced by the fall in the value of the currency, while taxation was reorganized to favour the richer classes. Indirect taxation made up 79 per cent of state revenue, and direct taxation was often not paid because of the corruption of the many-headed administration. It has been estimated that annual profits during this period reached a record 25 per cent return on capital. (Linardates, J Tetarti Augousto, p. 128). The policies of the dictatorship did not earn the regime significant popular support. The urban workers, the middle classes and the peasants, whom Metaxas had hoped to win over by demagogy, were gradually driven into open antipathy to the regime. The inequality of income distribution was-by * now unbearable.’ The hopes of a development that might _ modify the intolerable conditions of the lower classes had been completely dissipated and by, 1940 it was only big capital, domestic and foreign, that supported the dictatorship. A fascist ideology, corresponding to the nationalistic chauvinism of the petty bourgeoisie to which Metaxas himself be
7. According to Professor Evelpides, income deci in 1938 was as follows (113 drachmas= 1 US dollar): . Income in drachmas Number of families under 20,000 630,208 20,000 — 40,000 632,768 j 40,000 — 80,000 271,404 % eae te 80,000 — 140,000 66,897 Te Ye
140,000 — 280,000 31,173 ores
280,000 — 500,000 6,048 1:29 abe 500,000 — 1,000,000, 2,602 ae (: over 1,000,000 — 900 " «Sees
‘ at


years of active political life had never succeeded in capturing the public imagination and remained the head of an insignificant parliamentary faction. The classic arsenal of totalitarian - governments laws was made use of. A huge propaganda ap_ paratus, youth organizations, radio, manipulated press and impressive public festivities sang the virtues of the ‘Third _Greek Civilization’ and its leader. The centralized state and _ para-military organizations that were thus formed created the - basis for the strong ultra-right movements that would play an _ important role later on. _ Metaxas himself gives the best account of the regime:
; - Since August 4th Greece has become an anti-communist anti~ parliamentary, totalitarian State. Its agrarian and labour foundations
Bp :with all their forces. They should even acquiesce if immediate interests or geographical necessities had brought Greece nearer to England. How
Metaxas’ s propaganda. But the leader was a man who in twenty
_ make it anti-plutocratic. Thus, if Hitler'and Mussolini were really fighting for the ideology they preach, they should be supporting Greece |
a ever, on the contrary, Greece has remained distant from England. Ex- _
promised or given no help to England.
Greece, ‘illustrates the deep ideological affinity of Metaxas to _ fascism and Nazi Germany. But the pressure of King George
had made an open alignment of Greece with the Axis impos_ sible, and Metaxas was obliged to give in completely to
operating in Greece. In his own words: ¢
Ithink the difficulties encountered by British firms in Greece (which are ‘complaining about) are really iimaginary. One can really state ne onlydoh Sirms iin Greece are the British ones... . The Soe sah
_ cept for the indispensable and necessary friendly relations, Greece has ©
ar his speech, délivered on the eve of Germany’s attack on
and, above all, the, economic dependence of Greece on Britain _
; British demands. He agreed to an increase in the interest payF ments to British creditors (after personal intervention by the Oe _ King) and offered unprecedented advantages to British firms mei


- countries are ‘ofteMnasia nenreale to the interests 0, _ not according to the interests of the British entrepren
‘ilaa!g
‘ If, however, British capital had achieved ‘constants rte vantages in Greece, Germany remained the most importantcustomer for the main Greek exports. The prices offered by England were extremely low compared to those paid by the Germans, who were fighting for the political control of the Balkans. A large loan was offered on moderate terms and ° _ Goebbels, Schacht and von Schirach visited Greece and were given fabulous receptions. This double economic dependence in an international context that was rapidly approaching crisis created great tensions within the regime. Thus, when the Second World War broke out, Metaxas attempted to follow a ‘ _ policy of neutrality. But the regime’s internal contradictions _ between pro-Germans and pro-British had been resolved in
eee
Britain’s favour. The King still controlled the Army and thus decided foreign policy. On the eve of the war, the Army headquarters were purged of some elements whose allegiance to _ the British cause was doubtful and General Papagos, who en- _ joyed the full confidence of the King and the British, remained Chief of Staff. é The growing Italian menace, as well as the fact that Hitler ; was demanding the abdication of King George, hastened a _decision. Metaxas had no other choice but to opt for the _ British. An agreement was accordingly signed between the _ Greek and British staffs in view of an eventual Axis attack, Fascist Greece had been driven by necessity to the side of the democracies.
\


CHAPTER 4
a \ Resistance (1940-44)
THE occupation of Albania by Mussolini (April 1939) exten_ded the European crisis to the Balkans. Greece could scarcely hope to escape the general conflict that was obviously ap' proaching. Relations with Turkey had been stabilized by the _ Treaty of Montreux (1936), but the hostility of both Italians and Bulgarians on the northern frontiers presented a growing _ threat. Metaxas had already strengthened the armed forces as much as possible, while also exercising maximum prudence to avoid being drawn into war. He even went to the limits of : appeasement and refrained from accusing Italy when a Greek
iy
cruiser was torpedoed by an Italian submarine in the harbour of Tinos on 15 August 1940. But it was all in vain. On 28 Oc_ tober Mussolini issuedan ultimatum and, without waiting for _ its rejection by Metaxas, ordered his troops to cross the _ Albanian border. Greece was in the Second World War. Againsatll odds, the keenness of the Army and unanimous popular support enabled Greece to win the first victory _ chalked up against the Axis. Not only was the Italian offensive _ successfully held, but a series of energetic counter-attacks forced the Italian Army to retreat. By the end of the year, the front had been pushed back sixty kilometres into Albanian territory; sixteen Greek divisions had immobilized twentyseven Italian, despite the crushing supremacy of the latter in equipment, artillery and aircraft. _ The Greek Army’s heroism and tenacity was, however, inifficient to resist a second attack by Germany. After the collapse of Yugoslavia, on 6 April 1941, the Germans, aided by their Bulgarian allies, launched a major attack across the Bul_ garian border. The Greek Army, aided by a handful of British d New Zealand troops, could not possibly resist the Wehrcht tide for, long. The Germans were already beginning to ie a when General iaaaciein a future Quisling


{ bikie wihister) capita &on2B Kon
‘ment left the country and on 27 April theWehrmacht enterua
_ Athens. Metaxas had been spared the end. He had died a few. “ a "weeks before the German attack, having for the first time
i}
AY Korizis, who had succeeded Metaxas, was closely related to his incapacity to”
achieved a certain popularity with the aura of the Albanian victory. Except for Crete, the country was under Axis power. The dictatorship had been replaced by an Misi ay more ignominious foreign occupation. With the fall of Crete (May 1941) the whole of Grok ter_ ritory came under Axis occupation. The Ionian islands were © - officially annexed by’ Italy, Eastern Macedonia and Thrace by Bulgaria, while the rest of the country was divided into. : ‘German, Italian and Bulgarian occupation zones. The situation in both annexed and occupied regions very . soon grew disastrous. The functioning of the Greek economy was of no concern to the occupying powers. As there were no important factories to contribute to their war effort, the col-lapse. of the country’s economic life left them indifferent. Greece was forced to pay colossal sums for ‘occupation ex- penses’. Besides, all the country’s resources were taken over _ by the occupiers, who introduced special occupation bank- _ notes, issued freely and without limits by all military units Fil ‘according to their needs’. This led to the immediate explosion ~ of the monetary system. International trade was completely halted,? which was bound to lead to tragic consequences for a
1. Although all the circumstances of the collapse of the Greek front tebefore the German attacks are still not clear, the defeatist tendencies in the administration and the pro-German feelings of a large number of officials. and generals had been notorious. It was the Commander of the Northern a Army, General Tsolacoglou, who formed the first Quisling government; | 2 the director of the Athens police had autographed pictures of Hitler and Goebbels hung next to Metaxas’s and the King’s. And the Defence Minister, Papadimas, had given Easter leave to the men holding the Centre / front, where German pressure had been mostly felt (Stavrianos, American Dilemma and Opportunity, p. 57). It seems that the suicide of Premier
control the state apparatus in an attempt to oppose the Germans by force. 2. Imports in 1941 were 6 per cent of the 1939 figure, 7 per cent in 194: and 12 per cent in 1943. Exports in these years stood at 8 Der cent,6 per » _ cent, and 3 per cent. ; “Xk
58


"Resistance (1940-44)
a‘nation that was a heavy importer of foodstuffs. Naturally, 5goods vanished within a few weeks and the black market _ thrived. Very soon, the urban population was confronted with a food shortage. By the end of the year, it became famine. ' During the tragic winter of 1941-2, almost 300,000 people _ died. Probably more than defeat and foreign occupation, the horror of hunger — combined with the atrocities committed by the occupation forces - cemented the will of the Greek people. Their ultimate expendability led them to struggle, not to passivity. If they were to survive they had to resist. The question mark was against organization and leadership. The Greek government- in-exile was completely cut off from the country. The lack of all communication led by degrees to the existence of two Greeces, completely different in aspirations, aims and structure. From 1941 to 1944 the ministers of King George II, occasionally reinforced by new political "personalities who escaped from the homeland, lived and func’ tioned within their own small world, which was more a continuity symbol] they wanted to cling to than anything else. Even the Greek armed forces in the Middle East served under Allied HQ. The government’s authority was thus _purely nominal and its prestige at home was very low (mainly because of the role played by King George during the Metaxas dictatorship), even though it was gradually purged of its ex_ fascist membersT.he weak politicians of whom it was made up, remnants of the pre-Metaxas’ political world, evoked / nothing but indifference if not open mistrust. sta New centres of power, new leaders, new mass movements and political aspirations were neéded in the struggle that was ; (about to begin, and the exiled government was incapable of
ya' providing them. The Greece of 1940, in terms of which they _ thought and acted, was nearer to that of 1920 than to that of 1942. Moreover, most of the old politicians. — who had not. been in the limelight since 1936 — were too hesitant or too _ cowardly to take the initiative in a clandestine reorganization »of the national forces. Under the circumstances, it is only, na_. tural that the Communist Party should step in and fill the _ ‘ political gap. Most of the party ‘cadres’ had managed to aa 0
59


yi
" escape prison upon the collapse of fieMetaxist state, and their spirit of resistance and sacrifice matched the pugnacious mood generated in the Greek people by the German invasion. Their organizational experience in clandestine work and their simple in attitude towards the ordinary people whom they addressed_in their own language were great assets in the struggle that was about to begin, when the first nuclei of resistance were formed by. the Communists. Tito’s partisans had already started active resistance since July 1941, and news spreads fast in the Balkans. _ Thus, as early as the beginning of 1942, resistance was beginning to take massive form. Of all the occupied countries of Europe, only in Greece and Yugoslavia did the resistance movement have the character of a universal popular outburst _ which would in due course result in-a direct confrontation of military forces with the enemy. The high and virtually inaccessible mountain ranges in Greece enabled the guerrillas to operate from secure bases. The first resistance organization had been founded as early as 28 September 1941, when the Communist Party (K KE) in collaboration with various smaller parties created the National Liberation Front (EAM), under whose political -authority the creation of a People’s Army of Liberation (ELAS) was envisaged. The aims of EAM as expressed in its "; foundation statute* were to resist the occupation and to see to it that a new democratic regime should be established in Greece after the end of the war. In both these aims, EAM found itself in full accord with the overwhelming majority of the people. If the Communists. who were the bene y ahead
3.1. The liberation of our country from foreign occupation And.the achievement of national independence. 1. The formation of a provisional government by EA M after the expulsion of the foreign invaders. This government’s sole purpose shall be the _ holding of general elections under the system of proportional Sp eee : tion for the election of a Constituent Assembly. Ae “i iu. In order to ensure that the people shall be in a position to decide a . effectively on the regime they desire, unhindered by any reactionary attemy iis iS_to impose a solution contrary to the people’s will, EA M and.all organi


rce of EAM had other long-term objectives, the introduction of socialism was never envisaged as an immediate aim. Throughout the occupation, and even in the midst of the bitter civil wars that were to take place, EAM never departed from the official line stated in its founding document. In the policy stated there, no basic difference existed between the aims of EAM and those of most of the other organizations _ that were gradually being formed. Both the National Republican Greek League (EDES) and the national and Social Liberation Movement (EKKA), the most important of these, were formed by officers of the Greek Army known for their Republican and anti-Royalist sentiments. But none of these organizations managed to establish itself on a broad national basis or to penetrate the popular imagination to a significant degree. Both the EDES stronghold in Epirus and the EKK Acontrolled regions around Mount Parnassus were simply Operational bases. But in most of the countryside EAM ’ reigned almost unchallenged. A Free State was formed in the mountains with full cooperation from the peasants, whose traditional indifference was gradually transformed into wholehearted participation in the common struggle. Modern and efficient institutions were set up in regions where, until a few ' months before, the economy had worked on a virtually selfE contained basis and where the social structure was still to a large extent patriarchal and archaic. In the words of C. M. _ Woodhouse, a British agent parachuted into Greece with the 4 main object of breakiEnAgM politically:
Having acquired control of almost the whole country, except the principal communications used by the Germans, they had given it ._ things that it had never known before. Communications in the mountains, by wireless courier and telephone, have never been so good before _ orsince; even motor roads were mended and used by EA M-ELAS.. The benefits of civilization and culture trickled into the mountains for ‘thefirsttime. Schools, local government, law courts and public utilities, which the war had ended, worked again. Theatres, factories, parlia“mentary assemblies, began for the first time. Communal life was organized in place of the traditional individualism of the Greek peasant. His ild was Shae into the EPON oe body), his nest-egg levied
61


a‘(BAM’s naval army). Followed ata ldiltagee by the minor, organizations, the EA M/ELAS set the base in the creation of:something that the governments of Greece had neglected: an organized State in the Greek mountains. (The Apple of Discord, pp. 146-7).
‘But not only did services function more’ efficiently, The B Greek peasantry awoke to a new political consciousness through the creation of democratic state structures, which gave the people, for the first time in history, some power to decide their own destinies. The ‘Code for Self-Government _ and Popular Justice’, published by ELAS in December 1943,
in the Greek countryside. The structure of power and representation was directed upwards, and freely elected members constituted the administrative bodies on the municipal, country and regional levels. Justice was administered by elected judges and new penal and civil codes were issued in accordance with the long traditions of Greek mountain people.
was the first attempt to implant truly democratic principles
Yet, despite the socialist inspiration of EAM, the reforms - outlined above were radical only in so far as they aimed at giving the peasants a place in society. Notably, there were no _ provisions either to facilitate or to preclude any kind of Jand pe Tedisteibution — still fess collectivization. The land reform put
ties had been completed under Metaxas, and the petty private ownership prevailing in the Greek countryside was a conquest dear to the bulk of the peasantry. Because the percentage of landless agricultural workers was small, the creation of a separate peasant- proletarian class had been impeded; and
: ;‘in hand by the Liberal governments of the twenties and thir
the shortcomings of the small and scattered agranan units had not yet been seen as insurmountable. The ‘Code for SelfGovernment’ states: ‘In no case can the courts’ ‘order a land expropriation. They can, however, order the temporary in- ol stallation of poor or landless peasants of the district, after fixing an equitable rent for the owner’ (Article 65). _ This was the nearest EAM got to socialist legislation. But if this reluctance of the Communists to proclaim a more radi-. cal programme can be explained by the specific contigs prevailing among the peasantry, it also explains bis relative
62 As. MS
t


ue ciel iohiclethePicustienced..‘supremacy of EAM was shattered when, after liberation, the political battle took the - form of open class struggle. The ideological penetration of | _ the Communists during the occupation had been effected _ through the liberal-patriotic platform of the EAM coalition. q The Communists had imposed their leadership, but. not their [ ideology. . _ Whether or not these ‘resistance’ institutions could have functioned under normal conditions, there is no doubt that the archaic sub-cultures still prevailing in large parts of the country came into contact, for the first time, with a democracy that meant more than a vote in general elections. Yet this encounter was too brief, and too impregnated with the special and external phenomenon of national resistance, to leave per_ manent traces in the peasant outlook. After the defeat and _ destruction that befell the left-wing forces, the peasants re_ turned for two more decades to their pre-war passivity. 4 Meanwhile, the resistance grew steadily in scope and in- tensity. Except for the towns and the main communication 3 artery from Athens to Salonica, the whole country was con_ trolled by the partisans by 1943, Nine enemy divisions were pinned down on garrison duty and were continually harried 4 by the Greeks, who — by almost daily raids, sabotage, and a later by regular battles — made the Balkan route for supplying j the Afrika Korps with ammunition and material almost un4 usable. The most eloquent report comes from the Germans j themselves: 0 | is fd ( q Political situation in Greece, July 1943
- Axis powers and are ready for open revolt. The EA M with its combat q - organizations is the main bearer of the entire resistance movement against the Axis powers. The greater part of the bands is subordinated to it. It is in a leading position politically speaking, and because it is ery active and enjoys a coordinated leadership, it represents the great- _ st danger to the occupying forces. (quoted by N. Svoronos, Histoire ela Gréce moderne, p. 116). |
63


it nessible to eH leadalso, perhaps, ‘ A was the Communits or the non-Communists hat were the ; cause. They both had good reasons to fear one another. The i non-Communist organizations were obviously ill at ease with the fact that the Communist- inspired EAM had achieved undoubted political supremacy. Their chances. of stopping the regime from slipping to the left after the war would be seriously curtailed if they did not succeed in establishing a ai military force equal or superior to ELAS. Thus, while they _ were originally democratically minded, their ill-disguised antagonism towards EAM gradually sent them into the arms of im the British, and made them play the game of the King. On the other hand the EAM leadership was also increasingly hostile ‘towards the other organizations, who challenged its power. A’ hostility that was in the beginning based on the mutual desire _ De of each organization to strengthen itself on. its own did even- _ tually acquire specific ideological undertones. Thus, if EAM’s attitude was until the end of 1942 one of extreme reserve, it developed into undisguised hostility as a result of the role of the British agents who were parachuted into Greece as liaison between the guerrilla forces and military headquarters in the Middle East. After an initial phase, during which the British had assisted all resistance organizations with weapons, supplies and money on a more or less equitable basis, they tried to strengthen the non-Communist organizations by every means, meanwhile preaching the hase: ana of ay unity and collaboration. British policy should be seen in the light of the way in which the political problem of Greece was being treated. The King Ms :was still regarded as the only legal representative of the Greek _ people, although the regime remained for a long time an: offi_ cial continuation of the Metaxas dictatorship. On the death oy a "the dictator, the King had unequivocally declared that ‘all fields of activity, political and military’... as well as the or-) i ganization of national youth, shall continue-in the same spirit as before’ (New York Times, 30 January 1941). And it was not until February 1942, almost a year after the country had been overrun, that Sees obviously under sess: pres A


he was encouraged ss pressed. to penaden his representative capacity, while at the same time he refused to make any commitment that might in the future endanger his status.
aturally too in these circumstances, intolerable tension developed between EAM on the one hand and EDES and -EKKA on the other. By 1943 the situation was explosive. Bitter battles were fought; and, notwithstanding the strong British pressure, each armistice was followed by new grievances and armed conflicts.. The organizations accused each other of collaboration with the Germans. Although it appears to be untrue that any of the main organizations openly colaborated with the occupation forces — for, on all sides, the esistance was constantly growing both in dimension and. in activity— it does seem to be true that Zervas, the leader’ of _EDES, came into contact with the Quisling government behind the backs of his comrades in arms with a view to setting -a Greek collaborationist force, which would serve under ‘the Germans against EAM. In the middle of 1943 Zervas, “who had sworn allegiance to the King and was frankly playng the British game, was increasingly conscious of the im- plications of ELAS military supremacy. The creation of a» ell-armed group of collaborators called ‘Security Battalions’ d both his own and the British purpose well. One more rganized army group which would eventually fight EAM a d secure, at least temporarily, the capital from an immeate takeover by the Communists could finally tip the
a his lan for large-scale military intervention in the Balkans. The British position was very delicate indeed. On the one at
. The icaipire was still alive, and Greece was an extremely tantaah to British predominance in the Eastern Medi- 5
Jance. For meanwhilein Teheran Churchill had given up mee


point and the strategic ines of pisresistan was of fundamental importance. A direct clash with BA therefore out of the question until the ‘end of the war. Butthe departure of the Germans would leave the ELAS in com- plete control of the country, including Athens. By 1944 ELAS ~ had reached a force of 50,000 armed men stationed in the ‘Athens-Piraeus region, while EAM membership was anything between 500,000 and 2,000,000 (out of a population of - 7,000,000). Regardless of whether the Communists had in mind | to attempt a take-over, the British would find themselves extremely weak. But, even after the war, military intervention, without a pretext was (until the end of 1943 at least) not certain to be acceptable to Stalin. As Churchill’s plan of large- | scale military attack through the Balkans was finally turned down by both Roosevelt and Stalin, there seemed no other way for the British to avoid an undue increase of Communist influence in Greece than by creating a strong anti-Communist Greek military force that would see to it, if need be, that the Communist army was kept under control, or at least that a good pretext was given to the British for direct intervention. Churchill is very explicit on the matter in his memoirs. ‘On 29 September 1943 he writes: ;
.-. Should the Germans evacuate Greece we must certainly be able to send 5,000 British troops with armoured cars and Bren gun carriers into Athens .... The Greek troops in Egypt would accompany them .... Their duty would be to give support at the centre to the restored lawful Greek Government. The Greeks would not know how many were coming behind them. (Churchill, The Second World War, paperback edn, vol. 10, p. 188; italics supplied).
\\
The contradiction between military and political considera_ tions is manifest in the policy pursued. For a long time Middle East headquarters pursued different policies from those of the Foreign Office. It was only after the middle of 1943, ‘when Churchill assumed personal supervision of the Greek prob‘lem, that the political considerations were placed above the ~ short-term military objectives. Thus not only was the aid to © _ the Greek left-wing guerrillas completely stopped; Churchill
66


at he hound ‘not return to Greece before a plebiscite. This amant restatement of the King’s authority was complemend by the reinforcing of all military information that would entually be used against EAM. ‘The British had thus to secure the allegiance of the two Greek brigadesin the Middle East, where feelings between both officers and soldiers were mixed: This was far from easy: on the one hand there was a number of openly Royalist offi
1exion with the Metaxas regime. They could obviously be trusted to play the monarchy’s game but their influence was small. On the other hand, a significant number of officers and oldiers were openly sympathetic with EAM. They would have fto be purged. But the inajority of the Army were Republicans, -distrusting both the Royalists and the Communists. Their attitude was mainly oriented towards maintaining discipline in|
4 tand during the turbulent summer months of 1943, when a ~ series of minor coups exploded from both the Royalist and
et comply with British orders.
errillas on the mainland was pursued. But if the situation of ese was problematic at the beginning of the occupation, by. ; 44 ‘ithad become ery precarious. Rae the ae {A
sers of fascist inclinations, distrusted because of their con
4sthe Army and refusing to accept any purge from the right or | My ’ the left. This latter group was the strongest and their firm mal
the Communist sides, avoided a crisis. For the time being it a was stalemate. But EAM still had a strong hold within the ' _ army, so that the army could not be counted upon in a crisis ue
- Simultaneously, the strengthening of the non- Communist oe
Rath


After a long series of bitter battles, EKKA was completely eliminated and its leader Psarros was murdered (April 1944). A large-scale military manoeuvre was simultaneously organized by EL AS against EDES. It was most probable that EDES
i
=
would have followed EK K A’s fate, but for the intervention of the Germans, who launched a massive attack against the ELAS, thus obliging them to retreat to the mountains, But if EDES was not eliminated it hardly counted any more as a countervailing fighting force restricted as it was to a small area in Epirus. & British policy did not limit itself into the strengthening of the right-wing military forces. With considerable forethought, it was not the Royalist but the Republican and Liberal-ele- | ments of the old political world that were encouraged and used. The main political forces with which the British were working in Athens, as well as the governments they finally installed in the Middle East, were not Royalist but Republi' can. The issue of the monarchy was ably played against these forces and the King was first unofficially pushed to assume an adamant position and then later unofficially pressed to give in to the Republican political forces that constituted the Greek government-in-exile. While, however, the Republicans were consciously or unconsciously playing the British game by focusing their attention on the royal issue which they finally were allowed to ‘win’ (as the King was obliged to give \
4. Psarros’s murder, which was to have great repercussions in the political pourparlers later on, still remains obscure. It seems sure thatthe orders did not come from the ELAS General HQ, and the murder was committed by men under the command of Aris Velouchiotis, one of the most redoubtable Communist guerrilla leaders who openly disagreed with the conciliatory line of the party and preached an immediate and violent take-over, to the exclusion of any negotiation with the government-in- exile, and the British. His strategy, which was nearer to Tito’s conceptions, was never accepted by the Communist leadership. But as his following was_ great and his military prestige enormous, his uncompromising position ‘ greatly contributed to the vacillations of Communist policy, which could i not afford to openly\disown him. Psarros’s murder should therefore ‘be seen as one out of a series of fateful incidents through which the factions in the Communist leadership were creating faits accomplis in an Bite
' impose their own policy on EAM/ELAS. { Yi
(toe


. but of its Republican elements. But 1s vernment was carefully kept Predominanyy anti
bedther main aim: the popular forwed virtually acl ‘ene country and there was no other Greek force that
oa Germans, who in he last year of the occupation burned undreds of villages” and executed 70,000 people, had not. yken the morale of the population. Victory, liberation and lew democratic Greece were near. The preponderance of Ss.‘wass such eet no civil war was feared. Even at that
if freeactions’ and democracy. The bid for ener } des inedto take legal political forms. “And truly.aoe ;


CHAPTER 5
Liberation (March—December 1944)
On 10 March 1944, the Political Committee of National Liberation (PEEA) was created by EAM in order to organize and direct the national struggle for liberation, to administer the regions already liberated and to ensure the people’s sovereignty over the whole country. The PEEA included a considerable number of non-Communists and was presided over by Professor Svolos, the foremost Greék authority on _ constitutional law. It is significant that PEEA insisted, from _ the first day, on the democratic character of its structure and, , before assuming its governmental functions, it went so far as to organize free elections by secret ballot throughout the - country, held on 9 April 1944. The elected representatives constituted themselves into a national assembly which met in the village of Korischades in central Greece. Under the name of ‘National Council’ the assembly endorsed the _ authority of the PEEA and the latter became a representative government of Greece, working on Greek soil and backed by over a million votes. This was, in the words of Churchill, ‘a direct challenge to the future authority of the Tsouderos government-in-exile. An alternative communist-controlled Administration was thus formed as a rallying-POrne of all Greeks’ (italics supplied). The effect of the creation of PEEA was indeed enormous. _ Following the example of Tito, the Greek resistance had manifested its intention of functioning as an organized political force in the shaping of post-war Greece. Even if the creation of a Communist state was not envisaged, it is clear that the return of the King without a previous -plebiscite and the assuming of power by the puppet government-in-exile would 7 not be tolerated. The balance of power was such that-the | authority of PEEA could not be challenged. Apart from the undoubted supremacy of ELAS on the mainland, the Gree!
70


ryliable to be Coaindnwied by revolutionary mmunist elements there. Satan finds some mischief _ still for idle hands to do’ (Churchill, vol. 10, p. 192, 5 April 1944), But the object of PEEA, as seen by its authors, unlike the | _ object of the equivalent body that Tito set up in the Yugoslav ‘mountains, was not to constitute a central governmental authority controlled by EAM to the exclusion of all other _Political forces. Not only was the ultimate fate of the mon_ archy left open; the authority of the government-in-exile was ‘ only challenged inasmuch as the latter was not fully repre: _sentative of the Greek people, since it did not include mema bers of the resistance organizations. _ PEEA never went further than demanding the establishment of a national coalition government, in which their own _ representatives would be included, without however claiming the: post of Prime Minister. This conciliatory attitude left _ room for considerable manoeuvring by the British. The removal of the issue to the level of a political argument on the, 2ira of the future government gradually led to a
some, theBicantieltELAS army was not the only preoccupa- : anSea The majority of BAM members were to remain
eles: thisallowed: the existence of other armed ope test. their monopoly of power until the end of the oc: sy and mi bigahe their bargaining power


vulnerable within the towns thenebiyes because of their ex- i - posure to Germans and collaborationists - and later to ~ Royalists. The naturally more diversified town population was less prone to follow Communist leadership without question. Therefore, the broad coalition that constituted EAM had to be maintained. This explains the vacillating and contradictory strategy of the Communist leadership that was to lead to their defeat. True, the middle class had to a certain extent ceased to function as an autonomous interest group because of the economic collapse of the country, and had therefore on the whole accepted EAM leadership. Nevertheless, - because the main EAM effort had been directed to a loosely organized city network, the social and economic patterns that had prevailed before the war were not shattered in the towns but had only temporarily ceased to function. Thus the liberation and the prospect of a rapid normalization of economic life contributed to’ the re-emergence of class differences that had been submerged during the war. _ The first crucial turning point came as a result_of PEEA’s telegram to the Greek Premier Tsouderos, on 10 March 1944. After announcing its creation, PEEA stated that
; four] main preoccupation is the creation of a government of national unity ... we are addressing ourselves to your Excellency, certain that you will comprehend the national necessities and that you will decisively contribute to the formation of a government of general national unity. The impact of this demand on the rank and file of the Greek Army in the Middle East was tremendous. As the Tsouderos government showed no sign of meeting the PEEA demands, _ on 30 March a strongly worded memorandum was submitted by a delegation representing the majority of the soldiers, demanding the creation of a government of National Unity with the least possible delay, and stressing the government’s responsibilities if this were not doneThere is great contro-' versy concerning the instigation of the military ultimatum. It
j
seems by now certain that it did not result from instructions by EAM, as both EAM and PEEA were taken completely by
| oD) “ae


Whether theBritish ae (a agents to provoke it, ashas been alleged, or whether, as is more probable, it was a more or less spontaneous reaction on the part of the Republi_ can and left-wing elements who were a majority in the Greek _ Army, is irrelevant. In any case, it suited British plans admirably. Compelling Tsouderos (who had offered his resignation) to remain in his post, Churchill demanded the cate_ gorized rejection of the ultimatum in terms that could only 2 accentuate the crisis. When the first signs of a real mutiny A were manifest, the opportunity for purging the Greek Army _ of all its undesirable elements had arrived. _ Accordingly, Churchill went over to open attack. On 9 April he cabled General Paget: (
Our relations are definitely established wath the lawfully convtitited ' Greek Government headed by the King.... Neither can Greece find, constitutional expression in particular sets of guerrillas, in many cases ___ indistinguishable from banditti, who are masquerading as the saviours of their country while living on ‘the local villagers. (Italics supplied). _ Only a few months earlier he had referred to the same people _ as ‘gallant guerrillas containing thirty enemy divisions’.
__ ... It is a lamentable fact that they\ [the Greek brigades] should have _ signalized this opportunity by an undignified, even squalid, exhibition _ of indiscipline, which many will attribute to an unworthy fear of being sent to the front. (Italics supplied). In fact a permanent source of grievances among the Greek brigade was that theywere not sent to the front. And
You will have achieved success if you bring the Brigade, under con
aetrol without bloodshed. But brought under control it must be. (Church
‘ill, vol. 10, p. 195.) } On 14 April he cabled Leeper, British Ambassador to the Greek government-in--exile: iy,
~ Do not show yourself over-eager to parley. Simply he them. foahded up by cel and superior force and let hunger play its part.
@.19) ees 4
/
on the pee day:
eave


ricweant kiss allronndl: “We have toget these met inte : disarmed, without conditions and, I trust,without bloodshed. (p.197) And get them he did. After a series of unsuccessful attempts \ _ to find a compromise solution, which were rejected on Churchill’s instructions, the mutinous brigades surrendered to
tration camps in Libya and Eritrea — almost half the Greek
_ British policy was successfully accomplished. The Greek regular Army was now completely purged and what was left could be counted on to play the Royalist game to the end. No sooner had the crisis subsided than-the demands .of _ PEEA were discussed. Tsouderos was replaced by Sophocles
that he was suitable for this task’, he was replaced by George _ Papandreou, who was ‘specially brought outof Greece’ and
_ pose of the new government was to open negotiations for a
unity had served as the pretext for the purge of the Greek army, it was also used to entice the political forces of: the _ mainland into a series of complicated discussions, compro
: dominant position of the left-wing forces.
_ delicate process. A former minister under Eleftherios Veni
therefore inspired a maximum of confidence on the left. He
_ educated and highly intelligent, he was the most brilliant
the very few personalities from the old political world who had taken part in the resistance against the Germans and had
predicting ee necessity of British interventiont= ae
74
_ Papandreou was the ideal choice for this very subtle and |
zelos, he was known for his consistent republican feelings; he
‘been imprisoned for it. He also inspired complete confidence» in the British. As early as 1942 he had sent a memorandum to. Allied HQ explaining the political situation of the country ae
| the British. Approximately 20,000 men were sent to “concen
military personnel in the Middle East, The first object of
“Venizelos. But as, according to Churchill, ‘it was not felt
assumed the premiership on 27 April. The alleged main pur- 
coalition government. Thus while the demand for national .
mises and traps which would eventually undermine the
had even been offered the presidency of EAM, which he had , _ declined. Now, he was called upon to annihilate EAM. Well 
orator of his generation. Not least important, he was one of 
4


stated his is with unusual clarity: the aim of his govern; “ment was to achieve national unity, but without giving in to the Communists at any point. He insisted that the mutineers should be severely punished, and promised the ‘suppression _ of terrorism in the Greek countryside’. But the obvious trickery did not deter the forces of the left _ from maintaining their conciliatory attitude. A conference Was Called in Lebanon for 17’ May and representatives of all parties and resistance organizations attended. Papandreou opened the conference with an unprecedentedly fierce attack against EAM and EL AS, whom he described as ‘terrorists and _ murderers’. The murde ‘rof Psarros, leader of EKKA, was recent and the EAM/ELAS representatives, who had disavowed it, found themselves on the defensive. The vigour of Papandreou’s attack was such that he almost defeated his own _ purposes, for the conference nearly broke up then and there. _ But the conciliatory strategy of EAM/ELAS finally prevailed and the conference continued. On 30 May a National Charter was agreed upon and signed. The most important _ point was the agreement to unify all guerrilla forces of the mn country and put them under the authority of a national _ government under Papandreou himself. But the composition _ of the government, under whose authority the representatives of PEEA and EAM had readily put their military forces, was left open. PEEA had demanded 50 per cent of the portfolios ‘while Papandreou had offered only 25 per cent, and finally
}_ Outwitted his opponents to such effect that the matter was left
undecided.
However, after the return of the representatives of PEEA to Greece, the leadership decided to repudiate the agreement, _if Papandreou did not give in to their demands for par‘ ticipation in the government on the basis of a 50-50 ratio. _ Papandreou played for time, and for three months fruitless” Be rconcisals and counterproposals were exchanged to no effect. The situation became more and more explosive and by the middle of July the patience of EAM seemed to have been _ 2 gi Papandreou was accused of breaking the agreement
75
~~
4


the ministries of EAM and was areatenet withthe AanokneAt a of the Charter if not. The British seemed to be back where they started. But curiously enough EAM policy was to be com- a: _ pletely reversed. AG ' Twenty days later, on 29 July, PEEA Woneed to enter the | government on the single condition that Papandreou should be replaced, and on 15 August even this last demand was - abandoned. On 3 September, six representatives of PEEA entered the government in minor and insignificant posts. The © yolte-face was complete. In order to explain this extraordinary and baffling capitula- tion of the Left who, by September 1944, had almost total control of Greece, it is necessary to look at the international situation. The British in fact never believed in the possibility of a peaceful solution of the Greek political problem. As early ~ as April 1943 the Chief of the Military Mission in Greece, Colonel Myers, received secret instructions informing him of _ the political prospects. The opinion stated by the Cairo authorities was that upon liberation, civil war was practically. unavoidable. But no such war could be envisaged without “ ‘Stalin’S consent or at least his acquiescence. On 18 May 1944, _ Eden had a long conversation with the Soviet Ambassador in _ London, Gusev, concerning the assignment of Rumania and _ Greece to the Russian and British spheres of influence re_ spectively. The Russians were reluctant and insisted on the agreement of the USA government. After considerable pres_ sure from Churchill, the President gave in and on 19 June _ Eden informed the Soviet government that this ‘general divi_ sionof responsibility’ (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 67) was accepted. This was confirmed by a telegram of Churchill to Stalin dated 41 July. If Stalin’s answer was non-committal and did not , cover Churchill completely, it was sufficiently reassuring. He was now sure that Stalin would not intervene, 1p 6 oxani he wrote to Eden: eg Ni
_ Surely we should tell M. Papandreou he should continue as Prime id - Minister and defy them’all .... We cannot take a man up as we have p ei! done Papendieoy and letHien ‘ thrown to the wolves at thefirstsnar'
76


to me tohave reached the Piowing point: either we support Papan- dreou, if necessary with force as we have agreed, or we disinterest ourselves utterly in Greece. On the same day, he warned his chiefs of staff:
‘It may be that within a month or so we shall have to put 10,000 or _ 12,000 men into Athens, with a few tanks, guns, and armoured cars. 4g Such a force could be embarked now, and would probably be in ae for the political crisis, which is of major consequence to the policy of His Majesty’s Government. (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 97.)
If the Anglo-Russian agreement on the future of the Balkans produced only slight modifications of British intentions, it led to a complete reversal of Russian policies. On 26 July a
*
Soviet military mission under Colonel Popov was parachuted _ into Greece and immediately contacted the leadership of the - Greek Communist Party. Although the content of the discussions has never been disclosed, it is noteworthy that only _ three days after the Soviet mission’s arrival the first significant shift of EAM’s policy took place. It is hardly possible that it / was a coincidence. Stalin, it seems, kept to his part of the still ‘informal bargain, and the Greek Communists, who were the decision-making forces of EAM and PEEA, dutifully gave in. _ Although it is doubtful whether they had been informedof the fact that they had been abandoned for good, there can be no other explanation for their sudden giving in to Papan-. __ dreou except Soviet pressure. It was only in October, at the it. Moscow conference between Stalin and Churchill, that the > divisionof the Balkans was ‘officially’ ratified. On a half sheet _ of paper the future of the Balkans was rapidly decided upon __and Greece was allocated exclusively to Britain. ‘Might it not be thought rather cynical if it seemed we had disposed of ' these issues, so fateful to millions of people, in such an off' hand manner? Let us burn the paper,’ Churchill suggested after the conclusion of the agreement. ‘No, you keep it,’ said “Stalin (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 201).
a
\f
Rittacy |balance inside Greece had remained unchanged. either theBritish nor Papandreou were unaware that the 
71
- Meanwhile, if the political balance had been modified, the — ;
lr;


military, ed political domination of fhe ny E Al was still complete. The hasty arming of collaborationist } groups by the Germans did little to close the gap. But the © Communists obviously had. strict orders from Stalin to comply with British demands up to the end. Having decided on a _ strategy of a purely political bid for power, they were ready to give in completely on the military level. By the Caserta agreement in’ September, not only did they agree to be put under the command of the Allied (that is British) military
authorities, but also to allow the landing of British troops after the withdrawal of the German forces. ELAS was put _ under the direct command of General Scobie, who was to lead the British Expeditionary Force. Thus, the fears of _ Churchill concerning the power gap that would follow the German departure were to a great extent allayed. The British ieforces could easily provide a political bridgehead, solid - enough for the formal assumption of power by the “recognized’ Papandreou government. It is significant that during _ the Caserta conversations the only objection to this uncon_ ditional surrender of the guerrillas was made by the non- Communist General Saraphis, Commander-in-Chief of the _ ELAS forces, who was obviously not entrusted with the political secrets and, viewing the situation from a professional point of view, justly considered it frightening. However, these ob
tives, following the Moscow line. Thus Churchill’s intention | _ to ‘strike out of the blue without any preliminary crisis’, which ‘is the best way to forestall the EAM’ (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 251) proved unnecessary. Even Churchill -himself did ‘not anticipate the extent to which Stalin and consequently - the Greek Communist Party was giving him a free hand. On 12 October 1944 the Germans evacuated Athens. Three days later British troops under General Scobie entered the capital in the midst of demonstrations of indescribable jubila
_ Athens had not lasted for more than a few days. Once again, ; _ Churchill’s suspicions about a possible bid for aoe wereeh i
78
;jections were easily overruled by the Communist representa- 4
tion. The bridgehead had been gained. The power gap in 


if the Greek Peaple’ on the occasion of the liberation, ending ' with the words:
You will now become the goldabitehs of public order and of demo’ cratic liberties. Patriots, all united to complete, together with ELAS and our Allies, the Greek liberation, under the leadership of a government of National Unity. (Italics supplied.) It is thus gbvious that Communist strategy was still strictly legalistic. When Papandreou arrived at the head of the Government on 18 October, jubilation reached its peak. But if the government’s authority was at first sight generally re’ cognized, the situation was far from simple. Real power was still held by EAM, whose forces reigned unchallenged all over ‘the country. The effective authority of Papandreou was restricted to the Athens region and a handful of other towns . where the British Army had acquired a foothold. The transfer of power from the guerrillas to the central _ government was the main preoccupation of both the British and Papandreou. As Churchill puts it: ‘The testing time for our arrangements had now come. At the Moscow conference _ J had obtained Russian abstention at a heavy price.’ Under _ the terms of the Caserta agreement all guerrilla bands were to be disbanded and, together with the small Greek forces from the Middle East, were to\form the nucleus of. the new Greek _ Army under the national government’s authority. Very soon, _ however, insuperable divergences of opinion between the _ British and the Communists emerged over this crucial issue. The respective numbers of the forces to enter the Army, the question of whether the units to be formed should retain their _ ‘ distinct character or should be integrated, the problem of the _ new Army’s leadership, were matters it proved impossible to _ agree upon. The most crucialissue was the future of the heavily armed - Middle East Brigade, which, after the purge, was fanatically. Royalist. EAM insisted on its disbandment on an equal basis: iwith the guerrilla forces, whereas Papandreou refused to accept this. On 27 November discussions were suddenly broken off.Papandreou and EAM accused one is ofye


: promises, and. the deadlock wass complete. possibl » to extract the truth from the accusations that were‘subsequently. - made. It seems, however, that a compromise agreement had been reached and countersigned by both Papandreou and the . Communists. Next day (28 November) the Communists can_ celled the agreement, accusing Papandreou of duplicity. How _ and why the fateful decision was taken is still unknown. : In view of the overall strategy of the Communist Party in _ the past and again in the future, the sudden toughness is hard _ to explain. Be this as it may, the vital decision to engage in armed struggle if a satisfactory compromise should prove impossible seems to have been reached that same night. Whether or not Churchill actually believed in an inevitable attempt at a Communist take-over, he most certainly had pre_pared his own plans for military intervention. On i November he had cabled Eden:
In my opinion, having paid the price we have to Russia for freedom of action in Greece, we should not hesitate to use British troops to support ... Papandreou. ... This implies that British troops should certainly intervene to check acts of lawlessness .... I hope the Greek _Brigade will soon arrive, and will not hesitate to shoot if necessary, ... I fully expect a clash with EAM and we must not shrink from it, provided the ground is well chosen. (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 254; italics ~ supplied.) _. With the backing of the British and after consulting Am_bassador Leeper, without whom, according to Woodhouse (op. cit., 106),he did not make a single move, Papandreou decided to take a harder line: he summoned the cabinet and issued a formal order that all guerrillas should be disbanded _ by 10 December. On 1 December the crisis was further ac~ centuated. General Scobie took it upon himself to repeat the - government’s decision in terms of an ultimatum. The atmosphere had been rapidly deteriorating as a result of the activi_ ties of the extreme right-wing collaborationist groups, which had been formed by the Germans in 1943 to fight EAM. _ Mainly composed of members of the security services of the _ Metaxas dictatorship, these “Security Battalions’ were well armed and had been used against the resistance. Some. other,


with the sian battalions apie ‘the BAM. Four-cornered situations had developed, in which genuine resistance fighters _ aligned themselves with the collaborationists against the Com- munists while continuing to fight the occupation forces. After
the liberation it was inevitable that old feuds should be re
opened and accounts settled.
' The future of the collaborators had not hitherto been an object of disagreement. All parties had agreed in principle _ that they should be severely punished. In fact the members of ;the collaborationist governments and a number of the most _ _ notorious German agents were arrested by the government ‘ immediately after liberation. But the great bulk of them were hiding, waiting for events. As it became gradually clear that _the differences between EAM on the one hand and Papan_ dreou and the British on the other were seriously aggravated, -a double process was started off. On the one hand the attempted reorganization ‘of the police and the gendarmerie on the government’s side was taking the form of open recruitment of collaborationists, who, having found a new nest, were ‘only too glad to prove their attachment to their new masters, ‘by exceeding their orders and terrorizing their opponents when they had the opportunity. On the other hand, a large number of ELAS groups, who were still in control of the countryside and feared that the collaborationists would ultiT ately escape their well-deserved punishment and function as an armed force against them — as in fact the majority who | did escape or were given over by the ELAS to the regular ; authorities did — took it upon themselves to organize popular courts which, by October, were functioning all over the country.‘Naturally enough, the procedure was often summary and many hundreds: of persons were condemned to death and ae ‘This in turn led to giemnis to reorganize the fas


the resistance organizations were revived! a d the remnants o i the right-wing guerrillas took the side of the Seourity Bat- | talions. ‘This more or jex spontaneous regrouping SGthe forces of the extreme right was immediately encouraged and soon even officially sponsored by the British. Despite the clause in the Caserta agreement according to which the Security Battalions were considered as enemy formations and were to be treated _ accordingly, on 27 September, before the German withdrawal, General Scobie issued an order to General Shilioto- | poulos, who had been appointed Military Commander of Athens, to the effect that ‘after the departure of the Germans, _ the Security Battalions should receive instructions to desert and hide, or else to give themselves up to the British.’ And by the middle of November, “Arrangements were made to raise and equip National Guard battalions, each 500 strong. Ultimately there were thirty of these; they proved very useful in rounding up armed hostile civilians and guarding areas cleared by our own troops’ (Churchill, vol. 11, p.254). In this atmosphere, the order issued by Scobie to disband ELAS provoked the final crisis. The EAM ministers resigned from the National Unity government and a mass demonstration was called for 3 December. Permission for the rally had been given by Papandreou. But, under the pressure of Leeper, he then decided to forbid it. However, the demonstration was . . not cancelled, and on 3 December large crowds.assembled in Constitution Square. Unarmed and unsuspecting, they shouted anti-Papandreou but, on the whole, not anti-British slogans. Suddenly out of the blue there was firing and hun-dreds of dead: and wounded covered the pavement. The fighting had begun. ‘There was much controversy about sti did the shooting. Itiis now beyond doubt that it was the police who firedin cold blood and without any provocation. The police chief admitted ~ it, claiming ‘self-defence’. An eye-witness, the British Officer; ’ Byford-Jones, states that he himself saw and heard the orders to shoot on the unsuspecting crowd. Similarly, The Times, ae Press and New York radio- ‘Sorrespeaee are ON
82 st er sige


when ‘anti-Communist hysteria pecan general that any doubt was cast on the cause of ‘Bloody Sunday’. ‘What still remains unclear, however, is who gave the orders. Whether they came from the Greek government or _ the British authorities, or whether they resulted from a plot of » -ultra-rightists who wanted to precipitate events, is not yet _proven. - Some commentators consider that the massacre did not "provoke the conflict but only precipitated it. This raises a more fundamental question. There can be no doubt that a ‘ _EAM did not originally desire an armed seizure of power. i CBven if one disregards the effects of Russian advice, it is ab,surd to believe, in the light of all official and unofficial evirtdence, that the Communists intended to make a bid for power. If this had been their aim, there can be no explanation for their successive retreats, both political and military. The! example of Tito, who not only refused to accept any authority other than the popular government he himself controlled, but "specifically warned Churchill against any attempt at British military intervention in Yugoslavia (which finally deterred the British from intervening even though they had agreed on a © 50-50 basis of influence with Stalin) is telling indeed. Had the Communist Party opted for armed struggle, it was scarcely likely to wait until December 1944. J The fact that the Greek Communists had continually been © in touch with Tito during the occupation only makes their differences in strategy more pronounced. ‘As early as August 1943 the ‘secretary of the Communist Party, Siantos, had assured the British that ‘Greece belongs to a region of Europe where the British assume all responsibilities’. This extraorary declaration was made to appease British fears arising froma recent conference between Greek and Yugoslav guer-. illa leaders. Any ‘subordination to a pan-Balkan guerrilla ement was therefore out of the question’ (Siantos). Co- — dey di ation between | the two national liberation movements estricted to. intelligence and tactical considerations. antos’s ‘assurances seem to have represented EAM’s true 
83
=


liaison Gace: with the ELAS, atessii: the ELAS leaders of being ‘ideologically unprepared to take over power’ and stressed the legalistic attitude of the Greek Com- munist Party in contrast to the Yugoslav one. Even if their attitude could not have been different in the beginning, in view of their expectation that a full-scale Anglo-American attack was about to be launched through the Balkans, the a _ Teheran conference dissipated all such considerations. Nevertheless, at no moment did EAM change its policy. Indeed, it softened its position considerably after the pressure of the Soviet military mission. Since the Communists relinquished their military supremacy and did their utmost to achieve a political solution which would have enabled them to continue the struggle on a parliamentary basis, it is absurd to believe in an organized and planned Communist aggression. Finally, it should be noted that, in the fateful days when fighting started in Athens, the great bulk of the ELAS troops were stationed _ at great distances from the capital. The problem for the Communists had been how to avoid unilateral disarmament, not _ how toapt.
*‘


_ December marked the beginning of armed confrontation. _ EAM called a general strike and a mass meeting for 4 December. The rally was held without any incidents caused by either i EAM or the British. But while the demonstrators were dis- A persing they were attacked by armed groups of the ultra-right organization ‘X’ (led by Colonel Grivas) and other colla;'borationist bands. These attacks resulted in over a hundred iP deaths: Although ‘probably neither the government nor the ~ British were responsible, this was the last straw. On the same _ ‘evening, armed attacks by ELAS against the still unpurged police stations began and Scobie proclaimed martial law, calling on ELAS to evacuate Athens within two days. _ Next day (5 December), Scobie’s action was confirmed with s1 ati orders from Churchill:
iy
T have given instructions to General Wilson to make sure that all ‘ forces are left with you and all possible reinforcements are sent to you. . . Do not hesitate to fire at any armed male in Athens who assails ‘the British authority or Greek authority with which we are working. . it would be well, of course, if your command were reinforced by the _ thority of some [sic] Greek government, and Papandreou is being iS _ told by Leeper to stop and help. Do not hesitate to act as if you were conquered city where a local rebellionis in progress. With regard to the ELAS bands approaching from the outside, uushould surely be able with your armour to give some of these a son which will make others unlikely to try.... We have to hold and _ dominate Athens. It would be a great thing to peed in this without = ‘aioe edoe also with bloodshed if necessary. (Churchill,
x ugh Scobie was militarily. unprepared for a full- scale. he did not have more than 10,000 men at his imme


Pr
vieeres
Greece, Churchill’s decision was sto proceed immediately to:a final confrontation. His disregard for indigenous political elements can only be understood in the light of his overall decision that Greece was to be kept, at all costs, within the British orbit of ‘responsibility’. As he characteristically cabled Leeper on the same day (5 December):
This is no time to dabble in Greek politics or to imagine that Greek politicians of various shades can affect the situation. You should not worry about Greek government compositions. The matter is one of life or.death. You must urge Papandreou to stand to his duty, and assure him he will be supported by all our forces if he does so. The day has long gone past when any particular group of Greek politicians can influence this mob rising. His only chance is to come through with us. (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 257; italics supplied)
On this last point, Churchill proved most ‘definitely right. Papandreou, who had offered his resignation, revoked it and until the end of the war he unquestioningly complied with _ Leeper’s instructions. But if British policy was clear enough, the aims and intentions of the Communist Party and EAM were still selfcontradictory. Although the decision to launch an armed struggle was reached on 27 November, as we have seen, armed, action was still considered subsidiary to a political solution. Even after 4 December, when fighting had begun, there were serious disagreements about the extent it should take and about the more general strategy it should be integrated in. For not only did a considerable fraction of EAM still believe in the possibility of a compromise solution; it also hesitated’ as to whether or not the struggle should be undertaken with all its forces. In the first few days the ELAS fighters received specific orders to avoid any battles against British forces and to confine themselves to fighting against the Greek Royalist troops and the police. Even later on, when the possibility of keeping the British outside the struggle was obviously not envisaged any more, the ELAS forces showed great reluctance to shoot at the British. Thus during the whole war the British lost only 237 men, an absurdly low number if
86 i


that the British garrisons in Salonica Nad the other towns where they were stationed were never attacked, des- — a pite the enormous superiority in men and materials of ELAS Beeenvnere except in Athens. Another paradox, only to be explained if one accepts that the Communists never ceased to | :_. believein a political solution, is that during the war in Athens _ very few attempts were made to reinforce the units engaged in D reats fighting with other ELAS troops stationed else- i _ where. Instead of sending all available forces to Athens, the __ ey ELAS leadership launched an attack against the remaining , _ forces of EDES in Epirus which, however, had already n astarted to demobilize. EDES was rapidly dissolved, thereby _ ye _ ensuring an ELAS monopoly of military and political power oP ia the whole of rural Greece at the very time when the forces of ELAS in Athens were confronted with growing difficulties. _ While slightly superior to the British in numbers (they have __ been estimated at 20,000) they were seriously lacking in equip“ment, training and supplies. _ Nevertheless, the first days brought considerable success to ‘ELAS, who confined the British into a small area not more ‘than a mile square, in the centre of the town, including Colonaki, the Athenian Belgravia. Instead of launching a final attack against the British positions, which could have resulted . the elimination of the bridgehead, ELAS dispersed their |
osGar =
al
.
io)ed“9ty ° ionaoe fe)eS:< Oona bie=} ie)= Q o ce] ao° tEsi ee i=]» =@ > @
-out attack ghould be considered inathe light of the repeated ‘ tempts to achieve an armistice, even at the time when their
ould immediately evacuate Attica and surrender their fe)Five days later new conciliatory proposals were met. the same rigidity. Churchill was adamant. Feeling ably secure with respect to Stalin’s attitude, he decided to ; ELAS, which\he described as Trotskyist in the House


of Commons- a wink to Stalin — and to accept
4
The Greek
nothing except utter submission. On 8 December he told Scobie: =
There is much talk in the press tonight of alpeace offer by ELAS. Naturally we should be glad to have this matter settled, but you should make quite sure, so far as your influence goes, that we do not give away. for the sake of kindness what has been won or can still be won by our troops. It would seem that anything less satisfactory than the terms agreed upon before the revolt took place should not be accepted. ... The clear objective is the defeat of the EAM. The ending of the fighting issubsidiary to this.(Churchill, vol. 11, p. 258; Italics supplied)
Although international and British public opinion was greatly aroused (on 13 December the Trades Union Congress expressed with an astounding majority — 2,455,000 votes against 137,000 — its regret.at the policy of the British Government in Greece) and it was obvious that faulty intelligence had led to a miscalculation of EL AS power, the resolution of _ Churchill was undaunted. Field-Marshal Alexander, who had replaced Wilson as Commander-in-Chief of the Middle East ~ forces, kept men and supplies pouring in to Athens and by the 20 December the balance of forces favoured the British. The military position of Scobie being secure, the problem became how to achieve a political solution. On 22 December ~ Churchill cabled Alexander:
There is no question of embarking in any military operations away from the Athens-Piraeus area. We must however have a military foundation there on which a Greek Government of some—— or other canfunction. . ‘Thereafter wea not intend to stay in Greets except for such reasonable period as may be necessary to let the new Government, _ whatever it is, gain for itself a National Army or Militia, in the hope that these may be able to conduct elections, plebiscites, etc. [!] We can ‘achievneo political solution while negotiating from a base.of weakness . ‘and frustration. (Churchill, vol. 11, p. 274)
- On Christmas Day Churchill visited Athens to take a look - for himself. A conference was called with representatives of all the Greek political parties, EAM, the British authorities, and curiously enough Colonel Popov of the Soviet military mission, who throughout the hostilities had been quietly stays .
88 4 we at


ionsea hich also housed the military headquarters of Scobie. Churchill himself paid tribute to Stalin’s good faith:
Stalin adhered strictly and faithfully to our agreement of October and in all the long weeks of fighting the Communists in the streets of Athens not one word of reproach came from Pravda or Izvestia. (Churchill, vol. 11.) _ But it was the turn of the representations of EAM/ELAS to be adamant. Still believing in the possibility of a political victory, despite the fact that their military position had taken ha turn for the worse, they presented a series of impossible _ demands. Not only did they return to their demand for 50 per cent of the seats in government, including the Ministry of _ the Interior and other key ministries; they also demanded the - dissolution of the regular Greek Brigades, the purge of the police forces and general elections before April. The demands were naturally rejected and the fighting resumed. By the be_ ginning of January ELAS’s military position had become untenable and on 5 January Athens was evacuated. It is difficult to explain this second sudden hardening of the Communists’ position: They must have realized that their " military position had been seriously impaired. Continuous re_ inforcements had given Scobie an undoubted supremacy. The ' control of the airport enabled the British to keep adding to _ their fighting troops until they finally reached 40,000 men. On _the other hand: no serious reinforcement of ELAS forces was __being attempted. The bulk of their forces were still tied up i in the dispersal and elimination of the minor bands in the Decuntniside. No general offensive against the British was en‘visaged, nor was any such operation now feasible. It seems that EAM grossly overestimated the impact of domestic and
5
: %
:. ess, rather than style, and tried to make the best out of their pponents’ presumed need to give in. Perhaps they also be
89
international protest against Churchill’s policy. They probably interpreted his presence in Athens as a sign of weak
d in some kind of diplomatic support from the Soviet n. In this they were to be rudely disappointed. On the __


dreou Peabitaheny: was officially recente ey Stalin, ‘who also nominated Ambassador Sergeiev to Athens. Yhe motives - behind these fatal miscalculations of the situation are still an . - object of speculation. It has been implied that it was Tito’s influence that moved the Greek Communist Party towards - the hardening of their position, though such an interpretation _is not corroborated. It has also been said that we should find the clue in Soviet encouragement, in view of the well-known docility of the KKE to Stalin’s desires. But all official and ‘unofficial evidence shows that, at least at that stage, Stalin’s attitude was discouraging. In reality the strategy of the KKE ‘during those fateful days has yet to be brought to light. The responsibility for the inexplicable mistakes, vacillations and hesitations cannot be settled by pointing out the undoubted - inadequacy of the Communist leadership. The real decision_ making processes in the Greek Communist movement will only be illuminated if and when the Communist leaders in exile decide that the time has come to write their history. Other events with even: more far-reaching repercussions were taking place by the end of the month. While the military _ situation was gradually worsening, the ELAS troops not only intensified their punitive measures against the collaborationist _ and fascist bands, but started to arrest civilian hostages, whom they hurried out of Athens and into the mountains. This mea_ sure was to constitute one of the main.and most effective pro. paganda instruments in the hands of the future right-wing - governments. It was also of fundamental importance in the iAgradual switching of popular allegiance from left to right. It is impossible to estimate with certainty the extent of this brutal practice. Figures have been given ranging from 15,000 - to 35,000 from the Athens district alone. Out of these it seems. that approximately 4,000 were executedor died as a result of bad conditions. It should, however, be pointed out that these -malpractices were not confined to the Communist side. During December and January the Greek and British authorities - arrested almost 15,000 people in the Athens area alone. Most. of them were deported to concentration camps aseeine
1]
90


ext, the atrocities committed during the last days of _ December were to lead to the tragedy that was to befall not ' only the Communists but the progressive forces in general.
beeael
_ Having secured their military bridgehead, the British turned to settling the political problem. This involved the form of the regime and the composition of the government. The King had given in to Churchill’s pressure against an immediate return and agreed to the appointment of a Regent. On 1 January 1945 Archbishop Damaskinos accepted the Regency ' and proclaimed the need to end the fighting. Papandreou had by now served his purpose. He had been exposed by the political intrigues that led to the Communists’ defeat. A fresh personality, able to act as a conciliator but malleable enough to serve British plans, was needed. General Nicholas Plastiras,
ee
an honest but irresolute veteran with the aura of the antiRoyalist and uncompromisingly Republican revolution of 1922 which he had led, met with both these requirements. He _ had been flown into Athens some weeks before after a tenyear exile in France, during which he had lost contact with _ new political realities. He had also been talked into swearing os allegiance to the King, a fact that was not disclosed by the British until he was needed no more. His appointment was therefore accepted by the Communists as a conciliatory sign _ and an armistice was signed on 11 January. ~The armistice marked the end of the war. But the country _ was in ruins. The degree of destruction-Greece had suffered an only be compared with that in Yugoslavia, Poland and x_ Russia. From 1940 to 1944 550,000 people (8 per cent of the _ population) had perished, and 34 per cent of the total na_ tional-wealth had been destroyed; 401,500 houses were com: __pletely destroyed, leaving 1,200,000 people homeless; 1,770 villages had been totally burnt down; the large harbours, rail4 way tracks, steam engines, telephone networks, civil airports _ and bridges had been completely destroyed; 73 per cent of ey argo ship tonnage, 94 per cent of passenger ships had been
ate cars, 60 per cent of trucks and 80 per cent of buses;
91
sunk; 56 per cent of the roads were destroyed, 65 per cent of ES


> cat cent of small Shai ad died; 25 Bac cent of.theforests pall - been burnt; in 1944 cereal production was down by 40 per - cent, tobacco production by 89 per cent and currant produc_ tion by 66 per cent. . OMe The Varkiza Agreement signed on 12 February between the EAM, the British’and the Plastiras government was the pro-duct of long and strenuous negotiations. All guerrilla units were to be disbanded and ELAS was to surrender its arms within two weeks, while EAM would not be represented’ in the government, which undertook to hold a plebiscite on the question of the monarchy, within the year. On the other hand, the Communist Party was allowed to continue its political activities and an amnesty was given to ELAS and EAM fighters. This.clause was the main object of disagreement. The amnesty did not include offences under common criminal law, an omission which proved to be fatal. Whereas the leaders of | EAM were safe from sanctions, the rank and ne of the guer_sillas were subject to unrestricted persecution. For by stretching the law there was hardly any guerrilla activity that could ' not be brought under some common-law offence. Tens of thousands of resistance fighters were to suffer as the result of this castrated armistice, while the leaders, whose activities were by definition political, were left untouched. Their complete capitulation at a time when, while beaten in Athens, they still controlled the greatest part of Greece created the ‘legal’ background to the white terror which was to follow and eventually paved the way to the civil war. Once more _ Soviet pressure seems to contribute to the explanation. Part- salides, a member of the Politburo of the KKE, openly al_ luded to external pressures when he was later accused. of capitulation. It should be remembered that the Varkiza. _ Agreement coincides iin time with Yalta. Stalin may have nee in a hurry to prove his good faith. x The Varkiza Agreement was by and large fulfilled on ihe Communists’ part. 100 guns, 81 mortars, 419 machine guns, 2,115 automatic rifles, 138 individual mortars, 48, 653.rifles and Tevolvers and 57 anti-tank rifles (a greater number than
92


ties. A considerable amount of weapons and ammunition was, i ‘however, not surrendered. It does not seem that the withhold_ ing of the guns was due to a decision of the Communist _ leaders to retain them for another armed struggle. But a number of ELAS groups, including the redoubtable guerilla fighter Aris Velouchiotis, refused to accept the Varkiza _ Agreement and took once more to the mountains. As the white terror developed, more and more EL AS fighters refused to surrender their arms. But they were immediately disowned - by the Communist Party and EAM, who had issued orders that all guerrillas should disarm quietly and rapidly. Aris himself was to be.caught and killed, but in spite of this his example was followed by many of his companions who stayed in the mountains in order to escape arrest and execution. ‘By the middle of 1945 the white terror had reached enor' mous dimensions. A memorandum was signed on 5 June by ' Plastiras (who by now had served his purpose too, and had been replaced), and by Sophoulis, Kafandaris,Mylonas arid ‘Tsouderos, leaders of the Centre parties that had begun to revive. It stated:
- The terror initiated by the extreme right in the whole country after the December incidents is being amplified every day. Its development and its extension render the life of all non-royalist citizens impossible and exclude the hope that we can proceed to a free plebiscite or to elections. The terrorist organizations of the extreme right, which had been armed by the Germans and had collaborated with them, have not _ been disarmed or prosecuted, but have allied themselves to the security _ forces in order to strangle completely all democratic thought.
In fact the right-wing extremists constituted the bulk of ’ the security forces themselves, which, far from being purged, _ had been enriched with the members of organizations that up | to that point had functioned on a ‘private’ basis. The then Under-Secretary of War later admitted that ‘the First National Guard Battalions were formed with members of the: Security Battalions, on my own initiative.’ Simultaneously with the official security forces and in full collaboration with " them, Grivas’s ‘X’ organization, which later claimed to have
' 93
> rais ;


The Greek ee 1ge
Shesched, 200,000 eects | had as. itsmain -tion and murder of the ex--guerrillas of ELAS. In the hort ‘period from February to July 1945 20,000 persons had been arrested, over 500 murdered and 2,961 condemned to death. ‘(The latter figure was announced’ by the Greek government.) In December 1945 the Minister of Justice declared:
.. the number of imprisoned persons is 17,984. Of these 2,388 have _ been legally condemned and 15,596 are detained preventively.... 48.956 are being prosecuted for their activities as EAM/ELAS members. The total number of persons to be charged, including those already detained is, according to our estimate, over 80,000, _ According to EAM, from Varkiza till the election of 31 March 1946, 1,289 persons were murdered, 6,671 were badly ‘wounded, 31,632 were tortured and 84,931 were arrested. tN Meanwhile, in February, the Yalta conference had taken place. As far as the Balkan issues were concerned it only ratified the previous: agreements between Churchill and Stalin. im But its international implications were far-reaching, in as - much as the spheres of influence in the Balkans were definitely agreed upon whereas -the previous agreements had an allegedly provisional character. As Isaac Deutcher has pointed - out, Stalin was in a ‘bizarre, Byzantine way legalistically ‘scrupulous in his bargains with his bourgeois allies. It is the ‘tragedy of the Greek Communists that they never realized _ this. Unlike the French and Italian Communists who (especially the latter) had to confront similar, if not so serious, _ provocations from the extreme right after the end of the war, - the Greek Communist Party’s attitude was short-sighted. One _ has only to recall Togliatti’s calls for moderation and nonretaliation when an attempt on‘his life had just failed. By - contrast, persecution gradually led the Greek Communist ‘movement to a revolutionary attitude. { In June 1945 Zachariades, the Moscow-trained Secretary: General of the Greek Communist Party, who, after having ‘spent three years in Metaxas’s gaols, had been transferred to - Germany and interned in a concentration camp where he miraculously escaped ,with his life, returned to Greece and : immediately assumed his old post. In the beginning heDeiat


et tified ihe he to demobilize and ‘ermine the armed 4 struggle. But this readjustment of Communist strategy was not accompanied by a broader re-evaluation of the situation. The main consideration of Zachariades was obedience to Soviet _ wishes. His servility towards Stalin and his refusal to support the national territorial claims in northern Epirus (now part of Albania) helped to reinforce the propaganda against the _ Communists. He accepted the integration of Greece within the Western bloc, which he formulated as ‘the Greek axis, uniting the British-Mediterranean with the Balkan-European (Russian) poles’, but only so long as it was dictated by Stalin. Thus, for the time being, Communist hopes seemed to be _ founded on the social turmoil that would inevitably arise from the sad economic situation of the country. A galloping ‘in* flation that had resulted from the total collapse of the / economy during the occupation could not be controlled, and for all the efforts of the United Nations Relief organization (UNRRA), not only was the reconstruction programme " of no effect but even food was badly lacking in the provinces. _ The puppet governments that had succeeded Plastiras were ’corrupt, incompetent and had only nominal ethene and _the country was plunged into renewed chaos. _ Real power was still held by the British Army, and Scobie, 4 together with British Ambassador Leeper, imposed both _ governments and policies. Between January 1945 and April 1946 eight governments were formed, the longest of these _ being headed by Admiral Voulgaris, who had played an imfportant rolein the suppression of the 1944 Middle East Army 5%)mutiny. The advent of the Labour Government in 1945 did } not change ‘British policy in the least. Whenever Greek q‘governments tried to prevent the takeover of the Army and -the security services by the ultra-Royalist clique, they were. confronted by the veto of the British Military Mission. More- ; over; a anges Economic Mission was installed, acting as
ee eo 9


‘The Greek
he currency. Heonouite difficulties were in.fact: xacerbatec : _ by the rigidity of British economic control. All” ‘important decisions had to pass through London, so much so that one of the major demands of Premier Tsaldaris when he visited London in July 1946 was that the British Ambassador or Mis‘sion Commander be authorized to take decisions on the spot on matters of armament, equipment, rations and uniforms. : : The pre-war economic influence of Britain was also strengthened, The Athens—Piraeus tramways and trains, the water company, the electric power company, were restored to the f British, who had built and operated them before the war. Elections were planned for March 1946. The growing ter’ rorism made electoral campaigning difficult if not impossible for anyone but the Right. Not only the Communists but also the Centre parties, heirs of the pre-war Liberals, denounced the electoral farce that was to take place. Foreign Minister Sophianopoulas resigned in January and Vice-Premier Kafandaris in March, followed by twelve other members of the government. They all demanded postponement of the elections until a minimum of normality could be obtained. _ Nevertheless, British Foreign Secretary Bevin flatly refused - Premier \Sophoulis’s demand for postponement of the elec‘tions, and the latter remained fixed for 31 March, Thereupon the Communists and a large sectionof the Republicans (Centrists) committed one more, fateful mistake. They decided to : abstain and thereby deprived Greek democratic forces of parliamentary representation over the next four crucial years. _ For, despite the white terror, they stood a good chance of at _ Jeast imposing their presence on the new political world that was about. to be created. Their abstention suited Bevin’s policy admirably. When, two days after the deadline for the nomination of candidates, a considerable fraction of the Left decided to reconsider and asked for an extended deadline, _ Bevin again exercised his veto on Sophoulis. One half of the _ Greek population would thus not be represented in Parlia_ ment. Extraparliamentary opposition would become the only kind of opposition. And the Communist Party would be dragged once more byits leaders to the only path towards Pane
96


henmain issue in the elections was the nana The par“ties of the. pre-Metaxas period had managed to reconstruct themselves out of their scattered remnants. The Populists, “under Constantine Tsaldaris, espoused the royal cause and with some 600,000 votes won an absolute majority. The total number of votes barely exceeded 1,100,000 out of 2.2 millions on the electoral roll. The abstentions were thus close to 50 per cent. If one takes into consideration that a large number of EAM supporters had not been put on the register, the extended multiple voting practised by the Rightists who were in control of, the state machine, and the climate of open terrorism that reigned, the discrepancy between elected Parlia“Ment and public opinion ‘becomes even more manifest. But | regardless of whether the people were represented, the elecfetions had the important effect of legitimizing the government iand consolidating the Royalist revival. The plebiscite on the | ‘question of the monarchy, held in September, brought the expected result: King George’s return was secured by a 68.9 per cent majority and the King immediately returned to “Greece. _. Thus British policy had met with complete success. While Whe British found their military allies in the extreme Right — ii and. collaborationist: groups, who they had carefully preserved, _ armed and used against the ELAS, the political allies were Sought among the progressive and Republican pre-war political circles, who would be able to pose_as conciliators and _ “Moderates. Papandreou, Plastiras and Sophoulis were succes}sively called upon to play this role: The King, whose presence could have only been interpreted as a sanctioning of rightwing supremacy, was carefully kept away. The governments were encouraged to talk in terms of a conciliatory line, while _ the building up of the Army and security forces was entrusted to pore oe hands. The double structure oei Pe


h
~ subject to governmental authority, didnot end with the ter-_ mination of the civil war. Despite the fact that the right wing | was in power between 1952 and 1963, the army remained ‘untouchable’. Under the nominal authority of the’King, the ' special status of the armed forces which was planned by the British in 1944-6 became the dominating characteristic in the Greek political game. But the extent of the now institutionalized white terror was such that it almost defeated its own purposes. By March 1946 the arrests had reached 85,000 and the *X’ gangs were raiding the provinces in quest of more victims. The new Tsaldaris government did nothing to control the situation. The collaborators were unofficially, if not officially, rehabilitated. Legislation passed by the Quisling governments was retrospectively ratified. No restraint was imposed on the Right _. extremists, who continued their activities unperturbed.

The revival of the Quislings is vividly illustrated in the Twentieth Century Fund Report on the Greeks (1947). ‘Notorious wealthy collaborators — industrialists and others received protection, patronage and contracts from the government’ (p. 35). UNRRA supplies were sold to these businessmen, who resold them at huge profits. Instability further provided opportunities for speculation: ‘Industrialists and businessmen .-. hate to put their money into enterprise unless it promises at least 40 per cent profit on the investment, because they could make that much simply by manipulating ‘their money in foreign exchange’ (p. 75). It is estimated that a thousand families (a half of one per cent of the population) . enjoyed over a half of the total private revenue (Mathiopoulos, Geschichte der Sozialen Frage in Griechenland, p. 164)! Paul Porter, the American in charge of relief at the time, writes: ‘Profiteers, that is traders, speculators, and black marketeers, thrive in wealth and luxury, a problem with which no government has effectively dealt. At the same time masses of people live on a bare subsistence level’ (Economic Report, April 1947). One such specific case puts the matter in Betten perspective. Mr Tsironikos was Vice-President of the Quisling
98 "2 a “tg
Se \ id 9


nment Daroushout the Beousttion: He was ; also a@ per‘sonal friend of King George, whom he had met in the twenties in Bucharest, where the King was spending his exile, and where Tsironikos represented British interests in petroleum. ' He had come to Greece for the first time a few days before ' the outbreak-of the Second World War. When the Germans overran the country Tsironikos was immediately appointed _ No. 2 in the Quisling government and put in charge of econo_ mic affairs, where he remained to the end of the occupation.
Upon the Germans’ retreat from Greece he was one of the ‘few personalities who followed them. Arrested by the Americans when Germany collapsed, he was transferred to Greece, where he was condemned to death as a collaborator and was, ‘of course, not executed. ‘After a short stay in the then Se- curity Headquarters, under luxurious conditions, he was a _ free man. By 1952, when Marshall Papagos’s government_ “came to power, the process of rehabilitation was complete: _Tsironikos was appointed Special Counsellor to the Minister of. Coordination, Spiridon Markezinis. The latter had been Private Secretary to King George in the Middle East and had _been entrusted with the economic organization of the 1946 referendum on the monarchy, for which he had been given carte blanche. In 1952 Markezinis was the rising star of the right wing and was considered an economic wizard. Tsironi_ kos was dispatched to Bonn to organize Markezinis’s official _wisit to the Federal German capital, aimed to re-establish
out promised Ludwig Erhard; then Minister of Economic Affairs, _ to turn over the Greek broadcasting system to Telefunken | and the nationalized telephone company to Siemens. It is all as if the invisible nexus of Greek and foreign capitalist interests which operated before the war had continued to func
the iimmediate post-war turmoil settled down. ‘The disarray of the Communist Party had been nantly intensified. poi t3he ing line,the number of ae ene
99
‘the economic links between Greece and the Bundesrepublik. One year later, the Siemens-Telefunken scandal broke _ : aletter of Markezinis’s was made public, in whichhe ~
\
iondespite the war and had eventually remerged intact once aN


fighters who took to the mountains was ‘constantly. growi They soon organized themselves into ‘self-defence units’ and sporadic fighting in the mountains became more frequent. _ Further, thousands of former guerrillas crossed the frontier to Yugoslavia, Bulgaria or Albania. Even so, the leadership of the Communist Party hesitated on the course it should follow. Although the idea of a nation-wide guerrilla war had been implicit at their Seventh Party Congress in September - 1945, the decision was not reached until February 1946, when it had become clear that the general elections would be stagei _ managed. The internal evolution alone does not suffice to explain the - switch in Communist policy. Although there is no evidence that the Soviets actually encouraged the new insurrection, it should be pointed out that by the middle of 1945 the Soviet’s’ attitude had also hardened. During the Potsdam conference, Molotov presented a memorandum to the British in which he stated for the first time that the Soviet Union disagreed with | and protested against the way Britain was handling the Greek problem ‘on the grounds of an old and indefinite authoriza- | tion’. Stalin further demanded a military base in Greece for the Soviet Union and specified either Salonica or Alexandroupolis, a demand to which Churchill was to give publicity. | The Seventh Communist Party Congress, during which the possibility of insurrection was put forward for the first time, followed a few weeks after Potsdam. But the situation remained unclear for another six months. Not until January 1946, at the first meeting of the United Nations Security Council, did the Soviet government demand the immediate withdrawal of British troops from Greece, while the final decision to launch an armed struggle was reached in February. But already in December 1945 members of the Communist Party central committee had met with representatives of the Yugoslav, and Bulgarian general staffs in Petrich, Bulgaria. The actual discussions have not been disclosed, but they, must have referred to the feasibility of the venture as well as to the military help which the Yugoslavs and Bulgarians were prepared to. offer. To what extent aid was offered, whetiiet og
100 a Ba ae


in the petsibility of a Ccoremianist take-over or only desired to. intensify tension in the Balkans to which he sacrificed the Greek Communists, are questions that cannot yet be ans_wered. But it appears to be beyond any reasonable doubt that | ‘Soviet influence was as important for the resumption of armed / struggle in 1946 as it has been for the softening of the Com_munist position’ in the middle of 1944, Once more the in' transigence of the Greek reactionaires worked hand in hand > with Soviet influence, this time leading to a civil war which | was to last for three years. x! Bi! _ However, the Greek Communist Party’s policy was still _vacillating and at the national conference of the Party that was held in April 1946 the subject was not even touched. Even as late as August 1946, when General Marcos Vafiadis was iven the task of building up the ‘Democratic Army’ in the — cs ‘mountains, the Communists still hoped to be able to avoid an armed confrontation, and until July 1947, when full-scale civil war had already begun, significant efforts were directed _ towards convincing the Centrists to exercise pressure inside the government for the normalization of the situation. But once more, the ‘Communists, overestimated their bargaining __ power. Encouraged by some early successes in the field, and tragically uninformed about British and American intentions, they put forward a series of demands which, under the cir“cumstances, can only be considered as exorbitant. The Royalist government, recently endorsed by a plebiscite and iN eneral elections, and enjoying military, material and moral upport from both the British and the American governments, as backed by an army which was rapidly reorganizing itself intoa far from negligible fighting force. They could not acpt discussion on a basis of equality. Repeated proposals were ejected one after the other. Greece was heading towards tal civil war that was to have immeasurable repercussions on erfuture. Once more, the bawas cast.


CHAPTER7
‘Civil War (1946-9)
THE decision of the Communist Party to launch a new armed struggle was based, whatever else may be said about it, on a fundamental error in the evaluation of the balance of forces. Though economically ruined, unable to start on reconstruction without a continuous flow of foreign aid, and. with a government that did not represent popular feeling, Greece in 1946 was nevertheless in a different situation from that of two years before. The Communists now stood alone. Most of the small parties that had cooperated with the KKE in the framework of EAM had by now abandoned the Communists. The relative stabilization of the internal situation after Varkiza resulted in an attempt to regroup the non-Communist socialist forces in view of the political normality the country was supposed to be entering. This did not have serious repercussions in itself, for their actual political force had been marginal. What however was more significant was the fact that the Communists, left in isolation, could no longer present themselves as a broad popular coalition but were obliged to make it clear where they stood ideologically. The Zachariades leadership was later condemned for having given the movement a ‘socialist-revolutionary character’ which was not in tune with prevailing conditions. But it was hardly Zach-ariades’ fault that all non-Communist elements refused to take part in the new armed struggle. Six years of continuous fighting had been enough for the majority of the people. And the. National Front strategy pursued by EAM during the occupation had done little to prepare the peasants ideologically for a struggle for the installation of a Communist regime. Fur- . thermore, the middle classes, who had mainly supported EAM during the occupation, were very much opposed to a new war.” Although the economic situation could hardly be considered __ : as normalized, the first and most urgent demand of the middle d“i©i
102 ,


clasées was: economic saat and’ any threat of continual upheaval was dead against their interests and desires. The prewar stratification of the urban population re-emerged at least in its outlines, and the majority of the middle classes naturally ~ favoured a state of affairs which promised them a revival of. their shattered status. The atrocities and excesses committed by the Communists during the last days of December, ably magnified by the propagandists of the Royalist governments, greatly contributed to the hesitancy of a great part of the exsupporters of EAM. Although still enjoying the sympathies of a considerable fraction of the population who felt that the struggle was just, the KKE thus met with great resistance in launching a new war. Zisis Zographos, a member of the KKE Central Committee, later admitted that ‘the decision on ‘armed struggle ran counter to the sentiments of the masses’. Even many Party functionaries and members did not agree with it. Just as important, however, as the attitude of the stiajority : of EAM members was the line adopted by the Communist ~ Party. The city organizations, the core of Communist power, ' were not allowed to leave the city and join the guerrillas. Strategically, guerrilla warfare was still considered subsidiary _ to the decisive struggle which, according to Marxist-Leninist orthodoxy, would ultimately come about in the towns. Even large military units, the composition of which was orientated to the left, were prevented from joining the Democratic Army in the mountains, The mistakes committed during the occupa_ tion were repeated on a larger scale. Apart from the fact that, “until the middle of 1947, guerrilla warfare was still used by fh _ Zachariades (who was freely moving about in Athens until 1947) as a weapon to impose a political agreement, it should be taken into consideration that KKE leadership was increasingly suspicious of guerrilla leaders, who were seen as eventual threats to the monolithic structure of the party, | Zachariades in 1947-9 was just as reluctant to strengthen Markos as Siantos had been to strengthen Aris during the re
cae aeeaa of the venture. His most numerous ~ most
103 Rea
sistance. Having launched a civil war, he refused to see the


r e
a
N h
R a e
T h e
G r e e k
T r a g e d y
p s d
execution squads, without being given the opportunity to fire -asingle shot. Although there is only scanty evidence for the reasons of this fatally contradictory policy, it seems that dogmatic insistence on pure Leninist theories led to disregard and open mistrust of the potentialities of the peasant movement. Mar_kos’s deputy Kikitzas told the French writer D. Eudes (in an unpublished series of interviews) that Zachariades expressly forbade the broadening of guerrilla warfare on the basis of peasant conscription and set the number of 10,000 as the maximum of guerrilla effectives (Spring, 1947). As early as June 1945, Zachariades had criticized the ‘faulty composition’ _of the party, only 18 per cent of which were workers. He seems to have met with some success, for, in a later survey, 42 per cent were found to be members of the working class, though only 28 per cent were of ‘proletarian’ descent and upbringing (R. V. Burks, ‘Statistical Survey of the Greek Communist’, _ Journal of Modern History, XXVIII, 1955, p. 155). But the peasants who could have been mobilized on a large scale in 1946-7 were rebuffed. In 1948 even ELAS was condemned by the Communist leadership as ‘petty-bourgeois deviation-. -ism’, a line that could only accentuate peasant distrust. Thus, theoretical dogmatism and fear of losing Party authority combined in creating the wastage of town effectives and alienation of peasants. If this line contributed to the subsequent difficulties of the Democratic Army in building up its reserves, it also partly explains the relative ease with which the Right was
trusted human reserves were to be sacrificed in camps, gaols or 
~ to acquire a powerful grip on the rural population on the basis of an anti-Communist ideology. Thus only a small number of the progressives were in favour of the war. This was to prove of great significance when, later’ on, the problem of manpower reserves came to haunt the - Communist leaders. So it was only the hard-core fighters who could be trusted to obey the call to arms. The problem of _ supplies was also of critical importance. The few arms retained after the Varkiza Agreement could only be a provisional basis for the struggle. Complete dependence on
104
.
\ aa


ieAamanvin, Bulgaria and Aapeais could therefore not be _ avoided. Although it is not known what help was promised before the war started, training camps were functioning as early as the beginning of 1946, and a significant amount of supplies was in fact given. Most important, a pledge to keep the frontier open was given, aj fact which was of paramount importance for the coming guerrilla warfare. It is true that the Greek government could hardly be considered as being in a position of strength. ‘Obviously unrepresentative’ according to Walter Lippman, it had neither the prestige nor the power to follow or impose a national policy. Its sole source of power was British support. Thus, when in February 1947 the British government declared that Britain was unable to continue to assist Greece and that British troops would soon have to be withdrawnt,he situation looked ominous for thegovernment. British ‘protection’ had con-stituted the foundation on which the policy of the Right had been based. The withdrawal of Britain from the Near East, so soon after her diplomatic triumph in Greece, was the first sign of the disintegration of the Empire. One hundred years of British predominance in the Eastern Mediterranean virtually ended when the growing domestic economic problems, and the shifting of the centre of the British strategic interests further to the East, obliged the Labour government to evacuate Greece. The Greek government was left alone \with neither the means nor the power to preserve its position. But the power vacuum was not to last for long. Only a few days later, on 12 March 1947, the Truman Doctrine was officially announced. The United States was embarking on a new diplomacy of intervention. From now on, any left-wing threat in a - country not already Communist was to be ‘contained’ by force, if necessary. American intervention in Greece, as stated in the Truman doctrine, was only the beginning. Guatemala, 4 ~ Egypt, Lebanon, Cuba, San “aay and finally Vietnam - were to follow. in The ‘military and economic aid which poured into Greece
q proclaimed Marshall Plan was indeed unprecedented in 
Rane 105
as a result of the Truman Doctrine and of the subsequently —om


amplitude, Congress pierced! a sum of.$300 and much more was to come. But in addition to the quantity of US aid and its effect on the Greek economy, its first and most lasting significance Jas that it provided a permanent and highly efficient mechanism of intervention in Greek affairs. In - contrast to the loans of the pre-war period, American aid was by and large a gift. Through bargaining over the amount and the use of the money given, the USA had a stronger hold over - Greek governments than Britain had ever managed to get. An © ‘implied threat to stop, reduce or even postpone the aid was ‘enoughto make Greek ministers fall flat on their faces. This goes far to explain the ease with which the USA could impose governments, policies and personalities even after the civil war was over. This was a change from the past: British influence had been based on an elaborate and carefully developed system of ‘agents’ — either paid or, more often, unpaid — who possessed or acquired key positions in the _ decision-making processes of Greece. Under normal cireumstances, British intervention was never blatant or explicit, since _ it was channelled through diplomatic and ‘covered’ activities. _ American influence, on the contrary, soon became arecognized institution. Thus the octagenarian biboral Sophoulis was imposed as v Prime Minister once again, heading a government based on a ‘Royalist parliamentary majority. American intervention in the installation of the Sophoulis government was exceptionally blunt. The Prime Minister and leader of the parliamentary majority, Tsaldaris, was summoned and told that all aid would be withdrawn if he did not resign and make room for the already concocted Sophoulis coalition within twenty-fout hours. . Tsaldaris gave in and the new government, PeDeaente re_ shuffled, lasted until the end of the civil war. iS ve - When, in January 1948, a political crisis again seemed im_ minent, US Ambassador Griswold did not hesitateto threaten ~ _ the political world that ‘they should renounce all attempts to. _ form a new coalition, because the existing coalition is the last _ - possible parliamentary solution.’ A new crisis would lead 1003 9 an extra-parliamentary solution, which would eventually ye
106
+


Civil Waary1945-9)
ya eae dictatocial’: In such a case ‘the USA might reconsider its policy on aid. This period marks the definite re-establishment of the pre"war political patterns. Liberals and Populists re-emerged as the major political groupings of the Centre and Right respectively, and were split into many small personal parties. The main change brought about by the civil war was that they both accepted the monarchy unreservedly. Both consistently yielded to American-pressure and joined in coalition governments. Under the impact of the civil war and American aid, differences of ideology and policy between them quickly evaporated. Each hailed US aid and intervention, but for different reasons. The Right saw its control over the Army and the civil service strengthened as never before, while. the Centre hoped that the American desire for attractive-looking compromises would give it the lion’s share of political office, since a vacuum was left by the civil war and the discrediting of both the Communists and the moderate Left. This void was the more complete because the 1946 election ’ was boycotted by the Communists, the Socialists and the more progressive faction of the Liberals. When the civil war began, the parties which did have seats in the Assembly naturally tried to monopolize the scene. The bitterness of the civil war was so great that they succeeded. By 1948 there was no other alternative. It was either pro or anti-Communism. Most of the non-Communist progressive forces that had stayed out of Parliament during \that critical period found themselves completely powerless to influence events. Their audience dwindled and the first chance Greece had to form a socialist party vanished. In the days of dark oppression that were to come, it was easy for the right-wing propagandists to identify the Communists with the non-Communist left. After all, EAM had been a joint venture. The moderate progressive forces also found themselves completely alienated from the Communists, who could never forgive the fact that they had been abandoned at a crucial moment. Although a great number of nonCommunists had suffered and were to suffer in the concentration camps as the result of the white terror, they were still
oes 107


the nation in bitterames with one ‘msothere the Greek socialist movement was doomed. It would take almost twenty years for a similar movement to revive, under ee different circumstances. The first period of the civil war, frou Eebeuty 1946, which Gs regarded as the official opening date, till the spring of 1947, _ was confinedto an extended build-up. Communist activities were limited to scattered assaults on small and isolated viles _ lages and military units throughout the country. Still weak in _ numbers, the Communist guerrilla bands could not achieve anything more than the spreading of a climate of insecurity and terror in the countryside. When in August 1946 General Markos Vafiades was sent into the mountains to organize and - coordinate guerrilla activities, he was confronted with serious _ difficulties. He was very short of men, supplies and ammuni_ tion. Although the Greek regular Army was not yet in action, __ the National Guard of about 50,000 men, with the help of the still numerous right-wing bands, was sufficient to keep the - Communists restricted to marginal activity. Markos, an able strategist, opted for the hit-and-run tactics. which he was to | followup to the end, while doing all he could to strengthen his. forces, which amounted at the outset to no more than 4,000 _ men. Gradually, though with much less enthusiasm than during the German occupation, many former ELAS fighters joined _. him. But the numbers were still inadequate and Markos was _ driven by necessity to the recruitment of villagers. This process, which was to constitute the basis of Markos’s army, was - yoluntary to begin \with but gradually took on a more and more forcible character. Men and women fought side byside, the proportion of the latter growing and finally reaching 25 _ per cent. This method of recruitment, though it served its pur-' pose by enabling Markos to develop an army 20,000 strong,
108
had considerable defects. Most of the recruits were untrained village people and needed a long period of training. Although Yugoslavia contributed training camps, this increased the logistic dependence on Tito and kept the, Communist Army widely asberect The bravery and. tenacity’:which some of4 i


Bn Oh ee Be one
ne . 
Civil War(1946-9)
these recruits were to show later on could not counterbalance _ their military inexperience. When in 1949 guerrilla tactics were abandoned in favour of conventional warfare, the scarcity of professionally trained personnel would be bitterly felt. The regular Army, on the other hand, although reorganized by the British Military Mission, was still in an unsatisfactory state. Although by 1946 it numbered about 100,000 men, it was badly equipped, insufficiently mobile and suffered from an over-centralized and incompetent command. Up to the middle of 1947 it did not take part in military operations and indulged in ‘static defence’ of the cities and communications centres which it controlled. Thus, when, in the spring of 1947, Markos intensified guerrilla warfare, the Army was hardly in a position to counterattack; Raids became more frequent and the majority of the countryside seemed to be under Communist control. Partly encouraged by his successes and partly under the pressure of the Yugoslavs and Bulgarians, Markos launched a series of attacks on a larger scale against the towns of Florina, Konitsa, Kastoria, Grevena and Alexandroupolis. The object was to capture a town in which a rival Greek government could be | | established and recognized by the Communist nations. All ‘these attacks failed and made a return to guerrilla tactics necessary, but they convinced the Americans that their intervention had to be more massive. Another influence was the intensification of the cold war, which became ‘official’ for the first\ time with, battles in the UN over the Greek issue between the US and the USSR, and in particular with the creation of the Cominform in October 1947. By the end of that "year suplies were pouring in, and the US Military Mission (JUSMAPG) assumed the strategic leadership over the head of the Joint US—Greek Staff, hitherto responsible for planning and supplying military operations. The effects on the regular army were far-reaching. It was enlarged to 200,000 men; special anti-guerrilla mountain divisions were trained; the - Army was supplied with modern weapons, artillery, napalm bombs, tanks and aircraft. A modern network of communications was created, Airfields, roads, bridges and ports which
109


had been out a use since the Gerasa occup _ ilyrepaired. Boe yy A aie _ Nevertheless, throughout 1948 and notwittistenalis the -launching of large-scale offensives, the Army did not manage to break the guerrillas. Although casualties were very high, _ Markos successfully kept up his tactics, hitting hard when not _ expected, retreating and even crossing the international nor-thern border when unduly pressed. In the military sense, 1948. _ proved to be a stalemate, neither side ebsci to win considerable advantages over the other. - However, the balance of forces had radically changed. For ‘ : thehope of the Communists that.a general insurrection within the towns would in due course enable their military forces to break the undermined governmental forces was disappointed. The hardening of police action against Communists, the outlawing of the Communist Party and the arrest of thousands of members had resulted in the shattering of the Communist net‘work within the cities. Thousarids of persons were arrested, ‘tried and executed for minor or non- -existent offences. (The
eae exact number of executions has not been disclosed.) Selective conscription, which had been the basis of the Greek Army and which left the bulk of leftists free in the cities, had been
were called up — only to be separated from the rest of the : Army and interned in the notorious concentration camps of. _ Makronissos and Youra. Communist strength in the cities was completely broken. This knocked the props from under the - Communist strategy of taking control after weakening the - government by intensified guerrilla warfare. Time was now _ working against them. The Army was gradually becoming a _ formidable machine, constantly growing in numbers, weapons -. and supplies. Recruitment for the guerrillas was steadily get-, ting more difficult, as the government started to move peasants _ ingreat numbers from areas subject to Oe a into quieter regions.
110
abandoned, and by now all young Communist sympathizers
But the decisive event that foreshadowed, the Comins } ; _ defeat occurred on 28 June 1948. Following the deepening ‘ 4 w ‘rift phi Stalin and Tito, Yugoslavia was expelled from


eg
Oa Pp Cid War(1946-9)
theieeclintores. This posed a frightful dilemma for the Greek - Communists. Yugoslavia was their main supply centre, and it was over the Yugoslav border that Markos’s troops usually retreated when in peril. But Russia, though she had offered little actual help, was the mother country to which the hardcore Communists — Zachariades especially — felt unquestioning obedience. For the time being — indeed for a whole year — they did not have to take a stand. Tito kept up his assistance and the Soviet Union did not require Zachariades to disavow him. But the situation had become extremely precarious. It was thus political more than purely military difficulties that started to demoralize the Democratic Army. As the countryside was being emptied, the Communists intensified their terrorist raids and resumed the practice of taking hostages, even though these same practices had been officially condemned by the Communist leadership when they had occurred in December 1944. These excesses and especially the removal-of children between the ages of three and fourteen (most of .them related to guerrilla fighters recruited either willingly or forcedly) and expatriating them to Yugoslavia and Bulgaria did much to discredit the Communist cause. They evoked the darkest days of Ottoman rule in the Balkans, when the Turks periodically rounded up Christian children and made them into Janissaries. Every Greek schoolboy is taught to shrink at the idea of ‘children-snatching’, the symbol of foreign and tyrannical oppression, and the propaganda instruments of the government made the most of the historical
1
parallel. ;
Probably the greatest political mistake of the Coninuniste: however, was to revive the problem of the, Macedonian minorities, Although the population of Greek Macedonia had been _ predominantly Greek since the massive influx of immigrants from Asia Minor, due to Venizelos, the Communist Party had . repeatedly raised the question of a separate Macedonian _ nation. Already in December 1947 the ‘Provisional Democratic Government’ had underlined the significance of a national minority by creating a special committee to treat the pete Miacatly under Prime Minister Markos. In January
By. . aie ee
es +e %
a"itehed
or


as. ‘at the sth Biegow of the Greek communist
pressure of the Bulgarians, whose support was by now of critical importance. ‘The Macedonian population’, runs the _Official decision, ‘which has fought valiantly on the side of the _ Greek Communists, should be protected in its interests against the Greek chauvinists who oppress their national rights.’ Prob_ ably more than anything else, the resurgence of the Macedonian question, which had been haunting Greek foreign policy _ for fifty years, contributed to the effectiveness of the ideological arsenal of the Right. The all too fresh memories of Bulgarian atrocities during the Axis occupation fed the reviving . _ slavophobia with horrible connotations, especially among the peasants along the northern frontier, where the main battles were being fought. Far from feeling like ‘fish in the water’ the guerrillas were by now encountering open mistrust and enmity from the peasant population they dependeodn. The turn of the year marked another significant modificaio tion in military operations. Pressed by time, now that Tito’s support was no longer certain, Zachariades decided against ' Markos’s express protests to change Communist tactics from
_ Self-sufficient units that had so successfully resisted the Army were grouped into brigades of considerable strength. The all- or-nothing fight that could only result from this change in tactics speaks for the disarray of the Communist leadership. _ Markos was subsequently dismissed ‘for reasons of health’ f_ and Zachariades assumed the military ‘and pole tease ee te penal: In the meantime; the reorganization of the Army was fur_ ther pursued: Under American pressure, the officer corps was - completely reshuffled, younger and more energetic officers were entrusted with senior posts and on 25 February 1949
112
Zachariades posed the question once more, -obvio isly under
- guerrilla to conventional warfare. The small, independent and
- General Papagos, military commander in the Albanian war of 1940, was appointed Commander-in-Chief of armed forces and was given practically dictatorial authority. The cumulative - effect of these changes proved decisive. In the spring of 1949 5 patge clearing operations. were undertaken by a ie eat‘


large Army focbds moved into Roumeli (Central Gece _ which after bitter fighting ‘they also managed to clear. The _ _ Communists were by now restricted to the mountains of northern Greece, along the border. A new attack against Florina failed, while the guerrilla’ army could no longer replace’ ‘its. casualties with new recruits. The impact of conventional war- Wig fare was disastrous on the Communists. The inferiority in men and equipment which was of lesser importance during the ~ . guerrilla phase was now deadly. The problem of maintenance of a permanent network of supplies proved insurmountable. - « ‘New offers for negotiations were turned down by the government and a heavy governmental attack on the Kaimakchalan mountains on the Yugoslav border in the beginning of July | Ri virtually divided the Communist forces in two. Thus, when on 10 July Tito announced the closing of the Yugoslav border, he was administering the coup de grace. Apart from minor | forceson the Bulgarian border, which were broken up in the beginning of August, the Communist forces were restricted to es the triangular area adjacent to the point where Greece, Yugoslavia and Albania meet. A general offensive against the Grammos and Vitsi mountain ranges that dominate the region was _ launched in August. The battles were long and bitter, but by |
_ the end of the month the remnants of the Democratic Army ae
“were pushed behind the Albanian border. To all intents and
‘purposes the civil war had ended. Two months later, on 16 October 1949, the Communist Party announced its decision to ° ceasefire... .


CHAPTER 8 | a
The Aftermath of the Civil War and the Liberal Failure (1949-52)
ACCORDING to official figures, the civil war cost 40,000 lives. Unofficial estimates range up to 158,000. Hundreds of thousands of people were made homeless, and the material damage reduced the country to a state not much better than in 1944. Another 80,000 or 100,000 people crossed the border as refu_ gees and were gradually absorbed in the various Communist countries, the largest colony being at Tashkent in Central’ Asia. Yet in the final analysis the decisive legacy of the civil war was not the enormous human and material disaster, but the unprecedented political, ideological and cultural cleavage between what was labelled ‘the national attitude’ on the one hand, and the remnants of the progressive forces on the other. If the inevitable aftermath of any civil war is repression of the defeated by the victors, in Greece the repression went beyond the scope of politics. Not only were the victims expelled> persecuted and exterminated, but also, as in Spain, the post-war regime imposed its culture as well as its material power. However, unlike Franco’s Spain, Greece remained in the formal sense, at least — a democracy. The effects of this phenomenon are hard to measure or to define. The new - medieval ethos that blanketed the country was not imposed solely by force, but was brought about through the cleavage that operated on the political level. If any culture is in its essence a class culture, in the sense that it represents the attitudes and outlook of the dominant group in society, the mechanisms for minimizing or emasculating dissent usually work through control of information - © or, more subtly, by capturing dissident ideas and assimilating them within the system itself. But the specific feature of the Greek cultural system was that criticism and dissent were . forcibly reduced to total silence by the class in power; all
114 


Pee
lamental political aie pocial iateruatves: were Winiched! - The gradual evaporation of the vestiges of the ‘Great Idea’ after 1922 had cut the ground from under the feet of the developing bourgeoisie; and, during the inter-war period, the ruling class had been prevented from establishing a stable ideological frame of reference by. a combination of innate incapacity and international events. The very little that had been added by the progressive forces had been shattered by the long years of dictatorship, occupation and resistance. _ Thus, with the obliteration of the Communist Party in 1949, following upon the deep disarray into which the whole pro’ gressive movement had fallen in 1945, the end of the civil war left Greece with nothing to balance the political domination of the victorious Right — which had nothing to offer save political and military power. If anti-Communism as a political outlook was the common denominator of the ‘free world’, in Greece it permeated every aspect of social and cultural life. Politically, the cleavage was total. The Left had been beaten and blown to bits. Thousands of the people who had consti- ~ _ tuted the nation’ S progressive élite had been killed, imprisoned ihe
iy“
or exiled. The hecatomb can ‘only be compared. with the sombre fate of the Spanish intelligentsia. It is true that the Left _ was eventually allowed political representation. But the creation of EDA (United Democratic Left) in 1951 only served to ~ neutralize the dissident movement more effectively. An impenetrable ideological and political ghetto was developed, and the Left was still completely cut off from the life of the rest of - the country. In organizing political affairs, left-wing votes did
as
a
not count. Any non-Communist group-that tried to collabor- _ § ate with the Left was at once discredited and disowned. The "Slim body of non-Communist but socialist thought was quickly __ swallowed up by this process. Those who stood firmly by their beliefs were reduced to political non-existence, while the less high-principled were absorbed by the Liberals. Dissidents were ‘silenced one after the other, and for many years — until the _ early 1960s — there was no grouping, newspaper or periodical | : advocating a non-Communist alternative to reaction in the _ political, social or cultural sphere.
115 ae


4
f
- fied their hardening of the ideological arteries. -Depriv
; ‘Meansitilte, the isolation of the Commu
their red banner (the Communist Party had been. banned since 1947) they were obliged to pursue an officially reformist political line. But their need to maintain ideological rigidity, combined with the constant pressure that perpetuated their isolation, made for the development of an even more strin- gent orthodoxy in their cultural attitude. EDA recruited a - number of:non-Communist politicians who refused to conform to the status quo, but it was hardly an attraction for the gradually emerging new intelligentsia, to whom rigid Zhdanovism _ (the Stalinist policy of imposing the party line on all scientific,
i
i
intellectual or artistic activities) offered at least a dubious appeal. However, with the exception of ED A — which, despite its isolation, could at least function as a coherent ideological group — there was no possible platform for the expression of new ideas. This total cleavage accounts to a significant extent _for the inward-looking and non-political character of nonCommunist culture in the years that followed the civil war, despite the acuteness of the social problems that had emerged. - It is no coincidence that, while Greeks forged ahead in the visual arts, in music and in poetry, there were no major achievements in the social sciences, literary criticism or prose-. writing. Not merely political opposition; but any kind of dis
y
sident progressive outlook, was at once identified by the dominant bourgeoisie with Communist-inspired subversiveness. Though secular in its essence, modern Greek culture retained considerable religious overtones, and no major anticlerical trend managed to escape the prevailing conformity. Though mainly. oriented toward the West, Greece was unwilling to take a share in the flourishing of critical and de‘mystifying thought that followed the Second World War in Western Europe. Major novelists, who had expressed their national and cultural searchings in the Greece that had em- erged from the 1922 catastrophe, now rewrote their novels in“expurgated versions. A number of the most talented thinkers, such as Kazantzakis, turned — brilliantly, be it said — to prob
116.


‘Was These feeds were Bieady faherent in the castrated efforts of the Greek ruling class to find an image of itself in the 1930s. But the civil war led to the culmination of the rampant process that undermined the cultural life of the country. The timid modernizing changes that had been imposed on the A antiquated educational system by Venizelos in the early thirties were reversed. Greek and international history is now taught only up to the end of the First World War, and the resistance against the Germans is either systematically ignored or continually discredited. Within the context of a secular .education, religion and scripture are compulsory subjects for all schoolchildren for twelve years. Ancient Greek grammar ‘is taught—on every. single day throughout the secondary schools, but. the content of ancient texts is never analysed - or even discussed. In higher education, the situation is even sadder. While technical schools lack modern facilities and re- : search laboratories because funds are inadequate, the position in the Humanities is downright obscurantist. Some years ago-and to this day, most probably — the only mention of Freud _ in the Philosophical Faculty of Athens University was in ane 4 footnote iin which he is referred to as an authority on dreams. _ Marx is of course anathema, and sociology is an unknown. id‘ ‘scientific discipline, The history of philosophy ends with Kant. Even Darwin was recently attacked by a supposedly serious — ; _ Athens newspaper as a carrier of dangerous subversive ideas. is E> hus; the search for a national identity, which had been the major preoccupation of the Greek ruling class throughout cat ‘the nineteenth century, had finally and sadly failed. It was the realization of this failure that had been the main stimulant for the search for new directions during the thirties, and this in’turn had found. its political counterpart in the resistance — e "against the Germans. During and after the civil war, when this _ vast movement of intellectual awakening had to be checked, . anti-(“Communism presented itself as a general-purpose ideo- | logy |tuo no the (ida ae into the dried-up womb of
1 ea NGO eae


_ petuate the bondage of a ‘system that was already 1 aturally exhausted, frustrated and incapable of any dynamic;develop_ ment. It provided the unifying link and the raison d'étre for (a cultural system that had irretrievably lost all points of refer- ~ ence. And in the end it managed to create yet another ‘lost generation’. The purity of the language was baie: in the name of anti-Communism, and so was Christianity as ‘an obligatory social framework. Any fundamental criticism of social, moral or legal institutions was banned or kept for better days. The new Constitution, promulgated in 1952, preached liberty of conscience and declared the separation of State and Church —but opened with the words: “The dominant religion in Greece is the Eastern Orthodox Church of Christ.’ Religious marriage is the only form that one can legally contract in Greece. Significantly enough, it was not the Church — whose power is minimal — that imposed this new theocracy; it was the conscious choice of the groups. in power. Emerging after the war shattered, self-centred and fearful, the only cultural reference points the ruling class could propose were those of the past, which was resurrected by all means possible. The necessary counterpoint of this renewed glorification of “tradition” was the identification of novelty and intellectual integrity with subversion. Typically, pure and eternal values were invoked only to draw the line between anti-Communism and the ‘evil’ of dissent when a threat to cultural orthodoxy was present. The kiesks of Athens swarmed: with Parisian pornographic magazines, yet Sartre’s Le Mur was banned asobscene. ~ _ Thus, curiously enough, the deep political and ideological gulf between ‘national’ and Communist Greece coincided with a striking conformity of views, whenever the issues were not immediately political. Zhdanovism is not so far away from a commonplace obscurantist cultural dictatorship. While they fought to the death, both sides were probably unaware of how . essentially similar would be the consequences of their com- «~ peting forms of conservatism. The civil war had polarized Sane culture to the point where monopoly boibseeote id
118


ike the emergence of a new generation to. breaks aa deadlock: eas - But, in the last analysis, the cultural and ideological repercussions outlined above were only a function of the political _ development that followed the end of the civil war. Certainly, ; there was no escaping the polarization of political forces into two self-negating and incompatible groups. However, it was a matter of deliberate choice whether political power would | _. seek to heal or to maintain the new national schism. Although _ there can be no doubt that by 1949 the overwhelming majority of Greeks were more rather than less anti-Communist, and _ were fully convinced of the need to guard the country from Hak _ any renewed attempt at rebellion, it is also undeniable that most Greeks were deeply conscious of the dangers that threatened if the ‘schism’ became permanent. To appreciate the significance of the shifting names of people and parties during an extremely unstable yet homogeneous _ period of history, it must be recalled that the abstention of . the Left in the 1946 election had produced an unrepresenta- ag tive right-wing Parliament, but that British and American 4 pressure during the civil war imposed Centre- mine eS. We, _ governments under Liberal Prime Ministers. Oddly enough, _ in these exceptional conditions, the government was more rey presentative. of the popular will than the Baer This |. paradox became more evident after the end of the civil war. i And it was not confined to the top of the political structure. | i: - The people voiced |the need for stability, reconstruction and above all what soon became the slogan of the Liberals: Lethe (forgetfulness) and Amnesty. But-in the Army and the administration, not to speak of the private sector and the grey area ‘where relief was controlled, the key posts were almost exclu- _ sively occupied. by the right-wing: extremists who had obtained _ ‘them during the Royalist revival of 1944-7, It is the constant :struggle for control. of policy-making at all levels, and the eK repercussions of changes in the aims of US policy, that exee how ~ eaniows the overwhelming popular desire for a
holy
119


mmgtah3
mi,
disappointed and unstable political scene, and the basis for a long period of right-wing rule. However, lest misplaced emphasis should be given to the elements of instability and malaise, attention must be drawn to the unique fact of a demand for moderation after the end of a full-blown civil war. The only explanation of this incredible phenomenon was that victory over Communist revolution owed nothing to the patriotism of the governing classes. If Communist excesses gave rise to the profound desire for political stability and personal security, the injustice and corruption met with at the hands of the old ruling class — not to mention its collaboration with the Germans or its support for the | pre-war Metaxas dictatorship — were neither forgotten nor forgiven. The social issue that was poneseaily behind the resistance to the Germans was of such long standing and so deeply ingrained in popular consciousness that it survived the holocaust of 1944, was inflamed by the white terror, and again ‘survived the civil war, to re-emerge as a demand in the 1949 election and indeed ever since. Thus, to sum up the entire paradox: the Greek civil war stemmed from right-wing reaction. It was fought and won by progressives. They then tried in vain to blunt its effects as well as to remove what had been its acutest causes. Instead, they paved the way for the return of the same right-wing reaction, which methodically rebuilt the structure of social inequality that had caused the original explosion. __ But thisis looking ahead. In 1949, the US State Department was fully conscious of the trends that had emerged from the civil war. It was also in a position of strength. Economically, the country had been ruined; American aid had enabled the government to function and ultimately to win the war. But the economic problems were actually aggravated and compli-+ cated when peace came. Dollars would have to flow in con-' _ — tinuously if a minimum of normality was to be restored. ~-The Americans favoured a government as representative of ihe people as possible. No section of. the political world ques- ss tioned the assumption that Greece had to —— on USse am
120 ee aay


s
Threats of gurtailment or cutting off of economic aid constituted, throughout this period, the method by which the Americans imposed their views. Thus, when the Liberal leader -Sophoulis died in June 1949 and the coalition between Populists and Liberals showed signs of breaking up, Ambassador Grady announced that in the opinion of the US it was time to hold another election. The end of the war and the imposed reconciliation between the two main political groups should now be sanctioned by popular vote. And, the Americans thought, it was anne to elect a Parliament more representative than that of 1946. The election was held. on 5 March 1950. The Liberals, advocating moderation, won a clear majority. But their division into numerous hostile factions, of which the most important were led by Plastiras, Sophocles Venizelos and George Papandreou, made it extremely difficult to achieve an effective coalition. The issue of a general amnesty separated the rightwingers under Venizelos from the left-wingers under Plastiras. In fact, personal incompatibilities played a greater role than policy differences. Venizelos, refusing to work with Plastiras, formed a government in collaboration with the Right. But _ American intervention brought about his downfall and imposed a broader coalition under Plastiras. The Plastiras government lasted for almost, eight months. It was the country’s first chance to implement a policy of reconciliation and heal the wounds of war. But Plastiras was scarcely the man to cope with the very difficult conditions. Pure and honest, but of limited intelligence, he felt ill at ease in the climate of backstage manoeuvres and compromises in _ which he was entangled. Not being able to impose his views, he only managed to expose his Prestige. The: problems of economic reconstruction rapidly swallowed up the more general issues of home policy. Plastiras was undermined and soon overshadowed by masters of the parliamentary game By Venizelos, Papandreou and’the other professional politicians
121
the ‘broadening ofthe. edicts to include mre: ie ‘conciliatory tendencies was encouraged— and, later on, openly dictated—by the US. /


ae dadonieey trends was beyond the abilities ofpres ait ageing general. In the end he resigned— a confession of failure. _ There followed a chaotic period of perpetual realignment of Aa and cabinets. For almost another year Venizelos managed to retain the Premiership, supported first by right’ wingers and later by left-wingers. Endemic problems and gov‘ernmental instability combined to make the difficulties of reconstruction even greater. Throughout 1950 and 1951 the situation could hardly have been worse. Unemployment stood at about 20 per cent of the registered workers, reconstruction was taking its time, owing to the government’s inability to control the magnates who had taken over the channels of aid distribution since 1945, and, especially after Plastiras departed, repression set in once more. No coherent reform pro- gramme was presented in the political chaos that marked the Liberals’ inability to offer a stable and firmly oriented leader
ship. Peron:
In the meantime, however, serious international developments had taken place. The Korean war had broken out in i May 1950 and the consequent tendency to harden anti-. - Communist positions on the home fronts, which also found its counterpart in the rise of McCarthyism in the United States, led to a shift in the policy of the US towards Greece. -Much more than for.a broadly based democratic government, strategic and political considerations called for rigorous internal stability and anti-Communist vigilance. Plastiras had not only proved incapable of imposing a disciplined administration, he was also honestly and above all concerned with ending the cleavage that had resulted from the civil war. In view, however, of the international situation, such luxurious pre- occupations were not only superfluous; by degrees, they be- | - came undesirable. . he This new US outlook was marked by the replacement of the | affable Grady by John Peurifoy as Ambassador. Peurifoy, who had already made himself a name as a tough operator,
122


i!| tare ah]
to Greece seat a specific mission: to bring about a powerful, stable and uncompromisingly anti-Communist government. His first step was to bring about a reorganization of the Right, which. under the feeble leadership of Tsaldaris had allowed the powerful position of the Royalist party to evaporate. Field-Marshal. Papagos, the military leader of the Royalist faction during the thirties, Metaxas’s main supporter, hero of the Albanian campaign and Commander-in-Chief of the national Greek Army during the last victorious phase of the civil war, was suddenly persuaded to enter the political arena. - The venture was a sensational success. The new party wag called ‘The Greek Rally’, as Papagos attempted to draw a parallel between Greek and French problems and pose as the nation’s saviour in the manner of de Gaulle. He did not refrain from making the well-known claim that his movement was above and beyond. parties. Nevertheless, it worked. Papagos was quickly surrounded by the majority of the political personnel of the Right, as well as by a considerable number of Liberal politicians who sensed the rising star. Public opinion was on the whole positively impressed and the press was enthusiastic. The first phase of Peurifoy’s plan had thus been nie fulfilled. For his next step he only had to bid for time. With one governmental crisis following another, it was inevitable that new elections should take place soon. They were held in September 1951 and Papagos naturally emerged as the new favourite, with 36.5 per cent of the votes. The scattered remnants of the former Right, amongst them the Populists, vir- tually disappeared. The need for governmental stability was universally felt and the constantly reshuffled Liberal governments were greatly discredited. Yet if Papagos had shown his strength, over 60 per cent of the population still preferred to go on trying to find a more moderate solution. For despite his well-publicized inadequacies, General Plastiras’s pacificatory voice was not ignored. With 23.5 per cent of the votes, he supplanted Venizelos as leader of the most powerful Centre formation, even though he suffered virulent attacks from the Left, which had by then re-emerged under the name of EDA, 5 obtaining 9) per cent of the vote. By identifying Plastiras with
es S493


; de cticninn aoe own position: contri u : “ness of the political ghetto their adversai re diligentlybuilding up. Plastiras, and after him a number of leaders who aspired to create the prerequisites of a coherent democratic Movement, were rejected by the Left they hoped to embrace. o The forces that were willing to fight for the abolition of the already ominous cleavage were ee both from the Busbt and from the Left. It was only because of Papagos’s adamant. refasal to accept any coalition that Venizelos, who did not hide his preference for cooperation with him, was obliged willy-nilly to serve. ‘under a government led by Plastiras. This last Liberal govern_ ment did not last more than a year. It was to be the swan song of the Liberals. They would not return to power for another twelve years. - The last Liberal administration was as iheuncesahans as the iidious ones. Constantly sabotaged by the reluctant Vice- ~ Premier Venizelos on the question of amnesty and reconciliation, Plastiras was once more forced to do without the social | “cornerstone of his mandate. Moreover, in March 1952 he fell ‘seriously ill. Though still nominally Prime Minister he was in _practice replaced by Venizelos. . The undisguised distrust shown by the US towards the new government further precipitated its centrifugal tendencies. As early as January, a sharp reduction of US.aid had multiplied economic difficulties and the task of reconstruction’ appeared to be deadlocked. Venizelos’s decision to turn for ‘support to the King did not open new possibilities. Playing on the fact of Anglo-American antagonism, which was once more ~ in the air, he placed his bet on the wrong horse by turning to London for support. Even King Paul’s favour, which was thus secured, and the King’s personal grudge against Papagos, whose authority threatened to’ endanger the Palace’s inter-. -ventionary powers, could not tip: the balance in Venizelos’s favour. For the USA, whose aid was a day-to-day necessity, ies had decided to back the Greek Rally. Venizelos’s manoeuvres were entirely in vain. His attempt to appease American. dis-aA
124


favour yy Passing ‘anti-Communist laws only served to pb: the foundations for the eventual right-wing political monoRe poly. Venizelos’s laws and police measures intensified the - repression, concentration camps were set up on a permanent basis, and a large number of Communists were executed. All this served to deepen the malaise of the Liberal electorate and strongly alienate its progressive wing. Split into irreconcilable factions, lacking — after Plastiras had in effect retired — a _ leader who enjoyed prestige and general acceptance, and incapable of facing the economic problems of reconstruction, the Centre was losing its grip in every respect. Peurifoy’s chance to hasten the return of the Right to power .came in March 1952, when a serious controversy arose over the electoral system‘to be used in the forthcoming election. (Any system, to be adopted, had to have majority support in Parliament.) Most of the shrewd Centre politicians favoured ~ proportional representation, which would work out not too badly for the small parties to which they belonged. However, it became clear that Plastiras, either through senile miscalcu_ lation or in a gesture of throwing down the gauntlet, was in_ clined towards the majority system. Peurifoy thereupon acted } promptly. He publicly declared: “The US Government believes that the re-establishment of the simple proportional system, with its unavoidable consequences of the continuation of governmental instability, would have destructive results upon the effective utilization of US aid to Greece. The US Embassy feels itself obliged (he went on, attempting to sweeten _~ the pill) to make its! support publicly known for the patriotic _ position of Prime Minister Plastiras on this subject.’ Lest this should not prove to be enough, he also threatened behind the _ scenes to suspend US aid if the proportional system were _ accepted. The government gave in and the majority system - was voted. Peurifoy and Papagos only had to wait for an _ opportunity to press for new elections. ax The chance ‘came in the autumn. Pressed by the need for q economies and suffering from a continued embargo of American aid, Plastiras oaksfor reducing military ee by
~ 125


ted the government and ioined abies thus: cre ting a ia problem of parliamentary balance as the government’s major- _ ity was extremely slim. The balance was momentarily restored when two deputies from EDA joined Plastiras’s party. But Peurifoy had not played his last trump. In an unprecedentedly _ blatant statement to the Greek press, he expressed the opinion Sieh that
owing to the rapid political developments and the fact that the EPEK [Plastiras’s party] has replaced two of its members with ex-EDA leftists, it is my recommendation that the best thing for Greece would be to have new elections under the majority system as soon as possible.
For all the crudeness of Peurifoy’s language, the ageing Prime Minister accepted the inevitable. On 16 November 1952 general elections took. place for the third time in two years. Papagos won 49.2 per cent of the votes, but, through the operation of the majority system, he obtained 82.3 per cent _ of the seats in Parliament. Peurifoy’s mission was thus com- pleted. He had been the architect of the process of under- mining the Liberals, and had organized the return of the Right to power! US economic blackmail and open interventihoand U f complemented the failings of the Liberal governments. Greece was entering a phase of conservative stability— alas, a deadly one. ‘
1. One year later he was selected to organize the coup d’état that brought down the leftist government in Guatemala and installed the dictatorship of _ Castillio Armas. There again he was successful. Eventually he was to meet his Waterlod in the form of a ‘mysterious’ car crash in South-East Asia.


Ria eS CHAPTER 9
Conservative ‘ Stability’ — Social and / Economic (1952-63)
4 JA
In the twelve years between 1952 and 1963 the face of the country changed significantly. An unprecedented growth of the urban population made it, for the first time in Greek history, slightly larger than the rural population. In the 1951 census the urban population was 37.7 per cent of the total. By the 1961 census the urban population had reached 43 per cent, _ rural population had fallen to 44 per cent and the semi-urban had remained constant at 13 per cent. This major shift was mainly due to the rapid growth of the Athens agglomeration, which in fact absorbed 62.7 per cent of the total population increase between the two censuses and by 1961 was greater than the total urban population of the rést of the country. With the exception of Salonica (in the north) no other urban centre of any importance emerged, and the preponderance of Athens became overwhelming in all sectors of economic and . social life. By 1961 the region of the capital provided over one _ half of industrial employment, received 80 per cent of imports, _ paid 75 per cent of direct and 65 per cent of indirect taxation, had an income over 40 per cent higher than the national average, absorbed over a half of total newspaper circulation, ac- counted for a majority of hospital beds and 85 per cent of _ Specialist doctors and housed the bulk of the fairly excessive _ civil service personnel. However, like all the swollen capitals of underdeveloped countries, Athens is not an industrial town despite its size and growth. Less than a third of its registered ‘active’ population _ 4is employed in industry.Of these, almost a half are employed in units of less than ten persons, usually family enterprises of _ a primitive character. Over two-thirds of those registered as _ ‘active’, and perhaps up to a half more who are not registered at all, form the typical overgrown service sector encountered in |
- 127


Mtall Sey ciopink countries. The emergence of ac _ independent small traders, intermediaries and casual workers, ; who make up the vast majority of the urban population, is probably the most important change in Greek society since the influx of the immigrants from Asia Minor. With only a. third of the active population of Athens classed as wage- earners, and a smaller number in the other towns, it becomes - evident that these rapidly growing groups of town-dwellers found themselves fluctuating between a petty-bourgeois and a lumpenproletariat way of life. Despite the vast internal population movements, there was no clear-cut social class which was finding new means of live-lihood and changing its way of life from primitive to modern. Between 1956 and 1961, 220,000 persons came to Athens from the provinces, and of these 66 per cent came from strictly - rural areas. More significant, however, is the lack of any great ~ differences in the occupations of the newcomers and of the original city population. In Athens, 30.9 per cent of immigrants and 30.8 per cent of the original population were employed in _ industry (in the other large towns, 31.2 per cent and 28.5 per cent respectively). In Athens, again, the original population was more strongly represented in commerce (17.9 to 10.5 per cent) but less strongly in ‘other’ services (25.3 to 31 per cent) and, as one would expect, in building (7.9 to 11.7 per cent). Most significantly, the rate of unemployment between the two groups is remarkably similar. Thus, in marked contrast to the inter-war problem of assimilating the Asia _ Minor immigrants, the new internal migrants were more or _ less automatically merged with the urban working class and _ with the remnants of the pre-war middle class, which had been Linechagsd destroyed during the occupation and the civil war. ' Hence the movement from the countryside to the towns, _ and the wave of emigration which replaced it later in the de-_ cade, were overshadowed by larger changes: changes in employment, in consumption patterns, and in government policies to stabilize and then to develop the economy. Economic ‘reconstruction’ was initially the term. used fori
what later became ‘development’. Until Papagos came to
MMA hi
128 ee.


ow to stop a Tocar inflation: Ata. later stage, it was ey how to ‘prevent the balance of payments from bursting. - Throughout, it was necessary to give relief to homeless and hungry people, as well as to get industry and the infrastructure working again. When plans were drawn up, it was just as important to find the skilled manpower to put them into effect. The administrative system which the Liberals had built up in ' their heyday had been eroded by Metaxas and almost destroyed by the occupation. Up to the end of the civil war, administration was virtually taken over by the foreign economic missions. In this atmosphere, it is not surprising that most major projects of reconstruction or development, which were to be financed by war reparations or foreign aid and loans, came to little. For the foreign economic missions. not only _” did not encourage industrialization but even fought against it. ‘When, in 1949, a steel mill was given to Greece by the Ger_ mans as part of the war reparations, Paul Porter, chief of the US economic mission, imposed his veto. The machinery never left Hamburg and was eventually sold on behalf of the Greek’ : government as scrap. According to the former representative a of Greece to the OECD Professor Nicolaides,
bticdialecation met with unrestrained-reaction mainly because of its i effects on the foreign trade of the interested countries, but also largely _ because of the economic self-sufficiency of Greece, which would have _ resulted from it,in a few years’ time. Thusitwas commercial,economic and politicalinterests that imposed on the countries that took part [in ‘the economic missions] an unqualified hostility towards all plans for Greek industrialization. (Nea Oikonomia, June 1956; italics in original). The attitude of foreign economic missions ran parallel to the anarchic use of the few available funds that characterized “the immediate post-war period. It is largely here that the _ growth of parasitic activity must be traced. - Housing and commerce yielded higher returns with less insecurity than industry. If the economic system proper did not provide productive employment, people had to fend for themselves on an ad hoc basis. The inventive Mediterranean mind _ yas.quick to ‘discover’ new products, new technologies, new _
- 129


to poke a more or less paraete living on ie fringes of the ; productive system. Small commerce, handicrafts, personal services of all kinds and: various intermediary activities (often connected with a para-administrative complex through which the citizen could approach a lethargic and incompetent civil service) involved hundreds of thousands of people. With the passage of time this mode of existence became more or less stabilized. Out of the gradual stratification of those who ‘made it’, a new and extended parasitic middle class evolved. Though salaried employees accounted for a gradually increas-, ‘ing part of these new strata, persistent high unemployment (up to 20 per cent of urban active population) and the consequent excessive occupational mobility jimpeded-the formation of a new solid middle class. It was only towards the end of the fifties and throughout the sixties that rapid economic growth led to the emergence of a distinguishable layer of technicians, executives, members of the liberal professions, administrators and intellectuals. These new ‘professional’ groupings were quite distinct from the established middle class and particularly from the ‘oligarchy’. Their emergence as a social force was to coincide with the popular movement which led the Centre back to power in 1963. The first notable achievement of the Right was to devalue the currency. This was done swiftly to the tune of almost 50 per cent and was one of the most successful operations of its kind in post-war European history. Devaluation hurt the working people, whose savings were in cash, but it proved a boon to the commercial classes. The import control system was abolished, and a major governmental worry as well as a source of corruption thus disappeared. Despite the huge de_ valuation, imports of consumer goods boomed. Soon, distinct features of a new consumption pattern were to emerge: the better-off importing whatever they could, the urban poor and the peasantry providing the marketfor home industry. The demand pattern was strong enough to influence the supply; domestic industry exported practically none of ‘its production. This naturally kept’ the balance of payments 2 eae. Os
130


ain. With an increasingAtads deficit, Greece was be
was traditional, while tourism and emigrants’ remittances gradually provided important additions), on private capital
tically under the control of the USA. No serious effort was made to control the dangerous growth of luxury imports by the higher income groups; the obsolete tariff was kept in being; and import-substitution was in practice rejected through the government’s refusal to enter the private sector of the economy “where the market is the best guide’, In fact, it is tempting to see the worship of free enterprise as an economic counterpart to dogmatic anti-Communism. Apart from devaluation and free trade, the Right had no in
_ the socialist bloc eventually became necessary for the disposal Bey Of agricultural products which were unmarketable elsewhere; _ ~but, despite their size, they were not discussed much and were | seen as an unpleasant departure from an orderly neo-classical system. Ad hoc negotiations for the procurement of equipment in the West were seen as clever deals rather than as aids for a policy. Having renounced negative controls, the Right ‘threw out proposals for imitating the Italian experiment in
agement of the economy, after the reconstruction phase was _ considered complete, the Right attempted to be somewhat Keynesian. But this was difficult, both for administrative
_ Tegressive. Ultimately, fiscal policy accentuated the fiuctua
overall policy, it was confined to the use of monetary weapons.
in the currency, in fact, became the main slogan supporting what the Right meant by ‘stability’. In this, the Central Bank
131
_ inflow, and on foreign aid and loans. The latter two were prac- |
_ dustrial or commercial policy at all. Bilateral agreements with |
- reasons’ and, more, because the tax system was as a whole ~
tions of economic activity. So far as there was any effective
_ , Not unnaturally, the monetary authorities, considered that 'their job was to guard against inflation. Restoring confidence _
_ coming dependent on invisible earnings (of which shipping — .
Ny
public enterprise, and for a planning mechanism in the French _ style, as tools for development. The private sector was crudely definedas anything in which money could be made, regardless _of macro-economic implications or social policy. In the man


ally static, while private savings accumulated at rates impressive for the country’s income level. Beyond combating inflation, however, the monetary authorities were entrusted with the job of encouraging productive and discouraging unproductive expenditure. But, despite much sophistication in the use of incentives and specifically of funds, the Bank succeeded neither in promoting overall private investment nor in channelling money away from the luxury import market, the gradually thriving housing boom) or the straightforwardly illegal export of capital. In the words of X. Zolotas, who throughout this period was Governor of the Central Bank and architect-of monetary policy:
The expansion of credit to industry in 1957 and 1958 by over four times the rate of increase of industrial production showed that the commercial banks had not succeeded in their new role and were unable to‘prevent the excessive leakage of credit toward purposes wholly unrelated to industrial activity. (Monetary Equilibrium and Economic Development, p. 79; italics added)
‘The reluctance of the private sector to joven in industry
had deep-rooted causes. Lack of credit, as we have just seen, was not one of them. If anything it was the opposite — accord- ing to an OECD estimate, as much as 70 per cent of total _ private industrial assets were acquired from commercial bank loans. The lack of real and institutional infrastructure was not entirely imaginary but certainly a much exaggerated factor, particularly as public works were completed at a rapid rate. The real causes for the holding back of industry were more social and psychological than economic. Uncertainty, however imponderable, was perhaps 6f major importance in a country
1. The structure of investment is significant: in the twelve years between 1952 and 1963 out of a total fixed asset formation of 171,341 millions of drachmas (in current prices), 62,297 millions (36 per cent) were invested in housing, 24,912 millions (15 per cént) in agriculture, and only 22,049. mnillions (just over 700 million dollars) amounting to only 13 per cent of total. investment, in manufacturing. While the percentage of gross national product invested in housing is probably the highest in Europe, fluctuating between 3-7 and 6-2 per cent, the investment in manufacture is certainly the lowest, never exceeding 2:3 per cent.
132
was pa effective. The price level remained: practic: 3


‘7?powert discouraging the ak investor who, in any case, had one outlet besides a savings account — and that was housing. A stock market hardly existed,-while the acquisition of _ shares’ belonging to family enterprises guaranteed no divi_ dends whatever. The enterprises themselves, meanwhile, found solid industrial growth both more difficult. and less remunera" tive than commerce or speculation. Efficiency, or rather the lack of it, was no barrier to survival, while the tariff, dating a from the pre-war depression, was there to protect even steam- _ age technology. Family enterprises did not merge otherwise _ - than by marriage. Industrial units were thus fragmented and had neither room for new products nor markets wide enough for new technologies. Growth, therefore, just kept up with the ' growth of incomes of those classes of the population who _ were consumers of domestic production. The beginnings of ' rationalization of obsolete technology and organization came only after association with the Common Market in 1961, which brought fears that protection must decline, while also bringing a modest influx of foreign industrial capital and therefore an element of competition. ‘ _ At last, even the Right realized the extent of the private sector’s reluctance to industrialize the country. Meanwhile, _ however, the government had moved into the economic field _ : at a different level. Adamant though ministers were in keeping ‘out of what was not the ‘proper’ role of the state, they grasped before it was too late that the infrastructure needed huge efforts and that there was no way of building it up other than. by direct government investment. The expansion of public a investment spending, despite its naive single-mindedness and the corruption which was its inevitable by-product, was un_doubtedly Karamanlis’s historic decision — and a change adical enough to convince big sections of Liberal opinion that, at last, the Right, was not purely destructive. True, economic development through road-building was only a parial view of the problem. But, given that the conservative state was incapable of doing eeu more Sanne ae there is fine
133 ;


achieved in this period. Public investment expenditure rose 9 from 1.7 billion drachmas in 1952 to 5.8 billionin 1962. The _» gross national product grew by an average of nearly7 per.cent a year in constant prices. ‘Naturally, it is not easy to assess how much. of a contribution was made by public investment. By itself, it would certainly not have been enough to act as an engine of growth. But the missing half was provided by invisible exports. From 1957, tourism took on sizeable dimensions. Tourist receipts were soon growing at a rate of 20 per cent a year, with the further advantage that the money was shared in different regions and among different professions and classes. From 1956, emigra' tion came into the picture too, though in a different manner: By 1960, 100,000 people were leaving Greece every-year; and in 1963 their remittances amounted to $173 million. Finally, shipping — apart from providing jobs for the majority of the population from the islands— brought in $170 million of foreign exchange in 1963. Foreign emigration may for a time ee contributed to growth. On the other hand, it reflected two of the major problems which the type of economic growth achieved by the Right did not solve but rather accentuated. The first of these ~ was inability to provide full employment. The second was inability to check the large and growing income inequalities. We have already seen that the industrial sector did not function as a spearhead. Its contribution to total employment, in fact, relatively and (by a small margin) absolutely diminished during the twelve years between 1952 and 1963. The service and parasitic sectors, although growing most rapidly, were still insufficient to keep up with population increase and particularly to provide stable and growing incomes. The growth of this tertiary sector was in any case a counterpart of the inability of other sectors to offer productive employment. The emigration to the towns and then abroad is inexplicable unless _ one considers the growing incomevinequalities between town _ ; _and country. Underdeveloped agriculture could no longer _ satisfy the aspirations of the peasants: hence their migration
Fs i rd ’ ol
. 134 *
f)


tthere too. conditions were not easy or stable. The same
_ work throughout the social system. _ Agriculture was still the largest sector of production. But the peasant world had substantially changed since the pre
and the massive population movements that had then taken
town and country life. After the war these trends were intensi
- infiltrated the countryside. Roads brought tourists, while ‘the _ spread of cinemas and transistor radios opened the peasants’ _ eyes to the temptations of modern consumption. The vestiges _ of a closed and patriarchal socio-economic organization, first
being pulled into the modern world.
the inefficient structure of production on the land stayed the same. The main problems were still surplus peasant popula
. The government did make some effort to tackle these proba lems. Crop policy was gradually readjusted, so that by 1958 Greece was self-sufficient in cereals. Sugar production ‘was ‘promoted and new export products — cotton, fresh fruit and _ vegetables, rice — were added to the traditional tobacco, cur. and olive oil. Fertilizers were introduced on a large scale; the number of tractors, a mere 1,500 in 1940, reached 24,000by 1962. Major attention was given to developing new
’sexpenditure on capital account.
135
if tothe towns or abroad, despite tisfact hai Maria.
‘ demonstration effect? which accounts for the Europeanized consumption patterns of the higher income groups was at
war years. The resistance against the Germans, the civil war 
fied and the patterns of life of industrial society thus rapidly .
a shattered by the short-lived EAM experiment, were now — ihe _ crumbling. The younger generation of peasants was gradually
tion, ‘extremely low productivity, under-employment, mono- | culture in some regions, small and parcelled-out units, shortage of fertilizers and machines, and a systeomf exploitation based on the wholesalers paying miserly prices to the producers. me
crop land, and the arable area rose by 6 per cent ina decade. | ublic investment in agriculture represented over half the a
But the ‘ams was misconceived. Despite the ‘growth of his
‘ place had already increased the cultural interplay between — «
But if the countryside was being opened up as never before,


i production and praducbae on the whole cul j _ extensive. The large increases in cereal! production _ the agrarian pattern of work and created a permanent strain on the Budget, which covered the gap between the cost of home production and the world price. It was so advantageous for producers and wholesalers alike that half the cultivated land | was turned over to growing cereals. But the production of an export crop like cotton soon tailed off for lack of incentive, at the low prices secured by the growers of this labourintensive crop. Thus, extensive cultivation was often importsubstitution of the wrong kind, apart from the fact that it added to unemployment. _ Also, the cost of agricultural growth was excessive. Public works, which were poorly planned and badly carried out, always exceeded their\budget to the advantage of the private firms who did the job. However, output nearly doubled between 1952 and 1963. While techniques changed, the institutional framework did not. The system of exploitation was not only preserved but strengthened. The bulk of products were taken to market through the traditional wholesaler channels. The strong cooperative movement which emerged in the 1950s was generally encouraged, but was kept firmly under the control of the party _ in power. An American anthropologist describes the govern-ment’s attitude: ‘Since the idea of pooling land sounded so much like a collective farm on the Communist model, the government carefully investigated to be sure no subversive influences were at work before it granted any loans’ (I. T. Sanders, Rainbow in the Rock, p. 69). Thus, to the traditional wholesaler ‘there were «added the officially controlled councils of the cooperatives. Both stood between the individual farmer _ : and the market, and they made up a powerful pressure group intimately linked with the Agricultural Bank and with the government’ Ss organization for winning elections. Through this. grip on the peasants’ livelihood, as we shall see, the Right was able to carry out its systematic policy of isolating them poli- © tically, ideologically and economically and thus keep them in
136 ;
~~,


ee. es -strings. This, in ihe:at analysis, is sytiat kept the ‘Right ‘ constitutionally’in power. Because of their harsh and dependent economic conditions, the peasants did not take any vigorous political action for a long time. The main effect of the plight of the countryside was not revolt but mass exodus to the towns. This in turn produced a problem of urban unemployment which, from 1955, took on alarming dimensions. A solution to this problem was found — outside the confines of the Greek economy. By this time, the post-war European boom had led to an acute shortage of labour. The advanced countries looked for workers from the underdeveloped south of Europe. Within ten years, 7 pet cent of the population of Greece left the country , temporarily or permanently. An estimate has been made of 600,000 emigrants for the period 1955-64. Though one cannot get an accurate total because there was so much clandestine emigration, and though one cannot distinguish between temporary and permanent departures, it is certain that from 1958 onwards net emigration was larger than the natural growth of the population. The mass of emigrants were younger people, presumably part of the enterprising section among the labour force. Later skilled labour joined the trek north: by 1961 49.6 per cent of emigrants were skilled. This climbed to 56.2 ‘per cent for 1962. The long-term effects of the trend were clearly catastrophic, but it was encouraged by the Right, whose policies it suited well. The boiling pot of large unemployed ‘Masses was removed, domestic labour remained easy to control, the large remittances sent home by the emigrant workers helped the balance of payments and the economy’s parasitic sector: the socio-economic structure may have weakened from the viewpoint of long-run prospects, but meantime it had strengthened the Right’s social base. Imports of foreign capital had long been conshlored by the Right as a stone to kill many birds. In the beginning of its rule they were seen mainly as a substitute assisting insufficient _ domestic finance. Later, and as US aid gradually diminished © a until it vanished, the emphasis was put on the balance of
137


ae orolen capri bora. the panacea whichHe _ trialize the country. By opening the gates to. the country’s ‘protectors’, the Right ensured that its further political and economic integration with NATO was achieved. The Right’s u policy fully corresponded to the interests. of the economic ‘ oligarchy, whose main consideration was how to cling to their acquired advantages without any further risks. Imbued with _ the Common Market ‘ideology’ then developing, the oli‘ garchy was looking forward to the time when Greece would be _ ‘governed from Brussels’, so that no Greek government of any - complexion could interfere with their good life. Foreign capi_ tal was thus more than welcomed. If the choice of heavy _ reliance on foreign capital was ultimately incompatible with a’ survival of economic and political national independence (a -Hact that was to become all too obvious in later years), it permitted the Right to hope that an almost immovable and self_ strengthening social structure, fully corresponding to their interests, could be made permanent. The rapid rise in urban incomes could proceed so long as foreign capital and remittances from abroad continued to pour in, thus cementing a _ social balance rightly considered as still precarious for them. _ By the time income inequalities produced dangerous cout Y tensions, it was felt.that Greece would be so inextricably inte‘grated in the US block that her ruling class would be aiisia _ danger. hee! The opening of the Greek economy to foreign private cane: tal was made official in 1953, through a law offering prospective — : investors special tax exemptions, freedom to re-export capital plus interest and profits, as well as numerous other facilities. _ But, though the advantages offered were extraordinary, the - amount of foreign capital actually invested was not significant ¥ - until 1960. Between 1954 and 1964 investments of 450 million z dollars had been approved by the government, but of this only — ; 170 millions had ‘actually entered the country. About 40 per cent of this inflow was American-owned, a fact which marks 3 the first noteworthy penetration of US finance inthe Greek economy. If the figures do not seem impressivthee,y beat
138
Me"


?com isonsiete fetalLae assets in Greek ee viaeanieg? - According to estimates presented by the ERE Minister of Coordination in 1962, the total of post-war domestic manufacturing investment amounted to 632 million dollars, out of which a mere 220 millions belonged to the largest 447 firms. Thus foreign investment actually carried out by 1964 almost equalled the total assets of the manufacturing sector proper. Their power was, however, incommensurably greater because of the much larger units established. _ An example makes the process clear. In 1962 the powerful ESSO corporation undertook to invest 110 million dollars, later ’ increased to 190 millions, to set up a large industrial complex near Salonica, including a petroleum refinery, a steel plant and a petrochemical complex. By the time the project was nearing completion, Pappas, the Greek-American magnate who is in _ charge, controlled between one-fifth and one-sixth of total _ Greek manufacturing capacity. Not surprisingly, the shifts introduced in the control of economic decision-taking further modified the structure of __ political power. The pre-war economic penetration by mainly British capital operated largely through the Greek power system, thus creating stable alliances which had long-term ; interests in the country’s economic future. Foreign investment _ since the war’ remained, by contrast, largely independent of domestic economic interests. Hence its tie with the country was directly through ‘its links with the government, a fact which inevitably led to an alliance with the governing party. The Right claimed to have achieved a “Greek economic miracle’. The claim is only partly justified. Regardless of the _ fact that the international economic environment was favour_ able, regardless of the opportunities that were lost, and _ equally regardless of the economic mistakes or the social cost : of achieving the end, it remains true that when the Right fell from power, national income per head of the population ex4ceeded 400 US dollars. Though not yet rich, Greece was no ~ Jonger a poor country. _. This does not mean, however, that the country had been put _ on the road to economic development. Even apart from the
3
b=
‘


‘
The Gréck Tragedy ees.
fact that the Right was producing a growingly inegalitarian and unjust society, on purely technical grounds their econnomic policy must be found wanting: they did not succeed in creating employment opportunities so that Greeks might live in their own country;


CHAPTER ‘10
Conservative A api Political (1952-63)
_ THE political Beart of the socio-economic structure evolved in these years is closely related to the maintenance of political ‘stability’, which was inaugurated when Papagos’s 5 “Greek Rally’ came to power in 1952. For if the promise of _ political and economic stabilization greatly contributed to the assumption of power by the Right, it could hardly suffice for _ an indefinite maintenance of a sufficiently large and solid _ social and political! basis. The impact of anti-Communist | propaganda would necessarily lose its grip, and the force of events would inevitably exercisea strong pressure towards more radical solutions incompatible with the maintenance of _ the oligarchy’s privileges. New popular forces would emerge . challenging the foundations of the system. The established - rules of the parliamentary system would eventually underc mine what the Right was there to preserve. However, for _ twelve years (1952-63) the party in office ruled unperturbed, _ enjoying ample parliamentary majorities, its popular vote varying between 42 and 51 per cent _ But although the maintenance of the Right in power was _ periodically endorsed by popular vote, parliamentary representation did not correspond to the true balance of forces. It was the majority electoral system imposed by the US that had _ brought Papagos to power in 1952. Similarly, it was through
1. A table showing the percentage of votes and seats in Parliament respectively by the main political formations is highly significant.
4
; Phen 1952 1956 1958 1961
Right 49-22% (82%) 47-38% (55%) 41-17% (57%) 50-81% (59%) Centre 34-22% (17%) 2068 (12%) 33-66% (33-5 %)
/ ee ‘ 62% os) | ;
@ : 49-15% (449% 102% 8%
955%) He 24-33% (265%) 14-63% (8%) ‘ “141 heel
7
able manipulation of electoral systems, elaborated ad hoc
eh
1


selves in power. The deliberate refusal to readjust the electoral : i _ lists according to the new (1951) population census resultediits grave disproportions of representation between the ‘urban centres, where the Centre and Left ‘were stronger, and the > agrarian regions where the Right was powerful. In 1958 for _ example, in Athens, wheré the ERE percentage was 29 per ‘cent, 23,244 votes corresponded to one seat. In Thesprotia - (Epirus) where the predominance of the Right was enormous (57.8 per cent) it only needed 6,862 votes to elect one deputy. _ In the seven most over-represented electoral regions ERE was a _ stronger than average in all butonecase. y In 1956 the coalition opposed to ERE won more votes than Ha ERE but only obtained 44 per cent of the seats in Parliament ey against 56 per cent of the party in power. In the next elections (1958) an elaborate system of penalization of coalitions was F put forward, which impeded the grouping of anti-governmental _ forces. Thus the number of ERE deputies rose from 165 to -/ 171 while their votes dwindled from 47.38 per cent to 41.17 _ per cent. In 1961, the electoral system became even more com- plicated: while retaining the majority system in the provinces _ (still on the basis of the completely antiquated 1940 census, _ despite the availability of another census that had taken place in March of that year) proportional representation was the ; Ke method used in the urban centres. However, the results of the 1961 elections were bitterly ‘a ae challenged by the opposition forces. The electoral manipulations were denounced and the whole system of electoral fraud was exposed. For this time it was not only the electoral system a - that had been manipulated in the government’s interests. Down _ to the smallest details, the party in power had organized an elaborate system that resulted in blunt misrepresentation. “f Military votes, overwhelmingly for the ERE, were organized on separate lists under military control. Illegal entries in the - electoral lists enabling double or multiple voting were exposed on a large scale. The numbersof double voters were en
142 oe


aenal up to.500,000 fie been put tered Even if _ one allows for gross exaggeration due to the heated political _ controversy, it cannot be doubted that ERE was thus strengthened with a considerable number of non-existent voters. Besides fraud, the 1961 elections were also marked by violence. The system of electoral misrepresentation was com' plemented by the systematic oppression practised in the countryside, especially during electoral campaigns. Potential left-wing and Centre voters were all known in country localities and in the smaller electoral polling stations (wards) of smaller towns; this made a subsequent check on the votes cast comparativeelasyy. Pro-governmental ballot sheets with distinctive signs were distributed, and their recipients were threatened with sanctions were the sheet not to be found in the poll. A small number of sheets were subsequently actually checked, a fact which added to the credibility of the general _ threats. Moreover, the actual methods practised in order to implement threats against political dissension were extremely efficient. The chronic dependence of the great majority of the _, peasantry on loans by the government-controlled Agricultural Bank, or for the repeatedly needed moratoria for the repay_ ment of debts, had gradually led to a considerable economic dependence of the individual farmer on the state. This dependence was further accentuated by the local gendarmerie’s authority to impose large fines or to charge the villagers, with _ real or imaginary minor offences. Offences like not keeping the dog leashed, not keeping the garden clean or not having white_ washed the walls were prosecuted on the criterion of whether _ or not the peasant was politically docile. The inordinately high ' fines and expenses thereby imposed made the economic survival of the peasant strictly dependant on the representative of the central authority, that is, on the gendarme’s good will. _ Economic oppression affected not only the individual but a" lso the community through the mechanisms of local adminis_ tration:
em ie much to say about local schools. Even in those affairs where it is ; pposed to have jurisdiction, such as drawing up its own budget or
143 ian
‘The Community council does not maintain law and order, does not 


Sh Ministry of Interior. (sandersDp.229). We accin eit ieee
e Approval was given on the basis of purely political criteria: ‘Suchand _ such a thing becomes impossible, because the vileee had not voted be _ for the party in power.’ (ibid., p. 238)
Economic pressure was combined with positive oppression. _ Right-wing bands aided the gendarmerie and a special body of - Civil Guards (TEA) was built up originally along the frontiers but subsequently all over the country. TEA’s role in terror- _ izing the peasants was enormous. Carrying arms at any time, they beat up opponents, raided the countryside and occasionally burned down farms and crops of dissidents. They constituted a permanent barrier to any ideological penetration of _ Left or even mildly anti-governmental propaganda. Left-wing _ newspapers did not even circulate in the provinces and even Centre ones were bought and read at a certain risk. The radio stations were synonymous with party propaganda. In the frontier regions, tension was permanently maintained. Special” - authorization (characteristically issued not by the political authorities but by the Army) was necessary for non-residents to enter the region, and even members of Parliament or can_ didates of the Left, and sometimes of the Centre, were refused _ the right to enter even during their electoral campaigns. BS _ Revealing of the pressure effectively used are the electoral results in the border regions. In 1958 ERE won between 71 per cent and 86 per cent of the votes, and in 1961 when the a oppression reached its maximum the, percentage rose to be-y it _ tween 91 per cent and 100 per cent. eN _ The situation in the village Litochoron as jeconee by the i “French newspaper Le Monde depicts the prevailing ‘atmos-_ phere. On 10 October 1961, the military commander of the | TEA assembled the population at the gendarmerie station and ) urged them to kill the candidates of the Left, were they to. appear in the village. Two days later, on 12 October, twenty men under the leadership of an officer in uniform seriously— ‘ injured a left-wing candidate and four peasants. When, the
144


intervenerenfea of falsifying the free el of the system! _.. The oppression, which never ceased in the countryside, was _ not, however, sufficient to maintain the Right in power. Even though the rapid rise in incomes of the middle classes and the _ expansion of the parasitic tertiary sector had created a larger social base than the Right previously disposed of, the alliance between upper and lower middle classes was not broad enough _ for the Right to be indifferent to the free interplay of social ' forces which would inevitably result in the shattering of the propaganda system that had been based on the civil war. ‘ - Further, the alliance itself was precarious, to the extent that | _ its maintenance depended on the continuation of the economic boom that had enabled the middle classes to grow. It is thus easy to explain why the special measures taken ' during the civil war were never abolished. The Communist Party was still outlawed and administrative deportation was _ maintained. Apart from those still kept in prison on the basis of an. ordinary conviction (in 1962 there were still 1,350 political prisoners), thousands of persons were detained in - concentration camps in the islands of Agios Efstratios and _ Yaros until almost the end of the Karamanlis administration. ‘The camps, and the nightmare island of Makronissos where
suspected of such, wete interned under the pretext of military -conseription, served not only to neutralize all potential opponents, but also to intensify the disarray of what was left of ‘the Communist movement. Torture, isolation and blackmail were used in order to extract written statements disavowing ‘communism. The then Minister of Defence, Panayiotis Kanellopoulos, referred to this operation as ‘building the new ‘Parthenon’. The strict ‘no signature’ line of the Communist
who succumbed to torture, as stooges, traitors or simply ‘unrthy of the party’, and consequently to the political isola
bsequent depoliticization of innumerable militants that
. Bs as ‘
‘Party led to the implicit or explicit condemnation of all those
‘ion of vast numbers who. had given in. The neutralization
hundreds of thousands of young men of left-wing ideas or


Maver refuge in the socialist countries ster the end of the i _ civil war, deprived the Left of the majority of their old effectives. ~ The political and ideological neutralization of the érpanieed Left was, however, not enough. Repression in the large towns was taking new forms designed to contain the labour movement. While open terrorism had become, especially after 1955, far less conspicuous, the machinery of pressure remained con-stant. A ‘certificate of national probity’ was required as a condition for things as diverse as being’ employed by the state or by any private or semi-public firm controlled by the state, ‘obtaining a driver’s licence or a passport, getting into the University, hunting or fishing, and innumerable other every- day activities requiring for one reason or another an administrative authorization. The result was a suffocating atmosphere. In a country where unemployment was, at least until the mass emigration of the late fifties, the most urgent problem for the majority of the people, the threat of not being able to find a job was probably the most effective method of political control. Elaborate lists of ‘fon-nationalists’ were kept by the police, on the basis of which the certificate was refused. ' Although the accurate number of persons on this black list is unknown, it has been estimated to be in the order of 1,000,000. The control of trade unions by the government added to the oppression of the working class. Since 1946, when Tsaldaris had sacked the trade union leadership and had imposed. his own men, mostly remnants of the Metaxist |guilds, the workers had never managed to overcome the institutional obstructions that made genuine representation impossible. Though trade unionism was in principle free, an elaborate system of representation was organized to exclude the posibility of a radical labour leadership. Each union, regardless of the number of its adherents, elected one representative to the General Confederation. Dwarf unions of. ten members were a ‘constructed’ and could counterbalance a union with thouageds of members, thus dominating tthe whole structure of the
146
em E


sapiens were ‘abliged to pay a ent iiraerind iof their wages. The anti-labour policy of the ‘General Con_ federation’, -combined with continuous pressure on the part of the state and employers who threatened genuine representaifped as well as union members with dismissal and persecution, contributed to the corruption and underdevelopment of the labour movement. By 1963 over one half of the workers were not organized at all. The official attitude towards strikes was even harder. Al' though the Constitution recognized strikes as a right of the worker, a Metaxist law giving the government the authority of “political conscription’ of strikers was often applied, thereby _ transforming the continuation of the strike into a criminal 4 offence. The same effect resulted from another law passed in 1955, which forbade strikes after the Ministry of Labour had offered to mediate between employers and strikers. In any ‘ease, the police did not hesitate to intervene brutally whenever popular demonstrations assumed any dimensions. De_ monstrations of workers were in general those repressed most systematically. In short the actual institutional framework operating during this period was in flagrant opposition to the Constitution. If from a purely judicial point of view, the operation ‘of the "system: was legal, ‘since it depended on a legally promulgated set of norms, it must be stressed that its establishment had ESkes: place during the civil war, when ‘exceptional’ legisla-. tion could find justification in the spirit if not the letter of the siConstitution. Its maintenance, however, throughout the fif
external, had as its main objective to keep the Right in office, against not only the Communists, who were militarily
all social forces that might even threaten its monopoly of ; political power. The ‘legal’ institutional framework, referred to by Greeks s thepara-constitution, was by itself not enough to ensure a
147
ties, when the ‘exceptional’ circumstances had long ceased
and there was absolutely no danger of any kind, internal or ears
_ defeated, morally broken and politically isolated, but against 


_ political, economic and police measures of oppression. This.
. tical authorities. Though their fundamental outlook was in
?
homogeneity. As the ‘ultimate guarantee’ for the protection
‘consented to relinquish their semi-autonomous status which
coercion apparatus, which would function on the fringes of .|) institutionalized para-legality, was already in place. Instead of 3 _ dismantling what they inherited from Metaxas, the Nazis and - the civil war, the Right strengthened it: police, gendarmerie, civil guard and intelligence agencies took on extraordinary dimensions. Enormous sums, never listed in the ordinary bud- __ gets and free from any kind of control, were credited to the security services who, according to one estimate, had by 1962 over 60,000 persons on their secret payroll. =i
|
ao
Thus, the existence of the Constitution and the parkas | tary system did not prevent the growth and consolidation of a- { parallel centre of sovereign authority and power. The role of the armed forces within this ‘parallel’ state was extremely important. While consuming between 40 and 50 per cent of the ordinary budget, a fact which is partly explained by constant American and NATO pressure, they were both financially M and organizationally almost totally uncontrolled by the poli
distinguishable from that of the party inpower, whom they | supported politically with all their might, the military never |
was first built up by the British in 1943-4. % The real force within the Army was a secret society called ‘IDEA’, created in the Middle East in October 1944. This secret society controlled the Army and ensured its ideological
of the social order, IDEA held even the mildest proposal for reform to be a dangerous subversive activity. The structure of the Army was such that anti-Communist hysteria found good soil to grow in. Bad payment of regular officers, professional frustration and insufficient integration in society were the counterpart of the puffing-up of their own importance as guardians of the cultural, icant. and iso quintessence 3 of the ‘Nation’. sae ae For example: a letter from General Gogousis, Feputed'ttoa
148 ons


r he ; ndenonis ed the’ie aeetion to. create a sp ial service to ‘assassinate anyone who harmed the struggle’ _and betrayed the fatherland’. This almost messianic faith in the symbols which the army was ‘there to protectw’as rooted in the fanatical puritanism of the petty-bourgeois environtment which most of the officers came from. Throughout the decade the officer corps stewed in their own juice, pressing for more and more credits to ‘fight the Cold War’ and deter ‘the - internal enemy’. Their position had been strengthened after the incorporation. of Greece in NATO and the war in Korea. ‘A state within the state, running their own secret services _ and intelligence agencies, the armed forces were increasingly _ independent even of the political Right. The blatant intervention of the armed forces in the 1961 election was the culmination of a long process in which the Army became increasingly ' ‘autonomous. It was their first open participation in the poli- tical scene since the end of the civil war. (Excepting an alleged attempt of a coup suppressed by Papagos in 1951, and _ supposedly provoked by the Marshal’s decision to resign from - the Army and enter politics. However, there is no certifiable evidence on this.) The alleged fact that their intervention was put into effect against the will of Karamanlis is characteristic of a growing intolerance of the Right’s ‘mistakes’. ‘The direct offspring of this mentality is the 21 April 1967 “coup @ état. However, as long as there was a fundamental | agreement on the aims to be pursued, there was full colla:aboration in containing the common enemy. In short, through: the institutionalization of a series ae re" pressive standards, and the organization of an elaborate sysm of coercion, the Right had created the conditions for a perpetuation of its political monopoly. Eventually, however, levery process through which the democratic structures had _ been atrophied resulted in the centres of decision moving away from the political world. The open intervention of the King in the designation of Karamanlis as Papagos’s successor to the premiership contributed to the failure to work out a © democratic party,structure for the Right. Karnenls, like his
We el Cae


backed by the forces that hadae him iinplate: ’ Following the pre-war pattern, the party as a more or less Bi coherent organization had only two functioning elements: the leader himself, surrounded by his ‘inner circle’ of advisers, and the parliamentary group of deputies. The position of the latter, however, had been considerably weakened because of the incommensurably greater scope and power of the state mechanism. Party politics and propaganda were not pursued through the organs provided forin the party statutes (which did not really exist), but directly through the state, whose mechanism, at least at the higher levels, was fully identified with the party. Thus, instead of being authors of responsible political decision-making, the deputies and even to ~ a certain extent the members of the cabinet (a senior minister of the Karamanlis government resigned in’1959 because he did not manage to see the Prime Minister for eight months), found themselves, absolutely dependent on the Prime Minister, who alone decided on policy and distributed credits and patronage. The dependence of deputies on the Prime Minister is explained if one examines the mode of representation. The system of political ‘clientelism’ had been re-established, so that it was local notables who ensured the communication of theie electorate with its. representatives. The deputies’ social andTM political role was still centred on meeting the voters’ needs. Given the degree of under-development, the possibility of satisfying these needs concretely was of paramount importance. Whether the request was to find a job, to be admitted to hospital free of charge, to ensure a loan or to be given a state contract; or to put pressure for the carrying out of minor or . major investments or public works in the electoral district: the fulfilment of the clientéle’s needs, upon which the re--election of the representative depended, was in the hands of the Pre- | mier and the state machine which he controlled. Thus the role of Parliament gradually degenerated into a lobby for the ‘pro al motion of individual or specific group interests. The tedious methods used to camouflage this process went to the extreme q
150 | me
a


Who’ in each new hey and decree. YBut if it was the Premier and his inner circle who were the operational agents of state policy, they themselves were de‘a pendent on the network of vested interests which kept Kara- manlis in power. Having risen to his post by royal favour, ie Karamanlis was only superficially the boss. The very de_ generatioonf the parliamentary system, for which his authori_ tarian method of government was heavily to blame, had in - turn deprived him ofa solid constitutional foundation on _ which to base the government’s independence of the extra' parliamentary Establishment. For, beyond Parliament and the government, the all too real centres of power were the Army, the Palace, a small circle of politicians and civil servants, and a number of bankers, industrialists and ship‘owners. The close relationship between political and econo- _ mic oligarchy is revealed by the fact that the half-dozen | __ biggest political ‘names’ had personal or family connexions Bs! with big business, military circles and figures of the Court.
€ xaggerated in this period, the Palace was directly and indirectly involved in economic affairs to the degree that it was in itself part of big business. Its exact role is difficult to estabsh becauseof the extreme secrecy surrounding royal economic activitieBsu.t, in addition to the exorbitant sums received officially by the King (in 1964, $650,000 a year), he—or rather ueen Frederika —was entrusted with managing the so-called
public funds were used by the Palace to promote a number of rorthy objectives, totally uncontrolled by the state. To what xtent the Palace took part in other, more dubious financial
ers,shipowners and industrialists known as the ‘Royal clan’, vee cannot ascertain. What is certain, however, is that — what- | the exact relationships — there was hardly a significant 
aS
151
In addition to its strictly political role, which can hardly be
Queen’s Fund’, through which an, estimated $10 million of
activities through the transmission-belt of the group of ban- :
r ofJean life free from the ultimate control of what


The Greek Tragedy a TORR
’
has been called ‘the closed politics of the Royal clan’. Prime Minister, Party, Army and economic oligarchy looked to the King as their sovereign and protector, (See J. Meynaud, Les Forces politiques en Gréce, p. 338.) If it were possible to speak of any single centre of power, we should have to look for it within the Palace walls. Gradually, crowned democracy was slipping back to the nineteenth-century model: constitutional — or unconstitutional? — monarchy.
S
4
t;


Vata
CHAPTER tl
Foreign Powers and the Cyprus Problem (1952-64)
:f .
»
4
THE Truman Doctrine marked Greece’s entry into the American orbit. But it was only when Greece was admitted to NATO in 1952 that this alignment found its definite consolidation. Yet the latter was the necessary result of the former. If Greece’s foreign policy could, under other circumstances, have been oriented either toward her immediate Balkan neighbours, or toward the countries of the Middle East, the domestic results of the civil war in combination with the _ international cold war setting on the one hand, and the economic dependence on the US on theother, left no actual choice. Seen in its historical context, the decision to enter NATO was an inescapable necessity. The possibility (whether real or fic: titious) of another Communist bid for power made the need for integration within a larger and more comprehensive power
ie because Britain opposed her entry at the time that Greece -_was not a founding memberof NATO. Indeed, Britain tried for a period to stop Greece and Turkey from entering __ NATO, with the object of creating a similar defence organizaiY _tion in the Eastern Mediterranean in which she would have the upper hand. But, inevitably, the brief Anglo-American rivalry, whose repercussions on Greek domestic policy we have already seen, ended with Britain’s defeat. In August 1951 _ Greece applied for admission and on 18 February 1952 she _ was, together with Turkey, ad itted to NATO. . But this event had vont were totally unforeseen by _ the Greek politicians and particularly the Centre, who were _ in \office when the treaty was negotiated and signed. (It is interesting to recall this fact in the light of subsequent accusa' tions by the Right that the Centre was crypto-Communist.) Joining NATO was seen as a panacea for the most crucial ©
VR,
7
oe rans bX
‘bloc the cornerstone of Greek foreign policy. And it was only 
national problems, so the terms and implications of admission 


were. hot even diese So great almost all Greek politicians to accept the gift from -and so deep their fear of offending their alliesoe po af over the terms, that, as a painstaking analysis of the parlia- - ~ _ mentary ‘debates. shows, Greece entered NATO _without _ really knowing what to expect in terms of obligations (Theo- _dore A. Kouloumbis, Greek Political Reaction to American 4 and NATO Influences, p. 49) For NATO did much more _ than protect the country from external aggression: it also ; _ provided the context within which US influence would be _ kept constantly active. Up to the integration of the Greek _ army in NATO, the decisive American power over the Army Was justified by the extraordinary circumstances that pre‘ vailed during and immediately after the civil war. The nor- a ' malization of the situation would, however, lead to limiting | US influence to the ‘normal’ diplomatic and economic channels, NATO functioned both as the institutional framework and as the organizational instrument for the maintenanceof a permanent network for the preservation of US control. Many years were, however, to elapse before the full implications of the institutionalization of US presence became manifest. For the time being the Americans were the unanimously acclaimed saviours of the country. The curtailment of national independence was, of course, foreseen and accepted. Papagos stated if , itbluntlyin 1952:
_ When we exist not only thanks to our own decision, but beoaiae the ;q Americans exist, and they report to their citizens, under what type of ‘ce logic can we deny them the right to have their own opinions?...We must understand that we are members of'a family of nations, and this creates a new reality .... We will see that many things, exceptional according to heounteve become already rules of our publiclife. = 4 and Papandreou’s position was hardly different:
A
_ Those who think that we can live in the current face ef the world’ with the old understanding of sovereignty are wrong. But as it iscertain _that the period of independence has passed, it is equally certain that the loeriod of subjugation applies only to the iron curtain and not tothe . ei aie : ee - We have already seen the fundamental role playedys
154


we
prusProt em (
g to power of Papagos’s Greek Rally. Given such an unconReditionally friendly government, the US could afford to be far

less blatant in its interventions. Thus, the»‘agreement which gave the US Army free use of Greek territory was signed in a very hush-hush way, while the King was absent and Parlia-ment was not in session. Under pressure, Foreign Minister Stephanopoulos admitted in Parliament (25 November 1953) that the agreement, signed on 12 October, was reached under the threat that if Greece refused to ratify it she would be ex*pelled from NATO. But there was hardly any protest, so far as the essence of the agreement went. Greece was offering the ~ US unrestricted use of roads, railways and areas needed for ‘military purposes and was granting the right of uncontrolled entry, exit, movement and use of Greek territory to all American personnel. US activities were exempted from any taxation or charge; and the US could claim all kinds of services at tates “not exceeding those paid by the Greek armed forces’ that is to say, usually nothing. All installations and equipment were freely removable, and the Greek government undertook to compensate the Americans for anything they might choose to leave behind. Finallyt,he military and civilian US functionaries, as well as their families, were granted extraterri: torial rights — that is, immunity from the jurisdiction of Greek civil and criminal courts. The signature of the Balkan Pact between Greece, Yugo-slavia and Turkey in August 1954 seemed to set the seal on the ambitions of Greek foreign policy. Firmly entrenched in the Western alliance,-Greece was entering on a course of full - collaboration with her neighbours, where this was not incom- ‘patible with the continuing cold war. Moreover, Yugoslavia ceased to make any claims about the rights of: a separate _ Macedonian’ ‘nation. Greek territorial claims against Albania ‘concerning tiorthern Epirus — even though the state of war ‘started in 1940 had not been formally terminated, and indeed still hasn’t — were not meant very seriously. It was for the sake of appearances more than for reasons of substance that a were Sead put fopward,
% - ‘ 155
‘


inhabited by 137,631 Greeks and 45,458 Turks — a ratio of
sit_ tinguishes the Greek people.’
entry into the war on the Allied side was considered to be of
_ ticed and the offer was buried. Two years later, when Veni_ zelos’s revolution brought Greece into the war, not a word iy
is remained as remote as ever. Agitation gradually spread among
B hucotic unanimity - ion with,ihe excep p:raseries Left — that reigned over foreign policy issues, the problem of self-determination for Cyprus arose. Out of _the blue, the Cypriot problem successively burst the Balkan | ' Pact, threatened the south-eastern flank of NATO with total 7 demolition, almost provoked war three times between Greece ni ie Turkey, and finally contributed/in a big way to the aboli- tion of democracy in Greece. For almost fifteen years, it has been the nightmare of Greek politicians, whether in ome or - in opposition. It all started back in 1878. Under the Treaty of Bean! the _ a ‘island was ceded by the Sultan to Britain after 400 years of . Turkish rule, which had not, however, altered the predomin- _ antly Greek character of the population. In 1881 Cyprus was
three to one. Naturally enough, the Greek population saw British administration as a prelude to unification with Greece. _ This was, it was thought, only a matter of time. Britain was sure to repeat the gesture that had led to the return of the i-Tonian islandstoGreece. When Churchill visited the island in 1907, he saluted the will of the Cypriot people to become an pniceral part of their mother-country. “Such sentiments,’ he said, ‘are a proof of the patriotic attachment which nobly dis
Cyprus was in fact offered to Greece in 1915, when Gack
prime importance. King Constantine, however, was not en
was mentioned about Cyprus. The end of the First World War consolidated the situation. First in Sévres (1920) and _ then in Lausanne (1923) Turkey abandoned all her claims on, _ the island, which was formally annexed by Britain, and iinsie _ became a Crown colony. {
- Thus to the Cypriots the hope of unification with Greeceie
EY the Greek- speaking community, culminating in’ the serious
2 156


that tou place in 1941. The widespread Popular nstrations gave birth to the slogan of Enosis — union _ with Greece. But these were savagely repressed by the British : authorities, while the Greek Prime Minister, Venizelos, per/manently aligned towards an unconditional acceptance of _ British wishes, refused to support the Cypriot cause. Without ‘support from Greece and with the international situation rapidly deteriorating, agitation gradually subsided. When, however, the Second World War started; the Cypriots were encouraged to fight for Britain, the insinuation being that the - hour of unification with Greece was now approaching. Con: sequently, Greek flags that had been carefully hidden for fear of oppression were hoisted on the masts, and 30,000 Cypriots volunteered and distinguished themselves on the Allied side. After victory had been attained, and for eight more years, the Cypriots waited for what they considered as the natural _ crowning of their efforts. A plebiscite organized in 1950 left no doubt as to the population’s will: 96 per cent of the Greeks and 79 per cent of the island’s total adult population voted j for Enosis. But the Greek governments were hardly coopera- tive. Already in 1946, Prime Minister Tsaldaris had declared that ‘the question of Cyprus is not a demand and it should not be posed in a vindictive manner; it only concerns Greece and her friend Great Britain.’ He could have been speaking ~ a for his successors too. As long as British influence in Greece was preponderant there could be no question of international pressure. It is no coincidence that the first Greek Premier - who dared to defy, the British was Papagos, whose rise to ~ power had been largely due to the US victory in the silent a Anglo-American rivalry for Greece. It is true that the British _ had given him good reasons to break the chronic truce. In _1954, one year after renewed agitation under the inspired _ leadership of Archbishop Makarios had brought the Cyprus -problem to the UN, the British Under-Secretary for Colonial _ Affairs, Hopkinson, found it opportune to declare, referring . to Cyprus, that “certain- Commonwealth | territories can never _ hope to reach full a amv For, as Macmillan is rerted to have said, ‘Cyprus, hm ... how did Disraeli describe
157


Britain was retreating bam hermoree exposed positio _ As Eden put the matter: TERRI Path
5 ‘In geography and in tactical eouetteratione: the Turks Bevo: the stronger claim on Cyprus; in race and language the Greeks; in stra- ‘_ tegy the British, so long as their industrial life depends on oil supplies ’ " - from the Persian Gulf. (Full Circle, p. 315) ie This in a nutshell was the logic behind British Pentti: in the. attempt to preserve Cyprus as a colony. _ Thus, when Papagos, who then believed he could once more i count on US support, decided to back the Cypriot cause, and
brought the case before the General Assembly of the United _ Nations, Britain decided that the dormant Turkish element _ in Cyprus might prove to be useful in fighting the Greek claim. - All Turkish rights had lapsed since the end of the First World ‘War, and throughout the inter-war agitation the Turkish ‘minority, which had by then dwindled from one-fourth to - approximately one-fifth of the population, had not been at all present in the political arena. Full harmony prevailed between the two communities, and there was no more question of the Turkish minority imposing a veto’on the wishes of the majority than there had been in the case of Rhodes, which _ was returned to Greece in 1947, and was both nearer the - Turkish mainland and contained. a larger percentage of _ Turks. As C. M. Woodhouse has pointed out, ‘the British seemed to argue the Turkish case before the Turks ever thought of it’ (The Story of Greece, p. 271). For approxi- | _ : mately fifty years, during which the demand of the Cypriots - for self-determination had been manifesting itself in various forms, it had never occurred to the Turks to put up an argu- a ment; they did not in fact enter the picture as long as the categorical British refusal to accept any discussion kept the ay demand for self-determination on the level of academic discourse. ) _ The invitation to Turkey to join in was nates not turned | down by the Turkish government. They saw a chance to shift. "public opinion in Turkey away from burning domesti i
Ge! 158


uggle of Sisticed versus colotialists into a major international problem involving, apart from the Cypriot people ee themselves, ‘three European countries, all members of NATO. _ Macmillan was soon to shrug his shoulders and say: ‘Why do they hold Cyprus against us? It was nothing but a quarrel between Greeks and Turks and we settled it’ (Foley, p. 149). In April 1955, the Greek Cypriots, disillusioned with the _ possibilities of a peaceful solution, started an armed struggle ‘in order to make their presence better felt. ROK A, as the clandestine resistance organization was called, rapidly dominated the island. Under the leadership of the experienced Colonel Grivas of ‘X’ fame, and with the Archbishop’s blessing, the peaceful island became a hell of violence. The British had to face a dilemma: either they had to give in and accept _ some kind of compromise, or they would have to proceed to a long and violent suppression of a movement which was backed by practically the whole of the island’s population. A con_ ference was called in August 1955 between the British, Greek ~ and Turkish governments, in which the Cypriots were unrepresented. The conference, however, ended in disaster.
_ bombing of a Turkish mosque in Salonica, and then organized the Istanbul mobs in terrible retaliatory assaults against i the Greek population. Menderes’s role in organizing the vio_ lent incidents was established during his subsequent trial by _ the Turkish military who had him hanged - on different
charges. At the time, however, the incident had far-reaching _ effects. Apart from breaking Greco-Turkish friendship, pub_ lic opinion in Turkey had become, sufficiently aroused to preclude any solution not conforming to Turkey’s newly defined interests. And Turkish public opinion was important for -NATO?’s internal stability, even more important than that of
“had brought him in, but she could not get him out, or per
| too well. A referee was needed to adjudicate between the
#159
y -Turkey’s Premier, Adnan Menderes, ‘manufactured’ the
Greece. Very ably, Menderes had. imposed himself as a per-_manent partner of Britain in the Cyprus problem. Britain 
suade him to any moderate solution. He played his part only ;


ue oe and negotiations that ‘follewed necessarily failed:
(after the violent incidents in Istanbul) the NATO countries
sembly. Uproar consequently reached its climax. Anti-
if _ put to question. Even the Right felt extremely uneasy. Though
pressure to put an end to the explosive situation. King Paul 
- self-determination, which ‘would automatically lead to 3 ENOSIS, could not even be discussed, even as a remote eventuality. Britain had found a way of permanently maintaining _ her bases. For with ENOSIS ruled out, al other solutions could be kept under her control. a Throughout 1955 and 1956 EOKA’s ntriiaele®was ‘Antena Wy fied. Despite violent repression and the deportation of Archbishop Makarios to the Seychelles, the Cypriot resistance could not be broken. All British plans for some type of selfgovernment under British authority were turned down by the _ Greeks. For the pressure of Greek domestic opinion had become in the meantime extremely strong. In the fall of 1955
¥
unanimously voted against Greece in the UN General As- 4
American and anti-British feelings were virtually universal and for the first time the allegiance of Greece to NATO was ~
the government never raised the question openly, the most authoritative right-wing newspaper unequivocally attacked - the US and Great Britain, advocated an isolationist foreign ; policy of strict neutrality and stated that ‘We-do not know
what the government wants. But the people want withdrawal
_ from NATO?’ (Kathimerini, 22 September 1955). Two weeks later, Papagos died. The unforeseen designation of Karaman- lis as his successor should be seen in the light of the strong US ~
was obviously going beyond his authority by choosing Karamanlis for the 1b, but though the new Premier’s accession a was followed by an unmistakable shift towards. conciliatory : positions, public opinion was so aroused that any compromise : excluding ENOSIS risked provoking chain--reactions of un- © predictable amplitude. Thus if the new Premier made haste to proclaim the country’s unquestioned allegiance to NATO and the usefulness of Greco-Turkish friendship, he did
160


a “Whe n the British Taped aie so-called Radcliffe Contution (1957), granting full autonomy except for defence and foreign policy, it was unequivocably rejected.
which complicated the issue beyond their control. In order to
}Boyd threatened the partition of the island as an alternative
tegration of the two communities, partition was entirely im_ practicable: half the inhabitants of the island would have to
“ now on, whenever Greek pressure mounted, the Turkish _ government threatened to take their own part, by force if _ needed. NATO threatened to disintegrate. The Turks, whom Britain had brought in to balance the Greeks, were now creat_ ing a serious problem for the United States, who were obliged to become involved as arbitrators. ‘With EOKA violence intensifying and the relations between - the two Cypriot communities rapidly deteriorating, the situation had by 1957 become internationally explosive. The
misingly hard Field-Marshal Harding by the more agile and
When a series of violent incidents between Cypriot Greeks
being for some weeks on the verge of war, the Americans
“of the British bases seemed to be at stake. The- south-eastern lank of NATO was no longer operational and the tension
far,particularly if the Soviet Union saw fit to exploit the situa
a|
.
the ection of 1958 and could afford to face some internal
DOES iS |
' It was then that the British committed a serious blunder
_ blackmail Greece into accepting the compromise, Lennox
‘solution. However, because of the complete geographical in- '
_be forcibly moved, with catastrophic social and economic iy results. But the bait was eagerly snatched by the Turks. From
~ release of Makarios, and the replacement of the uncompro
liberal Sir Hugh Foot, did not do much to improve matters.
and Turks in July 1958 resulted in the two home countries 
_ were seriously concerned. Much more than the maintenance
between Turkey and Greece could spread no one knew how
aramanlis was more firmly entrenched; he had just won — :
: tion. Consequently, a way out had to be found at any cost | . i and very heavy pressure was put on the Greek government'to | accept a non-Enosis solution. This now appeared feasible.


* communities into an institution. The (necessarily) Greek [
ie cipalities, both administratively and geographically. Taxes _ q
‘elements who had supported the Cypriot demand for imme- Te
-rios, who was thus in effect appointed chief of a new state, -. could not put up a decisive resistance against pressure and 
- kish diplomats rejoiced over the triumph of goodwill and a
_ of guaranteeing minority rights. Cyprus was given two. govern-
- gether~ and Overlapping, As Charles Foley has von 4
had caused second thoughts among some of the intransige
diate self-determination. Complete independence for Cyprus — but to the exclusion of Enosis — was offered instead. Maka- rag
temptation. In the absence of the Cypriots, and under constant US pressure, preliminary talks took place at the NATO con- ference in the autumn of 1958. On 11 February 1959 a formal agreement was signed in Zurich by the Foreign Minis- E ters of Turkey and Greece. Eight days later, the agreement was ratified in London and countersigned by the British and the Cypriots, after considerable pressure had been put on _Makarios. Cyprus) was to have full independence rie aca year. ie NATO unity was thus preserved. British, Greek and?Tur:
international understanding. But reality proved to be more © / complicated. The new republic had been given a completely unworkable constitution, based on an impossible mixture of Greek and Turkish attitudes. On paper it was incomprehensible. In application, it was a legal monster. Instead of encouraging trends to integration, it made the separation of the two
President could be vetoed by the (necessarily) Turkish Vice- , President on almost any essential day-to-day decision. The Greeks were to have 70 per cent and the Turks 30 per cent of all governmental, administrative and state positions, except for the Army, where the ratio was to be 60 to 40 per cent. For the larger towns, the constitution required separate muni! 
were to be collected on a community basis. This was not a case q
ments — a majority one and a minority one — functioning to
162


“Archbishop eetitenied to Cyprus on 1 March 1959, Fifn months later’ he became the first President of the in
for.his administration to fuaétian Sati Despite all his efforts ;and those of the Turkish Vice-President, Dr Kutchuk, tension between the two communities rapidly built up once more. By 1963 the deadlock was complete, and at last Makarios decided to take a decisive step that would enable him to have an administration again. On 5 December, he announced his intention of ‘aronguanet amending the constitution.
_ On Christmas Day a Turkish fleet was approaching Cyprus, and for two months bitter fighting on the island was accompanied by continual threats of Turkish military intervention. Strong US pressure and Soviet threats contributed to the avoidance of war. But bloodshed continued, and it seemed that nothing could put an end to it except the presence of a powerful neutral police force that would keep Greeks and Turks in Cyprus from one another’s throats. Makarios turned to the UN. Simultaneously, however, the US— pulling strings. to make the UN take its time — proposed a NATO ‘solu- ionA’NA.TO mixed force would come in to separate the combatants. Security considerations would then make its per
- This caused an immediate crisis, more dangerous than ever;
manent presence necessary, and the island would become a NATO base. Makarios’s neutralist tendencies would be discouraged, and a de facto condominium of Greece, Turkey: a inte stabs would perpetuate ‘Allied military influence.


strong new Greek government under George Papandreou y
_ Cypriot positions in retaliation for a Grivas initiative of ter~ rorism against a Turkish village. Once more it was a stale
the possibility of ENOSIS, while the Turks were adamantiin Tejecting this. The Greek Premier consequently refused even z
has an army three times as big and a much more powerful
_ Greek policies in particular indicated a likelihopd pitGr
up the pressure. Lemnitzer iser He have triedtto1i eoeeide ;
all NATO considerations would lead to a solution ad
5 / 164
facto partition. He sent telegrams to both Greek and Turkish governments urging them to land troops on the island, which would have led to the landing of a NATO mixed force to interpose itself between Greeks and’ Turks and confront — a Makarios with a fait accompli (Kouloumbis, ibid., p. 184). But Makarios’s determination prevailed in the end. Backed by the
(and very unobtrusively by Britain, who now found the Archbishop too valuable to lose) he finally obtained a decision of the UN to send an expeditionary peace corps. benay ts NATO plans had thus failed. Makarios’s authority was strengthened and the UN force permitted him a margin of freedom. The crisis did not, however, subside. In August 1964 a Greek-Turkish war was imminent and was prevented at the last moment, after the Turkish air force bombed Greek
mate. The war had been avoided, but NATO unity was again © at stake. Papandreou refused any compromise that excluded a
to discuss the question in bilateral talks with Turkey. Making ~ a common front with Makarios, he insisted that the solution should be decided by the UN. Turkey’s importance in the strategic balance is far greater than that of Greece. (Turkey ©
navy and air force than Greece. She is also the frontier of NATO betwen the Soviet Union and the Arab world.) ‘Thus:
vantageous to Turkey rather than to Greece. Papandreou’s _ position seemed to make a mutually satisfactory solution impossible. What was more important for the USA: instead of bringing’ Cyprus into NATO, developments in general and :


i zh
nder copnstant pressurefae the Left, to risk a neu- F
government’ fallin July 1965 was due to a Gonipten off t icand international factors, as we shall see below. Tt: however, that Papandreou’s successor,
nAyextti could not hoe a the NATO ies vey) :
ou ated connivance ee the US military in the coup of 21 1967.


CHAPTER 12
The Rise of the Liberal Forces (1959-63 painna
Tk the maintenance of the political stability of the Right for twelve years was to a large extent due to the repressive systemte analysed above, the lack of a coherent political alternative helped too. The total failure of the Plastiras governmentto carry out a policy of conciliation had been one of the reasons for Papagos’s triumph in 1953. Once in power, Papagos man- aged to convey an atmosphere of authority and discipline which was undeniably welcomed after the chaos which had : prevailed during the eight years since the end of ‘the war. eK The Liberals, now in opposition, were even less able than _ before to present an alternative of equal authority and cohesion. After the death of Plastiras they were deprived of the only leader who could claim the allegiance of the scattered -. constellation of political notabilities — and could capture public imagination. The large gap that had been opened between the Right and the Left thus remained to all intents and pur- poses unfilled by a strong Centre grouping. Many prominent ~ 2 Liberal personalities had abandoned the sinking ship, either ‘ by joining Papagos (like ex-Premiers Tsouderos and Kanel- ‘lopoulos) or by agreeing to cooperate with him, as did George : _ Papandreou and other so-called independents. The biggest _ Liberal newspaper group, owned by the Lambrakis family, 7 also supported the Greek Rally, which could thus rely on the support of seven out of nine national daily papers. Of the __- many parties that had developed in opposition to Papagos, even the two most important — the Liberals under Sogo il Venizelos, and the EPEK, led by Papapolitis after Plastiras’s death — inspired, if anything, open distrust. Papandreou re_ turned to the Centre; he became leader of the Liberal: Party_ - when Venizelos retired from politics; Venizelos then changed thshis mind, was rebuffed by his old party, and bss a new
166 .
j .
q'
7


esults, the Centrists could not do so. tN For, while their interminable family easmates had seriously impaired their credibility, their own outlook and political ine made them extremely reluctant to define a true alternative. Their differences with Papagos were only pronounced in i that they were apt to conform to democratic constitutional Me _ provisions, which the Field-Marshal more or less disregarded. _ Beyond this, however, the Centre still represented the con- _ servative-liberal trends of the old Venizelist tradition. Except fora small fraction of social-democratic elements, who had survived the civil war and its sequel but who were politically and os ahaa crushed between Liberalism and Commun
:dministration, Scandals were exposed and corruption was a ¥ demned in the most poignant terms. But, on the whole,
the ‘system was not attacked as such. Like Plastiras be
ooo the ruling bourgeoisie. : cae of the most prominent Liberal personalities had per
stateapparatuswas ee ios. pronounced than that of the t’as ncien whey were, on the whole, financed by
eee e167
ism was confined to matters of secondary importance at


tal preoccupation with re-election. Thus, s of the monarchy had been settled, there were very ferences between the Right and the Centre. They both repre- ye sented the ruling bourgeoisie and had in mind the same or bn _ similar solutions for the main problems ‘of the country. Their historical differences had by now almost evaporated. It. was
the Right still had a significant advantage over the Centre: cohesion, authority and an undisputed leader who was fully
only the effective exercise of power that kept them apart: But x i
st
supported by the US. When, in September 1955, Field-Marshal Pankart died.; _ finda siuccnesgsor was a great problem. Markezinis, who had _ been the most prominent man in the Papagos government
“managed, through an efficiently run public relations office, - to make a name-for himself as an energetic Minister of Pub
that strong US pressure contributed to this umexpected - choice, which obviously went beyond the Kong Constitu- 
- industrialists and shipowners who disbursed large sums of money in all
and the planner of his economic policy, had been forced to resign some months earlier after a personal dispute with his . chief. (He has since re-emerged as an allegedly powerful éminence grise behind the colonels, after thirteen years in political limbo.) The two party Deputy Leaders, Kanellopou- a Jos and Stephanopoulos, of whom the latter had become act- | } ing Premier during the Field-Marshal’s illness, were both| considered too weak to ensure the Right’s cohesion. The King thereupon appointed Constantine Karamanlis as Prime a Minister. He was a relatively unknown politician who had 4
lic Works. It-seems beyond reasonable doubt, as we have seen, 
eee ae
1. The financing of Greek political parties has see been secret, there being no legal obligation to publish accounts or to disclose financial sources. It is well known, however, that both parties and individual politicians were lavishly financed, especially during the electoral campaigns, by bankers, — a
directions including, sometimes, the Left. If this ‘financing’ was not always _‘ followed by the undertaking ‘of specific obligations on the part of politi- 7 cians towards the ‘patrons’, it contributed to the social and economic inte-_ , gration of practically the whole of the Greek political personnelinoeemron a of vested interests.
168 ni ss


0:‘months aie Atmenean economic
came “the puppet Prime Minister in 1965, when the King at dismissed Papandreou, while Kanellopoulos later rejoined ~ Karamanlis, as his Vice-Premier.) Apart from this, however, | q _ the Palace met with complete success. The departure of the _ two aspirants to the leadership was not followed by any splitin _ the Right, who unquestioningly followed the King’s choice. The Greek Rally was renamed by Karamanlis as the National Radical Union (ERE) and in the ensuing elections (1956) 4 stood as united as ever. On the other hand, the coalition that __ was formed by the’ right-wing dissidents, the Centre’ and the Left, with the sole object of winning the elections, lacked _ the slightest ideological or functional unity. The working of _ the electoral system helped Karamanlis to remain in power a and, naturally, the opposition coalition dissolved immediately after the elections. ___ The Centrists had, however, not learned their lesson yet. They suffered one more crushing defeat in the 1958 elections, when the left-wing party, EDA, came second with 25 per om cent of the popular vote and seventy-eight deputies, thus beWe,a coming the official opposition. The electoral system, which ' favoured the larger parties and penalized coalitions, had walargely contributed to increasing the Left’s parliamentary representation. But the main reason for the collapse of the Centre should be found in the fact that large masses of Liberal supporters were sick and tired of the endless disputes between the Centrist leaders.
a
o
a,
d was in fact ded by representatives of the exiled Com- munist leadership. Its hard-core followers, who did not ex
of EDA, its clear-cut ideology and programme were a odel of the qualities which the Centre glaringly lacked. And _
ae - 169
EDA was a subterfuge for the banned Communist Party — |


its“appeal nis pon ee bythe fac ‘that -consistently denouncing the growing inequa and in demanding social justice. However, the big 195 to the Left did not mean a definite change in political i _ ing, as was soon to be proved when the Centre won back most _ of its lost votes as soon as it achieved some coherence and - emerged as a united party again. A big section of the Liberal electorate had made a protest, more than anything else, _ against the fragmentation and incompetence of the Centre Vek parties and the consequent lack of a political alternative. -.. But there were considerable repercussions from the un- ce i expected replacement of the Centre by the Left as the main | a Opposition party in Parliament. In the first place, this meant iA _ the partial dismantling of the ghetto in which the Left td | > been imprisoned since the end of the civil war. Now that it ta had almost a third of the seats in Parliament/,itsvoice could no longer be silenced. What was more important was that, , regardless of. the circumstances which had led to the Left’s P comeback, both the Right and the USA were seriously anxious. If the trend were to continue, Greece would see a poli- _ tical polarization which might prove very defficuts ib accommodate within the parliamentary system. | - The Right met the challenge by reviving the intermittent “war which it had been waging against the Left since it came to. power. Adding to his arsenal the threat presented by EDA’s : code new strength, Karamanlis intensified his system of coercion. ; It is significant that the ‘parallel state’ was perfected only : after the 1958 election, almost ten years from the end of the _ civil war and when the Right had been in power for six years. f _ The results were to be felt in the next lene three have ». dater. - The defeat of 1958 was the most severe suffered wythe Liberals since 1920. Seeing that they had no hope of returning to power without a radical reorganization, the Centre leaders had to come to terms with one another at last. Yet it took them another two and a half years to overcome the difficu ties, and it was only in September 1961, in face of impending new elections, that the Centre Union was formed as aun ed
170
|


-Paeeenin one ee itedl unit, jointly led by pesos apandreou and Sophocles Venizelos. _US influence seems to have played an important part in this. The Americans still supported Karamanlis; but they considered, especially after the re-emergence of a powerful Left, that a strong Centre party was needed so that they could preserve their influence in a political world that would be bi_ partisan, conservative and pro-American. So they systematic_ ally urged the Liberals to get together, and even implied that they would eventually welcome a Centre government. 4 The creation of the Centre Union was a major political event. For the first time since the war, there was an alterna_ tiveto the preponderance of the Right. The election of 29 _ October 1961 was therefore of great importance. Despite the __ extremely oppressive atmosphere in which it was held, the __ Centre Union got 33.5 per cent of the votes. At first sight, 4 ERE had succeeded in strengthening its position. But the lineup which had now emerged — of three distinct blocks, Right, Centre and Left — could only lead sooner or later to its fall. The Americans were satisfied. US Ambassador Briggs de_ clared: “The elections have given concrete proof of the Greek people’s faith in the ideals of individual freedom and human’ ignity’ (Le Monde, 29 December 1961). Now that they had ‘ot a Centre opposition, they could again openly support the Right. However, the role of loyal opposition did not satisfy the entre. The smell of battle had brought back the memory of past victories. \On the morrow of the elections, Papandreou aunched a full-scale attack on Karamanlis, challenging the
mn used. This strengthened the unity of the party and met h widespread, and somewhat unexpected, popular suport: Many voters, especially among the lower middle classes, ad voted for the Right purely because they feared a return
Patye 74
esults and exposing the whole oppressive system that had |
unstable. coalitions and political anarchy. But Pon were |


Be cipeal defeat but also attacked ERE with remapicllte firm mess and perseverance, a significant number of people who had temporarily turned to EDA pakupned to the rejuvenated Centre. But, if the creation of the Centre Union heralded an alters. ~ native government, it did not yet define an alternative policy. 1 At first, the new party was little more than a regroupment of the political personnel who had been kept out of power for!3.4 so many long years. It had broadened its political base, but not by virtue of a clear social and economic programme cor- eh _ responding to the hopes of the classes whose support a
sought. a _ Neither the structure of the Centre Union nor its (unstated) * q gus :ideological premises bridged the gap between party policy and the needs and demands of the people. George Papandreou’s incredible stamina and dynamism soon pushed Veni-zelos into second place, especially after the launching of the _ “intransigent struggle’ which was inspired and led personally _by Papandreou. The result was that Papandreou ran the party with a disregard for internal democracy and formal rules which worked out not very differently from the autocratic way in which Karamanlis ran ERE. Papandreou could not. achieve quite the same authority over his colleagues, since his" _ party was not in power and he had no patronage to dispense: but he did his best to subordinate them to his own charisma.
Using his personal charm and his public image, he managed / to" ‘impose obedience on his followers in Parliament. Sin slogans were enough to-win him massive support, he felt ne need for a party machinery functioning on ‘democratic prir _ ciples, which would have provided a permanent basis for an interplay of ideas and policies between leaders and members,
ieaa
4
i
te
going a significant change. The Centre had not lostits o
ne


1a Eibera1l political leaders. Indeed, it was the ‘big busiss’element that was the spearhead of economic reform in
‘ar; and it continued to support them during the inter-war ars, even when the lower middle class became more conseryative and supported the Populists. By the late fifties, however, the picture was vastly different. Whereas big business _ before the war had consisted mainly of tycoons returning om the diaspora of Greek settlements round the Mediter_Yanean (hence the strong pro-British connexion), in the fifties _ and sixties it was dominated by several new groupings. i Fortunes had been made in the immediate post-war years e- by those ‘who had benefited from Marshall Aid programmes. Public works and house-building made fortunes for contrac
_ who had built themselves up during the world war, the Korean _ war boom/and the Suez crisis also took advantage of the terms for attracting pone capital which the Right had been offer
its piponaes The Centre, especially 7 conservative wing nder Venizelos, was on good terms with business too? But d relations were’ one thing and common interests quite ther. The Jong period’ of right-“wing government inevitably 
etros pee whom we shall meet again), a banker, a shipowner and
f He had excellent relations with the banking and industrial Estabment besides pine a close personal friend of the sani
ay 1723
z Among the party’s most ‘prominent personalities were a beer magnate 
3
ey


paviicges terms and concessions that they were i] _tinguishable. Once a deal was made, the vested interest ‘ehich see its preservation became almost part of the hai
their privileged position’ through visite ‘any change government. Thus, although a significant section of the bourgeoisie supported or at least was well inclined towards the Liberals, the process of rapid and anarchic economic develop- —4 ment had created new sets of vested interests, which were be- coming more and more powerful within the nexus of the economic oligarchy and whose support for the Right was unqualified and unrestricted. peel al ’ The ‘intransigent struggle’ was at first mainly focused on he formal characteristics of the state structure developed ey the Right, which appeared to be a permanent barrier to the‘return of the Centre to power. The demand for democratiza- iq tion and the exposure of scandals, corruption and the in- , effectiveness of ERE were the main pivots around which the opposition attacks were centered. Though Papandreou’s per-8, sonal interest in problems of education produced a programme of radical changes in the educational system, the Centre’s social and economic programme \did not go further than a more or less general promise of fair play, justice and ‘Teorganization. Despite their vagueness, however, the Centre’s
pial
iWap
defences by ERE of their own achievements. ‘The numbers,’ i said sis pasate seem to be doing well. It is the people that
‘the yearning of the working people, and particularloyf the peasantry, for some social justice. Whereas the governme
growth, their ideology as well as their connexions with fiteering business made them bis iseteo think about i|i


enthusiastic yet rons mystical communion with the people. _’ Thus, oddly enough, the main tenets of the Centrist campaign were developed in the process of the ‘intransigeant struggle’ am did not derive from a peeconceived platform. They were
ed? TheKing was ; called on to dismiss Karamanlis and hold)
yy vi ane sovernments in power usually resigned during election periods and © - replaced by ‘service’ governments whose impartiality guaranteed 2 ea conduct of elections. The 1961 electoral ‘orgy’ to use
ilservants is significant: 30.8 per cent of their members were professors, 14.1 per cent members.of the ee 13.1 per cent :
Kes OTS


- to his proper constitutional role. As time went on, the attacks became fiercer and fier and were directed against virtually all the institutions which the _ Right had misused and injured. By early 1963 the situation was indeed explosive. Stimulated by the Centre Union’s uncompromising attitude, a series of demonstrations against the government started. All over the country, in towns and vil-_if lages alike, people of every class showed their profound dis- D ‘i - content. A wave of rallies, strikes and demonstrations shook the country. The police handled demonstrations with unyield- +7 ing sternness. Mass arrests and intensified measures of repres- _ sion by agents of the ‘parallel state’ only made grievancesmore bitter. When a peasant was shot dead by the gendar-- merie at a big demonstration of tobacco- -growers in Central. Greece, dozens of rallies of angry people all over the pee challenged the ERE government’ s right to rule. - Things came to a head in May 1963. Gregory Lashieeie an EDA deputy, was murdered in Salonica in the presence of : a large number of policemen, outside the hall where he had addressed a meeting of his party.. The murder served as ‘a catalyst for the pressure that had been gathering, as well. as -a symbol for thé intolerable oppression. Journalists did the job of the investigating authorities who, in the beginning, _ showed negligence, to say the-least. Gendarmerie General : - Vardoulakis, who was originally in charge of» the investigations, was later condemned to: imprisonment and dismisse - because he had put pressure on witnesses to withhold materi _ evidence. It was soon proved that the murder had been com:
¥))
i industrialists, 12.8 per cent pensioned generals, 12.6 per cent members of _liberal bag and ent8.9 per cent senior civil servants.Unde
of ministries (a purely political post); 12 per cent were members : ‘Court and 8 per cent members of the Academy of Athens.
176
t


tak on an + sehenioe senior Sollee officers - gradually implicated. The local gendarmerie chief, and - gendarmerie ‘Commander-in-Chief of Northern Greece, 
th e plottomurdet Lambrakis.
i hough an attempt was made to maintain a curtain of. silence around the affair, a task that was undertaken by the 7S ipreme Court Prosecutor Constantine Kollias (a King’s man a id Premier after 21 April 1967), the implication of the police officers could not be hidden. Kollias managed, however, to block investigations at this point. Although the police officers’ ‘role as immediate instigators of the murder was not in doubt, heir exact role and position within the ‘parallel state’ as well S$):their real motives and possible connexions with higher ircles of the Army, the government or the Palace were never _ disclosed. The Karamanlis government’ was, however, shaken. Who in God’s name governs this country?’ Karamanlis Wee fi eported to have shouted in exasperation when he was in: orn ed |about the circumstances of Lambrakis’s murder. It wv as not long before he knew the answer. A few weeks later as.the storm was reaching its paroxysm, Karamanlis was) os asoe about a state visit the royal couple f
eenthe Premier at Frederika (the King’s ‘stone wasan open secret. Nevertheless some mystery re- ae


secret battle euiast the royal control of the ‘ parallel state i with the ultimate object of curtailing royal prerogatives as much as possible, and strengthening governmental authority under his own leadership. This view is’ corroborated by Karamanlis’s.persistent attempts to introduce a ‘Gaullist’ amendment to the Constitution, in which he was finally unsuccessful. It has been furthér implied that the electoral falsification of : 1961 was put into effect against the will of the Premier in order to discredit him personally, and to strengthen the co- hesion of the Right around the Palace, which would then be able to choose a more malleable person as Premier. | ; The chief reason for Karamanlis’s fall is, however, to be found in the growing climate of internal strife that had re- | sulted from the “intransigent struggle’. Much more than the - ERE government was in danger once the King was involved in the political arena. Once again, as during the civil war, it~ seemed that the Liberals might be the best safety valves to ~ avoid the bursting of the system. If the party could be de- capitated in the process, so much the better. Venizelos, who —: ee had very ‘reluctantly followed Papandreou in his ‘intransi-gent struggle’, and the King, who had started to feel its con- sequences, were constantly seeking ways of reversing the trends which were leading towards political polarization. With both protagonists, Karamanlis and Papandreou, off the scene, _ _ vast possibilities of compromise would be opened, in which the Right would certainly be able to outmanoeuvre the few : progressive elements of the Centre. A move in this direction was attempted immediately afterthe Pipinellis government assumed office. Sophocles Venize- los, supported by a large fraction of the Centre Party, attempted to. support the Pipinellis government in Parliament, ; thus practically putting an end to the ‘intransigent struggle” and undermining Papandreou’s authority. But the latter’sSs”Ss reaction was fast and vigorous. Supported by large. demo | strations of popular indignation, he immediately expel e
178


The Rise of the Liberal Forces (1959-63)
Venizelos from the party and refused to compromise. Approaching eighty, Papandreou — once the master of compromise and suavity — obviously liked his new role. His charisma had at last, after forty years of political life, made him a national popular leader. His adamant position broke Venizelos’s resistance, and obliged him to retreat. The Centre Union resumed its struggle and exerted renewed pressure for immediate elections. The King finally decided to give in. Return to political ‘normality was the only way towards a reconciliation of the Centre and the Palace. Consequently, though Pipinellis won a vote of confidence in Parliament (a fact that shows the extent of the King’s influence over the Right, whose chief he had expelled only some! weeks ago) a general election was called for November. The service government appointed was a clear signal that the elections would be free: its President, Stylianos Mavromichalis, President of the Supreme Court, was a life_ long Liberal. The experienced Greek voter immediately knew that this deal between the King and the Centre signified that the Army would stay in its barracks. Without the Army’s open or covert support, the Right was obviously on the defensive. _ In the elections that took place on 3 November, the Centre Union emerged as the leading party with 42 per cent of the votes (as against 33.6 per cent in 1961), mainly at the expense of ERE, who fell from 50.8 per cent in 1961 to 39.3 per cent. Papandreou was called on to form a government. The Right’s twelve-year rule had come to an end.


RYE NiceotI SernRY
Behe Hf ay =A
CHAPTER 13 _ ‘
The Centre Union in Power (1963-5)
‘; THOUGH the elections of 3 November had brought Papan- dreou to the Premiership, the Centre Union did not have an absolute parliamentary majority. Refusing ‘to form a coalition government with the Right, or to depend on the support offered him by the Left, Papandreou résigned and opted for new elections which, he hoped, would give him an absolute majority. The new elections took place on 16 February 1964 and were a triumph for the Centre Union. With an unprecendented 52.72 per cent of the votes (against 35.26 per cent for ERE and 11.80 per cent for EDA), it had an ample majority in Parliament. The electoral triumph of Papandreou, whose personal position in the party had been strengthened after the death of Sophocles Venizelos (his life-long antagonist, and leader of the Royalist faction of the party), can i largely be attributed to the extensive liberalization and democratization that \immediately spread in the countryside during his first short government. Though the state apparatus. was still completely in the hands of the Right (it is significant that in the border regions, which remained under military
~~? ;
authority, ERE got between 62 per cent and 70 per cent of. . the votes), coercion had on the whole been restricted to a marginal role. It is true that the Centre victory was to a cer-. tain extent helped by EDA’s decision to put up no candidates in twenty-two out of the fifty-five electoral districts, where its strength was insignificant. Its share of the vote thus fell from 14.34 per cent in 1963 to 11.80 per cent in 1964. The Right made much of this, as ‘objective’ proof of Papandreou’s ‘col-’ laboration’ with the Communists. In fact, the real strengthening of the Centre did not come from the Left but from the i Right, whose share-of the. poll fell from 43.10 per cent (in- a cluding Markenizis’s tiny party) to 35.26 per cent (again in- ;
ee
cluding Berens, who collaborated with ERE this time).
*\
180


) nas cs fd in
hes te fourrelectoraldistrits)had always voted overwhelm- “ is
shes districts - - covering the rural areas i small towns M eae — ERE had an absolute majority in thirty-~three inte)
power ana Centre government was this clear proof of the _ gility of their machinery of coercion which had served them , 0 efficiently for overa decade. Papandreou’s declared inten- :
tostate their Said it is now the nationalists who S)to Glegvise their gonvictions. George sits is
ow hehas dealt. to anti-Communism “entitles us!10
f
him as apsre ralan's ey in Greece’ (quoted by
181


‘Immediately after the Centre Union’ too powe : did its utmost to discredit the new government. The assault started on the economic front. Allegedly because of Papandreou’s policy of increasing agricultural subsidies, wages and : d pensions, an unparalleled attack was launched by ERE onthe currency. Papandreou was accused of endangering the stabi- Be; lity of the drachma, and the public were told that the only -ii, safeguard for the value of their savings was to hoard gold. In — : iresponse to this campaign, deposits were withdrawn from the banks and gold sovereigns were purchased in the open mar- ket, where the price of gold soon soared. The authorities felt obliged to sell gold, thus depleting the official reserves. Suggestions to freeze the gold market were rejected from fear nt creating more panic. Ee The attack cut sharply. One of the undeniable achievements of the Right, and the cornerstone of their financial policy, had been the maintenance of a remarkable price stability. The decade between 1953 and 1963 was probably the only period 4 Greeks could remember when the country was not haunted, by inflation. But the government held firm and the momen_tary panic, apparently started through the withdrawal of some large depositors’ funds, was not followed by bigger with- mf drawals. After two months the fever subsided, the CentralBank started repurchasing its gold, the money returned to the banks, and the drachma remained stable. Despite some reiterated prophecies of impending disaster, price stability remained for the duration of the Papandreou government. Eventually, after some inflation had resulted from the handouts distributed by the puppet governments which folietesy Papandreou’ s dismissal, the gold market was closed. The Centre Union continued the ERE economic policy with respect to the industrial infrastructure. But in other fields, it made big changes. A major effort was made to redistribute income: agricultural subsidies and support prices were increased, minimum wages rose, and the result was a considerable rise in the incomes of both peasants and workers. The consequent increase in consumption mopped up all eXCess .; capacity in local manufacture, and a healthy industrial boois
182
4
.
aN


Hoe! Fhe Centre Union in Power (1963-5)
_ soon replaced the chronic stagnation of the industrial sector. The fact was that the Right had been too conservative in its monetary policy. Though it had provided the economy with a considerable modern infrastructure, private investment had remained stuck in housing or simply in land speculation, to the detriment of manufacture in particular. By contrast, the Centre was thoroughly Keynesian. Income redistribution was seen as a tool of effective demand stimulating domestic consumption. And indeed expansion was very rapid. In 1965, for the first time, the value of industrial output surpassed that of agricultural production. _ ~-Inm another sector, too, the Centre’s economic policy broke with that of ERE. Different ideas about foreign investment prevailed. After difficult negotiations, the terms agreed by ERE regarding the two biggest foreign ventures — the Pechiney aluminium development and the Esso-Pappas chemical complex — were revised and new terms, more advantageous for Greece, were imposed. On the whole, the economic policy pursued in the first period of the Centre Union government did not alienate the Greek ' bourgeoisie. Business was good and profits were high. The ’ system of fiscal and tariff privileges was maintained, the credit system was eased, the rate of economic expansion went up to - about 8 per cent in real terms, and prices were kept steady. - On the other hand, Papandreou’s policy towards the ‘parallel’ structureof power became extremely suspect in the eyes _ of the Right. Within a few months, a climate of freedom had been almost completely restored. Coercion by the police - and gendarmerie virtually disappeared, a number of extremist - right-wing bands were dissolved, the majority (but not all) /of the political prisoners were released, and the ‘certificate of national probity’, though officially maintained, fell into _ disuse. The results of the liberalization were enormous. Political democracy was at last functioning again, for the first time since 1935 a full thirty years since the Right had taken over. An unprecedented ferment of ideas, debates, political and cul: tural activities created a totally new climate. Among students, | professionals, workers and peasants alike, a universal eager


ness & join in working out new ee _ lems almost shook the foundations of soci
iituted, for all its shortcomings and conibadictinna a grea step forward which stirred up the swampy waters of Gree’ education. The creation of a third University in Patras, an the plan for the establishment of two others in Crete an Epirus, gave a great impetus to the antiquated cultural and educational scene. Compulsory~schooling was extended from six to nine years and free school meals in all primary schools. in the countryside (partly supplemented with limited scholar
_ tic in a country where poor parents would rather use their © children’s labour. Of all Papandreou’s reforms, by far the most popular was the chance seen by the peasants for theirchildren to become ‘civilized human beings’. (Free school © meals and the extension of the leaving age were both abolished __ by the colonels directly after the 1967 coup.) Papandreou also tried to establish a free trade union movepeorat ment by changing the structure of the General Confederation Y _ of Labour. He promulgated a law making representation pro-‘portional to the numbers of actual membership. The effect would be to liberate the unions from twenty years of control _ from above. Though the U S-dominated ICFTU (International Confederation of Free Trade Unions) intervened and managed - to modify the reform, a degree of genuine representation. wa: achieved for the first time. The thorough change in the political atmosphere quickly stimulated a radical mood among both peasants and workers _ A widespread movement of wage claims and demands soon got going, and although the OES was not openly wean
tions ook nase The cBeemaniat s attitude was much more liberal than that of its predecessor, but a number of serious
184


iewas Beiaiyine at least some of the grievances which had ept the Left united for so long. This intensified the fears of ne Right, as it was becoming more and more obvious that he Centre Union would be gradually pushed by pressure from low. Under the leadership of the Prime Minister’s son Andas, an economist» who had been a professor in the USA, a werful left wing developed within the Centre Union, press
or a determined reform policy was still in its early ‘stages. But it was quite clear to the Right. that the mounting pressure
Fonly lead sooner or later to the Centre Union adopting a radi"cal policy. Sy Ehe’ personal ambitions of many Centre Union politicians, who had hoped to succeed the ageing Prime Minister, con5 verged with the Establishment’s growing suspicions of the wly defined role of Andreas Papandreou. Threats that the party would split if Andreas were not discouraged eventu
ad to be involved in a transaction concerning the assign; ent of a large research project to a personal friend, an all
t attack by the Right and some of his colleagues compelled
‘ F , Ben f
to resign from his post of Deputy Minister for Co-. ordination. It was the first time since the war that a Minister resigned because of being implicated in a ‘scandal’, in a
s were involved in extremely shady transactions. Probably
egood than harm. owever, the government did not push hard at vital points. i ood firm in dealing with the epiphenomena of the police but did not attack its foundations except eee
185
g for more vigorous reforms. The struggle within the party |
had an effect on the Prime Minister. After Andreas was
ntry where it was common knowledge that many politi- ip
this reason, Andreas Papandreou’s prestige scarcely suf- © | from the incident. In later events, his dismissal did him 
of social demands, released by political liberalization, could _


ei unions, the most important weapot ‘ Army, stronghold and last resort of the system 0°
Th was for fear of pushing ihe Palace too ae hat : Papandreou committed his fatal ee Not ie did h sf
to take part in the ‘intransigent struggle’ which ‘overthrew ‘Karamaniis. It seems that the appointment of this ea }
é King but was ‘offered’ by Papandvesd as a gesture ei ena Papandreou obviously had not fonone Kane)Pa
i anone the patitica world. “I belong to you ad you below me,’ he had said. From what followed, it is obvious: that i _ Was not a ‘facon de parler’.
Jowance was almost doubled, the Queen- Mother Freder: (whose allegedly nefarious influence on royal “politics hac ‘ iven rise to a widespread demand to cut short her prime)


; ca gh in the etertial Liberal dilemma of phelber to were or about the challenge from the Left or the pressure from ight, his position was being slowly and steadily underned. His increasingly independent foreign policy, shown the Cyprus impasse, was arousing second thoughts among officials, who found him less malleable than they had exed. Though his loyalty to NATO and the Western alliance ; unchanged, it was clear that the Centre could not be isted to obey orders unquestioningly as ERE had in the © - past. Papandreou’s refusal to accept the NATO solution for prus was not his only sign of independence. He took meaures to end the total dependence of the Greek secret serices on the CIA. He refused to allow the Greek Army to ke part in the NATO military training exercises in August 64. He could not or would not prevent the pro-government ress from showing a strongly anti-American spirit. He sat back while Makarios accepted Communist weapons. Finally, spite strong NATO pressure, he planned to reduce miliary expenditure ~ American displeasure with political developments was ineased by the fact that the growing consciousness of class iterests, in quarters that had formerly been docile, threated not only to destroy the electoral balance, but also to lour class antagonisms with a strong anti-American and y
tical stability. But in reality the crisis was deepening. The
Dpmovement for social and economic demands was ener :
d mili ary caren that will accept it? /
187


qo; berated’ audiences in both city and countryside. a} 3 The main social force behind Andreas was the mass e
moved far into pptitice during the ‘intransigent cane they now demanded a direct hand in the political game
' able to turn these hopes into reality, it wass quite different from the marginal and utopian social- democratic effortsof
ae It was the first sign that the ‘clientéle’ type of po cal representation could be done away with HY geth
- the development of a Giada a tinea whith i sole eyes was needed to put the policies they advocated into mane
see the objective factors which explained the emergence _ both the movement and its leader. They concentratedt
ment put down ae roots and that it truly ‘sepheadeited _realignment of social forces after the fall of the Right. . ~ this new element in Greek politics that contributed to Papandreou’ S gradual loss of control over his most il


a (and, with them, the‘two biesedt newspapers, -controlry Kokkas and Lambrakis). Thus, when he had later to gh the Palace, his party lacked both the cohesion that would e enabled him to stand his ground, and the self-confidence thad resulted from the overwhelming electoral victory.
€s, to take measures which produced growing fear among Establishment and US officials. The Cyprus imbroglio
in the beginning of 1965. This was the beginning of the crisis that was to lead to his fall. Fearing, or more probably under pretext of fearing, an eventual shift in Greek foreign policy towards more independence and perhaps neutralism, the and the Right reacted with unexpected violence. Kannelolos, who had succeeded Karamanlis in the leadership of ERE, demanded the removal of Papandreou by his own lieutenants and obliquely promised parliamentary support if such ove were carried out. The US also pressed, mainly through King, for the cancellation of the Moscow visit. Although ular reaction to ERE’s public proposal and US interven‘was widespread, Papandreou’s moderation avoided an ex
ie.We was, however, ay a temporary postponement of the SA striation. Andreas’s return to the government in April 1965, after extensive tours of the pained where he
ati NATO ‘stand Aaiihe the Cyprus crisis of the previous aer were now intensified. The Prime Minister refused to in to extremely strong pressure applied by President
ited Washington. The failure of the ‘little summit’ to solve enewed Cyprus crisis precipitated events., A number of io} eT agents swarmed into Athens with the object of
189
hus, through 1964, the Centre Union Government was | ng gradually obliged, by both foreign and domestic pres
n with the Palace. But the trip to Moscow was adjourned 2
on when, in the beginning of June, the Papandreous
Sa
gIaeaate
led Papandreou to accept an invitation to visit Moscow


accept parliamentary support from the Right. (For adeta 1 account see Rousseas, pp. 28-32.) Papandreou retaliated - all these attacks with the exposure. of the ‘Pericles’ plan, document in which the role of the Army in the electoral m: 1
is a this was the drop that overflowed Aesipitueerain 1 __ had been transformed from a potentially dangerous oppone
hunieated before his intervention inie pris became ff C' tive. ¢
reNeve its immediate purpose well. If Andreas did have some kind of connéxion with Army circles, Geonse Papandreou'
‘control could be discredited as an rice! to cover hisson’ ; _ ‘criminal’ activities. yeh


dpeontica |from the ee on 13 July. Despite hia isted on staying in charge of his ministry. Meanwhile, itic efforts were being made by the King’s private secre-'
‘dissidents to overthrow Papandreou ‘legally’. When ! eythought nage had arranged this ‘solution’, Constantine
tionof a new Defence Minister or to dismiss the officers. Papandreou replied by proposing to take over the Defence Ministry himself, a solution which the King flatly rejected on’ ‘the ‘moral’ grounds that this would impede the investigaons regarding Andreas. The Premier then threatened to Te
i asansoayied: Within Wo hours — and this shows some bullythe advance plans had been made — a new govern: ,


as to whether or not the King was within his formal cons ituet rights, it is beyond discussion that his action openly
‘a fatal blow at the already vastable Founda of ddnnene ; in Greece. By making the acceptability and viability government contingent upon the monarch’s will, the ciples of parliamentary democracy were abolished. _ Another by-product of royal intervention was |


i ay ( Ns
ost Loney Tules of the paclimentary game were
‘ical crisis was visible. It was decided to topple him herefore, he was dismissed. The attempts to find a Centrist 4 ecessor were made only to save whatever appearances could Il be saved. ee _ The defection of at least forty-five Centrist deputies was 1eeded in order to form an alternative parliamentary maity. It took three months to assemble them, one by one, a series of bargains unequalled in the history of the on. The number of ministerial posts was increased until very single defector could be promised and given one, in a party which consisted exclusively of ministers. However, when . job in the puppet government was not enough to tempt rospective “apostates’ (as the defectors came to be called), © ge sums of money were allegedly offered on the side. There “e of course, no concrete evidence of the extent of this last esort. of the royal clique, though a number of non-dissident deputies claim to have been approached. Though the extremely espreadas well as vigorous popular reaction (and proly faulty information) made the operation much more ult than anticipated, the salami method was finally wned with success. The third prospective Prime Minister, ~ tephanos Stephanopoulos, formerly Vice-Premier under | ’a andreou — who had solemnly declared only a few days arlier that he would never agree to form a government with-. pandreou’ 's consent — managed to achieve a parliamenmajority with the support of ERE. Though this majority : extremely weak oe to 148), the crisis was formally
nani ahitorsof ticcrisis, ‘the creation of an alternative Cen- fe rist | nent had proved far from easy. The King had lef his ow pn Prepon as an unforeseen eo had made
193


the plan ‘backfire: Unpreceaonee: vigo ; popular indignation impeded the fulfilmen
people daily manifested their unqualified fa against de tors and Palace alike. When Papandreou decided to _ through Athens in a ceremonial appeal to the people, centre of the capital was filled by one million spectators a the scene was less reminiscent of a political rally than of a Roman triumph. It is not, therefore, surprising that prosp tive defectors should suddenly find themselves less eager to abandon a fallen chief, who now was the object of popular igs idolatry. When Lambrakis, owner of the largest Centrist newspaper group (unrelated to the assassinated EDA deputy), and a confirmed Centre-Right backstage manipulator, attempted to shift his position as a prelude for the abandonment of a Papandreou, an angry crowd assembled around the press ma “4 __ hate’s headquarters and huge piles of newspapers were set on _. fire. Lambrakis, who was making a fortune by record news- a paper sales, gave in. Thus, for the first time in years, an authentic feedback process between political activity in the broad sense and popular pressure seemed to be functioning. It was this unexpected element of direct mass participation that more than an thing else endangered the royal plan. It is beyond doubt th t the activity of the masses was to a significant extent due to . the militant spirit of EDA and especially to the Left youth | organizations, who tirelessly swarmed in the centre of Athe: day after day, supporting Papandreou in his struggle. But the _ Left was only part of the active vanguard of a much more general and varied mass movement. The bulk of Papandreot ¥ supporters during this period were the solid core of Cent voters. Their violent reaction was directed against the flagrant violation of democratic principles. If social connotations _ and anti-American (anti--NATO) feelings were in the air, the _ movement was not in the least subversive. It was the re- establishment and consolidation of popular sovereignty they | were after, not a change of regime. But for the Be thtei
194 : s


by a split in the Centrist electorate. Though the ‘apostates’ quickly organized themselves into a new party (called the _FIDIK), their appeal was almost non-existent. Powerful polif:ticians, who for many years had enjoyed great popularity both ' locally and nationally, suddenly found themselves devoid of ) any popular support. The furious attacks by the puppet 4‘government against the malpractices of the Papandreou ad' ministration were totally ineffective in the eyes of public opinion, not so much because the defectors themselves had - occupied important posts in the Papandreou government, but ' mainly because of the despicable manoeuvres that had led ‘to ' its fall, plus the fact that these attacks were seen as pretexts. _ Papandreou himself, on the contrary, was absolved from his sins and mistakes. No concrete criticism of his inadequacies ' could be effective any more in breaking his image. Whereas his contradictory administration had seriously diminished his redibility if not his popularity, his dismissal had made him ‘into a popular hero. The ‘apostates’ could never hope to ‘become anything else than what they had been in the beginning: an interim puppet government, a pawn in the royal game, a stage between Papandreou and a true Royalist government, _ The King had in fact burned too many bridges. In addition ‘to his direct involvement in the party struggle, he had en_ deavoured to become the ideological leader of the Right “Communism is a miasma born outside Greece and directed from abroad. Its ethic is lying and treachery. It corrupts and turns into an unforgivable enemy of the fatherland everyone ho comes into contact with it.’ This incredible statement was. ronounced by the King in his New Year’s address to the ation on 1 January 1966, a mere three months after his pupet government had achieved its precarious parliamentary ajority and when moderation was preached by all sides. The repercussions of the political crisis were therefore even
195


_ radical movement of which Andreas became the spokesman
:3
gute nefarious for the monarchy. Bytheeee.
prospective successors who had been annoyed by his rise. Although the Centre Union parliamentary group was still far i _ from anxious to adopt a more progressive policy, Andreas was _ the only remaining personality with any stature and appeal. Thus, the party’s orientation was affected by the coincidence
Papandreou tried to mollify the mounting wave of radical
pletely to the public sector.... Heavy industry should in general be public, while light badsay should be private..
eliminate conspicuous consumption and luxury imports
Broa was the conservativescien sumelicale weaken but a, the field was left relatively open for the further advancement se of Andreas Papandreou after the defection of most of the
Opposition to the foundations of the socio-economic struc_ ture: ‘I believe that the country’s infrastructure, transport -and communications, credit, and education must belong com- _
;
sla
It is imperative that efforts should be made to reduce or evenee
of extended and radicalized popular pressure with the rise of “ Andreas as unrivalled Crown Prince. Even though George 
;
ism, Andreas’s statements became increasingly clear in their
Wi ‘)
4
it is necessary to stop granting monopoly charters in ordemr e
in power had based their profiteering was endangered. If the 
was by no means socialist, in the Western European sense,it 
functioning within a context of modern rationality and tocut down their fiscal privileges and class advantages. The French-type economic planning he desired to put forward 4 : would canalize investments (both private and public) with ar someAe to longer- term social and economic oe asa
to attract business investment from abroad.’ aii It was obvious that the whole system on which the groups 
;
_ most definitely intended to force the Greek ruling class into q q


King’ S hasor Colonels’ Coup? (1965-7)
Bey Ps doubted whether Andreas could have actually suc_ ceeded in carrying out the programme he envisaged. A policy 3of rationalization would have met serious resistance, not only _ from the network of vested interests, but also from the middle classes, whose inclination to patterns of luxurious consumption would be difficult to reverse. Regardless, however, of the ‘practicability of such a policy, its firm promotion had dis'rupted the implicit gentleman’s agreement between the Right _ and the Centre that had been observed even during the ‘intransigent’ struggle of 1961-3. Panayiotis Kanellopoulos, leader of ERE, had openly stated in 1964 that ‘there are no serious ideological differences between ERE and the Centre 'Union, the divergencies being mainly due to incompatibilities =of ... attitude.” This was certainly no longer the case after ' the ousting of Papandreou. The key political conflict was ncw filled with very concrete:social and economic implications. As _ Andreas put it: ‘The Centre Union was no longer simply the 'party of political democracy. It was becoming the basic force for national change.’ _ In short, the aims of the royal intervention met with failure. The government party, FIDIK, represented nothing at all. Though the ‘apostates’ stayed in power for over a year, and pursued a policy of unrestrained demagogy to establish some kind of popular basis, the political polarization was so acute :hat they could look forward to winning votes only at the ex“pense of ERE, on whose support the government depended ' for its day-to-day existence. As the constitutional deadline for w elections approached, it became increasingly obvious that Centre Union had not only maintained but strengthened itsposition. The new element of clear class antagonism that ibued the political struggle added to the difficulties of the oc in power. Because of this factor, any further attempt to plit the Centre ‘from above’, even if successful, could only nave the same nil effects as the previous ones. Hence, so long as a focus of resistance to the royal game emained firm around George Papandreou, he was bound to
197


which had-led to the Centre’s politica ph i i Though Papandreou had explicitly rejected any collaboration / with the Left, and was adamant in refusing to drop even a about the possibility of a People’s Front, an effective People’s | Front was in fact formed from below. For increasing numbers of EDA supporters were gradually convinced, in con tradiction to the official EDA line, that the Centre would carry out those structural reforms which they themselves k wanted. There was, therefore, very little that could be done to break the increasingly solid class alliance. At least 65 per cent of the population were immovable in their decision to. By ote against the royal interventionists, and only an insignifi-af cant fraction of them could be controlled by EDA. Hence, no 4 _ electoral system could possibly get the Right back to power. } ___ Even a renewal of the terrorism in the countryside could 4 ‘not guarantee a repetition of the 1961 results. For the situation was by now completely different. Two years of vigorous ig
}
' political activity in a climate of freedom had enormously in- _ creased the potential for active or moral resistance to police_ oppression. Also, though the Stephanopoulos government. re- 4 ‘voked most of Papandreou’s measures ‘of. democratization i—q (for example, it officially reintroduced the ERE system of control of the trade unions), it hesitated to use the full poten- tial of the revived ‘parallel state’ for fear of simply playing —) the game of ERE, which was in direct contradiction to its own )electoral interests. It was consequently very doubtful if ‘the:45
Seare‘Right could win the forthcoming election. The majority of _ the bourgeoisie, which by now had totally aligned itself with -j _ the Right, was panic-stricken. With every day that passed, the margin for further manoeuvres ‘became narrower. Though actually fotine the positions of power, the Right felt com-A pletely cornered. The parliamentary game had been 'be ¥ and lost. 3 Throughout 1966, it was stalemate. Stephanopoulie con tinued to preside over the puppet government, while Papan ~dreou demanded immediate elections. Meanwhile, the rift w.
rr.
198


King’ s Coup or Colonels’ Coup? (1965-7)
“year,ve far-reaching political effects. In the trial of the murderers of the EDA deputy Lambrakis, which had been pending for over three years, the connivance of the gendarmerie and police authorities. was totally proved. Though the enior gendarmerie officers, in the end, were convicted only if “abuse of power’ and not of complicity in murder, the course of the trial was such that even right-wing papers had deplore the situation in the gendarmerie. (These men were ll rehabilitated by the colonels, while the judge who had conducted the investigation was discharged and arrested.) | The even more important ASPIDA trial, in which Andreas 4 Papandreou was accused by implication, failed still more " conspicuously to hit its target. The authorities soon found them_ selves cornered, since no evidence whatever could be pro_ duced against ‘any one of the defendants. On the contrary, ' day after day, fantastic revelations about the structure and functioning of the military secret services exposed, not the 4 defendants, but the plot that had been concocted against them. An elaborate system of tapping ministers’ telephones on be“half of the KYP (the Greek CIA) was exposed;.a plot against the life of George Papandreou, which had only failed for accidental reasons, was brought to light; and two officers revealed that they had been offered large sums of money to “give false evidence, in order to implicate Andreas in a Nasserstyle conspiracy. For the first time, it was shown how far the ‘secret services had penetrated into all state activities. The affair was clearly taking a bad turn. Accordingly, the court ent into closed session on the pretext that important state secrets would be disclosed. But the harm had been done, and est did not subside. When the chief defendants were sen_tenced to longer prison terms than Lambrakis’s murderers, a sie pected a peak. Instead of being anya: the
aie) 199


radical path which the party was now takial could no definition, backfire. If Papandreou were willing to pure
a compromise whereby he would evento return to po in collaboration with the Right and with the King’s blessi then the Palace would have achieved its primary aim — to ke aiepee control Ae the ultimate sources of power. But wha
'— the elderly ex-Premier could not afford to play the cae "i _ freely. He himself was, to a certain extent, the prisoner of theirresistible mass movement that he was leading. He also had to face the problem of the growing authority of Andreas, _ who had proved that he would not hesitate, if need be, to go i alone. Despite strong US pressure, Andreas refused to take part in any move toward compromise. At this point, through the intervention of Christos Lam brakis, the Centre-Right press magnate, a concrete plan was put forward for an escape from the dilemma. Believing thai the King would never allow a radical Centre Union to return ~ to power (rumours of an ultimate military take-over had bee s systematically spread since 1965), Lambrakis advocated a _ policy of eliminating the Centre-Left and Andreas. Thi would inevitably lead to weakening the electoral strength of the Centre infavour of the Left, which would consist of B and, hopefully, of Andreas, who might be pushed towart Left. In this way, elections could be held which would give _ party an absolute majority, thus forcing George Papandreou _ into coalition with the Right. Lambrakis would also be abl to promote his own favourite, George Mavros, as successor O ute ageing Papandreou and achieve his aim ofSe, the
ee Goi the strengthening of the Left and the CentreLeft 0 be facediin due course. E é ;


_ King’s Coup or Colonels’ Coup? (1965-7)
In this connexion, a series of secret negotiations took place ) toward the end of the year. Whether because he really be) lieved in the threat of a military coup organized by the King, or because he was scared by the radical turn that his party was taking, George Papandreou agreed to a compromise.’ _ The main clause of the agreement was that Papandreou was to support, together with ERE, an interim non-political “government designated by the King and was further to refrain from any attacks against.the Palace. The involvement of the King in the political controversy would thus cease, while the "joint support of a royal government by the Centre and the Right alike would alienate a large enough part of the radical‘ized electorate to exclude the possibility of a clear majority ‘for the Centre. In that case (the agreement ran further) a specific obligation was undertaken by the Centrist leader to form a coalition government with ERE without calling for ') new elections. An electoral reform was also agreed, favouring ‘the large parties, the Centre and ERE and penalizing the small ones, EDA, the ‘dissidents’ and, possibly, Andreas, in case he decided to run his own party. '» But the plan became known, under mysterious circumstances, to Constantine Mitsotakis, the most powerful personality “among the ‘dissidents’. The success of the plan would practic) ally wipe out the ‘defectors’, whose only chance lay in holding the parliamentary balance. Consequently, both George and Andreas Papandreou were warned that the agreement would be published unless withdrawn. Despite the warning, however, ‘the elder Papandreou went ahead with the scheme. ERE withdrew its parliamentary support and the Stephanopoulos government was obliged to resign.A royal government under the Governor of the Bank of Greece, Paraskevopoulos, was worn in (20 December) and was supported by both ERE and
i The prospects of the plan now depended on Andreas’s reaction. Having gathered around him about forty deputies, he igorously attacked his father. The latter threatened to expel em all from the party. But while the Right held its breath, crisis in the party subsided as quickly as it had arisen.
201


_ Andreas desided to yield to formal P rt : port Paraskevopoulos, But not only did he
- George Papandreou was published in Eleftheria by its edito Kokkas, Misotakis’s alter ego, on 1 January 1967, it only serve - to invigorate Andreas. The substance of the plan had failed. The _ Centre Union was as intact as ever, Andreas’s position was ‘ strengthened both vis-a-vis his father and in public opinion, th King had not been disentangled and he was now committed to new elections. The future composition of the Centre Union» parliamentary group promised to be much more radical and_ the impending elections, for all the elder Papandreou’s hesitancy and renewed moderation, would bring the Centre back__ to power stronger than ever. Not unreasonably,, anxiety gave _ way to panic. For King, Army and oligarchy it was becoming more and more obvious that the continuation of formal de- mocracy would lead to the collapse of the. edificeit had takencm the Right so many years to build. 4
i thei iecenork of the Right. A significant part of ERE aie y ‘the leadership of Panayiotis Kanellopoulos seemed to b against a non-parliamentary bid for power. While they were ready to use the full potential of the ‘parallel state’ apparatus. i: in order to tip the electoral balance in their favour, they we not bie aeto disrupt the formal constitution | orde
202


be exact intentions of the King are still unclear. It has established beyond any reasonable doubt that a military ym under the King himself, with the cooperation of a significant part of ERE, was being envisaged as a possible solution, © d that the mechanism of such a move had been carefully pared on the basis of the NATO plan ‘Prometheus’, dened to counter Communist aggression. But it is still not ttain whether the coup had been definitely decided upon | d a date fixed. What has been firmly maintained is that 6 question of whether and when to press the button was ‘main topic on the agenda of a meetingof senior Generals der the chairmanship of the King, which had been planned or 21 April 1967— on which date, as we now know, the actual c up was carried out. t also remains very unclear hat the so-called ‘royal coup’ d have amounted to. In February, a top-secret meeting s held in Washington, where representatives of the King d the Greek Army discussed with US officials the possibies of an Army take-over in Greece; but no operational ision was reached, Walt Rostow, who seems to have preover the meeting, is quoted as having closed it with the iphic words: ‘I hope you ‘understand, gentlemen, that aat we have concluded, or rather failed to conclude, makes ‘uture course of events in Greece inevitable’ (Rousseas, Death of a Demagogue, p. 59). But, if the King vacillated between an immediate coup and.
none the less determined not to let the situation escape his Cc. L. Sulzberger, ‘special correspondent of the New imes ‘and a personal friend of King Constantine, ‘Constantine himself resolved months ago that he
‘do everything possible to prevent his country from
ver the cliff; that if he felt the extreme Left was likely
ze Greece’s regime and policy, he would act by any
- 203.
t attempt to resolve the crisis in a constitutional way, he


to avert ‘disaster’. He may ‘have still clung to the ‘hops j Papandreou would not win an absolute majority, and tha i conciliatory compromise would then be reached. After all, the Centre Union did return to full power, he could always: carry out a coup afterwards. Only three weeks before th - coup of 21 April, he refused to yield to Army pressure for th immediate imposition of a dictatorship, despite the insistence of the newly appointed Chief of Staff, Spandidakis (later VicePresident of the First ‘revolutionary’ government). Thus, the King’s objections to dictatorship were not a matter of prin ciple. If he obviously overestimated his veto power over th _. Army, he did nothing to ensure his authority. Having given the green light to the preparation of a military take-over plan he certainly failed to see the consequences of freeing th officers from their scruples. We cannot know whether his repeated assurances to George Papandreou that elections wou c _ definitely take place were wilful deception or naive over-con- fidence. It is a fact that he was under constant pressure from the Army to act. The election campaign was to open on 2 April. If the King was hesitant, others were not. The coup w carried out on 21 April. | Dae fa i of journalistic information have. been pean
a Wihatne it for a long time. Though this replacement was: later to have immeasurable effects in the shaping of the new regime, the actual Army take-over was in essence. consistent _ _ with the royal plan. The reasoning behind the envisaged coup and the coup which happened was the same: the election.had to be prevented. Moreover, what made the execution of the plan objectively possible was the prevalence of the idea that/ the King was ready to take over. The putsch was made iin ‘thoe ‘King’s name, and for the first twelve crucial hours the royal acceptance was credible enough to ensure the acceptance ithe (a accompli. Finally, the. King did spot the ¢


e eilanes:of the Gaionels! According to Der Spiegel, ch has yet to be proved wrong in its facts, it was Queenother Frederika who tipped the balance of Constantine’s. itancy. “Shut up and sign,’ she is quoted as oe him. didboth. there is very sparse information about how the colonels’ was conceived, organized and executed. But the answers e numerous questions that arise would not greatly affect n ‘evaluation of what happened. There is nothing unique mut a military conspiracy by a few men taking advantage sonditions objectively favouring a coup. An analysis of ‘these men did after they seized power, and how they e managed to keep it, is another matter; but to investigate we should need more information than we possess. Of amount importance, however, is the role of foreign powers their secret services in the conception and execution of oup. Unfortunately, but for obvious reasons, informaa about the CIA’s active role is very inadequate. It is only gh bits and pieces that we can gain an insight into the course of events. It is: common knowledge that contemary events are wrapped in greater secrecy than ever, at: ; in their operational details. Thus, we can deduce the key > ofthe CIA only from a few scraps of evidence and from ore general, and necessarily theoretical, train of logic. at we do know is that for many years a fundamental hotomy has been obvious in US policy in Greece, as in er countries of immediate strategic value to the US. On epend, diplomatic influences have represented a more ss liberal tendency, especially since the Kennedy adation, and have refrained, so it seems, from open ination in Greek domestic affairs. On the other hand, the agon and the CIA have followed their own independent ies, governed by narrower military and cold-war stanThe friction that has existed since 1947 between these centres of US policy in Greece gradually led to virtual ‘contact between ‘official’ and “unofficial” activity.
on ane ie 205


18 CIA activities i nn Greece were not chaarialied ole through: CIA agents. The Greek ‘State Information Agency’ (K was infiltrated by the CIA to the extent that even its finan was guaranteed by a direct allocation of US funds, free’ any control by the Greek government. Formally, this state o: _ affairs was changed under the Centre Union government; bu it is very doubtful whether the replacement of a number a senior officers was enough to dismantle a whole complex activities that had functioned for over ten years, with stan: - dards of allegiance other than to the lawful Greek government. The declared aim of Andreas Papandreou to uproota foreign infiltration in the Greek secret service was a goo - reason for making him entirely unacceptable to the CIA. can be no coincidence that Colonel Papadopoulos, the ‘brain behind the coup, and a significant number of what. is now ‘the ruling junta of Greece, were KYP men who had been - working with the US secret services for many years! So itis highly unlikely that the CLA was not involvedin the solutiory _ chosen for the 1967 crisis. ae _ It is known that Richard Barnum, a ieCIA. agent w had played an important rolein the ousting of Papandreou : _ July 1965, was back in Athens by the beginning of 1967. H ; _ operated through the Esso—Pappas concern, whose interests were at stake as the huge contracts signed with the puppet _ government were questioned by the Centre Union. Pappas himself did not make a secret of his belief. that Gree oe _ ‘needed’, a military dictatorship. It has been further established that the Boston Pappas Foundation, run by Pappas’sfl brother, was a conduit for CIA money destined for Greece.
success of the coup. The contracts of Feceswerecoral repnays favour soon afterwards. Another detailmight a i
andthe main financial decker ofSpiro” Agnew,“Nixon's obDb


nee of the Greek Army on the Gesnctous inflow of US plies. The integration of the Greek Army in NATO, while tly fortifying its striking power, made it permanently ndent on the United States. It is thus highly improbable
dy at the Same time. Considering that the reaction of the g@ Was perhaps not certain, the colonels must have made
ihe US military authorities. It is also noteworthy that the ‘advent of the dictatorship led to an immediate resumption of @ conciliatory policy towards Turkey, designed to solve the iblem of Cyprus which had been simmering uncomfortably
sn
t the US could make good use of a government so totally pendent on them that it was to American advantage to help
Greece was purely a product of US intervention. If it were ble to isolate the significant element in the abolition of
mising attitude of the circle of vested interests towards any ge inthe antiquated and irrational socio-economic struces. The state within the state that has never stopped tioning since 1945 was made possible by British and subseently US policy: but in its essence it was the offspring of a urgeoisie that refused to give up. its medieval_privileges. The wave of popular indignation was bound to rise against the nmsome time. The Communist uprising in 1946-9 was unsuccessful vehicle for popular demands. But antiCommunism could not function as the permanent and eternal
y arrived in 1964, the bourgeoisie was confronted with ‘undamental dilemma. Hither they could give in, or they esist with force. The choice of the latter course was
i
_ 207
t is of course ridiculous to maintain that the dictatorship
mocracy in Greece, there is no doubt that it is the uncom
pon to contain any pressure for change. When the crisis |
t the authors of the coup could have dared to bluff every
‘sl re that they would at least enjoy the camouflaged support of |
the US for three years. The inference may well be drawn ~


The Greek Tragedy
probably inevitable in view of the power structure and ideological inclinations of the Greek ruling class. When Papandreou was ousted in 15 July 1965, it was already the beginning of the end. Twenty-one months later, the process had reached it: logical conclusion,




Tn me
published by Penguin Books
The suspension of ordinary liberties and the resulting political and cultural suffocation are all too familiar to the Greek people, for since the revolution of 1821 they have seldom been able to create the conditions for a stable parliamentary democracy. Strategically Greece is a gateway between Europe and Asia, through which has marched a succession of invading armies. And politically the frequent interventions of the monarchy and the constant juggling of parties and personalities have engendered an atmosphere of mistrust in which dictatorship can be imposed by the army as an alternative to Communism or instability — and even as a guarantee of firm government.
In this Penguin Special a Greek lawyer now studying in Paris presents an anatomy ofthe current Greek crisis, and relates it to an unhappy history of intervention and repression. Constantine Tsoucalas’s moving book portrays,inhistorical perspective, the full anguish of contemporary Greece.
Cover design by Brian Mayers
United Kingdom 30p 6/Australia $1.00 i New Zealand $0.85 South Africa RO.75 Canada $1,25