152
The discussion so far suggests that IFC represented an era of recovery and restoration of the credibility for the economies of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Serbia and Greece as evidenced by recovery of cost of borrowing, bond spreads and access to international markets. Moreover,I examined the turning points in the history of sovereign risk of each country and highlighted the role of political, monetary, institutional and other factors in explaining the historical trends. However, so far I have not dealt with the mechanisms through which IFC led to a decline in the sovereign risk nor have I attempted to explain the differences in the degree of recovery and success among the cases. This chapter provides a comparative picture of the political and fiscal institutions of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Greece and Serbia before 1914 and puts forward a framework to interpret the different ways that IFC functioned in each case. The historical trends in bond spreads across time were examined in the previous chapter. As for variation across countries, the differences may be attributed to a wide range of factors including among others international political context, global business cycles, macroeconomic performance of each country and institutional context. Therefore, providing a complete answer to this question would necessitate going beyond these four countries, accounting for the developments in other major borrowers and lenders – hence offering a broader picture of the pre-1914 capital flows and financial globalisation. This is beyond the scope of this chapter and the book. Instead, based on the historical discussion provided so far, I aim to highlight potentially an important determinant, which may explain significant differences in bond spreads across four countries after the foundation of IFC: fiscal and political context within which each IFC operated.
8
Resistance vs Cooperation: Political Economy of International Financial Control


Political Economy of International Financial Control 153
This analysis has broader implications since focusing on the interplay between IFC and political and fiscal institutions raises some interesting questions. More specifically, the chapter explores the role of IFC in determining the fiscal capacity, and at the same time, it tackles the question of how existing political institutions facilitated or hindered the working of IFC. In Section 8.1, I review the historical and conceptual literature in order to arrive some working hypotheses. I then discuss the role of political regime, tax systems, interplay between borrowing and taxation, and “alien rule” as potential links between state capacity and IFC before 1914. In Section 8.2, I provide a comparative picture of fiscal performance of the four representative countries of the Middle East and the Balkans both before and after the foundation IFC around these themes. In explaining the differences among each case, I argue that when IFC worked in harmony with local governments, it had significant positive impact on credibility reflected as recovery in both level and speed of bond spreads. On the contrary, if the defaulting country consistently resisted the “advice” and supervision of IFC and delayed fiscal and institutional reforms, the financial markets reacted negatively – reflected as a decline in bond prices and rise in bond spreads. In Section 8.3, I aim to show that the extent of penetration of IFC into the fiscal sovereignty of the defaulting country and the degree of local political cooperation with foreign creditors were a function of fiscal structure and political regimes of each country. In other words, the interplay between central governments, parliaments, local elites and taxpayers acted as either a constraint to resist against the control of foreign creditors or an incentive to cooperate with them.
8.1 Fiscal capacity, political regimes and tax systems: a review
The historical literature on state formation suggests that the ability of states to raise revenue via taxation is a key characteristic in explaining the rise of modern states. Given the links between state capacity and economic growth, more recently economists and political economists have paid particular attention to model the determinants of fiscal and legal capacity of states. Specifically in development economics and public finance, the role of credible commitment in fiscal institutions is closely examined with reference to developing countries’ autonomous revenue administrations and fiscal councils. Given that an important


154 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
role of IFC was to collect and transfer part of “revenues” of debtor states of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Serbia and Greece to foreign creditors, it is necessary to consider each of these arguments in the context of our discussion. In other words, in search of transmission mechanism between IFC and reinstated credibility, this section highlights the links between fiscal capacity and “fiscal arrest” introduced by IFC. In assessing these links, the key question I ask is whether IFC contributed to the consolidation and centralisation of fiscal regimes of the host countries, or in more general terms, whether the impact of IFC on fiscal capacity of debtor states was positive or not. In this section, I first aim to provide a concise overview of this historical and theoretical literature, then to discuss IFC in a comparative perspective to address the questions stated above.
8.1.1 Political regime type and fiscal capacity
In explaining the determinants of fiscal capacity, perhaps one of the most controversial arguments, which has attracted the attention of economists, political scientists and historians, is the impact of political regime type, whether being representative or authoritarian, on the ability of states to raise revenue. Conceptually perhaps the biggest difficulty is to establish the direction of causality in explaining the historical correlation between “taxation” and “representation.” For the purpose of our case studies, this point is important, as the political and fiscal institutional context in which IFC operated differed significantly from case to case. IFC did not only represent a case of taxation without representation, but also the degree of political representation of each country, within which they operated, showed a variation. The origin of this debate can be traced back to the seminal work of Schumpeter (1918), who is considered to be the founder of “fiscal sociology.” Schumpeter viewed fiscal history as an entry point to understand the history of state and social life. According to his interpretation, the historical transition from a feudal system to a modern “tax state” took place due to increasing needs of feudal princes to finance wars. As the war pressure increased, the feudal prince started meeting his demand of funds with borrowing and when that came to an end, the prince turned to the estates with a view that wars were not his personal affairs but a “common exigency.” Hence, “out of this ‘common exigency’ the state was born,” as it imposed a general tax duty on estates.1 This gave way to the eventual transformation of the “patrimonial” rights of the prince, as he was no longer just a landowner of his property but “now he was the state.”2 In transition to the “tax state,” the rising expenditures were


Political Economy of International Financial Control 155
now met with funds extracted from taxpayers, and the government no longer sustained itself by resources derived from its own property.3 Schumpeter’s ideas not only helped the emergence of fiscal sociology as a social discipline, but also they influenced the succeeding research on state formation. In debating the determinants of fiscal capacity, the seminal contribution by Tilly (1990) took Schumpeter’s arguments to a new level. A key factor in explaining the differences across Europe in fiscal capacity and state formation, he argued, is the role of interstate warfare, which served as a driving force behind changes in military technology and centralisation of political apparatus. In other words, the drive to build and maintain armies created pressure to reform the fiscal, military and administrative structures of the state – summarised neatly in the expression that “war made the state, and the state made war.”4 Although the focus of Schumpeter and Tilly was the ability of states to raise revenue, this framework has had wider implications in terms of analysing the interactions and causality between political regimes and fiscal capacity. Others, following Tilly (1990), suggest that the financial pressure created by wars not only gave way to the rise of fiscal capacity but also helped the formation of representative institutions. Recent studies in fiscal sociology especially highlight two important characteristics of the state-building process. The first one is the emergence of a social contract based on negotiation and bargaining around tax – a key issue in the emergence of representative political institutions, namely democracy. The second one is the institution-building incentive provided by the revenue drive, which enhances the state capacity. It is argued that combined together these two characteristics increase the legitimacy of the state and accountability between the state and its citizens.5 Studies on long-term history of fiscal states echo these views. In transition to the “tax state,” the sovereign asked for help to finance wars, while his subjects demanded to take part in decisions to spend, which led to the emergence a new set of property rights and the creation of a competitive political environment. This process consequently produced the institutions of political representation. Historical case studies provide a more dynamic relationship between taxation and representation suggesting that “the revenue collected was higher and the costs were lower if there existed consensus on the part of the taxpayers. Lack of consent resulted in tax evasion and the fiscal uprisings that were common in Europe.” In other words, in the tax state the legitimacy became a key factor for the efficiency of the system.6


156 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
Despite the major methodological differences, these views complement the neo-institutionalist framework put forward by North and Weingast (1989), which suggest that the emergence of limited government gave way to a “financial revolution” resulting in an increase in the state capacity. As discussed previously, this view suggests that institutional change following the Glorious Revolution served as a credible commitment mechanism, increasing the ability to borrow. Moreover, state’s ability to enforce contracts that emerged with limited government is interpreted as enhanced legal capacity – a key component of state capacity. Whereas in Schumpeterian framework war pressure was the key determinant of “tax state”; in neo-institutionalist framework the “financial revolution” was the result of “limited government.” A recent line of research brings together these two strands of the literature by modelling interstate warfare as a public good problem. In an influential study by Besley and Persson (2010) “fiscal systems and marketsupporting legal institutions (particularly those fostering financial development) are jointly endogenous to a common set of economic, political, and social variables.”7 In this perspective, state capacity is seen as a combination of legal and fiscal capacity. The former is defined as a state’s ability to support market institutions, mainly financial development and contract enforcement. On the other hand, fiscal capacity is defined as the state’s ability to raise revenue. Several empirical studies put some of these hypotheses to the test in a systematic way by compiling an extensive historical dataset with a particular focus on early modern Europe. In a comparative study covering the period 1600–1914, Dincecco (2009) suggests that fiscally centralised and politically limited regimes were associated with significant increases in per capita revenues relative to fiscally fragmented and politically absolutist ones.8 Following the start of the French Revolution in 1789, the march towards fiscal centralisation gained pace in Europe and “national governments” began to secure revenues “by way of a tax system with uniform rates throughout the country.” The emergence of limited governments, took place mostly in the nineteenth century and introduced constraint over spending of rulers and also favoured fiscal centralisation.9 Karaman and Pamuk (2013), by employing a much more extensive dataset, go beyond core countries of Western Europe and include others like the Ottoman Empire, Russia and Poland in their analysis. Their main finding is that war pressure and urbanisation had a positive impact on fiscal capacity, whereas political regimes did not have any direct influence. The role of political regimes only mattered under the pressure of war as it determined the organisational capacity of elites.


Political Economy of International Financial Control 157
More specifically “it was authoritarian regimes in more rural economies and representative regimes in more urban economies that tended to better translate war into state-building” and increased fiscal capacity.10 This conclusion suggests that there was no linear path in establishing fiscal centralisation and strong fiscal capacity. In introducing a landmark volume on the rise of fiscal states consisting of historical case studies across Europe and Asia, Yun-Casallila (2013) also suggests “the crisis of the old regime and the rise [of] liberal society went hand-inhand” and it eventually gave way to the monopolisation of taxation by governments and fiscal centralisation.11 The case studies suggest that in the emergence of fiscal states, negotiation and trust in the functioning of fiscal systems was a common element. Although fiscal centralisation historically accompanied the formation of fiscal states, there was no centralisation without negotiation. Moreover, both parliamentary and fiscal institutions led to a greater social consensus and stability in collection of taxes and in the management of public debts. The importance of this debate for the purposes of interpreting IFC in the Middle East and the Balkans is twofold. First, both political and fiscal regimes in the region showed a variation. Therefore, it is important to explore whether the performance of IFC and local degree of cooperation varied in the presence of representative institutions and fiscal centralisation. Second, IFC in the region represented an unusual case of taxation without representation and negotiation with taxpayers. Therefore, it is essential to assess the performance of IFC as private and foreign taxcollecting agents separate from governments.
8.1.2 Taxation systems and fiscal capacity
Can the source of tax revenue be an important determinant of fiscal capacity? The earlier line of research on this question emphasised that although the economic development could explain major differences in levels of taxation between poor and rich countries, the development on its own fails to help us understand the differences among developing countries. Therefore, a potential factor, which may explain the variation in fiscal capacity among developing countries, is put forward as the source of tax revenues or what the tax is levied upon. A broad indicator used in the literature for this purpose is the relative share of indirect and direct tax revenues in overall revenues of government, where the direct taxes are levied on income and/or property and indirect taxes are imposed on exchange and/or goods.12 In his analysis of tax systems of a wide range of countries, Hinrichs (1965) emphasised that the major source of government revenue for


158 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
less developed countries was based on taxation of the foreign trade sector; in other words indirect taxes, “primarily due to their ‘ease of collection’.” Therefore, the openness of the economy and the size of the foreign trade sector were the key determinants of tax revenues in the less developed world. Moreover, foreign trade had spill-over effects and increased states’ ability to collect taxes in other sectors, mainly due to its contribution to the degree of monetisation, urbanisation, industrialisation and infrastructure.13 The importance of the revenue sources is also referred by Tilly (1990), who points out that different types of taxes that governments collected were closely linked to the monetisation of the economy and in terms of required surveillance the tax collector needed. In this framework, payments on indirect taxes (flows) heavily depend on monetisation level. Payments on direct taxes (stocks) also depend on monetisation; however, if there is no well-developed market for stocks, such as land, then it is difficult to assess the tax value – hence the taxing stocks would be inefficient. According to Tilly (1990) taxes on stocks yield a higher return for a given amount of effort at collection – given that the economy monetised. In other words, if a state is attempting to raise exactly the same amount of revenue from the same tax in a less commercialised economy it faces greater resistance and collects less efficiently, therefore it would need to build a larger apparatus of control. On the contrary, the more commercialised state, on average, would end up with a slimmer administrative organisation.14 Similarly, in the context of early modern Europe, Bordo and CortesConde (2001) suggest that indirect taxes became initially the major source of revenue for many states, as direct taxes demanded complex assessment mechanisms, while indirect taxes were easier to implement. As for nineteenth-century Europe, Lains and Cardoso (2010) point out that taxes were mainly indirect. In many cases, tariffs on international trade did not reflect any protectionist economic policy instead aimed to raise revenue. On the other hand, direct taxes were usually fixed and did not reflect the changes in output values or the economic cycle. Finally, echoing Hinrichs (1966), Neal (2010) also suggests that less developed countries with traditional economic structures would have limited access to direct taxation. In transition to a modern economy, the traditional tax system would transform: indirect taxes would steadily increase as the foreign trade expanded and the share of direct taxes would gradually go down. However, when the indirect taxes from trade would start restricting the income of merchants, there would be a reversal in the trend, and indirect taxes would slowly be replaced by direct taxes, especially by income tax, as the society breaks away from the old system. As


Political Economy of International Financial Control 159
a result, in modern society, direct taxes would constitute a more significant revenue source for states than the indirect taxes.15 The transition would also have implications for foreign debt, as the government would be faced with a budget deficit due to administrative costs of tax reforms, and foreign creditors would usually finance this gap. It is possible to test some of these hypotheses in the context of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Greece and Serbia, as the reliance on direct and indirect taxes varied significantly due to geographical differences, states’ ability to monitor collection and finally different degrees of monetisation and openness. An analysis of relative shares of direct and indirect taxes both before and after the foundation of IFC can also shed light on the relative success of IFC and the incentives of governments to cooperate with foreign creditors in the Middle East and the Balkans.
8.1.3 Political regime type and public debt
So far our discussion on the determinants of fiscal capacity has exclusively focused on taxation, which constitutes the key source of revenue for states. However, as shown in the previous chapter, especially in the context of the pre-1914 financial markets, sovereign debt was a key source of revenue for many peripheries including the countries of the Middle East and the Balkans. Therefore it is essential to explore the links between ability to tax, ability to borrow and political regimes. As referred previously in numerous occasions, from a new-institutionalist perspective, ability to borrow and state capacity are closely linked, since legal capacity enhances the government’s ability to borrow. Tilly (1990) also recognises the public debt as an important source of revenue and argues that if a government can borrow, they can spend ahead of their income, which can make war-making easier. If they can borrow quickly, they can mobilise resources faster than their enemies and increase their chances to win the war. The availability of credit depends on previous history of repayment and presence of capitalists as mobilisers of loans. An important dimension of this argument is the link between monetisation and public debt. The activity of capitalists to lend also promotes monetisation, which in turn increases the available credit in the economy. According to Tilly, the ability to borrow became more and more crucial to military success during the sixteenth century when the scale of war expanded.16 However, with the rise of liberal states in Europe after 1815, the acceptance of the public became a crucial factor for the success of the states and implementing the policies. At the same time, because of the decline in war spending, tax burdens went down in relatively developed countries. On the other hand, for peripheries,


160 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
military spending became proportionally greater, therefore the management of public debt became a major institutional challenge in the formation of fiscal states given the pressure from the public.17 In many cases, the public debt management also led to the creation of central banks and the development of financial markets where bonds and other assets were traded. In this framework the ability to borrow is seen as a function of ability to tax.18 Therefore the main issue faced by the traditional economies was the “management of the trade-off between the need to borrow and the capacity to tax.”19 Accordingly, the three main pillars of the modern fiscal state in nineteenth-century Europe were the ability to extract taxes, a scheme of government spending addressing the needs of the taxpayer and a credible management of public debt. The main challenge was to increase the taxation without compromising the social and political support and not to keep it too low so as to endanger the ability to service the debt. Hence, the successful fiscal states of Europe first reached a consensus between the bondholder and the taxpayer before creating the political institutions. In other words, there are close links between the emergence of fiscal states in Europe and building trust in sovereign debt, because centralisation of tax collection and democratic negotiation over taxable revenues are essential characteristics of the fiscal states.20 An important dimension of this debate is the link between type of political regime and the ability to borrow. With reference to early modern Europe, Stasavage (2007) tests two hypotheses which argue that European states with constitutional constraints over the executive authority could obtain credit at lower interest rates than states that lacked such constraints – generalising the findings of North and Weingast (1989).21 Furthermore, the analysis relies on the idea that merchants became a dominant group, compared to landowners, in decision-making given that they were the primary lenders to the state and city-states accessed credit more easily and at lower interest rates than larger territorial states. If merchants became the main decision makers, then they would prioritise servicing debt rather than choosing repudiation of the debt. Alternatively, depending on the case, if they did not have full decision-making power, they could impose significant political and economic costs if the sovereign declared a default. The novelty of this view is that the existence of representative institutions on its own is not enough to ensure credibility, as what matters is whether merchants constitute a majority within these institutions – which was not the case in larger territorial states where merchants made up a small fraction of political elite.22 In more general terms, constitutional checks and


Political Economy of International Financial Control 161
balances are neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for increasing credibility and reducing the risk of default. In the case of government borrowing, there is usually a division between owners of the debt and the taxpayers who service the debt. If the owners of the debt are a minority, then this will create commitment problems – unless other groups have incentives to support repayment in order to gain political support. Finally, under a representative regime rulers can delegate authority to individuals who are committed to pursuing a particular policy, which may have a positive impact on the credibility. In the context of public debt in early modern Europe, a ruler could give a group of officials the right to manage public revenues so as to ensure full debt repayment, and this bureaucratic delegation could reduce default risk. However, this would not be effective unless creditors had political power within a representative assembly, as rulers could easily change unilaterally delegation agreements.23 These historical findings provide a useful framework to consider the relationship between taxation and the public debt in the Middle East and the Balkans. Unlike many European countries, the Ottoman Empire, Serbia, Greece and Egypt did not face with the trade-off between taxation and borrowing, as their ability to borrow was restored by IFC. Moreover, given the degree of political development, the scope of liberal fiscal state was different in each case; and this affected the performance of IFC. As will be shown below, the consensus between the taxpayer and the government was about to be reached or already reached in the cases of Serbia and Greece, before defaults took place, therefore there was stronger opposition and resistance to IFC; whereas in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire there was no such consensus and no established presence of political representation. Hence, IFC worked in a relatively supportive environment in political terms. As for the delegation of public debt management to an independent agency, it is a relevant argument in the context of IFC, but with a degree of variation, as not all instances of IFC assumed this role for future issues of debts. Moreover, as this delegation had an international character – unlike the national bureaucratic delegation as referred above it is necessary to consider the implications of this unique aspect.
8.1.4 Foreign control: resistance vs cooperation
Although the above-presented views regarding the determinants of fiscal capacity may provide useful insights to interpret the different degrees of cooperation and performance of IFC in the Middle East and the Balkans, they still have a major limitation, as they do not consider the “foreign” and semi-autonomous character of IFC. This distinctive


162 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
feature of IFC requires taking them into account as a further interest group in addition to the central authority, representative assemblies, local elites and taxpayers. In this context, perhaps a different strand of literature focusing on the links between fiscal capacity and foreign support can provide even further insights in offering an alternative framework to analyse the incentives of IFC. In discussing different options with reference to the tax reform in the developing countries, the literature highlighted the role and influence of international experts, conditionality and foreign aid – as different forms of foreign support – in determining the fiscal capacity. A key question to consider is whether countries, which are highly dependent on cheap and/or guaranteed credit or foreign aid over long periods of time, will face difficulties in developing fiscal capacity. In this regard, the literature emphasises that foreign support can create more financial autonomy for governments, as they no longer require bargaining with taxpayers or constructing of fiscal capacity. In contrast, a state that relies on taxation for financing its needs can have stronger incentives to increase the production and trade and negotiate with interest groups.24 The role of international factors in shaping fiscal capacity was also noted with specific reference to the IMF performance conditions and standby agreements as a stimulus for governments to undertake capacity-building and other reforms of their tax administrations. Especially after the Latin American debt crises of the 1980s, signing a “Letter of Intent” which embodies such conditions has been a precondition for obtaining IMF programme assistance. In some cases, the administrations of the countries concerned were persuaded to approve targets for fiscal prudence – an illustration of the loss of fiscal sovereignty.25 The questions of enforcement of sovereign debt contracts and policy conditionality have become even more relevant since the beginning of the recent European debt crises. To tackle the chronic fiscal problems of several members of the eurozone, the establishment of independent fiscal institutions (or fiscal councils) has been suggested as one of the many solutions for the sustainability of the European Monetary Union both by policymakers and academics.26 Similarly since the early 1990s, several countries in sub-Saharan Africa have established semi-autonomous revenue authorities (ARAs). These are organisationally distinct from ministries of finance, with some real operational autonomy. Both African governments and the international development agencies involved in the reforms see ARAs as a means of increasing central government revenues and state capacity. The few empirical studies on ARAs suggest that there is little sign that they have


Political Economy of International Financial Control 163
actually increased public revenues, but rather that they contributed to a range of reforms in the ways in which taxes are assessed and collected.27 The logic of ARAs can be found in the new-institutionalist model, which suggests that neither governments nor their tax-collecting agents can be trusted with powers over the taxation process. To the extent that governments hand over these powers, in a binding and non-reversible way, to some independent authority that in turn can be trusted not to abuse them – and to abide by correct procedure and the law – taxpayers will have less to fear from the tax agency and its staff and be more willing to declare their real income and wealth. More tax revenue will be forthcoming, less will leak into the pockets of the collectors, and the government itself will become more legitimate. Hence, similar to the logic of central bank independence, the prescription is to increase the degree of autonomy that the revenue authority has with respect to politicians and government. By doing so, the government has made ‘credible commitments’ to taxpayers about the integrity of future tax arrangements.28 The literature on IMF, ARAs, fiscal councils and foreign aid is very useful to offer alternative frameworks to interpret IFC; however, they lack historical perspective on the matter, as IFC operated under a very different international financial architecture. In the pre-1914 context, perhaps the only relevant study focusing on fiscal capacity is by Strauss (2008) on the Sino-Foreign Salt Tax Inspectorate in China. This was a jointly operated organisation established as the central condition for a large debt-consolidation loan made to the Chinese government in 1913 by a consortium of foreign banks. Strauss notes that the inspectorate was run by a majority of foreigners who could act as decision makers by going beyond a simple advisory role. The Sino-Foreign Salt Inspectorate, by self-consciously adopting a set of strategies and policies, helped to solve the dilemma of increasing the state capacity when existing fiscal and administrative institutions were weak.29 This historical example is comparable to the case studies of this book as presented in previous chapters. However, it also differs as we aim to explain the varying degrees of success with reference to existing fiscal institutions and political regimes of the host countries within which IFC operated.
8.1.5 Conclusion
The literature on history and theory of fiscal capacity provides some working hypotheses to analyse the political economy of IFC. However, their scope is also limited when it comes to assessing the role of international actors and networks in the emergence of fiscal states during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In this context, IFC,


164 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
as revenue-collecting foreign agent, was at the heart of the tension between global capital and national sovereignty in the Ottoman Empire and succeeding debtor states of the region. IFC meant a partial loss of fiscal sovereignty, the extent of which was different in each case depending on the international political affairs and local political and fiscal institutions. As shown in previous chapters, the enforcement of IFC was effective in improving the credibility of the defaulting sovereigns. It achieved this by regularly transferring the surplus from assigned revenues to the bondholders in order to compensate for their losses. On the other hand, as I discuss below, local resistance to/cooperation with IFC took place with changing degrees, and it was conditioned by the existence of conflicting interests within and between governments and local interest groups, such as provincial elites, tax farmers and taxpayers. The lack of fiscal centralisation, as in the Ottoman Empire and Egypt, created an incentive for the central authority to cooperate with foreign creditors and meant a faster penetration of capital. In other words, it was preferable to cooperate with the foreign creditors instead of leaving the control of taxable revenues to the tax farmers and/or local elites. This cooperation helped to eliminate a local threat and provide access to cheap foreign capital at the same time. On the other hand, young democracies of the Balkans, as in Serbia and Greece, where the centralisation of fiscal systems was already on its way, were less willing to share the tax revenues with foreign creditors and for that they were penalised (or not rewarded as much as the others) in the international financial markets. In the next sections, we have a closer look at some of these assumptions.
8.2 Varying degrees of success and the extent of control
In order to test some of the hypotheses stated in the previous chapter, it is first necessary to provide comparative indicators of varying degrees of success of IFC in reinstating credibility of the debtor countries. This section provides an overview on both the degree of recovery and the loss of fiscal sovereignty experienced in each country when IFC was in operation, and it brings together some key elements of historical presentation in previous chapters. Table 8.1 summarises several measures of borrowing capacity, including the total number and value of contracted loans, outstanding foreign debt per capita, average effective interest rates and bond yields both before and after the foundation of IFC. To start with Egypt, both


Political Economy of International Financial Control 165
the total number and volume of loans contracted remained more or less the same before and after the Caisse. Despite the fact that the Egyptian government regularly serviced its outstanding debt, the debt per capita remained almost the same in both episodes. The most significant change took place in the cost of borrowing as both the average effective interest rates and bond yields declined under IFC by almost half compared to the early episode of borrowing. The Ottoman Empire was the first among four cases to join the international financial markets as early as 1854. This fact is reflected in the total value of contracted loans before IFC. The significant decline in debt per capita in the postIFC period reflects not the declining ability to borrow but the considerable “haircut” of outstanding debt in 1881. Similar to the Egyptian case, under the management of the Council, the cost of borrowing for the Ottoman government declined almost by half both in primary and secondary markets. For Serbia, after the Administration founded in 1895, the volume of borrowing increased steadily, reflected an almost 50 per cent increase
Table 8.1 Cost and volume of borrowing before and after IFC
Number of foreign loans contracted
Total nominal value of foreign loans (millions of £)
Debt per capita (£)
Average effective interest rate (%)
Average yield (%)
Before IFC
Egypt 9 69 7.2 8.5 8 Ottoman Empire 18 219 8.9 8.6 8.6 Serbia 17 16 6.2 6.7 6.2 Greece 9 26 6.5 6.3 7.1
After IFC
Egypt 10 55 7.5 4.5 5.4 Ottoman Empire 23 90 6.2 4.7 4.7 Serbia 7 25 9.1 5.1 5.4 Greece 8 29 7.8 5 10.7
Sources and notes: See data tables in Chapters 3–6. The periods before IFC are 1862–1876 for Egypt, 1854–1876 for the Ottoman Empire, 1879–1893 for Greece and 1881–1894 for Serbia. The period after IFC is 1881–1913 for the Ottoman Empire, 1876–1913 for Egypt, 18981913 for Greece and 1895–1913 for Serbia. To eliminate double counting I only account for new issues and exclude bond conversions. Population estimates are from Maddison (2007) averages of same periods. Bond yields are average values before and after IFC, starting with the first date of borrowing, excluding episodes of defaults and ending in December 1913.


166 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
in debt per capita in the post-IFC period compared to the previous era. Although not as much as the Ottoman Empire and Egypt, the impact of the Administration on cost of borrowing was also significant and led to an almost 40 per cent decline in average effective interest rates and bond spreads. Finally Greece was also able to borrow in the post-IFC period despite a bad record of borrowing history – perhaps the worst among the four, as this was the second default of the Greek government during the nineteenth century, and the settlement of the first one had taken more than 35 years. Although the Greek government was still able to borrow relatively cheaply in the primary market thanks to the influence of the Commission, the investors did not have the same degree of trust in Greek bonds reflected as very high-average bond spreads – despite the downward trend after 1898. A comparison of bond spreads of four cases can also provide some useful hints on the varying degrees of success of IFC. At the eve of the World War I, the Ottoman Empire enjoyed the lowest-level bond yields followed by Serbia, Egypt and Greece. In other words, as far as the credibility in the secondary market is concerned, the Ottoman Empire had a significant recovery and the Ottoman bonds outperformed even the Egyptian ones, where direct British control was long established. Throughout the period in which IFC was in operation the Ottoman Empire enjoyed the biggest recovery in cost of borrowing, whereas Greece was not rewarded as much mostly owed to the memory of previous default. To complement this picture, it is also possible to have a long-term view on the speed of recovery after the debt settlement as reflected in bond spreads. As seen from Figure 8.1, the impact of the IFC following debt settlement was a steady decline in bond spreads in all four cases. However, in the longer term, the Ottoman Empire and Egypt benefited from a much more significant decline: compared to the pre-IFC period of borrowing, the bond spreads declined on average 96 per cent and 80 per cent, respectively. At the end of 1913, bond spreads of Egypt were around 2.1 per cent, whereas the Ottoman bond spreads were as low as 0.78 per cent. For Serbia and Greece, the decline in bond yields was not as fast: in 1913 compared to the pre-IFC period, bond spreads declined around 70 per cent in Serbia’s case and almost 55 per cent in the case of Greece. By the end of 1913, Serbian bond spreads stood at 1.2 per cent whereas Greek spreads were still at a relatively higher level of 7.7 per cent. As mentioned in previous chapters, IFC emerged in two different historical contexts: Egypt and the Ottoman Empire experienced a more direct form of control during the mid-1870s, whereas Serbia and


Political Economy of International Financial Control 167
Greece experienced relatively more indirect forms of control during the 1890s. The differences between the two sets of countries can partly be attributed to the evolution of the governance structure of the sovereign debt market between the two different waves of defaults in the nineteenth century, and it may suggest that the forms of control became gradually less direct. Even if we treat the 1870s and 1890s as two different episodes of governance of the sovereign debt market, it is still necessary to explain why the Ottoman Empire managed to secure a sustained decline in bond spreads until the end of 1913 and why Greece was not rewarded as much as Serbia and/or the Ottoman Empire. To summarise, the evidence suggests that IFC was not always successful in reinstating the credibility and some countries benefited from the control of foreign bondholder representatives more than others. A possible venue to seek an explanation for this difference is the degree of control exercised by bondholder representatives over host countries, which can be understood in administrative and fiscal bases. In terms of administration, in Egypt the IFC had the most extensive privileges and the foreign control over Egyptian politics and finance was reinforced by additional means and organisations. The Caisse, initially consisting of French, Austrian and Italian representatives, gradually increased its
Default
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910
Ottoman Empire
Defauult
Egypt
Default
Greece
Default
Serbia
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 11990055 1910 1915
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 11990055 1910 1915
Figure 8.1 Bond yields before and after IFC, 1854–1913


168 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
power over the finances of the Egyptian government and it expanded with members from England, Germany and Russia. The members, who were initially bondholder representatives, later assumed the role of diplomatic representatives appointed by respective governments. As presented in Chapter 2, the Caisse represents the extraordinary case in our sample as the financial control expanded and eventually led to a complete loss of political sovereignty. In other words, in the case of Egypt, the Caisse was the imperium in imperio.30 In the case of the Ottoman Empire, the Council also enjoyed the freedom to directly collect the revenues assigned for the repayment of the outstanding debt. In doing so, it established an extensive network and employed a large group of salaried tax collectors. The contraband against the Council was common and the Council had to form its own armed security forces with the approval of the Ottoman government to prevent smuggling and for the protection of its employees. In fact, the Ottoman government was willing to extend the privileges of the IFC further and requested from the Council to act as a tax collector on its own behalf and trustee for future loan issues. On the other hand, in Serbia and Greece, the IFC operated via independent companies and they did not penetrate into the finances of these economies as much as Egypt or the Ottoman Empire. In the case of Greece, diplomatic representatives who had supervisory power over tax collection found themselves in conflict with the National Assembly and it proved to be difficult to implement most of the fiscal reforms. However, the Commission had considerable interest in the monetary reforms and despite the reluctance of the Greek government, it gradually managed to withdraw the excessive notes in circulation. In Serbia, the IFC was not welcomed as it was seen as an infringement of the sovereignty. However, once in operation, the Administration and the government worked in relative harmony. Unlike the other cases, the majority of the managing council of the Administration consisted of Serbian nationals, including the president and vice-president of Narodna Banka and two government officials. Although in practice, their influence was limited, they contributed positively to the political legitimisation of the decisions of the Administration. In fiscal terms, as seen from Figures 8.2 and 8.3, the revenues under the control of IFC steadily increased in most of the cases. The most significant loss of fiscal sovereignty took place in Egypt, where the IFC revenues constituted on average 40 per cent of total revenues of the government. In the early years of the control, the revenues under the control of the Caisse reached to more than 70 per cent, creating unrest among the taxpayers. In the case of the Ottoman Empire, the revenues


Political Economy of International Financial Control 169
controlled by the Council on behalf of the creditors were on average 13 per cent; however, after taking into account the revenues controlled on behalf of the Ottoman government, the assets under the control of the Council reached 35 per cent of all revenues of the state. For Greece and Serbia, the shares were respectively on average 29 and 35 per cent for the period IFC was in operation. In all cases the revenues under the control of IFC at least doubled. In absolute terms, the Ottoman Council was the biggest of all – at least after the reform of 1904, which changed the constitution of the Caisse and significantly reduced its influence in the overall Egyptian finances. Despite the high level of revenues under control, in terms of growth performance, the Ottoman Council and the Egyptian Caisse enjoyed an average annual growth rate of around 2 per cent
Table 8.2 Variation in the degree of administrative structure
Egypt (Caisse)
Ottoman Empire (Council)
Serbia (Administration)
Greece (Commission)
Period 1876–1914 1882–1914 1895–1914 1898–1914
Managing council
Bondholder Bondholder Bondholder/ government
Diplomatic
Composition of the management
Germany, Great Britain, AustriaHungary, Russia, France and Italy
Britain, France, Netherlands, Germany, Italy and AustriaHungary bondholders, and a representative of the Ottoman government
France and Germany bondholders, director and four representatives of Serbian government
Diplomatic representatives of AustriaHungary, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and Russia
Revenue administration
Direct collection and legislative power
Direct collection
Supervision and direct collection
Supervision
Acting as a trustee
Yes Yes Yes No
Monetary reform
Establishment of the National Bank
Coinage reforms
LMU Removal of forced currency
Resistance Contraband/ armed
Contraband/ armed
Political Political
Source: Author’s own elaboration.


170 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
02468
£m
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Greece Ottoman Empire Egypt Serbia
Figure 8.2 Net IFC revenues in comparison, 1876–1913
0 .2 .4 .6 .8
IFC revenues / Total government revenues
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Ottoman Empire Egypt Serbia Greece
Figure 8.3 IFC revenues as a share of total revenues, 1876–1913


Political Economy of International Financial Control 171
and 0.7 per cent, respectively.31 On the other hand, the Greek Commission and the Serbian Administration enjoyed an average annual growth rate of around 6 per cent. In other words, despite the political resistance, IFC in the Balkans performed relatively more efficient in increasing the revenues under their control (see Figure 8.4). A potential explanation for this difference is the type of revenue each IFC controlled, a subject I discuss in the next section. To summarise, after the initial discontent was over, IFC in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire worked with relatively little political challenge to their control and had extensive authority over fiscal matters. In Serbia, the political resistance to fiscal control was relatively strong and the National Assembly remained suspicious on the activities of the Administration. Thanks to the fact that the majority of managing council consisted of Serbian nationals, the Administration kept carrying on its operations and played more of a supervisory role than direct control over taxation. Finally, in the case of Greece, the political resistance to the fiscal reforms remained strong throughout the period, and because of this opposition and unwillingness of the government to cooperate, the influence of the Commission remained limited to monetary affairs. In the next section, we shift our attention to political institutions and tax systems of the host countries to seek explanations
50 100 150 200 250 300
Index (100 = IFC revenues at T1)
0 10 20 30 40
Years in operation
Greece Ottoman Empire Egypt Serbia
Figure 8.4 Growth in IFC revenues starting from the year of operation, 1876–1913


172 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
for resistance towards the rule of IFC and their relative efficiency in tax collection.
8.3 Political institutions and taxation systems
In this section, I explore an important dimension of the question of IFC in the Middle East and the Balkans with the aim of reaching some generalisations, which can be applied to the experience of the debtor states of the region. After presenting the major characteristics and evolution of political and fiscal institutions of each country, I then discuss further comparative evidence on tax systems and fiscal capacity in order to establish links between fiscal/political systems and IFC. In terms of political regime, for most of the nineteenth century the Ottoman Empire remained as an authoritarian monarchy despite several reforms aimed at modernising the state apparatus and significant political transformations. The liberal reform edicts of 1839 and 1856 gave way to the first constitution of the Ottoman Empire in 1876 and eventually led to the Young Turk Revolution in 1908. In fact, the transformation of the Ottoman state had already begun after the second half of the eighteenth century with several military reforms to catch up with the West both economically and militarily and to speed up the political centralisation against the local notables. The reforms gained pace during the reigns of Sultan Selim II (1789–1807) and Mahmud II (1808–1839) with the first attempt to create a modern army and abolish the traditional janissary corps.32 The so-called Tanzimat Era (1839–1876) was characterised by two reformation decrees of 1839 and 1856, which helped to accelerate the centralisation and bureaucratisation of the Ottoman Empire. They offered guarantees to all subjects of security of property and a regular system of assessing taxes, regardless of ethnicity or religion, with strict observance of annual budgets; however, most of these reforms were not implemented in practice either due to lack of willingness or ability of the Ottoman state to enforce them. As regards the evolution of fiscal institutions, the nineteenth century witnessed the implementation of new methods of raising revenue. The tax revenues at the eve of the Tanzimat mostly relied on the traditional tithe collected almost exclusively with the help of tax farmers. In order to finance the costly reforms and the centralisation of the state apparatus, and also to shift the tax burden from the countryside to the urban centres, beginning with Mahmud II and continuing throughout the century, the government repeatedly but ultimately unsuccessfully attempted to replace tax farming with salaried tax collectors. The


Political Economy of International Financial Control 173
government endeavoured to abolish tax farming for the first time, in 1839, but abandoned the effort in 1842 because of the significant losses. The 1856 decree ordered the “final” abolition of tax farming but with no better results than in 1838. In the early 1880s, the state again abolished tax farming but, reassessing its position in 1886, realised that the new system was too costly due to lack of local networks and information, and so the experiment was abandoned. The taxation system remained still heavily reliant on land tax, which was collectively calculated and collected with the help of tax farmers. Customs duties had the potential to be a significant revenue source; however, due to the capitulations and bilateral trade treaties, the Ottoman government was not able to modify the rates unilaterally. Only in 1905 did the powers agree to a minor increase in the import taxes. The personal tax, a symbol of transition to the modern tax state, was only introduced in 1903. In terms of collection of revenues, tax farming remained the norm throughout the empire both for direct and indirect taxes, and the resistance to tax collection was a common phenomenon. Despite all these obstacles the Ottoman government continued its march towards fiscal centralisation, and the central government managed to increase its total and per capita tax revenues. However, lagged significantly behind compared to cores and peripheries of Europe. The process of – slow – fiscal centralisation was also different from Europe and representative institutions and negotiation with local elite played very little role. An Ottoman parliament and the constitution for the first time emerged in 1876, which aimed at introducing accountability over fiscal matters and regularising the authority of the Sultan. However, in practice it did not empower any other group than the existing Ottoman political elite and bureaucracy. That is why there was no fight or resistance against Abdulhamid II’s decision to suspend the constitution and the parliament just two years later. A representative assembly was not successfully established until after the Young Turk Revolution of 1908.33 In 1908, the Young Turks compelled the Sultan to reinstate the constitution and revised the text of the 1876 constitution. From this year onwards, the representative assembly had the power to pass legislation over the Sultan’s authority, and the dominant political force was the nationalist Committee of Union and Progress, which eventually led the Empire into World War I.34 Egypt went through a completely different political transformation. Nonetheless, the negotiation with local elites and limited government were also not the determinants of increases in fiscal capacity before 1914. Unlike the Ottoman Empire, starting with the occupation by Napoleon


174 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
Bonaparte in 1798, the country went through a change in the system of taxation with the elimination of tax farming and its partial replacement by a system of direct taxation. However, permanent change in this matter would come only under the rule of Muhammad Ali.35 After being granted as a hereditary domain by the Ottoman Sultan in 1841, Muhammad Ali imposed a monopoly over both the production and exchange of agricultural commodities. In order to replace the existing method of collecting agricultural taxes, he established absolute control over the countryside by ordering the tax farmers to pay him half the revenue that they were collecting. As regards the public expenditure, most of the surplus was spent on extensive public works such as the building of canals and meeting the needs of the army and navy. During this period, although he abolished the system of tax farming and became a de facto landlord of the whole country, there was no modernisation of political institutions.36 From Muhammed Ali’s death in 1848 to the establishment of the European control in 1876, Egypt was dominated by the dynastic state of the Khedives. Following the foundation of the Caisse and the Dual Control, the Commission of Inquiry in 1878 suggested constitutionalism for the first time as part of reforming Egyptian finances and limiting the personal government of the Khedive. Although there was a “Consultative Chamber of Delegates” since 1866, consisting of provincial notables and landowners, the Khedive had the power to suspend or reorganise it whenever necessary.37 In 1882, the new Khedive introduced the first constitution, which gave more authority to the Chamber. However, the constitution was never fully implemented, and when the British occupied Egypt the same year, it was suspended. Under British rule, two representative assemblies were founded in Egypt, but they had very limited power over fiscal matters. The Legislative Council consisted of representatives of provincial assemblies, but it could not pass any law and only had a consultancy role over the budget. The Council could make legislation proposals, but they had no implication and the Egyptian government was not bound to accept them. The General Assembly, on the other hand, consisted of mostly provincial notables. Although it could not propose any legislation, it had a veto power on taxation and no new tax could be imposed without its approval. However, more important than any of these were different means of foreign control that came with the British rule. Besides the control of the Caisse over taxation and spending, Khedive’s British financial adviser served as the key political figure since he had the veto power of all financial legislation.38


Political Economy of International Financial Control 175
Under British rule, the land tax constituted a significant part of total revenue and it was collected with the help of accountants established in several villages. Despite the improvements, the land tax was still considered as the most oppressive form of taxation in Egypt. With regard to indirect taxes, customs duties were also collected by government officials at a rate of 1 per cent on exports and 8 per cent on imports, while the collection cost was as low as 4 per cent. However, Egypt was also bound with free-trade treaties and capitulations as legally still being part of the Ottoman Empire, hence the government was not able to increase indirect taxation easily. Although the representative assembly in theory had some power over taxation, on the side of the expenditure, almost the sole authority was the Caisse.39 Overall, Egypt represents an exception, as in practice the British controllers were the main deciding actors over fiscal matters and the role of parliament remained very limited until 1904 when the power of the Caisse over spending was reduced and its funds partly went under the control of the Egyptian government. In terms of the relationship between fiscal and political institutions, the situation in the Balkans was rather different. Following the Greek independence, the three powers, which guaranteed Greek independence in the Protocols of 1832, implemented a monarchy without constitutional restrictions. After the arrival of the King Otto, the key political positions were occupied by Bavarians, which led to increasing discontent among the Greek political elite. This opposition eventually culminated in a coup d’étatt and gave way to the first Greek constitution and representative assembly in 1844. Despite the liberal nature of the constitution, there was no significant change in the existing political picture as King Otto maintained his influence over the parliament until he was overthrown by another coup in 1862. According to the new constitution of 1864, the representative assembly elected by universal direct suffrage held the whole legislative power. A new king – with a Danish origin was introduced to Greece with the help of the Great Powers. King George I remained in reign for nearly 50 years and the existing parliamentary system was maintained. A turning point in political structure was in 1875, when the King recognised the majority rule in the parliament to form a government, which practically meant a two-party system until the 1890s. During this period, Trikoupis emerged as the main political leader. He was a proponent of Westernisation of the economic and political institutions, and he supported the settlement of foreign debt and striking a deal with creditors. The implication of this plan in fiscal terms was more taxation, which was not a popular remedy. At the other end of the spectrum, Deliyannis represented a more traditionalist and populist


176 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
view, which was in favour of the idea of Greater Greece and a more adventurous foreign policy. The competition between these two political parties shaped the attitudes towards IFC. The picture only slightly changed following another coup d’état in 1909 – similar in spirit to the Young Turk Revolution of 1908 – and a new constitution in 1911, which introduced a second chamber, called the Council of State, with supervisory function over legislation.40 In terms of a tax collection system, in the first half of the nineteenth century, the tithe on agricultural products was managed by tax farmers, who were usually members of the local notable families. However, their role was mostly restricted to calculating the local taxable production while the actual collection was in the hands of state authorities. Starting from the 1860s, the tithe was collected in cash; and in the 1870s, the fiscal policy constantly aimed at lowering the tax burden on the peasants, replacing direct taxation with indirect consumption taxes. As a final step, in 1880, the tithe was abandoned and a new agricultural fiscal system was introduced. This system was founded on the taxation of animals, was lighter and promoted productivity in the agricultural sector. The receipts from this tax equalled only a third of the former tithe receipts and it was imposed only upon the owners of working animals and not upon landowners.41 As regards the government finance, the period from the 1830s to 1860s was characterised by balanced budgets and relative financial stability, even though during this period Greece was isolated from international financial markets by a previous default.42 After the 1860s, the fiscal policy of Greece rested on the principles of deficit financing and the low taxation of the higher classes and the peasantry. Greece was amongst the last countries in Europe to apply income and inheritance taxes, introduced respectively in 1910 and in 1898. As for the under-taxation of the peasantry, which constituted the largest voting group in Greece, it started progressively from 1864 and reached a landmark with the abolition of tithe and tax farming in 1880. Apart from political considerations, the under-taxation of the peasants had an economic basis. They lived at the margin of subsistence and thus had little if any surplus that might be extracted. The fiscal burden of both direct and indirect taxation fell on the middle class and the urban sector. Peasants effectively escaped the burden of indirect taxes as they operated basically within the confines of subsistence farming and barter trade. The state prevented urban unrest by becoming the largest employer in the country and absorbing the surplus labour that could not be assimilated elsewhere. In this context, foreign capital was not seen by the state as a tool for promoting economic growth, but rather


Political Economy of International Financial Control 177
as a means of enabling the central government to enhance its position in Greek society.43 In Serbia, there were significant similarities in terms of evolution of taxation and political institutions. The rule of revolutionary leader Prince Miloš, who remained in power from 1816 to 1839, laid the foundations of the modern Serbian state. Despite its authoritarian nature, he was popular amongst the peasantry due to legislation protecting private property in land and homestead laws. On the other hand, opposition to his rule was mainly from merchants and educated men, who favoured a representative assembly of notables and limiting the powers of the monarchy. In 1838 with a new constitution and abdication of Miloš, a “state council” was founded which was granted important restrictive power of legislation. Until the late 1860s, the Serbian state continued to modernise the administrative structure and its army. Prince Milan Obrenović, who remained in power from 1868 to 1889, carried Serbia to independent nationhood. He started his rule with an updated constitution, which contained significant provisions for parliamentary rule. The dominant party in the assembly until the 1880s was the liberal party, which was supportive of restricting the powers of the King and of improving representative and parliamentary institutions. In terms of foreign policy, it was pro-Russian against the influence of Germany, and a proponent of pan-Slavist nationalist foreign policy. On the other hand, Prince Milan had a more cautious approach towards expansion due to weakness of Serbia’s military strength. From 1887 to World War I, the radical party, which ideologically relied on peasant populism, remained in power. Since the radicals saw themselves as the protectors of average Serbs, this helped them to remain in power and to be elected several times. They were pro-Russian in foreign policy and, at home, stressed local autonomy at the expense of the central government, partly because they mistrusted the educated, urban social groups. This direct connection to “the people” also made the radical party the most nationalistic and powerful group in Serbian politics until World War I. After the abdication of King Milan in 1889, a new constitution was voted by the National Assembly in the same year, and it remained in power until 1894; after a brief prelude it was reinstated again in 1901. According to the constitution, the executive power was vested in the King, assisted by a council of ministers. The King, in conjunction with the National Assembly, exercised the legislative authority. The State Council consisted of members appointed partly by the King and partly by the Assembly, and it had the power to decide on the provincial taxes and loans, the expropriation of private property for public purposes, the


178 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
final settlement of debts due to the state and the paying out of extraordinary sums sanctioned by the budget.44 In terms of evolution of fiscal institutions, from 1815 onwards, when Serbian principality was granted independence in tax collection by the Porte, the Prince and principal authorities had the exclusive right to collect taxes.45 Fearing that regional governors might establish territorial fiefs on the basis of their delegated powers of tax collection, Miloš treated them as salaried officials, holding them responsible for collecting the head tax, without letting them get a share from the proceeds.46 With low taxation and mass peasant freehold landownership, the situation was favourable for the peasantry; however, the state budget was not looking good.47 During the 1880s and 1890s, the budget was permanently in deficit, which only changed after the fiscal consolidation in 1903.48 Finally, as for different types of taxes, from the early years of independence, the major indirect tax revenue was the customs duties imposed on the border trade with Austria-Hungary. New indirect taxes on sales of tobacco and salt were introduced in the early 1880s; however, these did not yield the expected revenue and remained minor. In the later years, as Serbia turned into a land of monopolies, the receipts of these constituted an important indirect tax category. Despite the importance of indirect taxes, in Serbia direct tax on land income also remained significant until 1914. Until 1864, the communes could levy the land tax as they wanted, but later the system was unified across the country. In 1884, a new reform introduced a progressive rate, which favoured large producers and wealthy peasants. The opposition from this group prevented the introduction of heavy taxes at the top of the scale. In 1889, due to peasant pressure a new reduction over land tax was introduced. For the remaining period, the Serbian budget increasingly relied on the taxation of the urban sector and merchants and the importance of direct taxes from the rural sector gradually diminished in the overall revenues of the state.49 A closer look at the sources of tax revenues of the countries in question can provide a helpful framework to understand the degree of local cooperation with international financial control or resistance and the relative success of IFC in collecting revenues. Figure 8.5 summarises the five-year moving averages of direct and indirect taxes as a share of total revenues of the Ottoman, Greek, Serbian and Egyptian governments. In the cases of the Ottoman Empire and Egypt, high tax revenue per capita reflected the heavy taxation of the rural sector, whereas in the case of Greece and Serbia it was the result of the transition from costly direct taxation to indirect taxation and fiscal consolidation. Throughout


Political Economy of International Financial Control 179
6
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 . .7 .8
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Direct taxes Indirect taxes
Ottoman Empire
Direct taxes Indirect taxes
Egypt
Direct taxes Indirect taxes
Greece
Direct taxes Indirect taxes
Serbia
Figure 8.5 Direct and indirect taxes as a share of government revenue, 1880–1913
the period, the Ottoman Empire struggled to introduce a centralised tax collection system and had to share most of the tax revenues with other intermediaries such as local notables and tax farmers. Moreover, both in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire most of the revenues were based on direct taxes levied mainly upon the land. Given its lack of monopoly over taxation, the Ottoman government was more willing to cooperate with the foreign creditors in transferring revenues. On the contrary, in the late nineteenth century, Greece and Serbia already derived a significant part of their government revenues from centrally collected indirect taxes. The centralised taxation system combined with an established system of democratic negotiation over tax revenues created reluctance for the national assemblies to cooperate with IFC, as they were less willing to share these sources with foreign creditors. During the same period there was also a Europe-wide shift towards indirect taxation, which eventually favoured the countryside at the expense of merchants and rural economy and became an important determinant of the rise of fiscal states in the nineteenth century.50 Greece and Serbia were part of this broader change and relatively less penetration of IFC into these countries can be explained with fiscal consolidation and existence of representative institutions and a competitive


180 Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control
political environment driven by negotiation. In the context of the Ottoman Empire and Egypt, this shift was initially not possible due to lack of political competition between different interest groups, and later it became even more difficult as IFC reinstated the ability to borrow. In this context, the cooperation with IFC and accompanied low costs of borrowing delayed the process of fiscal consolidation, as governments could now borrow without going into the costly route of negotiation with local elites – perhaps with the exception of Greece where resistance to IFC was the most visible.
8.4 Summary and conclusions
This chapter offered a unifying framework to interpret IFC experience of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Serbia and Greece before 1914. Relying on the literature on fiscal capacity and history of fiscal states, I propose that the Ottoman Empire and Egypt heavily relied on the costly method of direct taxes from the rural economy and in the absence of any political competition, representation and negotiation over tax sources, demands to reduce the tax burden of the countryside did not realise. As a result, the heavy reliance on direct taxes meant high surveillance and collection costs and inefficiency in collecting taxes. The lack of fiscal centralisation, as in the Ottoman Empire and Egypt, created an incentive for the central authority to cooperate with foreign creditors, and meant a faster penetration of capital. In other words, it was preferable to cooperate with the foreign creditors instead of leaving the control of taxable revenues to the tax farmers and/or local elites. This cooperation helped to eliminate a local threat and provide access to cheap foreign capital at the same time. The IFC in these countries restored the trust of foreign bondholders and reinstated credibility; further, the cost of collecting taxes was reflected as a relatively slow increase in revenues under the control. On the other hand, young democracies of the Balkans, as in Serbia and Greece, had to take into consideration the demands of the countryside thanks to the representative institutions and elections. They joined the Europe-wide shift towards indirect taxation well before IFC was introduced and they were not keen to share the revenues. This political resistance coincided with a relatively more indirect form of control, and less improvement in credibility reflected as higher costs of borrowing. Despite the lack of cooperation, IFC was still more efficient in collecting taxes under their control due to the nature of sources and high degree of monetisation in these economies.