Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Explorations in Economic History
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eeh
Democracy, autocracy, and sovereign debt: How polity influenced country risk on the peripheries of the global economy, 1870–1913
Ali Coşkun Tunçer a,∗, Leonardo Weller b
a University College London, United Kingdom b São Paulo School of Economics, FGV, Brazil
article info
Keywords: Country risk Sovereign debt Polity Political stability Peripheries First financial globalization
abstract
This article tests the influential democratic advantage hypothesis – that democratic governments have historically borrowed more cheaply than autocratic governments – in the context of the first financial globalization, from circa 1870 to 1913. We construct indicators of political regime types, then regress government bond spreads of 27 independent capital-importing countries on them. In contrast with the mainstream literature, the results suggest that democracies were associated with higher country risk. Our findings indicate that autocratic regimes had a significant advantage: democracies paid 5.7% more on their debt than autocracies, controlling for several financial and political variables. This gap is the equivalent of 35.4% of the negative effect defaults had on credit costs. Our conclusions hold when allowing for different definitions of political regime type and bond spreads. The correlations identified also find support in qualitative evidence, according to which creditors favored autocracies for being politically more stable than democracies.
1. Introduction
The study of sovereign debt is ultimately a study of power. The capacity of states to govern, tax, and promote economic growth is correlated with the risk of default. Creditworthiness, therefore, says a great deal about political conditions. The existing literature often argues that parliamentary democracies produce better borrowers because the legislature can limit the power of the executive, forcing it to credibly commit to its contracts and respect the property rights of creditors (North and Weingast, 1989). This is allegedly not the case for autocracies, whose powerful executives are under the inevitable temptation of expropriating their creditors. The idea of a democratic advantage, however, is debatable, and there is no consensus on the topic today. The historical literature challenges the assumption that Britain was a democracy in the century that followed the Glorious Revolution and argues that a particular form of party politics rather than polity explains Britain’s capacity to tax and to borrow in that period (O’Brien, 1999; Horwitz, 1997; Stasavage, 2008). Studies in modern political science also show that policy consistency and stability rather than regime type explain country risk, and autocratic regimes tend to depend more on creditors to maintain the stability of their regimes, creating incentives for good borrowing behavior (Archer et al., 2007; DiGiuseppe and Shea, 2016). While Beaulieu et al. (2012) found that autocracies were excluded from the credit market in the postwar period, Block and Vaaler (2004) show that creditors and credit rating agencies tend not to like elections in developing countries. The democratic advantage hypothesis, however, is almost virtually accepted without debate for the period of the first financial globalization – from the 1870s to 1913, when most countries in the world borrowed in London. Most authors who study that period focus on financial rather than political conditions in borrowing countries. Such a financial approach may be due to the debate on
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail addresses: a.tuncer@ucl.ac.uk (A. Tunçer), leonardo.weller@fgv.br (L. Weller).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2022.101449 Received 3 December 2020; Received in revised form 19 January 2022; Accepted 27 February 2022 Available online 1 March 2022 0014-4983/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
the gold standard around which that literature evolved (Flandreau and Zumer, 2004; Ferguson and Schularick, 2006; Mitchener and Weidenmier, 2010; Mauro et al. 2006). The lack of studies on polity is striking because not only capital but also political institutions were globalized at the turn of the twentieth century. Independent states across the world extended suffrage and introduced parliamentary checks and balances, while other countries followed a more authoritarian model based on Bismarck’s Germany (Huntington, 1993; Ziblatt, 2017). This heterogeneity in political institutions makes the 1870–1913 period an ideal setting to test the democratic advantage hypothesis in the context of foreign debt. To assess the relationship between polity and the cost of credit, we perform regressions on the government bond spreads in London of 27 independent capital-importing countries between 1870 and 1913. Our regressors of interest are indicators of political regime type (measures that capture the power of the legislature and how the heads of states are chosen) derived from the Statesman’s Yearbook (1870-1913), a contemporary British publication. We include a number of control variables that capture political stability, defined as years that countries had been at peace, together with several financial indicators widely applied in the literature. The overall conclusion of this article is that the democratic advantage did not apply to the peripheries of the first financial globalization. Without implying causality, our regressions show that democracies were associated with higher spreads.1 Results indicate that democracies paid about 5.7% more on their debt than autocracies. This gap is significant: it is the equivalent of 35.4% of the notoriously negative effect defaults had on credit costs. This “autocratic advantage” holds with several political and financial controls; it is also robust allowing for different definitions of polity and spreads. A similar result stands out from a panel event study that indicates that the spreads were significantly higher when countries moved from more to less autocratic polities vis-à-vis the opposite process – respectively democratization and autocratization. These correlations are in line with qualitative evidence from primary sources, which indicate that creditors praised what the press called “true autocrats” for providing political stability. In contrast with today, the term “dictator” did not necessarily have a negative connotation, and democracies were not always regarded positively. This is consistent with the fact that democracies were nascent polities in the period, and thus on average less stable than today.
2. The literature on polity and sovereign risk
The historical literature that relates sovereign debt to polity focuses on the evolution of fiscal institutions in early modern Europe. The influential work by North and Weingast (1989) proposes that the British parliamentary system that emerged from the Glorious Revolution in the 1680s limited the executive’s power to impose lump-sum tributes and forced loans. The Parliament represented taxpayers and creditors, who became more willing to pay taxes and to lend to the government. Thanks to the power of the legislature, the executive was able to tax consistently and to issue relatively cheap long-term debt. The work of several scholars supports this democratic advantage hypothesis. Some point out that legislators with ministerial responsibilities made it easier for governments to raise taxes (Daunton, 2010, 2012; Cox, 2011; Hoffman and Rosenthal, 1997). Others present democracy as the main driver through which governments introduced progressive direct taxation, such as an income tax (Bordo and Cortés Conde, 2001; Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006; Aidt and Jensen, 2009; Ardanaz and Scartascini, 2011). In a cross-country exercise for pre-modern Europe, Dincecco (2011) finds that limited government in centralized states achieve better fiscal results than those that were fragmented and absolutist. Nevertheless, the democratic advantage hypothesis has also received criticism. Stasavage (2008) asserts that party politics rather than a limited government system increased taxation and reduced the risk of default in early modern Britain. Several scholars highlight the role of external wars rather than polity in making taxation politically easier for the state (Tilly, 1990; O’Brien, 2012; Bonney, 1999; Besley and Persson, 2009). Karaman and Pamuk (2013) combine war and polity in a cross-country study that covers Europe from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries. They find that war intensity raised taxation both in autocratic rural states and in representative urban states: hence, the success of the British system was a subcase. Others find no causality between democracy and taxation in recent times (Mulligan et al., 2004; Profeta et al., 2013). Another stream of the financial history literature studies the determinants of sovereign risk during the first financial globalization, from circa 1870 to 1913, when a record amount of capital flew from Europe to the rest of the world. Britain was at the center of that process and sovereign debt was one of its main drivers. In contrast with the works quoted above, however, this specific literature overlooks the role of polity, emphasizing instead financial and monetary factors such as the gold standard. The pioneering work by Bordo and Rockoff (1996) regresses government bond spreads of nine countries on variables that capture financial conditions, including a dummy that controls for adherence to the gold standard. The authors find that countries on gold borrowed at lower rates. Applying panel regression methodologies on larger samples, several scholars confirm these results (Obstfeld and Taylor, 2003; Mauro et al., 2006; Esteves and Tovar Jalles, 2016). Others find that variables such as credit record, fiscal sustainability, and association to the British Empire were more important than the gold standard in determining credit rates (Flandreau and Zumer, 2004; Ferguson and Schularick, 2006; Alquist and Chabot, 2011; Mitchener and Weidenmier, 2015). The work by Flandreau and Zumer (2004) is particularly important for two reasons. Firstly, it avoids ahistorical analysis by limiting its empirical exercise to information available to contemporaries. For instance, modern reconstructed series such as GDP are not included in the regressions.2 Secondly, despite the lack of changes in political institutions in their country set during 1870
1 We use the term “democracy” to characterize polities that were far more authoritarian than the democracies that exist today – a point discussed in detail below.
2


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
1913, the authors control their regressions for franchising rate, which appears to be significantly associated with lower credit costs (Flandreau and Zumer, 2004: 37). However, a more recent paper by Dasgupta and Ziblatt (2021) shows that the impact of franchise extension on bond spreads was in fact the opposite during 1800–1920, as franchise extension contributed to large increases in bond premiums. Despite being valid steps towards the study of polity in the sovereign debt market, the franchising rate is a problematic proxy for democracy, since rigged elections in authoritarian countries could include a significant portion of the population, who de jure had a say, but de facto were excluded from the political process.3 Moreover, the contemporary bondholders had very limited information on the share of adult population with the right to vote during the period we study, which is only one of the dimensions of polity. Instead, as we show in the next chapter, they were more likely to be informed about institutional arrangements that could limit the power of the executive, such as the existence of elections or effective legislatures. Although the first financial globalization literature does not focus on polity in great detail, some works include variables that capture political stability. Both the definitions of political stability and the results vary. Flandreau and Zumer (2004) show that a political crisis dummy was associated with higher spreads. Mauro et al. (2006) and Ferguson and Schularick (2006) find similar results in relation to interstate and civil wars, respectively. Mitchener and Weidenmier (2015) and Esteves and Tovar Jalles (2016) find no significant results whatsoever. It is important to note that these variables on political instability capture short-term events such as wars and uprisings. They may be related to but are different from the polity variables we construct in this article, which capture long-term political systems. Overall, by assessing the effect of polity on credit cost, we contribute to the literature on the first financial globalization. We focus on 1870–1913, when countries around the world borrowed extensively in London. Our sample includes 27 independent peripheral countries: Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, Greece, Guatemala, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Nicaragua, Norway, the Ottoman Empire, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Spain, Sweden, Uruguay, and Venezuela. These countries were all on the “peripheries”, in that they were independent capital-importing countries in Latin America, Southern and Eastern Europe, Scandinavia, and Asia.4 In the next section, we provide a historical explanation of our focus on these regions.
3. Polity and the peripheries of the first financial globalization
During 1870–1913, political institutions such as elections and parliamentary power over the executive spread around the world. Purely autocratic polities, in which the executive was the only relevant power, had become a minority by the turn of the century. This does not mean, though, that democracies spread across all countries in the same way. Some countries followed Britain, building effective parliaments and promoting free and fair elections. Yet others had strong governments that tried to emulate variations of the Prussian model, with dysfunctional or weak legislative powers and limited or rigged elections. To make matters more complex, a few countries fluctuated between systems, becoming more or less democratic throughout our period of analysis (Huntington, 1993; Ziblatt, 2017). The uneven spread of democratic and autocratic institutions appears in contemporary print-resources available to the bondholders. These sources occasionally reviewed the major differences in political regime types across the world. For instance, the Economist (1894a: 1340) highlighted key defining characteristics of autocratic regimes: “the true autocrat is a man whose order has the full force of law, and who can therefore not only order a change in the number of a jury by decree, but can direct the arrest of a subject [...] without appeal or responsibility”. Yet only a few would fall under this category, such as the Russian Tsar, Montenegrin Prince, and the rulers of some British dependencies like the Sarawak Raj and Indian Viceroy. These “true autocracies” were seen to be different from the constitutional monarchies of continental Europe, where personal power could only be exercised within the constraints of the law. Moreover, the discrepancies in the effectiveness of democratic legislatures were also obvious to contemporary observers. For instance, the Spanish Cortes was seen as “a farce ever since it was constructed” and the Austrian Reichsrat was regarded as incapable of governing the entire Austro-Hungarian Empire. Similarly, the “shadowy legislative bodies of South and Central America” were also seen as weak and “few either know or care anything of their proceedings” (Economist, 1898b: 867). This awareness of different degrees of democratic and autocratic rule was part of the information set of the contemporary bondholders. Moreover, contemporary observers did not necessarily have a negative attitude towards autocracies. The assumption that a representative legislative body was “the final product of political wisdom” was increasingly questioned in the light of historical
2 We follow a similar approach because our intention is not to test a modern economic theory with historical data, but rather to understand whether contemporary perceptions of polity mattered in determining historical bond prices. 3 Russia had a franchise rate of 253 per 1,000 inhabitants in 1910, higher than the rate for Britain (171) and close to the United States (292) (Banks and Wilson, 2020). Yet Russia was a notorious autocracy ruled by an unelected tsar. More moderate – but still authoritarian – dictators often used rigged elections to legitimize their rule. A famous example is Porfírio Díaz, who “won” six elections during his 27 year-long presidency in Mexico. Francisco Madero was arrested for attempting to run as a contender in 1910. In the following year, he led the revolution that toppled Díaz and allowed the first free and fair elections in the country’s history (Speckman-Guerra, 2013: 196, 209-210). 4 We do not include formal or informal colonies in our analysis, as we are interested in understanding the impact of political institutions that emerged locally, rather than those enforced or transplanted by foreign powers. Moreover, the literature shows that it is methodologically problematic to pool together colonies and sovereign states in the analysis of borrowing costs (Accominotti et al., 2010, 2011).
3


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
events (Economist, 1898b: 867). For example, Bulgaria was governed by a Western-style liberal constitution, universal male suffrage, and parliamentary power in a one-chamber system since its independence in 1878. Nonetheless, the Bulgarian prince was dissatisfied with the democratic constitution, since it gave extensive powers to the local population and peasantry at the level of communes. Following a series of political struggles and turmoil between the parliament and the monarchy, the latter eventually came to dominate the political arena in 1887, and the parliamentary system of Bulgaria lost its importance (Pammer and Tunçer, 2021). In assessing the financial condition of Bulgaria in 1894, the Economist argued that Bulgarian bonds could potentially be a good investment. In addition to Bulgaria’s rich natural resources and strong state finance, its political regime was also praised as a positive factor, because it was seen as having the “good fortune to be ruled successively by two remarkably sagacious and high-minded young Princes”. Moreover, the newspaper depicted the country’s long-reigning prime minister Stefan Stambolov as someone who “has labored for nearly twenty years for the welfare of his native country, earning the well-merited title of ‘Dictator of Bulgaria’” (Economist, 1894b: 16–17). A similar sympathetic attitude towards autocratic rule can also be observed for Russia. In discussing the corruption claims of the new Russian Emperor, Nicholas II, the Economist (1895: 2684) recognized that a representative body would be the best check on corruption, but it also argued that in other areas of economic and political reform, the Tsar’s autocracy could deliver results more efficiently. Likewise, the Times (1899: 10) praised the “military dictatorship” Porfirio Díaz imposed on Mexico, thanks to which “order and progress” replaced “revolutionary outbreaks.” Based on his “absolute powers,” the dictator was able to “turn his attention to the best means of increasing the national wealth by the developing of the latent natural wealth of Mexico and by the encouragement of private industrial enterprise wherever opportunity offered.” That praise was given in the same year the country issued a conversion loan in Europe at record low rates (Weller, 2015). These examples imply that, in contemporary public opinion, autocracies could potentially offer efficiency and political stability. As for the opposite side of the political spectrum, democratic regimes with parliamentary systems were not regarded as inherently positive. For instance, during the political crisis of 1907 in Portugal, which eventually led to the assassination of the King in 1908, the Economist (1907: 2077) reported that “parliamentary government, as in Spain, has consisted in a see-saw of two parties, rejoicing in particularly pretentious names, but resting on no real support of intelligent public spirit”. Following the failure of parties to come up with a coalition government and get the budget through the Parliament, the King’s suspension of the parliament appeared a positive step: “the nation, as well as its creditors, might well be thankful for any regime which would fulfil the promises of the government”. The Economist (1898a: 934) made a similar remark about the political and fiscal crisis in Italy in 1898, which, according to the newspaper, resulted from the “vexatious meddling of the Chamber”. The newspaper argued that the executive temporarily should be free from the “shifting intrigues of an incapable Chamber”, even though this could be considered “absolutism”. Such a step was a “necessity at times in countries in which the Parliamentary system does not respond to the national requirements”, and “only those who worship of Parliament as a fetish, rather than [...] as a means to an end, will dispute this proposition”. This cautious attitude towards democracy was particularly pronounced during transition periods, which were commonly turbulent in the peripheries of the late nineteenth century. For example, the Economist (1909a: 809) did not have a positive view of the new regime that appeared in Nicaragua in 1909 after the collapse of the 15-year-long dictatorship of President Jose Zelaya Lopez, “however cruel to individuals”. The reason behind this was the fear of civil unrest that could follow the removal of the dictator, who at least ensured “a long immunity from serious wars and revolutions”. Another article published in 1909, titled “violence as a means of persuasion”, affirmed that democratic governments were more unlikely to be brought about “by peaceful means than by violence”. Although military force could overthrow autocratic regimes, the Economist (1909b: 736) recognized that this would often lead to further political instability. It is possible to extend the list of these historical narratives from print-sources available to contemporary investors. One conclusion emerging out of these views is that the contemporary observers did not regard democracy or autocracy as inherently good or bad. Rather, they were interested in the potential of polities to produce political stability. In the context of capital-importing countries, creditors were inclined to have a more favorable view of autocratic regimes. That was a reaction to political instability, since the relatively young parliamentary democracies of peripheries were usually plagued by civil wars, social unrest and deadlocks between opposing parties and competing interest groups. Similarly, transitions to a democratic regime could potentially bring instability in the short term, which creditors regarded warily. In the next section, we rely on this historical account while building our variables, model, and hypotheses.
4. Polity and sovereign risk: data and model
In order to analyze the impact of political regime type on sovereign risk, we construct a cross-sectional time series dataset covering the period 1870–1913 for 27 independent countries that borrowed in London. We regress government bond spreads on variables that capture polity, political stability, and economic conditions.
4.1. Spreads
Our dependent variable is government bond spreads, defined as the difference in yield between borrower governments’ bonds and the British consol. We follow Alquist and Chabot (2011: 265) and define the bond yield of a given country i as the average of the coupon yield of their bonds j floating in London in time t, weighted according to their respective capitalization or outstanding
4


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
value:5
Rit =
j ∑
j=1
(wijtrijt
) − rUKt (1)
where: wijt is the market-value weight of bond j in country i in time t; rijt is the coupon yield of bond j in country i in time t, which is given by the ratio of that bond’s interest rate and the discount at which it is traded; rUKt is the British consol yield in time t. In Appendix 3, we list the bonds used to calculate the weighted-average spreads defined in Eq. (1). We have included all bonds issued by our countries that follow three criteria: (1) they are denominated in gold-pegged currencies, almost always in British pounds; (2) they do not have special guarantees from third parties, such as railway companies or other governments, and (3) they have been issued by the central rather than provincial governments. This is crucial to avoid biases from peculiarly senior or junior bonds.
4.2. Polity variables
The variables of interest measure polity, capturing whether countries were more or less democratic. They are derived from the Statesman’s Yearbook, an annual British compendium, which is arguably the most consistent and reliable contemporary source of general information on countries around the world.6 The Statesman’s Yearbook printed information on features such as population, area, economic conditions, and – crucially for us – regime type. For each country, under the heading of “constitution and government”, the source outlined key political characteristics of the country, including its constitution, selection methods of the executive, the effectiveness of the legislatures, and other relevant information. For instance, Russia was referred to as “an absolute hereditary monarchy” where the “whole legislative, executive and judicial power is united in the emperor whose will alone is law” (Statesman’s Yearbook, 1881: 365). At the other end of the spectrum, Costa Rica was “governed under a constitution [...]. [B]y its terms the legislative power is vested in a congress of one chamber [...] chosen in electoral assemblies, the members of which are returned by universal suffrage [...]. The executive authority is in the hands of a President elected in the same manner as the Congress for the term of four years” (Statesman’s Yearbook, 1881: 533). Moreover, the source reported major regime changes whenever and wherever they happened. The Cross-National Time-Series (CNTS) database has codified the polity information available in the Statesman’s Yearbook according to two dummy variables, effective legislature and elected executive (Banks and Wilson, 2020), which are defined as follows:
Effective legislatureit =
{1 if a legislature effectively limits the executive in country i in time t; 0 otherwise.
Elected executiveit =
{1 if an executive is elected by popular vote in country i in time t; 0 otherwise.
Effective legislature thus captures the power of the legislative branch, while elected executive reflects the electoral processes. In respect to this latter variable, it takes the value of 1 if elections are both direct and indirect. Indirect elections happened in parliaments and electoral colleges. Polities are more democratic when these variables take the value of 1, and autocratic when they equal 0.7 Fig. 1 shows the values of elected executive and effective legislature for our sample. As described in the previous section, contemporary reports often took into account these two polity characteristics (legislature and elections) together to characterize different political systems across the world. Given the two dummy variables shown in Fig. 1, we have four possible combinations, which we label by mirroring the contemporary language as follows:
(1) True autocracy: the head of state is not elected by popular vote and there is no effective legislature limiting his powers. (2) Presidential democracy: the head of state is elected by popular vote but there is no effective legislature to limit his powers. (3) Constitutional monarchy: the head of state is not elected by popular vote but there is an effective legislature limiting his powers. (4) True democracy: the head of state is elected by popular vote and there is an effective legislature limiting his powers.
We should emphasize that these polity groups are historically conceived: contemporaries used the terms above to describe political institutions, rather than comment on their de facto quality. Due to non-transparent elections and relatively weak legislatures, some of the “true democracies” were well below the standards of modern democracies. In particular, the “presidential democracies” of the
5 We differ from the literature that analyzes supply-side factors, such as the liquidity of the market for colonial debt, where the bond-based approach may be justifiable (Chavaz and Flandreau, 2017). Although such a bond-based approach increases the number of observations significantly, it also introduces biases towards countries with many bond issues. As shown in Appendix 3, the number of bonds per country varies greatly in our sample. Moreover, an average-based approach is in line with our aim to assess the role of country-defined polities on credit cost. As a robustness check, we run the variations of our main model in a bond-based specification. As shown in Table E in Appendix 4.2, our main findings still hold. 6 See Flandreau and Zumer (2004) for an application and discussion of this source in the context of the first financial globalization. 7 We have reviewed these polity dummy variables by going through the various issues of the Statesman’s Yearbook. We found that the CNTS codification is consistent with the primary sources most of the time.
5


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Fig. 1. Dummy variables on polity, 1870–1913. Note: Effective legislature takes the value of one when there is a legislature that effectively limits the power of the executive, and zero otherwise. Elected executive takes the value of one when the executive is elected directly or indirectly, and zero otherwise. Source: Banks and Wilson (2020), Statesman’s Yearbook (1870–1913).
past resemble today’s illiberal systems such as Turkey and Venezuela, which contrast with modern democracies headed by presidents, such as the United States. What is more, presidential democracies would be autocratic under the criterium adopted by North and Weingast (1989) and the literature that followed it, which focuses on the legislature’s power to limit the executive rather than on elections. For these reasons, we consider presidential democracy more authoritarian than constitutional monarchy. We thus work with a democracy ranking that follows the order in which these polity groups were presented above: ranging from (1) true autocracy, the least democratic, to (4) true democracy, the most democratic. We use this ranking in an event study shown at the end of this article. Following this group typification, we condense the variables elected executive and effective legislature, shown in Fig. 1, into the following new dummy variables:
True autocracyit =
{1 when elected executiveit = 0 and effective legislatureit = 0; 0 otherwise.
Presidential democracyit =
{1 when elected executiveit = 1 and effective legislatureit = 0; 0 otherwise.
Constitutional monarchyit =
{1 when elected executiveit = 0 and effective legislatureit = 1; 0 otherwise.
True democracyit =
{1 when elected executiveit = 1 and effective legislatureit = 1; 0 otherwise.
Fig. 2 shows how, following the criteria above, we characterize the countries in our sample by polity groups from 1870 to 1913. Notoriously autocratic polities such as Russia and the Ottoman Empire are unsurprisingly classified as true autocracies.8 Countries
8 This result finds support in the contemporary press. We use the “term frequency” tool of Gale and include variations of dictatorship, autocracy, despotism, and tyranny as our choice of words because they reflect the historical terminology about autocratic regimes. These terms appear in the Economist in 96 articles, from 1870 to 1913, mainly in respect to Russia (30% of the total), but also substantially to the Ottoman Empire (13%).
6


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Fig. 2. Polity per country: 1870–1913. Note: True autocracy: unelected head of state governs without legislature constraint; Presidential democracy: head of state is elected but is not limited by the legislature; Constitutional monarchy: the head of state is not elected but an effective legislature limits his powers; True democracy: elected head of state limited by the legislature. Source: Banks and Wilson (2020); The Statesman’s Yearbook (1870–1913).
under typical dictators who staged elections but governed without legislative tutelage, such as Porfirio Díaz’s Mexico and Zelaya’s Nicaragua, appear as presidential democracies. Austria-Hungary is a famous example of constitutional monarchy. As stressed above, true democracies may not have been democratic by today’s standards, which explains why this typification is attributed to countries like Argentina and Costa Rica. Although imperfect, however, elections and Congress did play significant roles in those countries’ political processes (Botana, 1994; Alonso, 2000). Two conclusions stand out from Fig. 2. Firstly, the number of true democracies increased substantially over the years. Constitutional monarchies were the most stable polity group, even though their numbers declined slightly. Yet the most considerable decline happened with true autocracies, which fell from nine to three. Some of these extremely authoritarian polities became presidential democracies, which is the smallest group in our sample and only involved Latin American countries. The second conclusion imposes a limitation to our methodology: in most cases, regimes did not vary substantially. Across the 44 years we study, eight countries maintained their polities and thirteen had a dominant regime type.9 The remaining six countries (Brazil, Bulgaria, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua) switched between three or four regimes throughout the period.
4.3. Political stability variable
We construct a variable that captures the duration of political stability in every country across time. The variable is defined as the years since the last time a civil war or coup d’état took place. More formally, we set the variable years of domestic peaceit = 1 when a coup or a civil war happened in country i in year t = t0. Assuming that such events do not happen in the year t = t0 + n, where n = {1, 2, ...}, then years of domestic peaceit = n + 1 for every t.
Fig. 3 shows the value of years of domestic peace for our sample during the period of analysis. The dataset goes back to the 1810s, which allows us to capture political stability in the long run. It also explains why years of domestic peace takes values well above one for some countries in 1870. In the Portuguese case, for example, years of domestic peace1870 = 36, which is the number of years since
9 This is defined as having more than 30 years with one regime type.
7


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Fig. 3. Political stability: Years of domestic peace, 1870–1913. Note: Years of domestic peace takes the value of one whenever countries are in civil war or a coup d’état takes place, two in the first peaceful year after any of these events, three in the second peaceful year, and so on. Source: Calculated from Sarkees and Wayman (2010), Banks and Wilson (2020).
the end of the 1832–34 Portuguese Civil War. Years of domestic peace fluctuates close to one in particularly unstable countries, such as Serbia. On the other extreme, Sweden is the most stable country in our sample: it was undisturbed by either coups or civil wars from the beginning of the series. For Sweden, then, we set years of domestic peace1870 = 54, meaning that the variable took the value of one just after the end of the Napoleonic Wars.10
4.4. Financial variables
We control our model for a number of financial variables. In line with the literature, we control for default by introducing the dummy years on def aultit = 1 when the government in country i fails to meet its external financial obligations in time t, and 0 otherwise. The analogous dummy variable years on goldit controls for the time t when country i is on the gold standard. Debt/taxit is the ratio between the stock of sovereign debt the central government in country i owes in London and the tax revenue it collects in time t. The higher this ratio, the heavier the debt burden. Exports/populationit is a measure of openness of the economy. It is defined as the ratio between exports and population of i in t. Share of exports to Britainit is the exports the country i sells to Britain in proportion to its total exports. It captures any special relationship between the borrowing countries and Britain.11 Finally, market spreadit controls for global market conditions; it is the debt-weighted average of spreads for 27 countries in our sample for each year t, excluding the country i from the sample.12 We report the summary statistics and data sources in Appendix 2.
10 One issue with the political stability variable may be the potential for endogeneity with the political regime indicators. We address this issue by not including the polity and political stability indicators in the same model in section 5.2. 11 As noted in footnote 2, we do not include GDP as a control variable in our main specifications. Yet we do so as a robustness check (Table 3), and the results remain the same overall. Ferguson and Schularick (2006) control for trade openness with exports/population whereas Flandreau and Zumer (2004) and Accominotti et al. (2011) compute it relative to Britain. We adopt both approaches. 12 We have also conducted our analysis with the market-capitalization weighted average of bond spreads from Mauro et al. (2006), as well as British capital calls from Stone (1999), and the results do not change significantly.
8


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
4.5. Baseline model and empirical limitations
Our baseline model is:
logRit = θ1P olityit + θ2P eaceit + θ3χit + αregion + βt + εit (2)
where bond spread is the dependent variable as in Eq. (1); it enters into the model with logarithmic values to symmetrize the residuals, given the wide variation in spreads across time and countries. αregions and βt are the regional and time fixed effects, respectively. Polity refers to the polity dummy variables, both non-interacted (elected executive and effective legislature) and interacted in polity groups (true autocracy, presidential democracy, constitutional monarchy, and true democracy). Peace is the value of years of domestic peace for country j at year t, χ are the financial control variables,13 and εjt is the error term. We face two main empirical challenges. Firstly, most polities were stable across time in our sample. Hence, time-invariant polity variables prevent the model from being controlled by country fixed effects. Including country fixed effects would only take into account within country variance, disregarding between country variation (Beck, 2011; Plümper et al., 2005).14 Moreover, a simple random effects model shows serial and contemporaneous correlation of errors and groupwise heteroscedasticity.15 We partially address this problem by including regional fixed effects. The regions are defined based on geographical proximity: Asia (China and Japan), Caribbean Latin America (Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, and Venezuela), non-Caribbean Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, and Uruguay), Eastern Europe (Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria, Greece, the Ottoman Empire, Romania, Russia, and Serbia), Northern Europe (Denmark, Norway, and Sweden), and Southern Europe (Spain, Italy, and Portugal).16 The second problem is potential endogeneity between our polity and peace variables. Dictators often took power through coups and, once in office, threw their countries into civil wars, using violence to make their regimes more repressive. Inversely, those fighting for democracy often needed to take up arms to get rid of autocratic regimes.17 This is reflected in our dataset: 20.7% of the polity changes we analyze happened during civil wars and 17.2% when coups took place in the respective country. Although most polity changes happened in peaceful years, a large proportion coincided with violence (when years of domestic peace = 1). We do not claim that there was always a causal relationship between political violence and polity change in these cases, but the numbers indicate that there is room for endogeneity. In Section 5.2 we address this problem by running our baseline regression without years of domestic peace and with an alternative variable that captures external rather than domestic wars. These changes do not alter results significantly, indicating that endogeneity is unlikely to be a driver of our main conclusions.
5. Results and discussion
5.1. Baseline model
Table 1 shows the results of our baseline specifications with standardized beta coefficients and standard errors in parentheses.18 In specifications 1 and 2, we regress spreads on the two polity dummy variables effective legislature and elected executive, which we have described in Fig. 1. The coefficient of effective legislature is positive and significant, which suggests that limited governments borrowed more expensively in London. The size of the coefficient suggests that spreads were 5.5% higher in countries where the legislature was effective. This effect is considerable: it is equivalent to 34.1% of being in default, which notoriously damages countries’ credit.19 However, elected executive is not significant, which implies that the impact of elections on credit costs may be conditional upon the presence of a legislature. In specifications 3 to 5, we introduce the four polity groups described in the previous section. With respect to true autocracy (the omitted group), the coefficients of true democracy and constitutional monarchy are positive and significant. These are the two polity
13 The financial control variables are debt/tax revenue, exports/population, and share of exports to Britain at 3-years moving averages. 14 There is an extensive literature on this issue within the empirical political science literature beyond what is cited in the text. 15 We run a Hausman test to see whether unique errors are correlated with regressors in order to decide between fixed or random effects. 16 We divide Latin America using the Caribbean because of the growing influence of the United States in that region during our period of analysis. In comparison, the United States was less present elsewhere in the continent, where Britain remained the main trade and financial player (Smith, 1986). 17 A good example is Nicaragua under the authoritarian rule of José Santos Zelaya (1893–1909). Zelaya was the leader of a liberal alliance against the unconstitutional reelection of Roberto Sacasa (1889–1893). Once in power, Zelaya sent troops to invade Mosquito, then a British protectorate, and Honduras. Meanwhile, at home, he imposed an autocratic constitution and persecuted his former liberal allies. Zelaya continued to wage wars for the rest of his presidency, instrumentalizing these conflicts to build a regime he referred to as “honest dictatorship” (Cruz, 2005: 94). Another example is the Young Turk Revolution of 1908, a revolt initiated by army officers that brought an end to the autocratic rule of the Abdulhamid II and gave the representative assembly the power to pass legislation over the Sultan’s authority (Brown 2002: 23–26). 18 Standardized or beta coefficients are calculated as Bi = s(xi)
s(y) × θ(xi) , where y and xi are the dependent and the independent variables, respectively. θ(xi) is the unstandardized regression coefficient, s(xi) is the standard deviation of the independent variable xi, and s(y) is the standard deviation of the dependent variable y. Because beta coefficients are all in the same standardized units, they express the number of standard deviations by which the dependent variable changes with one standard deviation increase in the independent variable.
19 The elasticity of our variables of interest in relation to the dependent variable spread is given by: εi = (eBi× s(xi)
s(y) ) − 1, where Bi is the standardized coefficient reported in Table 1, s(xi) is the standard deviation of the independent variable xi, and s(y) is the standard deviation of the dependent variable y, in our case log bond spreads. Appendix 2 reports the standard deviations for all variables.
9


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Table 1
Baseline OLS regression results.
Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Effective legislature 0.123∗∗∗ (0.057) Elected executive -0.018 (0.058) True democracy 0.098∗∗∗ 0.115∗∗∗ 0.130∗∗∗ (0.087) (0.082) (0.069) Presidential democracy 0.012 0.026 0.001 (0.085) (0.079) (0.075) Constitutional monarchy 0.140∗∗∗ 0.138∗∗∗ 0.170∗∗∗ (0.069) (0.066) (0.064) Years of domestic peace −0.301∗∗∗ −0.280∗∗∗ −0.304∗∗∗ −0.302∗∗∗ −0.081∗∗∗ (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) Years on default 0.487∗∗∗ 0.485∗∗∗ 0.492∗∗∗ 0.471∗∗∗ 0.403∗∗∗ (0.076) (0.081) (0.081) (0.078) (0.062) Years on gold −0.095∗∗∗ −0.082∗∗∗ −0.093∗∗∗ −0.069∗∗ 0.026 (0.070) (0.069) (0.069) (0.069) (0.054) Debt/tax 0.098∗∗∗ 0.092∗∗∗ 0.092∗∗∗ 0.080∗∗∗ 0.082∗∗∗ (0.011) (0.011) (0.012) (0.011) (0.012) Exports/population −0.077∗∗∗ −0.025 −0.063∗∗ −0.050∗ 0.149∗∗∗ (0.010) (0.011) (0.013) (0.011) (0.013) Share of exports to UK −0.081∗∗∗ −0.065∗∗ −0.080∗∗∗ −0.100∗∗∗ 0.108∗∗∗ (0.125) (0.129) (0.123) (0.125) (0.109) Market spread 0.196∗∗∗ 0.198∗∗∗ 0.196∗∗∗ (0.054) (0.054) (0.053)
Observations 974 974 974 974 974 R-squared 0.548 0.537 0.549 0.598 0.744 Time FE NO NO NO YES YES Region FE NO NO NO NO YES
Note: Dependent variable is log values of market-weighted bond spreads at annual frequency (mean = 1.30). Standardized beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Constants are significant at ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗ < 0.1. Source: Appendix 1.
groups in which the legislature limits the executive, in line with the result for effective legislature in specification 1. Once again, the size of the effects is considerable: specification 5, our baseline model, suggests that true democracies faced 5.7% higher spreads than true autocracies. This is the equivalent of 35.4% of the penalty imposed on defaulters, which, from the results in specification 5, increases spreads by 16.3%. The effect with constitutional monarchy is even higher: 7.9%. Presidential democracy is not significant. The coefficients of the control variables have the expected sign and do not show any correlation with our polity and political stability variables. Particularly notable is the variable years of domestic peace, which has a negative and significant coefficient, suggesting that creditors were averse to political violence, as one would expect. We control for market spread and for time fixed effects separately, since both variables capture time-specific conditions common to all countries. Results hold irrespectively. The same applies to the regional fixed effects, whose introduction increases the polity variables’ coefficients.
5.2. Robustness checks
Robustness checks confirm the baseline results shown above. Table 2 introduces different definitions of polity and peace variables. In specifications 1 to 3, we use alternative definitions of polity variables from the Polity IV project (executive constraint, executive recruitment, and the Polity index). In contrast with the polity variables in our baseline regressions, these indexes rely on modern data and methods, and thus may not reflect how contemporaries perceived political systems. Another difference is that they are continuous rather than dummy variables. We have normalized these variables so that they take values from 1 to 3, with higher values indicating a more democratic regime type. Executive recruitment captures how political leaders come to occupy their positions. It combines three indicators of the degree to which the method of choosing heads of states was institutionalized, competitive, and open to society as a whole. Free and fair elections, in which any party may run, receive the highest score, while autocratic transfers of power between leaders, such as the inheritance of the throne in absolutist monarchies, receive the lowest. Executive constraint captures how much the legislature can limit the power of the executive. Strong parliaments are associated with high scores, in opposition to polities with no legislative power at all. Countries with weak parliaments are between these extremes. The variable Polity index is a combination of the above with a third variable that captures civil liberties (Marshall et al., 2017). The Polity IV variables have positive and significant coefficients, which supports our conclusion that democracies were associated with higher spreads. Results only differ for elections: while we have not found any results on this in our baseline models, in this robustness check executive recruitment is positive and significant. Hence, the conclusion that democracies borrowed more expensively
10


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Table 2
OLS regressions with different polity and peace variables.
Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Polity index 0.099∗∗∗ (0.038) Executive constraint 0.051∗∗∗ (0.025) Executive recruitment 0.081∗∗∗ (0.037) True democracy 0.125∗∗∗ 0.125∗∗∗ (0.070) (0.070) Presidential democracy 0.006 0.006 (0.076) (0.076) Constitutional monarchy 0.156∗∗∗ 0.156∗∗∗ (0.063) (0.063) Years of domestic peace −0.035∗ −0.058∗∗∗ −0.055∗∗∗ (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) Years of external peace −0.002 (0.001) Observations 971 938 938 974 974 R-squared 0.732 0.708 0.702 0.741 0.741 Controls YES YES YES YES YES Time FE YES YES YES YES YES Region FE YES YES YES YES YES
Note: Dependent variable is log values of market-weighted bond spreads at annual frequency (mean = 1.30). Standardized beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Controls include years on default, years on gold, debt/tax, exports/population, share of exports to UK. Constants are significant at ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Source: Appendix 1.
than autocracies is stronger when we use Polity IV’s modern indexes instead of our main variables, which have been constructed from contemporary sources. We next consider variations of the political instability variable that, as explained in Section 4.3, may be endogenous to the polity variables. In specification 4, we run our baseline model (from Table 1, column 5) without the variable years of domestic peace. Overall, results remain the same, with the variables true democracy and constitutional monarchy positive and significant. According to this new specification, true democracies had spreads 5.5% higher than true autocracies. This effect is almost the same as the figure we found in our baseline model (5.7%). This exercise does not allow us to rule out the hypothesis that there is endogeneity between our polity and peace variables. However, it strongly suggests that endogeneity is not driving our main conclusions: results hold with and without years of domestic peace.
In model 5, we introduce a different peace variable, years of external peace, which captures the effect of external conflicts. This variable is constructed in a similar manner to years of domestic peace, but it takes into account interstate rather than domestic civil wars. It takes the value of 1 in the year t when country i wages wars with other states, 2 in the first peaceful year after such conflict, and so on. The coefficient is very small and not significant, which makes sense because conflicts in a foreign land were less harmful to economic activity than civil wars, while victorious countries could profit from the economic exploitation of conquered territories and war reparations, both common practices at the time.20 The most important conclusion of specification 5 is that our variables of interest true democracy and constitutional monarchy remain significant. This is another indication that endogeneity is not driving our main results, since years of external peace is arguably less endogenous than years of domestic peace. The decision of going to war abroad depended not only on the domestic but also on foreign governments. Hence authoritarian belligerent leaders were more likely to use civil than interstate wars to manipulate the political systems at home. Table 3 shows a second round of robustness tests that include additional variables and a different estimation procedure. In specification 1, we take financial intermediaries into account by introducing two dummy variables that control for countries under international financial controls and whose debt was underwritten by Rothschilds. International financial controls emerged following defaults, when bondholders’ representatives or their governments took charge of economic policy in indebted countries (Mitchener and Weidenmier 2010; Tunçer 2015). In our sample, that was the case of Bulgaria, China, Greece, Guatemala, Nicaragua, the Ottoman Empire, Peru, Serbia, and Venezuela in different years. Rothschilds was the world’s most prestigious debt underwriter and did business with a relatively small number of governments: from our sample, these include Austria-Hungary, Brazil, Chile, Italy, the Ottoman Empire, Russia, and Spain.21 Apart from Chile, which joined the club relatively late, the Rothschilds club was composed only of
20 Japan is a notorious case of a belligerent nation that profited from military victories (Suzuki, 1994). 21 London House of Rothschild (1905).
11


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Table 3
Robustness checks: additional controls and model.
Variables (1) (2) (3) (4)
True democracy 0.110∗∗∗ 0.094∗∗∗ 0.130∗∗∗ 0.130∗∗∗ (0.066) (0.068) (0.069) (0.071) Presidential democracy −0.040 −0.023 0.0003 0.001 (0.075) (0.074) (0.075) (0.080) Constitutional monarchy 0.147∗∗∗ 0.123∗∗∗ 0.166∗∗∗ 0.170∗∗∗ (0.058) (0.066) (0.063) (0.062) Years of domestic peace −0.032∗ −0.070∗∗∗ −0.080∗∗∗ −0.081∗∗∗ (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) Rothschilds −0.177∗∗∗ (0.067) International financial control 0.005 (0.092) Log GDP −0.129∗∗∗ (0.017) Log GDP per capita −0.016 (0.058) Observations 974 974 974 974 R-squared 0.761 0.750 0.744 0.744 Model OLS OLS OLS PCSE Controls YES YES YES YES Time FE YES YES YES YES Region FE YES YES YES YES
Note: Dependent variable is log values of market-weighted bond spreads at annual frequency (mean = 1.30). Standardized beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Controls include years on default, years on gold, debt/tax, exports/population, share of exports to UK. Constants are significant at ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Panel-corrected standard errors (PCSE) model (4) retains OLS parameter estimators, but replaces OLS standard errors for PCSEs, which takes into account the groupwise heteroscedasticity for 27 groups (countries). Source: Appendix 1.
monarchies in the 1870s.22 These controls do not substantially change the coefficient of the variables of interest. The coefficient of the Rothschilds dummy is negative and significant, as one would expect from the literature.23 International financial control is not significant. This may be because its positive impact on bond spreads was conditional upon the domestic politics of the host country.24 In specifications 2 and 3, we control our baseline result for the logarithms of GDP and GDP per capita, both of which are measured in PPP dollars of 2011. Even though these variables are ahistorical, they are useful to account for variation in the size of the economies (say Russia in opposition to Costa Rica) and living standards (rich Argentina and poor China, for example) in our sample. The main results hold. In specification 2, which controls for log GDP, the effect of true democracy is 9.7%. The introduction of GDP per capita, in specification 3, does not alter the polity variables’ coefficients. Finally, in column 4, we run our baseline specification with panelcorrected standard errors (PCSE).25 The results remain the same.
5.3. Event study
So far our analysis has focused on average correlations between bond spreads and political regime types. However, the dynamics of regime changes may also be informative. In this section, we run a panel event study drawing on our baseline model.26 Our goal in this exercise is to estimate the impact of regime changes that took place in different countries of our sample between 1870 and 1913. We define events as democratization, which happened when countries switched to a more democratic polity, as opposed to the
22 Ferguson (1998) claims that the bank’s owners preferred monarchies to republics, which may explain why they picked monarchic Brazil as their only Latin American client in the 1820s. 23 Flandreau and Flores (2009) propose that Rothschilds guided bondholders by associating its premier default-free “brand” only with creditworthy borrowers. 24 In the case of the Middle East and the Balkans, Tunçer (2015) shows that authoritarian Ottoman Empire was able to implement the reforms proposed by the international financial control more easily than democratic Greece. A similar point can be made for Peru, where the autocratic regime could cede the control of key natural resources to British bondholders with limited political challenge (Vizcarra 2009; Sicotte et al. 2010). 25 The PCSE model retains OLS parameter estimators, but replaces OLS standard errors for PCSEs, which takes into account the contemporaneous correlation of the errors and groupwise heteroscedasticity. For examples of its use in economic history research, see Karaman and Pamuk (2013), Meissner (2005), and Ferguson and Schularick (2012). 26 Panel event studies are widespread in policy research, and in contrast with those of finance, which usually rely on high-frequency data, it helps to analyze the events that may not create an immediate impact in time series in a cross-sectional context (Clarke and Schythe, 2020).
12


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Fig. 4. Panel event study: the impact of regime changes on bond spreads. Note: Events are defined as changes in polity type, which happen in year 0. The treatment group are countries in which new polity types remain stable for at least ten years after the regime change. Democratization happens when polities become more democratic after year 0, and the inverse applies to autocratization. The order of polities, from less to more democratic, is: true autocracy, presidential democracy, constitutional monarchy, and true democracy. Full regression results are reported in Appendix 5. Source: Appendix 1.
event of autocratization.27 The treatment countries are defined as those in which polity changed and remained the same until 1913.28 Therefore, we do not include countries that continuously switched across polity groups. For example, Colombia had the most frequent polity changes in our sample and thus is not included in the event study.29 We also exclude events that happened after 1903, in the final 10 years of our period. We do not apply such stringent conditions in the years that preceded the events, since regimes often changed several times before they stabilized as a single polity.30 In each event, the control group consists of the countries where no regime change took place. We have a relatively larger number of democratization events because that was the historical trend during our period of analysis.31 As for autocratization, we have a more limited treatment group, consisting of only four countries.32 After we identify the events, the treatment, and the control groups, we then calculate the lags and leads of the events. We use the panel event study as the extension of our baseline OLS regression, as outlined in Table 1, column 5. This is the most historically consistent specification since it includes all our controls, as well as year and region fixed effects. Finally, we include a “post-event” indicator for all periods after the regime change in the treated countries. The estimated model is the following:
log Rit =
∑L
l=2
βl(Lag l)it +
K ∑
k=2
γk
(Lead k)
it + χit + αregions + βt + εit (3)
Besides the lags and leads terms, all variables are defined as in Eq. (1). Lags and leads are binary variables indicating that country i was a given number of years away (respectively before and after) from the event of democratization or autocratization. l and k are respectively lags and leads. A single lag or lead variable is omitted to capture the baseline difference between areas where the regime change does and does not occur.33 We report regression results in Appendix 5. Fig. 4 shows point estimates along with their 90% confidence intervals. The baseline (omitted) period is one year prior to the regime change and is indicated by a solid vertical line. In the case of autocratization, leads and lags variables are not statistically significant. Democratization, however, is associated with significantly higher spreads nine years before and five years after the transition. This suggests that creditors punished countries that went through processes of democratization, which often started prior to the transition due to political uncertainty and lasted until the polity got stabilized. This is consistent with our findings so far. However, these results should be interpreted with caution because of limitations in our sample. Our treatment and control groups are not perfectly balanced, and the number of countries is small. Moreover, some
27 As explained in the previous section, we characterize the polity group according to the following order, from least to most democratic: (1) true autocracy, (2) presidential democracy, (3) constitutional monarchy, and (4) true democracy. Hence, democratization happened whenever countries moved from 1 to 4, even when they switched to neighboring groups (say, from presidential democracy to constitutional monarchy), while autocratization happened when the transition was from 4 to 1. 28 The only exception was Nicaragua, which had another polity change in 1912. 29 See Fig. 2. 30 If we were to introduce countries that had only one regime change (for example, Japan in 1890), there would be three events to run this exercise. 31 Brazil (1894), Costa Rica (1882), Japan (1890), Norway (1884), Peru (1886), Sweden (1883), Uruguay (1887), and Venezuela (1888). Event years are in parentheses. 32 Bulgaria (1894), Guatemala (1898), Nicaragua (1894), and Spain (1874). Event years are in parentheses. 33 We conduct this analysis with the eventdd command in STATA, as outlined by Clarke and Schythe (2020). Our specification is also based on the general specification by Clarke and Schythe (2020: 4).
13


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
of our countries switched across polity groups before time 0 but maintained the same polity after that. In other words, our sample includes countries which showed polity variation before the event but not after. This is particularly a concern in the event study on democratization because most countries that democratized had frequent polity changes. In the short run, bondholders reacted negatively to these changes, and the event study on democratization is likely to be capturing this reaction several years before time 0.34 Nevertheless, this data-driven bias does not apply to the period after the breaks. Thus, the event study suggests that democratization led to significantly higher spreads for another five years, when polities were durable.
6. Conclusion
This article shows that autocracies were associated with lower borrowing costs in London than democracies during the first financial globalization between 1870 and 1913. Even though it does not claim causality, the exercise suggests strong association between low credit risk and unelected governments that ruled without parliamentary tutelage. Following the language of contemporaries, we call such polities “true autocracies”. In association with primary qualitative evidence, these results suggest that creditors preferred autocratic regimes, since they were perceived as more capable of promoting political stability than democratic ones. This result is at odds with the influential democratic advantage hypothesis, according to which democratic institutions lead to lower borrowing costs. The notion of democratic advantage has been widely discussed for early modern Europe, with the British parliamentary system being presented as a model. There are two main differences between early modern Europe and the countries and period we analyze. Firstly, eighteenth-century Britain could be characterized as a constitutional monarchy because it lacked free and fair elections. In contrast, by the turn of the twentieth century, elections were a common institution across the world, including in some of the countries that make up our sample. Hence, we should be cautious when comparing these two periods. The evidence presented above suggests that there was no democratic advantage for capital-importing countries during the first financial globalization, based on what contemporaries understood by “true democracies” at the time. A second contrast between our period and early modern Britain may explain why that was so: in an era of globalization, the countries we analyze borrowed extensively abroad, whereas pre-modern European sovereigns did so mainly at home. The empowering of voters and legislators may increase the power of domestic creditors, as proposed by the democratic advantage hypothesis. Yet one may assume that democratization reduces the capacity of foreign creditors to influence the actions of governments, since those governments become more accountable to domestic taxpayers. Foreign bondholders do not vote and are not represented in the Parliaments of the indebted countries. In this paper, we do not discuss the long-term consequences of accessing relatively lower costs of borrowing for the autocratic regimes, especially with regards to the development of domestic financial institutions and fiscal capacity. Arriving at a precise understanding of the political economy of sovereign debt during the first financial globalization – involving foreign creditors, legislators, policymakers, and taxpayers – requires case studies that are beyond the scope of this article, but the results presented here make the case for future research along such lines.
Acknowledgments
This article is part of the research project Democracy, Autocracy and Sovereign Debt: How Polity Shaped Government-Creditor Relations in the First Financial Globalization, which is financed by the British Academy Newton Fund. The authors are indebted to Rui Esteves, Colin Lewis, Larry Neal, Şevket Pamuk, Márcio Nakaguma, Ariel Akerman, and William Summerhill, as well as the participants of the Social Science Seminar at CALTECH in 2018, World Economic History Congress Polity and State Finance session in Boston in 2018, Economic History Society Conference in Belfast in 2019, Economic History Association Conference in 2020, and the Global Economic History Seminar at Cambridge in 2021, the editor of the Explorations in Economic History, and two anonymous referees for their insightful comments. The usual disclaimer applies.
Appendix 1. Data sources
Spreads: Investor’s Monthly Manual (1870–1913). Polity variables: Statesman’s Yearbook (1870–1913), Banks and Wilson (2020), Polity IV project. Years of domestic peace, years of external peace: Sarkees and Wayman (2010), Banks and Wilson (2020), Clodfelter (2002). Years on default: Corporation of Foreign Bondholders (1870–1913). Years on gold: Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). International trade: Federico and Tena-Junguito (2019). State finances and tax revenue: Statesman’s Yearbook (1870–1913), Flandreau and Zumer (2004), Tunçer (2015), Banks and Wilson (2020). International financial control: Mitchener and Weidenmier (2010), Tunçer (2015). Rothschilds: Investor’s Monthly Manual (1870–1913), London House of Rothschilds (1905). GDP per capita: Bolt and van Zanden, (2020).
34 We do not rule out the possibility of a pre-trend driven by another variable.
14


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Appendix 2. Summary statistics
Tables A–C
Table A
Summary Statistics, annual frequency.
Variable Obs Mean Std. dev. Min Max
Bond spreads (weighted average) 999 7.17 11.55 0.26 99.17 log Bond spreads (weighted average) 999 1.30 1.07 -1.33 4.59 Effective legislature 1,170 0.66 0.47 0.00 1.00 Elected executive 1,170 0.44 0.50 0.00 1.00 True autocracy 1,188 0.20 0.40 0.00 1.00 True democracy 1,188 0.30 0.46 0.00 1.00 Presidential democracy 1,188 0.13 0.34 0.00 1.00 Constitutional monarchy 1,188 0.35 0.48 0.00 1.00 Polity IV 1,176 1.81 0.53 1.00 3.00 Executive constraint 1,140 1.80 0.74 1.00 3.00 Executive recruitment 1,142 1.86 0.75 1.00 3.00 Years without coup or civil war 1,182 16.80 18.37 1.00 99.00 Years without interstate war 1,182 31.21 27.51 1.00 105.00 Rothschilds 1,188 0.15 0.36 0.00 1.00 International financial control 1,172 0.14 0.35 0.00 1.00 GDP per capita (in 2011 USD) 1,172 1,931.53 1,181.88 424.00 6,687.00 GDP (in 2011 USD) 1,172 40,174.73 80,947.37 339.53 482,538.30 log GDP (in 2011 USD) 1,172 9.07 1.77 5.83 13.09 log GDP per capita (in 2011 USD) 1,172 7.39 0.60 6.05 8.81 Years on default 1,180 0.20 0.40 0.00 1.00 Years on gold 1,180 0.26 0.44 0.00 1.00 Debt/tax revenue 1,123 3.68 2.88 0.00 21.05 Exports/population (£) 1,170 2.41 2.45 0.05 14.62 Share of exports to Britain (3-years-ma) 1,119 0.32 0.28 0.01 1.82 Market weighted spread 1,188 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.06
Table B
Summary statistics, monthly frequency with weighted averages of bond spreads.
Variable Obs Mean Std. dev. Min Max
Bond spreads (weighted average) 11,855 6.44 10.01 0.00 115.31 log Bond spreads (weighted average) 11,721 1.26 1.02 -2.85 4.75 Effective legislature 11,855 0.62 0.49 0.00 1.00 Elected executive 11,855 0.44 0.50 0.00 1.00 True autocracy 11,855 0.23 0.42 0.00 1.00 True democracy 11,855 0.29 0.45 0.00 1.00 Presidential democracy 11,855 0.15 0.36 0.00 1.00 Constitutional monarchy 11,855 0.33 0.47 0.00 1.00 Polity IV 11,820 1.81 0.54 1.00 3.00 Executive constraint 11,402 1.83 0.75 1.00 3.00 Executive recruitment 11,417 1.84 0.74 1.00 3.00 Years without coup or civil war 11,855 17.75 18.93 1.00 99.00 Years without interstate war 11,855 31.27 28.28 1.00 105.00 Rothschilds 11,855 0.18 0.38 0.00 1.00 International financial control 11,855 0.13 0.34 0.00 1.00 GDP per capita (in 2011 USD) 11,855 2,035.68 1,206.18 424.00 6,687.00 GDP (in 2011 USD) 11,855 44,158.08 82,963.65 339.53 482,538.30 log GDP (in 2011 USD) 11,855 9.26 1.77 5.83 13.09 log GDP per capita (in 2011 USD) 11,855 7.45 0.59 6.05 8.81 Years on default 11,855 0.20 0.40 0.00 1.00 Years on gold 11,855 0.27 0.44 0.00 1.00 Debt/tax revenue 11,801 3.69 2.61 0.00 15.77 Exports/population (£) 11,855 2.53 2.56 0.05 14.62 Share of exports to Britain (3-years-ma) 11,617 0.29 0.25 0.01 1.77
15


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Table C
Summary statistics, monthly frequency without weighted averages of bond spreads.
Variable Obs Mean Std. dev. Min Max
Bond spreads 33,345 6.19 10.73 0.00 136.88 log Bond spreads 33,345 1.14 1.03 -5.49 4.92 Effective legislature 33,345 0.65 0.48 0.00 1.00 Elected executive 33,345 0.43 0.49 0.00 1.00 True autocracy 33,345 0.29 0.45 0.00 1.00 True democracy 33,345 0.35 0.48 0.00 1.00 Presidential democracy 33,345 0.07 0.25 0.00 1.00 Constitutional monarchy 33,345 0.29 0.46 0.00 1.00 Polity IV 33,288 1.80 0.58 1.00 3.00 Executive constraint 32,375 1.81 0.78 1.00 3.00 Executive recruitment 32,296 1.76 0.76 1.00 3.00 Years without coup or civil war 33,345 18.04 18.93 1.00 99.00 Years without interstate war 33,345 26.44 23.96 1.00 105.00 Rothschilds 33,345 0.30 0.46 0.00 1.00 International financial control 33,345 0.18 0.38 0.00 1.00 GDP per capita (in 2011 USD) 33,345 2,225.92 1,385.68 424.00 6,687.00 GDP (in 2011 USD) 33,345 57,840.88 95,218.79 339.53 482,538.30 log GDP (in 2011 USD) 33,345 9.73 1.68 5.83 13.09 log GDP per capita (in 2011 USD) 33,345 7.52 0.61 6.05 8.81 Years on default 33,345 0.17 0.38 0.00 1.00 Years on gold 33,345 0.34 0.47 0.00 1.00 Debt/tax revenue 33,250 3.91 2.82 0.00 15.77 Exports/population (£) 33,345 2.86 2.95 0.05 14.62 Share of exports to Britain (3-years-ma) 33,085 0.29 0.20 0.01 1.77
Appendix 3. List of bonds used in the monthly analysis
Argentina 3.5% External Loan of 1889 Hungary 3% State Loan of 1895 Argentina 4.5% Sterling Bonds Hungary 4% Gold Rentes Argentina 4% Bonds of 1897 (Law 3378 and 3783) Hungary 5% Bond of 1871 Argentina 4% Bonds of 1897 (Law 3378) Hungary 5% Bond of 1873 Argentina 4% Bonds of 1897 (Law 3655 and 3750) Hungary 6% Gold Rentes Argentina 4% Bonds of 1898 Italian Irrigation 6% Loan Argentina 4% Bonds of 1898 Redeemable 1901 Italy 3.5% Rentes Argentina 5% Bonds of 1884 Italy 5% Rentes of 1861 Argentina 5% Bonds of 1886–1887 Italy 5% State Domain Bonds of 1865 Argentina 5% Treasury Consolidation Bonds Italy 6% Tobacco Loan of 1868 Argentina 6% Bonds of 1866–1868 Japan 4.5% Sterling Bonds of 1905 1st Series Argentina 6% Funding Loan Japan 4.5% Sterling Bonds of 1905 2nd Series Austria 4% Gold Rentes Japan 4% bonds of 1905 Brazil 4.5% Bonds of 1852–1858 Japan 4% Sterling Bonds of 1899 Brazil 4.5% Bonds of 1860 Japan 7% Bond of 1873 Brazil 4.5% Bonds of 1863 Japan 9% Customs Loan of 1870 Brazil 4.5% Bonds of 1883 Mexico 3% Bond of 1851 Brazil 4.5% Bonds of 1888 Mexico 3% Bond of 1864 (issued in arrears) Brazil 4.5% Gold Loan of 1879 Mexico 5% Consolidated External Loan of 1899 Brazil 4% Bonds of 1889 Mexico 6% Consolidated Bonds Brazil 5% Funding Bonds of 1898 Mexico 6% External Bonds of 1890 Brazil 5% Loan of 1859 Nicaragua 6% Bonds reduced to 4% Brazil 5% Loan of 1865 Nicaragua 6% Sterling Loan of 1909 Brazil 5% Loan of 1871 Norway 3.5% Assenting Bonds of 1886 Brazil 5% Loan of 1875 Norway 3.5% Bonds English Scrip Brazil 5% Loan of 1903 Norway 3% Bonds of 1888 Bulgaria 4.5% Bonds Norway 4.5% Bonds of 1876 Bulgaria 5% Gold Loan of 1902 Norway 4.5% Bonds of 1878 Bulgaria 6% Bonds of 1888 Norway 4% Bonds of 1880 Bulgaria 6% Sterling Mortgage Bonds Peru 5.5% Salt Loan Chile 4.5% Bond of 1858 Peru 5% Bonds of 1865 Chile 4.5% Bond of 1885 Peru 5% Consolidated Loan of 1872 Chile 4.5% Bond of 1893 Portugal 3% Irredeemable Loan Chile 4.5% Gold Loan of 1906 Portugal 3% Irredeemable Loan 1st Series Stamped Chile 4.5% Loan of 1886 Portugal 3% Irredeemable New Loan of 1869 Chile 4.5% Loan of 1887 Portugal 3% Irredeemable New Loan of 1874 Chile 4.5% Loan of 1889 Russia 3.5% Bond Chile 4.5% Loan of 1895 Russia 3% Bonds of 1859
16


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Chile 5% Loan of 1870 (2% Sinking Fund First 5 Yrs) Russia 4.5% Bonds of 1850 Chile 5% Loan of 1873 Russia 4.5% Bonds of 1860 Chile 5% Loan of 1875 Russia 4.5% Bonds of 1875 Chile 5% Loan of 1892 Russia 4% Rentes Chile 5% Loan of 1896 Russia 5% Bonds of 1822 Chile 5% Loan of 1905 Russia 5% Bonds of 1862 Chile 6% Bond of 1867 Serbia 4% Unified Bonds Chile 7% Bond of 1866 Spain 2% Bonds (overdue coupons) China 4.50% Gold Bonds of 1898 Spain 3% Deferred Bonds China 5% Bond of 1896 Spain 3% External Bonds (1% in Cash) China 5% Registered Bond of 1896 Spain 4% External Bonds of 1882 China 6% Bond of 1885 Series A Spain 4% Sealed Bonds China 6% Bond of 1885 Series B Sweden 3.5% Bonds of 1900 China 6% Gold Bond of 1895 Sweden 3% Bonds of 1889 China 6% Gold Bond of 1895 Redeem 1901–1915 Sweden 4.5% Bonds of 1876 China 7% Bond Series A Sweden 4.5% Government Loan of 1864 China 7% Bond Series B Sweden 4% Bonds of 1878 China 7% Silver Bond Sweden 4% Bonds of 1880 1st Issue China 8% Bond of 1874–1876 Sweden 5% Bonds of 1868 China 8% Bond of 1877 Ottoman 3.5% Scrip of 1894 Colombia 1.50% to 3% External Loan of 1896 Ottoman 4% Loan of 1902 Colombia 3% External Loan Ottoman 4% Priority Loan of 1890 Colombia 4.50% New Granada Debt Converted Bond Ottoman 4% Unified Bonds Colombia 4.75% Bond of 1873 Ottoman 5% Customs Loan Costa Rica 4% Bond of 1911 Ottoman 5% General Debt of 1865 Costa Rica 5% A, 3% in 1898–1904 Ottoman 5% Ottoman Deferred Bonds of 1877 Costa Rica 5%B, 4% in 1887, 2.5% in1898–1904 Ottoman 5% Secured Egyptian Bond of 1854 Costa Rica 6% Bond of 1871 First Issue Ottoman 6% Bonds of 1869 Costa Rica 6% Bond of 1871 Second Issue Ottoman 6% Bonds of 1873 Costa Rica 7% Bond of 1872 Ottoman 6% Egyptian Trust Bonds of Danubian Provinces 7% Loan of 1864 Ottoman 6% Loan of 1862 Danubian Provinces 8% Loan of 1867 Ottoman 6% Loan of 1863–1864 Denmark 3% Amortisable Bonds of 1897 Ottoman 6% Loan of 1868 Denmark 3% Gold Bond of 1894 Ottoman 9% Treasury Bonds of 1872 Series A Denmark 3% Stock of 1825 Ottoman Converted Bonds – Series B 1 % Denmark 4% Bond of 1850–1861 Ottoman Converted Bonds – Series C 1 % Denmark 4% Stock of 1862 Ottoman Converted Bonds – Series D 1 % Ecuador 1% New Consolidated Bond Uruguay 3.5% Bonds Ecuador 4.5% New External Bonds Increasing to 5% Uruguay 5% Bonds of 1896 Greece 4% Monopoly Loan Uruguay 5% Consolidated bonds of 1905 Greece 4% Rentes Uruguay 5% Unified Bonds of 1883 Greece 5% Funding Loan of 1893 Uruguay 6% Bonds of 1871 Greece 5% Loan of 1881 Venezuela 6% Bond of 1862 Greece 5% Loan of 1884 Venezuela 6% Bond of 1862 (issued for arrears) Greece 5% Loan of 1890 Venezuela 6% Bond of 1864 Guatemala 4% Bond Venezuela 3% Bond Guatemala 4% External Loan Venezuela 3% Diplomatic Debt Guatemala 5% Bond Venezuela 4% New Consolidated Bonds Guatemala 6% Loan of 1869
Source: Investor’s Monthly Manual (1870–1913)
Appendix 4. Results at monthly frequency
4.1. Market value weighted average of bond spreads
Although monthly frequency data is available for most bond prices in London during our period, all our regressors are defined per year, including the variables that capture polity. For this reason, in the main text, we have annualized the spreads by averaging monthly data and conducted our empirical exercise at an annual frequency. This has the disadvantage of reducing the variation in our dependent variable. In this appendix, we run our main specification at a monthly frequency to check if annualization is somehow affecting our main results. The model is the same as in equation 1, but now time t refers to months rather than years. Hence, αit is the time fixed effects for 527 months. As shown in Table D below, that is not the case: results hold at monthly frequency. With higher frequency, all coefficients become smaller than in our annual exercise. The effect of true democracy on spreads is 2.8%, according to specification 3, our preferred model in Table D, compared with 5.7% at annual frequency (our baseline model in Table 1). This reduction is expected, given that we are now varying the dependent variable monthly and repeating all covariates every 12 months. This is the reason why all other coefficients are also smaller. The best way to compare this effect with that found in our baseline model is by normalizing it for other variables, such as default. Seen in this way, the results do not change considerably: the effect of true democracy on spreads is 18.9% of the effect of default. Another difference with our annual results is that presidential democracy is now significant and positive, although less robust than the other polity groups.
17


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Table D
Market value weighted average of bond spreads by country, monthly frequency.
Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Effective legislature 0.046∗∗∗ (0.036) Elected executive 0.022 (0.062) True democracy 0.062∗ 0.056 0.055 0.062∗∗∗ (0.081) (0.085) (0.086) (0.022) Presidential democracy 0.050∗ 0.055∗ 0.053∗ 0.050∗∗∗ (0.083) (0.083) (0.085) (0.025) Constitutional monarchy 0.068∗∗∗ 0.055∗∗ 0.059∗∗ 0.068∗∗∗ (0.053) (0.057) (0.058) (0.018) Years of domestic peace -0.079∗∗∗ -0.068∗∗∗ -0.078∗∗∗ -0.078∗∗∗ (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.000) Years of external peace -0.069∗∗∗ (0.001) Years on default 0.347∗∗∗ 0.347∗∗∗ 0.349∗∗∗ 0.354∗∗∗ 0.358∗∗∗ 0.349∗∗∗ (0.075) (0.074) (0.074) (0.077) (0.079) (0.016) Years on gold 0.001 0.003 0.005 -0.001 -0.015 0.005 (0.054) (0.055) (0.057) (0.056) (0.061) (0.015) Debt/tax 0.180∗∗∗ 0.173∗∗∗ 0.177∗∗∗ 0.179∗∗∗ 0.185∗∗∗ 0.177∗∗∗ (0.009) (0.010) (0.010) (0.010) (0.010) (0.003) Exports/population 0.041∗ 0.057∗∗∗ 0.052∗∗∗ 0.061∗∗∗ 0.070∗∗∗ 0.052∗∗∗ (0.008) (0.007) (0.008) (0.009) (0.008) (0.003) Share of exports to UK 0.112∗∗∗ 0.117∗∗∗ 0.119∗∗∗ 0.123∗∗∗ 0.127∗∗∗ 0.119∗∗∗ (0.102) (0.101) (0.096) (0.100) (0.098) (0.029)
Observations 11,477 11,477 11,477 11,477 11,477 11,477 R-squared 0.713 0.712 0.715 0.711 0.714 0.715 Model OLS OLS OLS OLS OLS PCSE Time FE YES YES YES YES YES YES Region FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Note: Dependent variable is log values of market-weighted bond spreads at monthly frequency (mean = 1.26). Standardized beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Constants are significant at ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Standard errors are adjusted for 44 clusters in year. Panel-corrected standard errors (PCSE) model (6) retains OLS parameter estimators, but replaces OLS standard errors for PCSEs, which takes into account the groupwise heteroscedasticity for 27 groups (countries). Source: Appendix 1.
4.2. Bond based spreads without averaging
We have followed Alquist and Chabot (2011) in defining our dependent variable as the weighted average of the spreads issued per country (see Eq. (1)). As explained in footnote 5, an alternative approach is to define the dependent variables without averaging the bonds, so that spreads are defined as Rjt = rjt – rUKt, where rjt is the coupon yield of bond j in time t. To address the small-cluster problem and account for the repeated values in some of the control variables, regressions include double clustered standard errors on year and country (27 countries ∗ 44 years). Table E shows that results hold when we run our main models with bond-based spreads at monthly frequency. The coefficient of true democracy is higher than in Table D. It suggests that true democracies are associated with a rise of 5.4% in spreads, the equivalent of 44.9% of the penalty paid by defaulters.
18


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Table E
Bond based spreads, monthly frequency.
Variables (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Effective legislature 0.101∗∗∗ (0.061) Elected executive 0.017 (0.055) True democracy 0.112∗∗∗ 0.101∗∗∗ 0.098∗∗∗ 0.112∗∗∗ (0.075) (0.079) (0.080) (0.014) Presidential democracy 0.059∗∗∗ 0.068∗∗∗ 0.065∗∗∗ 0.059∗∗∗ (0.090) (0.095) (0.097) (0.019) Constitutional monarchy 0.124∗∗∗ 0.099∗∗∗ 0.104∗∗∗ 0.124∗∗∗ (0.070) (0.072) (0.073) (0.011) Years of domestic peace -0.157∗∗∗ -0.140∗∗∗ -0.156∗∗∗ -0.156∗∗∗ (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.000) Years of external peace -0.059∗∗∗ (0.001) Years on default 0.300∗∗∗ 0.304∗∗∗ 0.305∗∗∗ 0.321∗∗∗ 0.328∗∗∗ 0.305∗∗∗ (0.070) (0.071) (0.069) (0.072) (0.073) (0.012) Years on gold -0.045 -0.044 -0.041 -0.055∗ -0.064∗∗ -0.041∗∗∗ (0.060) (0.062) (0.060) (0.062) (0.063) (0.009) Debt/tax 0.232∗∗∗ 0.208∗∗∗ 0.235∗∗∗ 0.252∗∗∗ 0.256∗∗∗ 0.235∗∗∗ (0.010) (0.010) (0.010) (0.011) (0.011) (0.002) Exports/population 0.008 0.036 0.023 0.043 0.061∗∗ 0.023∗∗∗ (0.010) (0.010) (0.010) (0.011) (0.011) (0.002) Share of exports to UK 0.113∗∗∗ 0.108∗∗∗ 0.120∗∗∗ 0.118∗∗∗ 0.123∗∗∗ 0.120∗∗∗ (0.110) (0.112) (0.110) (0.116) (0.117) (0.021) Observations 32,990 32,990 32,990 32,990 32,990 32,990 R-squared 0.657 0.651 0.659 0.645 0.647 0.659 Model OLS OLS OLS OLS OLS PCSE Time FE YES YES YES YES YES YES Region FE YES YES YES YES YES YES
Note: Dependent variable is log values of individual bond spreads at monthly frequency (mean = 1.14). Standardized beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Constants are significant at ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Standard errors are adjusted for clusters in year and country (27 countries ∗ 44 years). Panel-corrected standard errors (PCSE) model (6) retains OLS parameter estimators, but replaces OLS standard errors for PCSEs, which takes into account the groupwise heteroscedasticity for 173 groups (bonds). Source: Appendix 1.
Appendix 5. Event study: democratization vs autocratization
Variables Democratization Autocratization
Years of domestic peace -0.036 -0.051∗∗ (0.001) (0.001) Years on default 0.390∗∗∗ 0.410∗∗∗ (0.057) (0.059) Years on gold 0.020 0.034 (0.050) (0.052) Debt/tax 0.050∗∗ 0.065∗∗∗ (0.010) (0.010) Exports/population 0.214∗∗∗ 0.202∗∗∗ (0.011) (0.011) Share of exports to UK 0.131∗∗∗ 0.126∗∗∗ (0.097) (0.096) Lag10 0.100 -0.321∗ (0.219) (0.608) Lag9 0.108∗ -0.113 (0.206) (0.608) Lag8 0.131∗∗ -0.051 (0.197) (0.609)
19


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Variables Democratization Autocratization
Lag7 0.129∗∗ -0.097 (0.196) (0.434) Lag6 0.161∗∗∗ -0.120 (0.196) (0.434) Lag5 0.128∗∗ -0.146 (0.196) (0.434) Lag4 0.122∗∗ -0.097 (0.195) (0.359) Lag3 0.083 0.023 (0.195) (0.358) Lag2 0.130∗∗ 0.010 (0.195) (0.358) Lead0 0.128∗∗ -0.045 (0.196) (0.309) Lead1 0.122∗∗ -0.076 (0.196) (0.308) Lead2 0.145∗∗ 0.042 (0.195) (0.308) Lead3 0.153∗∗ -0.016 (0.196) (0.308) Lead4 0.114∗ -0.064 (0.196) (0.308) Lead5 0.010 -0.061 (0.206) (0.308) Lead6 0.031 -0.043 (0.206) (0.308) Lead7 0.060 -0.102 (0.219) (0.309) Lead8 0.041 -0.083 (0.219) (0.309) Lead9 0.005 0.021 (0.206) (0.309) Lead10 -0.044 -0.017 (0.207) (0.309)
Observations 974 974 R-squared 0.742 0.735 Time FE YES YES Region FE YES YES
Note: Dependent variable is log values of market-weighted bond spreads at annual frequency (mean = 1.30). Standardized beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Constants are significant at ∗∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Only 10 years of lags and leads are reported. Remaining lags and leads are not significant. Democratization sample: Brazil (1894), Costa Rica (1882), Japan (1890), Norway (1884), Peru (1886), Sweden (1883), Uruguay (1887), and Venezuela (1888). Autocratization sample: Bulgaria (1894), Guatemala (1898), Nicaragua (1894), and Spain (1874). Years of transition are in parantheses. Analysis is conducted by eventdd command in STATA (Clarke and Schythe, 2020).
References
Accominotti, O., Flandreau, M., Rezzik, R., Zumer, F., 2010. Black man’s burden, white man’s welfare: control, devolution and development in the British Empire, 1880–1914. Eur. Rev. Econ. Hist. 14 (1), 47–70. Accominotti, O., Flandreau, M., Rezzik, R., 2011. The spread of empire: clio and the measurement of colonial borrowing costs. Econ. Hist. Rev. 64 (2), 385–407. Acemoglu, D., Robinson, J.A., 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Aidt, S.T., Jensen, P.S., 2009. The taxman tools up: an event history study of the introduction of the personal income tax. J. Public Econ. 93 (1–2), 160–175. Alquist, R., Chabot, B., 2011. Did gold-standard adherence reduce sovereign capital costs? J. Monet. Econ. 58 (3), 262–272. Alonso, P., 2000. Between Revolution and the Ballot Box: The Origins of the Argentine Radical Party in the 1890s. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Archer, C.C., Biglaiser, G., DeRouen, K., 2007. Sovereign bonds and the democratic advantage. Int. Org. 61 (2), 341–365. Ardanaz, M., Scartascini, C., 2011. Why Don’t We Tax the Rich? Inequality, Legislative Malapportionment, and Personal Income Taxation Around the World. Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper IDB-WP-282, Washington, DC. Banks, A. S., Wilson, K. A., 2020. Cross-national time-Series data archive. Databanks International. https://www.cntsdata.com. Beaulieu, E., Cox, G.W., Saiegh, S., 2012. Sovereign debt and regime type: reconsidering the democratic advantage. Int. Org. 66 (4), 709–738. Beck, N., 2011. Of fixed-effects and time-invariant variables. Polit. Anal. 19 (2), 119–122. Besley, T., Persson, T., 2009. The origins of state capacity: property rights, taxation, and politics. Am. Econ. Rev. 99 (4), 1218–1244. Block, S.A., Vaaler, P.M., 2004. The price of democracy: sovereign risk ratings, bond spreads and political business cycles in developing countries. J. Int. Money Financ. 23, 917–946. Bolt, J., van Zanden, J. L., 2020. Maddison project database. https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/releases/maddison-project-database-2020?lang=en. Bonney, R., Bonney, R., 1999. Introduction. In: The Rise of the Fiscal State in Europe c. 1200—1815. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 1–18.
20


A. Tunçer and L. Weller Explorations in Economic History 85 (2022) 101449
Bordo, M.D., Cortés Conde, R., 2001. Transferring Wealth and Power from the Old World to the New: Monetary and Fiscal Institutions in the 17th through the 19th Century. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Bordo, M., Rockoff, H., 1996. The gold standard as a ‘good housekeeping seal of approval. J. Econ. Hist. 56 (2), 389–428. Botana, N.R., 1994. El orden Conservador: La Política Argentina Entre 1880 y 1916. Sudamericana, Buenos Aires. Brown, N.J., 2002. Constitutions in a Nonconstitutionalist World. State University of New York Press, Albany. Chavaz, M., Flandreau, M., 2017. ‘High & dry’: the liquidity and credit of colonial and foreign government debt and the London stock exchange (1880–1910). J. Econ. Hist. 77 (2), 653–691. Clarke, D., Schythe, K.T., 2020. Implementing the Panel Event Study. IZA Institute of Labour Economics Working Paper No. 13524. Clodfelter, M., 2002. Warfare and Armed Conflicts: A Statistical Reference to Casualty and Other Figures, 1500-2000. McFarland, Jefferson, NC. Corporation of Foreign Bondholders, 1870–1913. Annual Report of the Corporation of Foreign Bondholders. Wentworth Press, London. Cox, G.W., 2011. War, moral hazard, and ministerial responsibility: England after the glorious revolution. J. Econ. Hist. 71 (1), 133–161. Cruz, C., 2005. Political Culture and Institutional Development in Costa Rica and Nicaragua: World Making in the Tropics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Dasgupta, A., Ziblatt, D., 2021. Capital meets democracy: the impact of franchise extension on sovereign bond markets. Am. J. Polit. Sci.. Daunton, M., Cardoso, J.L., Lains, P., 2010. Creating legitimacy: Administrating taxation in Britain. Paying for the Liberal State: The Rise of Public Finance in Nineteenth-Century Europe. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Daunton, M., Yun-Casalilla, B., O’Brien, P.K., 2012. The politics of British taxation, from the glorious revolution to the great war. In: The Rise of Fiscal States: A Global History, 1500–1914. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 111–142. DiGiuseppe, M., Shea, P.E., 2016. Borrowed time: sovereign finance, regime type, and leader survival. Econ. Polit. 28 (3), 342–367. Dincecco, M., 2011. Political Transformation and Public Finances: Europe, 1650-2013. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Economist, 1909a. Nicaragua. 23 October, 809. Economist, 1909b. Violence as a means of persuasion. 16 October, 736. Economist, 1907. The struggle in Portugal. 30 November, 2077. Economist, 1898a. The crisis in Italy. 25 June, 934. Economist, 1898b. The decline of legislatures. 11 June, 867. Economist, 1895. The Russian Emperor’s declaration. 2 February, 2684. Economist, 1894a. Phases of personal government. 3 November, 1340. Economist, 1894b. The financial condition of Bulgaria. 20 January, 16–17. Esteves, R., Tovar Jalles, J., 2016. Like father like sons? The cost of sovereign defaults in reduced credit to the private sector. J. Money Credit Bank. 48 (7), 1515–1545. Federico, G., Tena-Junguito, A., 2019. World trade, 1800-1938: a new synthesis. Rev. Hist. Econ 37 (1), 9–41. Ferguson, N., 1998. The House of Rothschild: The World’s Banker. Penguin, New York. Ferguson, N., Schularick, M., 2006. The empire effect: the determinants of country risk in the first age of globalization, 1880–1913. J. Econ. Hist. 66 (2), 283–312. Ferguson, N., Schularick, M., 2012. The “thin film of gold”: monetary rules and policy credibility. Eur. Rev. Econ. Hist. 16 (4), 384–407. Flandreau, M., Flores, J.H., 2009. Bonds and brands: foundations of sovereign debt markets, 1820–1830. J. Econ. Hist. 69 (3). Flandreau, M., Zumer, F., 2004. The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913. OECD, Paris. Hoffman, P., Rosenthal, J.L., Drobakand, J., Nye, J., 1997. The political economy of warfare and taxation in early modern Europe: historical lessons for economic development. In: The Frontiers of the New Institutional Economics. Academic Press, St. Louis, pp. 31–55. Horwitz, H., 1997. Parliament, Policy, and Politics in the Reign of William III. Manchester University Press, Manchester. Huntington, S.P., 1993. The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century. University of Oklahoma Press, Normal. Investor’s Monthly Manual: A Record of the London Stock Exchange, 1870-1914. Karaman, K., Pamuk, S., 2013. Different paths to the modern state in Europe: the interaction between warfare, economic structure and political regimes. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 107 (3), 603–626. London House of Rothschild, 1905. A Century of Finance: 1804–1904. Neely, London. Marshall, M. G., Gurr, T.R., Jaggers, K., 2017. Polity IV Project. Center for Systemic Peace https://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm. Mauro, P., Sussman, N., Yafeh, Y., 2006. Emerging Markets and Financial Globalization: Sovereign Bond Spreads in 1870–1913 and Today. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Meissner, C.M., 2005. Voting rules and the success of connected lending in 19th century New England banks. Explor. Econ. Hist. 42 (4), 509–528. Mitchener, K.J., Weidenmier, M.D., 2015. Was the classical gold standard credible on the periphery? Evidence from currency risk. J. Econ. Hist. 75 (2), 479–511. Mitchener, K.J., Weidenmier, M.D., 2010. Supersanctions and sovereign debt repayment. J. Int. Money Financ. 29 (1), 19–36. Mulligan, C.B., Gil, R., Sala-i-Martin, X., 2004. Do democracies have different public policies than nondemocracies? J. Econ. Perspect. 18 (1), 51–74. North, D., Weingast, B., 1989. Constitutions and commitment: the evolution of institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-century England. J. Econ. Hist. 49 (4), 803–832. Obstfeld, M., Taylor, A.M., 2003. Sovereign risk, credibility and the gold standard: 1870–1913 versus 1925–31. Econ. J. 113 (487), 241–275. O’Brien, P.K., Bonney, R., 1999. England, 1485-1815. The Rise of the Fiscal State in Europe c.1200–1815. Oxford University Press, Oxford. O’Brien, P.K., Yun-Casalilla, B., O’Brien, P.K., 2012. Afterword: reflections on fiscal foundations and context for the formation of economically effective Eurasian states from the rise of Venice to the Opium War. In: The Rise of Fiscal States: A Global History, 1500–1914. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 442–453. Pammer, M., Tunçer, C., Morys, M., 2021. Economic policy in the long nineteenth century. In: The Economic History of Central, East and South-East Europe: 1800 to the Present. Routledge, London, pp. 69–96. Plümper, T., Troeger, V.E., Manow, P., 2005. Panel data analysis in comparative politics: linking method to theory. Eur. J. Polit. Res. 44 (2), 327–354. Profeta, P., Puglisi, R., Scabrosetti, S., Fuest, C., Zodrow, G.R., 2013. Taxation and democracy in developing countries. In: Critical Issues in Taxation and Development. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 217–238. Reinhart, C.M., Rogoff, K.S., 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton University Press, Princeton. Sarkees, M.R., Wayman, F., 2010. Resort to War: 1816-2007. Correlates of War Project. CQ Press, Washington DC. Sicotte, R., Vizcarra, C., Wandschneider, K., 2010. Military conquest and sovereign debt: Chile, Peru and the London bond market, 1876–1890. Cliometrica 4, 293–319. Smith, R.F., Bethell, L., 1986. Latin America, the United States and the European powers, 1830-1930. The Cambridge history of Latin America, vol. IV, c. 1870 to 1930. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Speckman-Guerra, E., García Martínez, B., Jáuregui, L., Speckman-Guerra, E., 2013. The Porfiriato. In: 2013. A New Compact History of Mexico. El Colégio de México, Mexico City, pp. 195–228. Stasavage, D., 2008. Public Debt and the Birth of the Democratic State: France and Britain, 1688-1789. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Statesman’s Year-Book:Statistical and Historical Annual of the States of the Civilised World, 1870–1914. Palgrave Macmillan, London. Stone, I., 1999. The Global Export of Capital from Great Britain, 1865-1914: A Statistical Survey. Macmillan, London. Suzuki, T., 1994. Japanese Government Loan Issued on the London Capital Market, 1870-1913. Athlone, Atlantic Highlands. Tilly, C., 1990. Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD.990–1990. Basil Blackwell, Cambridge. Times, 1899, Mexican affairs, 6 April, 10. Tunçer, A.C., 2015. Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control: The Middle East and the Balkans, 1870-1914. Palgrave Macmillan, London. Vizcarra, C., 2009. Guano, Credible Commitments, and Sovereign Debt Repayment in Nineteenth-Century Peru. J. Econ. Hist. 69 (2), 358–387. Weller, L., 2015. Government versus bankers: Sovereign debt negotiations in Porfirian Mexico, 1888–1910. J. Econ. Hist. 75 (4), 1030–1056. Ziblatt, D., 2017. Conservative Parities and the Birth of Democracy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
21