Conditionality, fiscal rules and international financial control in the European periphery before 1914
Ali Coşkun Tunçer*
September 2016
Abstract
Ensuring fiscal discipline of debtor governments in order to reduce default risk
has been a key concern for foreign creditors both today and in the past. This paper
discusses the functioning and evolution of one particular method of securing
payment from a historical perspective: lending conditionality via international
financial control. By focusing on the major defaulters in the European periphery
during 1870-1914, the paper maintains that the success of lending conditionality
in the form international financial control was mainly determined by the
willingness and ability of the debtor governments to comply with the advice of
their foreign creditors -or in the modern language by the “country ownership” of
fiscal programs. Limited fiscal capacity created incentives for the debtor
governments to cooperate with foreign creditors but this willingness to cooperate
was constrained by the political representation of taxpayers, since foreign control
usually implied heavy taxation of key sectors. The findings of the paper suggest
that, similar to today’s Eurozone fiscal discipline programs, the success of
international financial control over government finances was dependent upon the
political economy of fiscal and political institutions of debtors.
Keywords: international financial control, sovereign debt, conditionality, fiscal rules, pre
1914.
* University College London, History Department, Gower Street, London WC1E6BT;
a.tuncer@ucl.ac.uk


1
1. Introduction
Following the recent European sovereign debt crisis, introducing and enforcing
effective fiscal rules have increasingly been put forward as a remedy for ensuring
fiscal discipline among the members of the Eurozone. The implications of
different policy instruments, especially as regards to political feasibility and
credibility, have been extensively debated amongst the economists and
policymakers. In order to reduce the risk of future crises strict policy
conditionality, mostly in the form of adopting a credible austerity package, has
been put forward as a major requirement for financial assistance through
European Stability Mechanism and Economic Adjustment Programme. At the
extreme end, several proposals include establishment of independent fiscal
agencies or fiscal councils in debtor states as a solution to the deficit bias of
Eurozone countries (Castellani and Debrun, 2005; Featherstone, 2015; Grauwe,
2011; Ioannidis, 2015; Hagemann, 2011; Kaplanoglou and Rapanos, 2013).
This paper explores how European financial markets dealt with similar
problems in the past, and discusses the functioning and evolution of lending
conditionality and fiscal rules during 1870-1914, when global capital flows were
at its peak. One of the consequences of the global expansion of capital markets
during this period was the rapid increase in sovereign debt from surplus to
deficit countries, which eventually led to defaults on foreign obligations in many
debtor states (Suter, 1990).1 As a response to defaults, foreign bondholders and
their respective governments adopted several coercive tools, which included
seizing the assets of debtor countries through military intervention, imposing
trade restrictions and preventing access to future credit. More refined solutions
sought to reduce default risk through issue of loans, which were contracted on
strict conditions. These different enforcement mechanisms, repayment
incentives and lending strategies constituted the pillars of global governing
sovereign debt before 1914.
The focus of this paper is on the effectiveness of a particular type of
lending conditionality via international financial control (IFC), which was
introduced following defaults in a number of heavily indebted countries in the
European periphery from 1860s to the First World War. IFC meant a partial or
full loss of sovereignty for debtor countries, as it would assume the right of
administering certain revenues of defaulting states on behalf of creditors. The
first known example was established in Tunisia in 1869. Several others in the
region, including Egypt, the Ottoman Empire, Serbia, Greece and Bulgaria,
1 Including Tunisia (1868), Ottoman Empire (1876), Egypt (1876), Spain (1877), Argentina (1890), Portugal (1892), Greece (1893), Serbia (1895) and Brazil (1898).


2
followed this suit.2 In the case of Egypt, the establishment of IFC led to a direct
takeover of the state finances and complete loss of political sovereignty, whereas
in the Ottoman Empire, IFC took charge of several revenue sources and
administered them on behalf of foreign creditors. These more direct methods of
control emerged during 1875-76 had some key differences from the later
episode of IFC, which appeared in Serbia and Greece during 1895-98. In these
two cases the administrative structure of IFC was more refined, the extent of its
control was more limited, and it mainly focused on measures concerning fiscal
and monetary discipline. Having been administered by the representatives of
foreign creditors and their respective governments, these multilateral
enforcement bodies introduced a different set of fiscal and monetary rules in
each country in return for reinstating credibility and restoring access to the
international financial markets.
In this context, the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, I
document the evolution of IFC in the European periphery, and discuss the most
prominent cases in the region: Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Greece and Serbia.
Section 3 provides comparative evidence on the performance of IFC in
administering the revenues of debtor states and it impact on the credibility of
the defaulting sovereigns. Section 4 elaborates on the issue of “ownership” of
policy advice in pre-1914 context. I suggest that political resistance to IFC and its
operations can be interpreted as a sign lack of ownership and I explore the
relationship between political regime types, debtor governments and IFC in
search for some explanations. In conclusion, I highlight that the success of
lending conditionality in the form IFC was mainly determined by the willingness
and ability of the debtor governments to comply with the advice of their foreign
creditors. I conclude that this cooperative attitude with foreign advice and
control was mainly driven by the lack of political representation of taxpayers.
2. Conditionality and international financial control before
1914: a review
Sovereign debt contracts are unique as they are concluded between parties, who
do not enjoy the same degree of legal immunity. Despite the lack of legal
enforcement by a third-party in the case of a default, debtor countries still repay
their debts because of the costs of default, which are positively correlated with
the ability of creditors to impose effective sanctions (Bulow and Rogoff, 1988;
Kelly, 1998). Historically, in the context of the pre-1914 sovereign debt market,
2 For a comparative history of sovereign debt and international financial control in the Ottoman Empire, Egypt, Greece, and Serbia see Tuncer (2015). For Bulgaria see Avramov (2003) and Tooze and Ivanov (2011). For Tunisia see Zourai (1998).


3
creditors employed a combination of direct and indirect forms of enforcement
ranging from military interventions to preventing access to future credit.3
Creditors also sought ways to strengthen the terms of sovereign debt contracts
to claim their debts on legal grounds. Arbitration, renegotiation, sinking fund and
collective action clauses were incorporated into agreements in order to reduce
the risk of default and create incentives for repayment (Wynne, 1951; Choi,
Gulati and Posner, 2012: 140-148). Moreover, bondholder protective
organisations, such as British Corporation of Foreign Bondholders (1868), were
established to provide market-based solutions to the debt renegotiations and
collective action of bondholders (Mauro and Yafeh, 2003; Esteves, 2013).4
Although the term conditionality has frequently been used in the context of IMF
lending, it can be interpreted yet another mechanism to reduce the risk of future
default, since it implies that if a country takes certain specified actions, continued
financing will be provided (Drazen, 2002; Bird, 2003; Dreher, 2009, James,
2003). In this broad sense of the term, IFC or foreign control over the revenues
of the defaulting states was a direct form of conditionality as it increased the
likelihood of future repayment of debts for creditors, and it implied a set of
conditions for borrower countries to access international financial markets in
the long term.
IFC in the European periphery was organised as revenue collecting agents
because of a particular feature of sovereign debt contracts. In pre-1914
sovereign debt market, most of the bond issues of peripheral countries were
implemented on the basis of a security, which could be placed beyond the reach
of the borrowing country and be used only for the service of the relevant loan.
These pledges could be very general and suggest that the bond repayment was
secured “upon the entire revenue and assets and domains of the borrower” or
they could be as specific as particular real estates of a sovereign or some other
tangible assets (Wynne, 1951: 82). More frequently, bonds before 1914 were
secured with future revenues from certain resources of the borrower sovereign.
Depositing assets or assigning securities meant that, in theory, in the case of a
default it would be relatively easy to seize these assets or demand hypothecated
revenues in order to compensate the loss of creditors.
In many instances these future revenues could come from governmental
monopolies or other public services, commercial enterprises such as mines, they
could be from future tax revenues. In majority of cases, indirect taxes and custom
3 For the use of military intervention until the Second Hague conference in 1907 see Adams (1890), Borchard (1925: 314); Finnemore (2003). For trade sanctions see Rose (2005). For preventing access to future credit see Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Bulow and Rogoff (1989), Panizza, Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2009). For a general discussion on sanctions and costs of default see Borchard (1951), Kaletsky (1985), Mitchener and Weidenmier (2010), Waibel (2011). 4 More recent contributions point out that CFB’s significance in the pre-1914 sovereign debt is over-rated; instead it was the leading investment banks and intermediaries who would give the right signals to the creditors. Flandreau and Flores (2009), Flandreau (2013).


4
revenues from specified ports or products of the borrower were the most
popular choice, as they constituted a stable source of revenue (Hyde, 1922: 534
535; Wynne, 1951: 82-91). Although most of these pledges were quite valuable,
creditors were aware that the securing future revenues for the payment of a loan
did not mean that sovereign borrower would in fact utilize them for this purpose
or manage them in a way to prove to the lender beneficial. In order to address
this problem, in certain cases lending would be linked to the condition of
establishing “creditor committees”, which were responsible of monitoring how
the funds would be spent. An earlier example of this was the guaranteed
Ottoman loan of 1855, which was granted by the Great Powers to support the
Ottoman Empire against Russia during the Crimean War of 1854. One condition
of the guaranty was to use the proceedings entirely for war purposes and British
and French representatives were assigned to monitor the spending of funds. The
role of these commissioners, who were sent to Istanbul despite the opposition of
the Ottoman government, was to verify the treasury accounts and ensure the
funds were in fact spent in support of the army. A problem with these types of
arrangements was the lack of enforcement if the debtor state did not comply
with the lending conditions. In fact, in this specific example, due to the
opposition of the Porte to the arrangement, the work of the foreign commission
started only in January 1856, after several army contracts had already been
signed in order to evade its control. By September 1856 all funds were spent and
the commission finished its work. 5 Similar problems emerged especially in the
case of a default, as there was no automatic mechanism to transfer the
hypothecated revenues of defaulted governments to the creditors. As early as
1860s, well before any of the defaults took place in the European periphery, in an
article published in the Economist, contemporary observers highlighted the
potential limitations of the existing system of sovereign lending on the basis of
guarantees:
“Loans made on specific securities to a foreign state are never the
most satisfactory sort of loans and this for a single plain reason: -the
property which is pledged is almost wholly under the control of the
indebted state, and if that state is inclined to repudiate, there is a
necessary difficulty in getting at the security. Such is especially the
case if the security consists, as is ordinarily the case, of a certain part
of the state revenue. First it depends on the state itself whether that
revenue is ever collected; and secondly, it depends on the state itself
whether that revenue shall be paid to creditor... It is quite true that
the creditors may apply to their own government for protection. If the
English, for example, lend their money to Turkey upon certain specific
5 For a detailed discussion of pre-1914 guaranteed bonds including the Ottoman loan of 1855 see Esteves and Tuncer (2014).


5
securities, they may apply more or less successfully to their own
government to obtain for them the annual income of those securities.
But if the government consent to give its aid, the probably result will
be a political complication of which no one can foresee the end: and
this is the best event, for if the government decline to aid by force the
claims of its subject, we may be sure they will receive nothing from
their repudiating debtor”.6
This article, written in fact with reference to a new bond issue of the
Ottoman Empire, predicted almost accurately the sequence of potential pitfalls,
when the bonds were secured with specific revenues. To put it in other words,
the pledged revenue could become a security in the hands of creditors if it could
indeed be removed from the defaulting sovereign and transferred to the
creditors. However, in practice this was not possible due to the nature of these
revenue sources. Therefore, the proposed solution was to use an organisation
independent from the defaulting sovereign to administer and control the
pledged revenues on behalf of bondholders, and to transfer the receipts from
these sources to all creditors for the unpaid debt (Borchard 1951: 91; Hyde,
1922: 535). I name these ad hoc foreign revenue administration agents, which
appeared in Egypt (1876), the Ottoman Empire (1881), Serbia (1895) and
Greece (1898), collectively as IFC.
The historical literature on IFC is limited to a few documentary studies
published by contemporaries to outline their major functions and administrative
structure (Andreades, 1925; Borchard, 1951; Deville, 1912; Wynne, 1951). One
line of literature treats IFC on legal grounds and discusses them in the context of
international law (Borchard, 1951: 93; Waibel, 2011: 42). Recent contributions
in economic history literature argue that IFC was a form of “supersanction”
which helped to enforce sovereign debt contracts, and that they were effective
tools to reduce the cost of borrowing for the defaulting countries (Mitchener and
Weidenmier, 2010). As oppose to economic and legal literature on the IFC,
historiographies of the defaulting countries usually approach them in the context
of imperialism debate, since a direct consequence of foreign control was the
partial loss of fiscal and/or political sovereignty of the debtor states. In this view,
foreign control of government revenues is seen as an extension of imperialist
rivalry over the Middle East and the Balkans before 1914 (Blaisdell, 1966;
Crouchley, 1938; Levandis, 1944; Zourai, 1998).
In this paper, I focus on the mechanism through which IFC functioned and
reinforced the credibility of the defaulting sovereigns in comparative
perspective. Unlike previous line of research, I avoid labelling and discussing IFC
as “sanctions” or “punishment” or direct instruments of imperialism. Instead, I
6 “The New Turkish Loan”. Economist [London, England], 22 December 1860: 1417.


6
highlight the fiscal dimension of IFC as revenue collecting foreign agents and the
lending conditionality it implied. In order to provide the historical context to the
discussion, the next section focuses on the mechanism through which IFC
operated in the region and the particular characteristics of each case. I then focus
on the questions of ownership and success record of IFC.
3. Evolution of international financial control in the European
periphery
For the period 1870-1913, it is possible to identify two distinct waves of
sovereign defaults taking place during 1875-1882 and 1890-1900. Response to
these defaults not only varied from case to case but there were also differences
between the two episodes due to the evolution of institutions governing
international sovereign debt market and more particularly of IFC. As mentioned
briefly in the introduction, the early episode witnessed more direct forms of IFC,
where the creditors involved in the financial affairs of defaulting countries more
extensively. After 1890, the involvement of IFC into financial affairs remained
relatively limited and supervisory. Below I first focus on the initial era of IFC,
namely political and fiscal control in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire respectively.
In the second half of this section, I turn my attention to the experience of Serbia
and Greece, which was characterized by lesser degrees of infringement into the
sovereignty of debtor states.
3.1. From military takeover to fiscal control: Egypt and the Ottoman Empire
The first IFC in the European periphery during the period 1870-1914 appeared
in Egypt in 1875. Despite being a semi-autonomous country, Egypt was de jure
part of the Ottoman Empire until 1914 and ruled by hereditary pashas called the
Khedives. In 1862, for the first time in Egypt’s history, the Khedive negotiated a
state loan with the permission of the Ottoman Sultan. This loan was followed by
several others and during the period 1862-75 the Egyptian government issued
ten bonds with the support of several British and French banking houses (see
Table 1). The main lending conditionality for these bonds was the requirement
to assign some of the tax revenues to the repayment of these loans. These
included the land taxes of the several provinces, general revenues of the
Egyptian state, and personal estates of the Khedive. Taken together the overall
guarantees corresponded to almost entire revenues of the Egyptian government
in 1875, hence it was not possible to contract further loans in international
markets with a similar guaranty (Crouchley, 1938: 122; Tuncer, 2015: 29-34;
Wynne, 1951: 582).


7
Meanwhile, the default of the Ottoman Empire in late 1875 had a direct
impact on Egyptian credit abroad and it was no longer possible to obtain new
loans from the international financial markets and, in April 1876, the payment of
Egypt’s treasury bonds was suspended. This failure led to the foundation of IFC
under the official name of “Caisse de la Dette Publique Égyptienne” on May 2nd,
1876. Directed by foreign commissioners nominated by their respective
governments the Caisse was authorized to receive the revenues intended to
service the debt directly from the local authorities. Taxes from several Egyptian
provinces, the salt and tobacco taxes along with custom revenues, which
corresponded to almost three quarters of total government revenues in 1876,
were assigned to the Caisse. The Egyptian government committed itself not to
modify these revenues or to contract any new loans without the consent of the
Caisse. In November 1876, in addition to the Caisse, a special administration of
the railways and of the port of Alexandria was established, and placed under the
direct control of a commission of foreign creditors. Moreover, two controllers
general (one British and one French) would be appointed, who would exercise a
supervision over the entire fiscal administration of the country, one mainly
responsible of expenditure and the other of revenues. The budget was still to be
framed by the Khedive and his ministers, though with the assistance of
controllers-general. Finally, a special administration of Khedive’s personal lands
would also be placed under a separate international control.
[TABLE 1 HERE]
The political consequence of all these new regulations was the exclusion
of the Khedive from the administration of Egyptian finances, and transition from
the personal government of the Khedive to a government by an executive council
whose leading members were foreigners. This radical change first led to the
burst of violent riots and later gained an anti-European character. It eventually
resulted in military intervention of Britain in 1882. Within a few months after
the British took charge, the Anglo-French dual control was abolished. The British
Consul-General was given authority over all the English advisors that were
placed in the Egyptian ministries. However, the British consuls did not have the
power to modify the previous agreement with the bondholders. French
government and bondholder representatives refused to permit any reduction in
the authority of the Caisse. Moreover, the separate administrations of railways
and estates of the Khedive, on all of which France was represented, were
maintained (Wynne, 1951: 621-622).
From 1885 onwards, Egyptian finances started to improve, and by 1890
the budget yielded a surplus. In the meantime, the Caisse kept servicing the debt
and accumulating extensive amount of reserve funds and refused the give
authorisation to the Egyptian government to use any balance for the purposes of
additional expenditure. The commissioners were content to maintain the Caisse


8
as an agent managing the servicing of the debt, however, its extensive privileges
had started becoming too restrictive. This led to a new agreement between
Britain and France in April 1904, the Entente Cordiale, which introduced a
change in the constitution of the Caisse. After the agreement, the Egyptian
government obtained full control of the reserve funds, leaving the Caisse a small
reserve plus a working balance. The rigid model of balance was abandoned and
the Egyptian government regained more control over fiscal matters. In theory,
the Caisse still possessed considerable powers of control, retained its position in
Egypt until the complete repayment of the debt, however its functions were now
limited to receiving certain assigned revenues on behalf of the bondholders, and
ensuring the due payments (Crouchley, 1938: 169-179; Feis, 1974: 393; Tuncer,
2015: 48-52). The Caisse emerged out of a combination of political, economic and
legal factors meant a direct form of conditionality as it transferred the entire
fiscal policymaking into the hands of foreign creditors in return for future access
in international financial markets.
A similar process led to a different form of IFC in the Ottoman Empire,
which faced with default almost at the same time with Egypt. Starting with the
Crimean War in 1854, issuing bonds in international markets became the most
important way of dealing with budgetary difficulties for the Ottoman Empire.
From 1854 to 1876 the Ottoman government contracted 18 loans with a total
face value of £219 million. In general, these loans had similar lending
conditionality arrangements and they were secured on wide range of direct and
indirect tax revenues, custom duties and Egyptian tribute (see Table 1). Financial
markets were aware of the unsustainability of this rapid increase in debt,
especially after the crisis of 1873 when overseas lending came to an end and it
became almost impossible for the Ottoman government to contract a new loan.
In October 1875, the Ottoman government first suspended part of the interest
payments, and in January 1876 defaulted on all its outstanding debt, which then
stood at around £191 million (Eldem, 2005; Kiray, 1988; Pamuk, 1978). This was
a “long-predicted catastrophe”7, but what made it exceptional was the scale of it,
as it was the biggest sovereign default to the date.8
European press referred the event as “financial barbarism”9, which also
meant that the international financial markets were closed to the Ottoman
Empire after 1876 until the government and bondholders could reach a
reasonable deal. The successful settlement of the debt would not be achieved
until 1881. According to the agreement, the outstanding debt of the empire was
reduced from about £191 million to £96 million, and unpaid interest payments,
which were amounted £62 million, were reduced to approximately £10 million.
In return, the Council of the Administration for the Ottoman Public Debt
7 “The Turkish Repudiation” Economist [London, England] 9 Oct. 1875: 1190 8 The other two significant cases were Spain, which defaulted on an outstanding debt of £170 million, and Egypt on around £100 million as discussed above. Suter (1990: 67-69). 9 “The Turkish Default.” Economist [London, England] 6 Nov. 1875: 1310


9
(thereafter the Council) was established to represent the bondholders and act in
their interest. The government agreed to transfer the revenues from the tobacco
and salt monopolies, several custom duties and the silk tithe of several provinces
to the foreign creditors, who would have complete freedom to decide on the way
of collection and production (Tuncer, 2015: 58-63).
Starting from 1883, the Council established more than twenty offices in
the various provinces of the Empire extending from Yemen to Salonika, which
were administered from the central office in Istanbul. This was an extensive tax
collection network employing around 4500-5000 officers (including inspectors,
collectors, security guards etc.). The lessons derived from the Egyptian
experience, and the fear of resistance from the local population made the
representatives of bondholders to choose the gradual method of replacing the
existing local staff, introducing new techniques of production and reforming the
existing collection system for the ceded revenues. One of the biggest obstacles
that the Council was faced during this period was the widespread “armed
banditry” and opposition against the administration of foreign creditors.
However, the opposition to the presence of the Council remained limited to
popular resistance, since there were no conflicts between the Ottoman
government and the Council (Quataert, 1983; Tuncer, 2015: 64-76).
Despite the contraband and popular resistance to the Council, it turned
out to work efficiently in its management of the resources for which it was
responsible. Both the revenues from direct contributions (silk, salt, spirits,
stamps and fisheries), and from Tobacco Régie increased significantly. In fact,
after 1889 the Ottoman government decided to extend the rights of the Council
to collect revenues for its own account. According to the agreement the Council
would be responsible of collecting the revenues especially for those loans
concerning the railways together with tithes of several provinces. The Council,
after collecting and reducing the collection expenses, would transfer the entire
net revenue to the government. Therefore, the expenses of administration and
collection of these revenues were borne by the revenues themselves, and did not
fall upon the revenues ceded to the bondholders. From the perspective of the
Ottoman Empire this operation was preferable not only to show its willingness
to reinstate its credibility in the eyes of the creditors but also it reflected the fact
that creditors were proven to be more successful to collect and administer the
revenues. For the creditors, on the other hand, the extension of transfer of fiscal
sovereignty was seen as a sign of trust between them and the government, which
in return secured the position of the Council in the overall fiscal system of the
Empire (Tuncer, 2015: 64-78).
This brief historical presentation of sovereign debt in Egypt and the
Ottoman Empire highlights some important aspects of pre-1914 lending
conditionality. In both cases, international political considerations played an
important role in the way IFC was established and organised, however the legal
justification of such control was based on the lending conditionality clauses


10
included into the bond contracts –i.e. hypothecation of future revenues for
repayment of bonds. Once in operation, IFC transformed into direct form
conditionality as it secured access of Egypt and the Ottoman Empire into
international financial markets by imposing a set of changes in fiscal policy. In
Egypt, although IFC was originally planned to play a similar role as in the
Ottoman Empire, it eventually became a prelude to British military take over and
it was reinforced by other means of political and economic control. The Egyptian
government did not have any choice but to “cooperate” -hence the weight of the
Caisse in overall tax collection remained significant until 1904. The IFC in the
Ottoman Empire, on the contrary, operated without the intermediation of the
political representatives of the creditor states involved, hence its success would
still depend on the “ownership” of the Ottoman government. Bondholder
representatives, having autonomy on the way that they managed hypothecated
revenues, implemented both short- and long-term solutions in an attempt to
compensate for their losses and to increase the ceded revenues and eventually
started managing revenues on behalf of the Ottoman government as well.
3.2. From fiscal control to financial supervision: Serbia and Greece
IFC established in 1875-76 in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire was economically
and politically costly for creditors and their respective governments, since such
an infringement into the sovereignty resulted in popular armed resistance in
both cases. Therefore, when the new wave of sovereign debt crisis hit the small
Balkan economies during 1890s, creditors and their respective governments
were aware of the need for introducing more indirect and less costly forms of
managing and transferring revenues.
Although IFC was came into existence in Serbia three years earlier than
Greece in 1895, the history of its sovereign debt did not start until it was
recognised as an independent state in the Berlin Congress in 1878.10 From its
independence to 1893, the Serbian government contracted 17 loans in the
financial markets London, Paris and Vienna with a face value of around £16
millions and an average effective interest rate of 6.7 per cent (see Table 1). The
repayments of these loans were secured on future revenues of the state
including import duties, revenues from railways, land taxes of several provinces
and monopolies of tobacco and salt. However, these loans were not enough to
meet increasing state expenditure driven mostly by the railway building, debt
service and military spending.
By 1893, the outstanding debt of the country had reached around £13
million and the annual charges on the debt stock were consuming more than one
10 The only exceptions to this were the loans granted in support of independence wars against the Ottoman Empire during the 1860s and 1870s with the help of Russia (Feis, 1974: 262; Gnjatovic, 2009: 5; Hinic et al., 2014; Sundhaussen, 1989: 500).


11
third of state revenues. In the meantime, with the default of Greece in the same
year, there were further increasing concerns regarding the financial condition of
Serbia. In late 1894, the Serbian monarch Milan started lobbying for a financial
arrangement. A loan contract was signed on December 26, 1894, payments of
which were secured by the state monopolies of petroleum, cigarette paper,
matches and salt and overall revenues of the state. The proposed scheme also
envisaged the establishment of a special administration consisting of four
delegates –two nominated by the Serbian government, and two by contracting
banks- to collect and administer the receipts from monopolies on a monthly
basis. The Serbian National Assembly rejected this scheme as the arrangement
was seen very similar what was offered to Greece at the time and implied a
financial control and empowering a foreign financial group for the conversion of
foreign debt.
The decision to reject a debt conversion meant that by mid-1895 the
government was unable to meet the amount due in interest and principal on the
floating debt. In June 1895, negotiations to discuss a solution started between
the syndicate of underwriting banks from London, Paris, Vienna and Berlin, the
Russian government and the Serbian officials in a conference at Karlsbad.
Eventually a new loan with a face value of around £14 millions at 4 per cent
interest rate was agreed to convert the outstanding debt. This was secured on
the net profits of certain railways, stamp duty, customs duties, profits from the
salt monopoly and the revenue from the monopoly on mineral oils, matches and
cigarette paper. More importantly the Autonomous Administration of
Monopolies at Belgrade (hereafter the Administration) would control these
revenues for the purposes of servicing the debt (Tuncer, 2015: 79-99).
The managing council of the Administration was appointed by a royal
decree from the Ministry of Finance, however the freedom of action of the
Serbian government was still limited: two out of the six members were
representatives of the foreign creditors. Other members consisted of the
governor and the vice-governor of the National Bank of Serbia and two Serbian
nationals appointed with the recommendation of the Administration. Overall,
from 1895 to 1913 the Serbian government managed to contract a new series of
loans with a face value of £39 million and an average effective interest rate of 5
per cent (see Table 1). Despite the initial discontent, once in operation, the
government and the Administration worked more or less in harmony and the net
yield of the monopolies and other pledged revenues steadily grew to an extent
that it not only covered the interest payments on the outstanding debt but also
yielded a surplus. Although the Administration remained autonomous, it was
bound by the technical and legal decision of the Ministry of Finance, therefore it
did not enjoy the greater flexibility and freedom as much as the Ottoman Council
or the Egyptian Caisse. (Lampe and Jackson, 1982: 156-195; Tuncer, 2015: 79
99).


12
Unlike Serbia, the history of sovereign debt in Greece can be traced back
to 1820s when Greece contracted three loans amounting to £6.8 millions to
finance its independence war against the Ottoman Empire. These issues were
secured with the future tax revenues of the Greek state, including custom duties,
the salt mines and fisheries and ultimately by all public revenues. However, it
was not easy to raise tax revenues in newly founded state and in 1843 the Greek
government defaulted on all three loans (Kofas, 1981; Wynne, 1951: 283-287).
This year marked the beginning of a long isolation from international financial
markets. Despite repeated attempts of bondholder representatives, it was not
until the 1860s that the parties formally began discussing proposals for a
settlement, and an agreement was finally concluded in September 1878, which
satisfied the both parties.
From 1879 to 1893, the Greek government contracted 9 loans with a face
value of approximately £25 million and average effective interest rate of 6.7 per
cent. Similar to other cases, the payments of these bonds were secured through
the special assignment of revenues. Among the loans contracted during this
period, the Monopoly Loan of 1887 had a special place because it came with a
particular lending conditionality, which later became the foundation on which
the IFC was built. According to the agreement, besides the hypothecation of
monopoly revenues, the creditors were given the right to establish a Monopoly
Society (Société de Régie des Revenues de Gréce). This company was put under the
control of the Greek government and granted the right to administer, collect and
supervise the assigned revenues. The company was subject to Greek laws and
was to be terminated upon the settlement of the loan. At the same time, the
government was required to make up the difference from the treasury if the
proceeds of the assigned monopolies were insufficient to meet the annual
charges of the loan. In return for these concessions, the Greek government
managed to contract the largest loan with lowest effective interest rate in this
period. However, the Monopoly Loan was not enough to stop the deterioration of
the Greek finances. In 1893, because of worsening economic conditions, the
government defaulted on its foreign obligations. Moreover, the revenues, which
were under the administration of the Monopoly Society, were handed directly to
the public treasury, thus violating the earlier agreement with the creditors
(Levandis, 1944: 55-69; Lazaretou, 2005).
From the outset, one of the main concerns of the bondholders was the
Greek government’s unilateral modification of the Monopoly Society’s rights, and
the earlier agreement on the way in which these hypothecated revenues were
collected. The revenues specially assigned as guarantees for the service of
different loans consisted of the customs receipts from several major ports,
tobacco tax, stamp dues, receipts of the monopolies of salt, petroleum, playing
cards, matches, cigarette paper and emery and the revenues of several railways.
The committee was keen to combine these revenues to create a surplus for the
servicing the debt. Moreover, unlike other cases, creditors were concerned about


13
the situation of the money market, in particular the instability of the exchange
rates and excessive amount of notes in circulation. As the Greek government
opposed to several proposals of creditors and demanded significant reduction in
the outstanding debt, the negotiations almost came to a dead end. Meanwhile, in
1897, Greece found herself in conflict with the Ottoman Empire over the Cretan
Question, which led to the Greek-Turkish War of 1897 and the defeat of Greece.
According to the peace terms, determined through the mediation of six powers
(Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and Russia), Greece was
condemned to pay a war indemnity, which made the financial position of the
country even worse. Under these circumstances, Greece no longer had
bargaining power with its creditors.
In 1898, the Greek government agreed to sign the Law of Control with the
representatives of foreign powers. IFC was to be confided in a commission
established in Athens and composed of diplomatic representatives of the
mediating powers. The gross proceeds of the monopolies (salt, petroleum,
matches, playing cards and cigarette paper), tobacco, stamp and import dues
collected by the customs house of Piraeus were assigned to the service debt.
Finally, the collection of these revenues was placed in the hands of the Society
registered in Greece, which would be under the absolute control of the
Commission. Immediately after the delegation of the Commission, the
representatives of the powers started to investigate ways to improve and extract
the highest sum from the revenues under their control. Therefore, in order to
introduce a change in the production methods, the Commission could ask the
government to modify the relevant laws and regulations regarding certain
revenues, but did not enjoy the same right of direct management of revenues as
in Egypt, the Ottoman Empire and Serbia. In order to increase the revenues
under its control, the Commission urged the government to pass certain laws to
modify production and taxation of revenues under its control, however these
bills and laws were either not passed by the Greek Chamber, or, when they were
passed, were not enforced by the government. Part of the problem was
unwillingness of the Greek government to cooperate with the foreign creditors.
As a result the Commission also showed reluctance to act as a trustee for future
loans in international financial markets (Tuncer, 2015: 100-122).
The Greek and Serbian cases show significant differences compared to the
direct forms of control exercised over the Ottoman and Egyptian finances. The
degree of cooperation of Greek and Serbian governments was not as extensive as
the previous two cases, and IFC operated in a politically more challenging
environment, hence the problem of ownership of IFC policies became even more
important. Moreover, the tax collection was organised with the intermediation of
semi-independent companies, which gave further scope of freedom to the
governments. In the next section, I compare the varying degrees of success of IFC
in a more systematic way. I then explore the issue of ownership or the
willingness and ability of governments to cooperate with IFC.


14
4. Success and extent of international financial control
In this section I aim to establish the degree of control exercised by IFC in a
comparative way and relate it with the success in restoring access of debtor
states into international financial markets. As a measure of credibility and
sovereign risk, it is possible to rely on monthly bond spreads to judge the degree
of recovery following defaults.11
[FIGURE 1 HERE]
As seen from the Figure 1, the impact of IFC following debt settlement
was a steady decline in bond spreads in all four cases. However, in the longer
term the Ottoman Empire and Egypt benefited from a much more significant
decline: compared to pre-IFC period of borrowing the bond spreads declined on
average 96 per cent and 80 per cent respectively. At the end of 1913, bond
spreads of Egypt was around 2.1 per cent whereas the Ottoman bond spreads
were as low as 0.78 per cent. For Serbia and Greece, the decline in bond yields
was not as fast: in 1913 compared to pre-IFC period bond spreads declined
around 70 per cent in Serbian case and almost 55 per cent in the case of Greece.
By the end of 1913, Serbian bond spreads stood at 1.2 per cent whereas Greek
spreads were still at a relatively higher level of 7.7 per cent. Overall, the evidence
suggests that IFC was not always successful in reinstating the credibility and
there was no uniform response of markets towards the lending conditionality
introduced by IFC.
A possible venue to seek an explanation for this difference is the degree of
control exercised by bondholder representatives over host countries, which can
be considered in administrative and fiscal terms. In terms of administration, in
Egypt the IFC had the most extensive privileges and the foreign control over
Egyptian politics and finance was reinforced by additional means and
organisations and the Caisse transformed into the imperium in imperio. In the
case of the Ottoman Empire, the Council also enjoyed the freedom of directly
collecting the revenues assigned for the repayment of the outstanding debt. In
doing so, it established an extensive network and worked in harmony with the
Ottoman government, which was willing to extend the privileges of the IFC. On
the other hand, in Serbia and Greece, the IFC operated via relatively more
independent organisations and they did not penetrate into the finances of these
11 Bond spreads are calculated as the difference between current yield of representative bonds of each country minus the British Consol and French Rentes yields. See the notes for Figure 1 for details.


15
economies as much as Egypt or the Ottoman Empire. In the case of Greece,
diplomatic representatives, who had supervisory power over tax collection,
found themselves in conflict with the parliament and it proved to be difficult to
implement most of the fiscal reforms. In Serbia, the Administration and the
government worked in relative harmony. However, unlike the other cases, the
majority of the managing council of the Administration consisted of Serbian
nationals, including the president and vice-president of the National Bank and
two government officials, who contributed positively to the political justification
of the Administration.
[TABLE 2 HERE]
In fiscal terms, as seen from Figure 2, the revenues under the control of
IFC steadily increased in most of the cases. The most significant loss of fiscal
sovereignty took place in Egypt, where the IFC revenues constituted on average
40 per cent of total revenues of the government. In its early years, the revenues
under the control of the Caisse reached to more than 70 per cent creating unrest
among the taxpayers. In the case of the Ottoman Empire the revenues controlled
by the Council on behalf of the creditors was on average 13 per cent, however
after taking into account the revenues controlled on behalf of the Ottoman
government, the assets under the control of the Council reached to 35 per cent of
all revenues of the state. For Greece and Serbia the shares were respectively on
average 29 and 35 per cent for the period IFC was in operation. In all cases the
revenues of IFC at least doubled from the first year of the control to the World
War 1. In absolute terms, the Ottoman Council was the biggest of all –at least
after the Entente Cordiale, which changed the constitution of the Caisse and
significantly reduced its influence in the overall Egyptian finances. Despite high
level of revenues under control, in terms of growth performance, the Ottoman
Council and the Egyptian Caisse managed an average annual growth rate of
around 2 per cent and 0.7 per cent respectively. On the other hand, the Greek
Commission and the Serbian Administration enjoyed an average annual growth
rate of around 6 per cent. In other words, despite the political resistance, IFC in
the Balkans performed relatively more efficiently in increasing its revenues. This
was partly due to the low costs of collection in Serbia and Greece mostly
conditioned by the type of revenue each IFC controlled and monetisation level of
each economy.
[FIGURE 2 HERE]
To summarise, the enforcement and conditionality introduced by IFC was
effective in improving the credibility of the defaulting sovereigns. They achieved
this by regularly transferring the surplus from assigned revenues to the
bondholders in order to compensate for their losses. On the other hand, local


16
resistance to/cooperation with IFC took place in changing degrees. After the
initial discontent was over, IFC in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire worked with
relatively little political challenge to their control and had extensive freedom
over fiscal matters. In Serbia, thanks to the administrative structure of the IFC
and strong representation of Serbian government in the Administration, the role
of IFC was mostly confined to a supervisory level. Finally, in the case of Greece,
the political resistance to IFC remained strong throughout the period, and the
influence of the Commission was limited to monetary affairs. In the next section,
I explore the issue of resistance towards IFC and propose a framework to
interpret the different degrees of political compliance with foreign creditors.
5. Political regimes and resistance to international financial
control
Based on the historical presentation so far, it can be suggested that the success of
IFC in reinstating the credibility of debtor states was considerably influenced by
its political environment, and more specifically the degree of political
representation of taxpayers. This view is in line with the recent studies in fiscal
sociology, which highlight that two important characteristics of state building
process are the emergence of a social contract based on negotiation and
bargaining around tax, and institution-building incentive provided by the
revenue drive. Combined together these two characteristics increase the
legitimacy of the state and accountability between the state and its citizens.
Studies on long-term history of fiscal states echo these views and emphasize that
negotiation and trust in functioning of fiscal systems was a common element in
emergence of modern fiscal states (Brautigam,, Fjeltstad and Moore, 2008;
Martin, Mehrotra and Prasad, 2009; Tilly, 1990; Yun-Casalilla, 2013: 12-13). This
perspective provides a useful framework to consider the relationship between
taxation, the public debt and the conditionality in the form of international
financial control in the European periphery. Unlike many other debtor countries,
the Ottoman Empire, Serbia, Greece and Egypt did not face with the trade-off
between taxation and borrowing as their ability to borrow was restored by IFC.
Moreover, the degree of development of the liberal fiscal state and evolution of
representative institutions were different in each case, which had an impact on
the incentives of the governments. An implication of the representative
institutions for these dominantly agrarian economies of the region would be
strong influence of the countryside in decisions over taxation of the rural sector
given there existed a competitive election system, which resulted in rural
representation.
In terms of political regime, for the most of the nineteenth century, the
Ottoman Empire remained as an authoritarian monarchy despite several


17
reforms aimed at modernising the state apparatus and significant political
transformations (Karpat, 1972). An Ottoman parliament and the constitution for
the first time emerged in 1876, which aimed at introducing accountability over
fiscal matters and regularise the authority of the Sultan. However, in practice it
did not empower any other group than the existing Ottoman political elite and
bureaucracy. That is why when the Abdulhamid II decided to suspend the
constitution and the parliament just two years later; there was no fight or
resistance against this decision. A representative assembly was not successfully
established until after the Young Turk Revolution of 1908. From this year
onwards, the assembly had the power to pass legislation over Sultan’s authority
and the dominant political force was the nationalist Committee of Union and
Progress, which eventually led the Empire into the World War 1 (Brown, 2002:
23-26). As for the tax revenues, they mostly relied on the traditional tithe
collected almost exclusively with the help of tax farmers. In order to finance the
costly reforms and shift the tax burden from the countryside to the urban
centres, the government repeatedly but ultimately unsuccessfully attempted to
replace tax farming with salaried tax collectors. Moreover, the taxation system
remained still heavily reliant on land tax. Custom duties had the potential to be a
significant revenue source, however, due to the capitulations and bilateral trade
treaties, the Ottoman government was not able to modify the rates unilaterally.
Only in 1905, the powers agreed for a minor increase in the import taxes. Finally,
the personal tax, a symbol of transition to the modern tax state, was only
introduced in 1903 (Aytekin, 2013; Karaman and Pamuk, 2010: 598; Özbek,
2010; Quataert 1994: 764-855; Shaw, 1975). To summarise, unlike many
European countries during the same period, in evolution of fiscal institutions in
the Ottoman Empire, representation and negotiation with local elite played very
little role. Throughout the period the Ottoman Empire struggled to introduce a
centralized tax collection system and had to share of most of the tax revenues
with other intermediaries such as local notables and tax farmers. Moreover, most
of the revenues were based on direct taxes levied mainly upon the land. To put it
crudely, at the time the Ottoman Empire defaulted on its foreign debt, it was a
state that was unable to tax. Given its lack of monopoly over taxation, the
Ottoman government was more willing to cooperate with the foreign creditors.
Egypt went through a completely different political transformation,
nonetheless the negotiation with local elites and limited government were not
the determinants of increases in fiscal capacity before 1914. As early as 1841,
Egypt managed to move away from tax farming thanks to the centralisation
policies of Muhammad Ali. From Muhammed Ali’s death in 1848 to the
establishment of the European control in 1876, the country was dominated by
the dynastic state of the Khedives. Although there was a “Consultative Chamber
of Delegates” since 1866 consisting of provincial notables and landowners, it did
not have any significant power over taxation. In 1882, the new Khedive
introduced the first constitution, which gave more authority to the Chamber,


18
however, the constitution was never fully implemented, and when Britain took
control of Egypt the same year, it was suspended. Under the British rule two
representative assemblies were founded in Egypt but they had very limited
power over fiscal matters. The Legislative Council consisted of representatives of
provincial assemblies but it could not pass any law and only had a consultancy
role over the budget. The General Assembly, on the other hand, consisted of
mostly provincial notables. Although it could not propose any legislation, it had a
veto power on taxation and no new tax could be imposed without its approval.
However, the influence of these institutions remained limited under the British
rule, as on the side of the expenditure, almost the sole authority was the Caisse.
Moreover, Khedive’s British financial advisor served as the key political figure
since he had the veto power of all financial legislation. As regards the type of
taxes, the land tax constituted a significant part of total revenue and it was
collected with the help of accountants established in several villages. Although
there were efforts to reduce the burden on the peasantry, the land tax was still
considered as the most oppressive form of taxation in Egypt even under the
British rule. As for indirect taxes, government officials also collected custom
duties and it had the rate of 1 per cent on exports and 8 per cent on imports and
the collection cost was as low as 4 per cent. However, Egypt was also bound with
free trade treaties and capitulations of the Ottoman Empire (Aharoni, 2007;
Crouchley, 1938: 42-57; Ezzel-Arab, 2009; Fahmy, 2002; Martin, 2004: 464;
Shaw, 1962; Tuncer, 2015: 174-175). Overall, in Egypt the British controllers
were the main deciding actors over fiscal matters and the role of parliament
remained very limited until 1904 when the power of the Caisse over spending
was reduced and its funds were partly went under the control of the Egyptian
government.
The relationship between fiscal and political institutions in the Balkans
was rather different. Following the Greek independence, the three powers, which
guaranteed Greek independence in the Protocols of 1832, implemented a
monarchy without any constitutional restrictions. The first Greek constitution
and representative assembly emerged in 1844 as a result of a coup d’etat against
King Otto. Despite liberal nature of the constitution, there was no significant
change in the existing political picture as the king maintained his influence over
the parliament until he was overthrown by another coup in 1862. According to
the new constitution of 1864, the representative assembly elected by universal
direct suffrage held the whole legislative power. From 1875 to 1890s, C.
Trikoupis emerged as the main political leader as a proponent of economic and
political westernization. He supported the settlement of foreign debt and striking
a deal with creditors. The implication of this plan in fiscal terms was more
taxation, which was not a popular remedy. After 1895 he was followed by T.
Deliyannis, who represented a more traditionalist and populist view, which was
in favour of the idea of Greater Greece and a more adventures foreign policy. The
competition between these two political parties shaped the attitudes towards


19
IFC.12 In terms of tax collection system, starting from 1860s the tithe was
collected in cash and in the 1870s the fiscal policy constantly aimed at lowering
the tax burden on the peasants, replacing direct taxation by indirect
consumption taxes. As a final step, in 1880, the tithe was abandoned, tax farming
was abolished and a new agricultural fiscal system was introduced reducing the
burden on landowners. After 1860s, the fiscal policy of Greece rested on the
principles of deficit financing and the low taxation of the higher classes and the
peasantry. Greece was amongst the last countries in Europe to apply income and
inheritance taxes, introduced respectively in 1910 and in 1898. As for the under
taxation of the peasantry, which constituted the largest voting group in Greece.
The fiscal burden as both direct and indirect taxation fell on the middle class and
the urban sector. Peasants effectively escaped the burden of indirect taxes as
they operated mostly with subsistence farming (Dertilis, 1986; Minoglou, 1995;
Palamas, 1930; Tuncer, 2015: 176-177).
Finally, in Serbia, there were significant similarities to Greece in terms of
evolution of taxation system and political institutions. From the early years of
the autonomy until late 1860s, the Serbian state continued to modernize the
administrative structure and its army. Prince Milan Obrenović, who remained in
power from 1868 to 1889, carried the Serbia to the independence and
introduced a new constitution with significant provisions for parliamentary rule.
The dominant party in the assembly until 1880s was the Liberal Party, which
was supportive of restricting the powers of the King and of improving
representative and parliamentary institutions. From 1887 to the World War 1,
the Radical Party, which ideologically relied on peasant populism, remained in
power. In 1889 a new constitution voted by the National Assembly gave the
executive power to the King in conjunction with the National Assembly, which
exercised the legislative authority. The State Council consisted of members
appointed partly by the King, and partly by the Assembly kept the power to
decide on the provincial taxes and loans, the expropriation of private property
for public purposes, and the final settlement of debts. In terms of evolution of
fiscal institutions, from 1815 onwards, when Serbian principality was granted
independence in tax collection by the Porte, the revolutionary leader Prince
Miloš treated local tax farmers as salaried officials, holding them responsible for
collecting the head-tax, without letting them getting a share from the proceeds.
With low taxation and mass peasant freehold landownership, the situation
remained favourable for the peasantry. During the 1880s and the 1890s the
budget was permanently in deficit, which only changed after the fiscal
consolidation in 1903. As for different type of taxes, from the early years of
independence, the major indirect tax revenue was the custom duties imposed on
12 The picture only slightly changed following another coup d’etat in 1909 –similar in spirit to the Young Turk revolution of 1908- and a new constitution in 1911, which introduced a second chamber called the Council of State with supervisory function over legislation (Clogg, 1997; Spyropoulos and Fortsakis, 2009)


20
the border trade with Austria-Hungary. In the later years, as Serbia turned into a
land of monopolies, the receipts of these constituted an important indirect tax
category. Despite the importance of indirect taxes, direct tax on land income also
remained considerable until 1914. In 1884, a new reform introduced a
progressive tax rate in land, which favoured large producers and wealthy
peasants. The opposition from this group prevented the introduction of heavy
taxes at the top of the scale. In 1889, due to peasant pressure a new reduction
over land tax was introduced. For the remaining period, Serbian budget more
and more relied on the taxation of urban sector and merchants and the
importance of direct taxes from the rural sector gradually diminished in the
overall revenues of the state (Gnjatovic, 2006; Hinić et al, 2014; Lampe, 1971;
Palairet, 1979; Tuncer, 2015: 177-178).
The success of IFC in transferring funds from revenues under its
management was heavily influenced by the underlying source of these revenues.
In the cases of Egypt and the Ottoman Empire, the dominance of direct taxes
from land meant a relatively small rate of growth in total revenues transferred to
the creditors. Nonetheless, these countries enjoyed a greater recovery in their
borrowing costs due to their political compliance with foreign creditors. On the
contrary, in the small Balkan economies of Serbia and Greece, the underlying
revenue source of IFC was mostly indirect taxes, which were relatively easier to
manage, and they had significantly higher growth rates and better performance.
However, this did not necessarily lead to a corresponding recovery in spreads as
IFC in these two cases faced with constraints and resistance to its policies.
6. Conclusion
This paper demonstrates the multi-dimensional character of a pre-1914
enforcement and conditionality mechanism implemented by the foreign
creditors following sovereign defaults. IFC resulted with a partial loss of fiscal
sovereignty, the extent of which was different in each case depending on the
international political considerations and local institutions. As a direct form of
conditionality, fiscal rules introduced by IFC were effective in improving the
credibility of the defaulting sovereigns, however the speed and extend of
recovery largely depended on the degree of cooperation of debtor governments
with the policies of IFC. In explaining the lack of ownership in the context of IFC,
the paper mainly highlighted the role of the political regime type, more
specifically political representation of taxpayers. The limited fiscal capacity of
the Ottoman Empire and Egypt created an incentive for the central governments
to cooperate with foreign creditors and full compliance with the conditionality.
This cooperation helped to access to cheap foreign capital until World War 1. In


21
the absence of democratic institutions, these two countries did not face with the
political costs of conforming to fiscally oppressive policies of IFC. On the other
hand young democracies of the Balkans, as in Serbia and Greece, where the
centralisation of fiscal systems was already on its way, were less willing to share
the tax revenues with foreign creditors and for that they were penalised (or not
rewarded as much as the others) in the international financial markets. The
broader conclusion to be drawn from this comparison is the importance of policy
environment predefined by the political and fiscal institutions of the debtor
governments. In the context of pre-1914 sovereign debt market, these
institutions not only determined the success of conditionality and fiscal rules in
reinforcing the credibility of debtor governments, but also they acted as
constraints or stimuli in terms of country ownership of IFC programme.
In this paper, it was not possible to analyse the impact of lending
conditionality in the form IFC on the long-term development of fiscal capacity of
debtor governments. Although the Ottoman Empire and Egypt were able to
borrow during this period on a long-term basis with very low costs, there was
limited accompanying transformation of political institutions and fiscal
centralisation. It can be argued that reinforced credibility combined with lack of
developed political institutions slowed down the fiscal centralisation even
further, as the governments were more willing to choose the less costly path of
borrowing. On the other hand, in Serbia and Greece, IFC operated in a relatively
more developed fiscal and political institutional framework; hence the
governments were less willing to cooperate with foreign creditors, resulting in
more costly borrowing. The high cost of borrowing, especially in the case of
Greece, acted as a catalyst to reform the monetary and fiscal institutions even
further and accelerated its move towards fiscal centralisation. Testing these
arguments would require going beyond the cases of this paper.
7. References
Aharoni, R. (2007) The Pasha’s Bedouin – Tribes and States in the Egypt of
Mehmet Ali, 1805-1848, Routledge: New York.
Andreades, A. (1925) Les Controles Financiers Internationaux, Athens.
Avramov, R. (2003) “Advising, conditionality, culture: money doctors in Bulgaria,
1900-2000” in M. Flandreau, Money Doctors: The Experience of International
Financial Advising 1850–2000, Routledge.
Aytekin E. A. (2013) “Tax Revolts During the Tanzimat Period (1839–1876) and
Before the Young Turk Revolution (1904–1908): Popular Protest and State
Formation in the Late Ottoman Empire” Journal of Policy History, 25, pp 308-333
Blaisdell, D. C. (1966) European Financial Control in the Ottoman Empire, AMS
Press, Inc.: New York.


22
Borchard, E. (1951) State Insolvency and Foreign Bondholders – Volume I 
General Principles, Yale University Press: New Haven.
Brautigam, D., Fjeldstad, O.-H., & Moore, M. (2008). Taxation and state-building in
developing countries: capacity and consent. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.
Brown, N. J. (2002) Constitutions in a Nonconstitutionalist World. Albany: State
University of New York Press,
Bulow, J. and Rogoff, K. S. (1988) “A constant recontracting model of sovereign
debt”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 95, No. 6.
Bulow, J. and Rogoff, K. S. (1989) “Sovereign debt: is to forgive to forget?”,
American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 1, pp.43-50.
Castellani, F. and X. Debrun (2005) “Designing macroeconomic frameworks: a
positive analysis of monetary and fiscal delegation”, International Finance, Vol. 8,
pp.87- 117.
Choi, S. J., M. Gulati, and E. A. Posner (2012) “The Evolution of Contractual Terms
in Sovereign Bonds”, Journal of Legal Analysis. Open access.
Clogg, R. (1997) A Concise History of Greece, Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.
Crouchley, A. E. (1938) The Economic Development of Modern Egypt, Longmans,
Green and Co.: London.
Dertilis G. (1986) Banquiers, usuriers et paysans. Réseaux de crédit et stratégies du
capital en Grèce (1780-1930), Paris.
Deville, F. (1912), Les contrôles financiers internationaux et la souveraineté de
l'état, Paris, Limoges.
Drazen, A. (2001) “Conditionality and Ownership in IMF Lending: A Political
Economy Approach”, IMF Working Paper.
Dreher, A. (2009) “IMF conditionality: theory and evidence”, Public Choice, 141,
233- 267.
Eaton, J. and Gersovitz, M. (1981) “Debt with potential repudiation: theoretical
and empirical analysis”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp.289-309.
Eldem, E. (2005) “Ottoman financial integration with Europe: foreign loans, the
Ottoman Bank and the Ottoman public debt”, European Review, Vol. 13, No. 3,
pp.431–445.
Esteves, R. P. (2013) “The bondholder, the sovereign, and the banker: sovereign
debt and bondholders' protection before 1914” European Review of Economic
History, Vol. 17(4), pp. 389-407.


23
Esteves, R. and Tuncer, A. C. (2014) “Feeling the Blues. Moral Hazard and Debt
Dilution in Eurobonds Before 1914” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9860.
Ezzel-Arab, A. (2009) “The Fiscal and Constitutional Program of Egypt’s
Traditional Elites in 1879: A Documentary and Contextual Analysis of “al-Lā'iha
al-Wataniyya”(“The National Program”)” Journal of the Economic and Social
History of the Orient, 52, 301-324.
Fahmy, K. (2002) All the Pasha’s Men – Mehmed Ali, his army and the making of
Modern Egypt, The American University in Cairo Press: Cairo.
Featherstone, K. (2015) “External conditionality and the debt crisis: the ‘Troika’
and public administration reform in Greece”, Journal of European Public Policy
Vol. 22, Iss. 3, 2015
Feis, H. (1974) Europe, the World’s Banker 1870–1914, Kelley: New York.
Finnemore, M. (2003). The purpose of intervention: changing beliefs about the use
of force. Ithaca, Cornell University Press.
Flandreau, M. (2013) “Sovereign states, bondholders committees, and the
London Stock Exchange in the nineteenth century (1827–68): new facts and old
fictions”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy (2013) 29 (4): 668-696
Flandreau, M. and J. Flores (2009) “Bonds and Brands: Foundations of Sovereign
Debt Markets, 1820 1830”, The Journal of Economic History, V. 69 (03)
Gnjatovic, D. (2009) “Foreign Long Term Government Loans of Serbia 1862
1914”, Bank of Serbia Working Paper. 2009-03.
Grauwe, P.D. (2011) “A less punishing, more forgiving approach to the debt crisis
in the eurozone”, CEPS Policy Brief, No. 230.
Hagemann, R. (2011) “How Can Fiscal Councils Strengthen Fiscal Performance?”
OECD Journal: Economic Studies, Vol. 2011/1.
Hinic, B. et al. (2014) “Serbia/Yugoslavia: from 1884 to 1940” in South-Eastern
European Monetary and Economic Statistics from the Nineteenth Century to World
War II, Bank of Greece, Bulgarian National Bank, National Bank of Romania,
Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Hyde, C. C. (1922) “The Negotiation of External Loans with Foreign
Governments”, The American Journal of International Law, Vol. 16, No. 4 (Oct.,
1922), pp. 523-541.
Ioannidis, M. (2015) “How strict is ‘strict conditionality’? The new Eurozone
agreement on Greece” European Law Blog, url:
http://europeanlawblog.eu/?p=2716#sthash.GZ1ZLCgz.dpuf, accessed on 23
March 2015.


24
James H. (2003) “Who owns ‘ownership’? The IMF and policy advice” in M.
Flandreau, Money Doctors: The Experience of International Financial Advising
1850– 2000, Routledge.
Kaplanoglou, G. and V. T. Rapanos (2013) “Fiscal Deficits and the Role of Fiscal
Governance: The Case of Greece”, Economic Analysis and Policy, V.43, No.1.
Karaman, K. and Pamuk, S. (2010) “Ottoman State Finances in European
Perspective, 1500–1914” The Journal of Economic History, 70, p.593-629.
Karpat, K. (1972) “The transformation of the Ottoman State, 1789-1908”,
International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 3, pp.243-281.
Kaletsky, A. (1985) The Costs of Default, Priority Press Publications: New York.
Kelly, T. (1998) “Ability and willingness to pay in the age of Pax Britannica,
1890–1914”, Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 31–58.
Kiray, E. Z. (1988) Foreign Debt and Structural Change in ‘the Sick Man of Europe’
– The Ottoman Empire – 1850–1875, unpublished PhD thesis, MIT.
Kofas, J. V. (1981) Financial Relations of Greece and the Great Powers 1832-1862,
East European Monographs: New York.
Lampe, J. R. (1971). Financial structure and the economic development of Serbia,
1878-1912, PhD University of Wisconsin.
Lampe, J. R., & Jackson, M. R. (1982). Balkan economic history, 1550-1950: from
imperial borderlands to developing nations. Bloomington, Indiana University
Press.
Lazaretou, S. (2005) “The drachma, foreign creditors, and the international
mone- tary system: tales of a currency during the 19th and the early 20th
centuries”, Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 202–236.
Levandis, J. A. (1944) Greek Foreign Debt and the Great Powers 1821-1898,
Columbia University Press: New York.
Martin, I. W., Mehrotra, A. K., & Prasad, M. (2009). The new fiscal sociology:
taxation in comparative and historical perspective. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Mauro, P. and Yafeh, Y. (2003) “The Corporation of Foreign Bondholders”, IMF
Working Paper, No. 03107.
Minoglou, I. (1995) “Political Factors Shaping the Role of Foreign Finance: The
Case of Greece (1832-1932)” in J.HARRISS, J.HUNTER, C.M.LEWIS (eds), The New
Institutional Economics and Third World Development. Routledge, London
pp.250-264.


25
Mitchener, K. J. and Weidenmier, M. D. (2010) “Supersanctions and sovereign
debt repayment”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 29, Issue 1,
pp.19–36.
Özbek, N. (2010) “Osmanlı İmparatorluğu’nda Gelir Vergisi: 1903-1907
Tarihli Vergi-i Şahsi Uygulaması.” Tarih ve Toplum Yeni Yaklaşımlar, no. 10
(2010): 43-80.
Palairet, M. (1979). “Fiscal Pressure and Peasant Impoverishment in Serbia
before World War I”. The Journal of Economic History, 39, pp 719-740.
Palairet, M. R. (1997). The Balkan economies c. 1800-1914: evolution without
development. Cambridge, UK., Cambridge University Press.
Panizza, U., Sturzenegger, F. and Zettelmeyer, J. (2009) “The economics and law
of sovereign debt and default”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 47, No. 3,
pp.651–698.
Quataert, D. (1983). Social disintegration and popular resistance in the Ottoman
Empire, 1881-1908: reactions to European economic penetration. New York, New
York University Press.
Quataert, D. (1994) “The Age of Reforms”, Part 4 of H. Inalcik et al. (eds) An
Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire 1600–1914, Vol. 2,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Palamas, L. K. (1930) History of monetary enactments in Greece, 1828-1885
(Athens).
Rose, A. K. (2005) “One reason countries pay their debts: renegotiation and
international trade”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 77, pp.189–206.
Shaw, S. J. (1962) The financial and administrative organization and development
of Ottoman Egypt 1517-1798, Princeton University Press: Princeton.
Shaw, S. J. (1975) “The Nineteenth-Century Ottoman Tax Reforms and Revenue
System 1517-1798” International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 6, No. 4
(Oct., 1975), pp. 421-459
Sundhaussen, H. (1989). Historische Statistik Serbiens, 1834-1914: mit
europäischen Vergleichsdaten. München, R. Oldenbourg.
Suter, C. (1990) Debt Cycles in the World Economy: Foreign Loans, Financial Crises
and Debt Settlements, 1820–1990, Westview Press: Boulder, Colorado.
Spyropoulos, P. K., & Fortsakis, T. (2009). Constitutional Law in Greece.
Netherlands, Kluwer Law International.
Tilly, C. (1990) Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990– 1990. Blackwell.


26
Tooze, A. and Ivanov, M (2011), “Disciplining the ‘black sheep of the Balkans’:
financial supervision and sovereignty in Bulgaria, 1902–38”. The Economic
History Review, 64, 30-51.
Tuncer, A. C. (2015). Sovereign Debt and International Financial Control: the
Middle East and the Balkans, 1870-1913. Palgrave Macmillan.
Tuncer, A. C. and Pamuk, S. (2014) “Ottoman Empire: from 1830 to 1914” in
South-Eastern European Monetary and Economic Statistics from the Nineteenth
Century to World War II, Bank of Greece, Bulgarian National Bank, National Bank
of Romania, Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Waibel, M. (2011). Sovereign defaults before International courts and tribunals.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Wynne, W. (1951) State Insolvency and Foreign Bondholders – Volume II - Selected
Case Histories of Governmental Foreign Defaults and Debt Readjustments, Yale
University Press: New Haven, Connecticut.
Yun Casalilla, B., & O'brien, P. (2012). The rise of fiscal states: a global history,
1500-1914. New York, Cambridge University Press.
Zourai, A. J. (1998) European Capitalist Penetration of Tunisia, 1860-1881,
Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Washington.


27
8. Figures
Figure 1 Bond spreads: 1850s to 1913
Source: Tuncer (2015). The bonds used in calculations are as follows. Greece: 5% Independence Loans of 1879 (Old Greek loans converted), 5% Loan of 1881. Turkey: 6% Loan of 1852 and 1854, 6% Loan of 1858, 6% Loan of 1863–1864; 6% Loan of 1862, 5% Priority Bonds, 4% Priority Loan (new issues in 1890), 4% Loan of 1891. Egypt: 5% preferred Loan of 1877, 7% Loan of 1862, 3.5% preferred Loan of 1890. Serbia: 5% Loan of 1881, 5% Loan of 1890, 4% Loan of 1895. The spread is expressed as percentage points is the difference between the current yield of bonds and British consols. In the case of Serbia, as the price quotes are from Paris, I used French rentes to calculate bond spreads.
Default
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910
Egypt
Default
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Greece
Default
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910
O9oman Empire
Default
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Serbia


28
Figure 2 Revenues collected by IFCs (in millions of £): 1876-1913
Source: Tuncer (2015)
0 5 10 15 20
£ (millions)
1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Egypt
0 5 10 15
£ (millions)
1898 1900 1902 1904 1906 1908 1910 1912 1914
Greece
0 10 20 30
£ (millions)
1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
O?oman Empire
12345
£ (millions)
1895 1900 1905 1910 1915
Serbia
Total government revenue Revenues of IFC


29
9. Tables
Table 1 Summary of foreign loans: 1854-1913
Number of foreign loans contracted
Total nominal value of foreign loans (m£)
Debt per capita (£)
Average effective interest rate (%)
Average yield (%)
BEFORE IFC
Egypt 9 69 7.2 8.5 8
Ottoman Empire 18 219 8.9 8.6 8.6
Serbia 17 16 6.2 6.7 6.2
Greece 9 26 6.5 6.3 7.1
AFTER IFC
Egypt 10 55 7.5 4.5 5.4
Ottoman Empire 23 90 6.2 4.7 4.7
Serbia 7 25 9.1 5.1 5.4
Greece 8 29 7.8 5 10.7
Source: Tuncer (2015). Notes: The periods before IFC are 1862-76 for Egypt 1854-76 for the Ottoman Empire, 1879-1893 for Greece and 1881-94 for Serbia. The period after IFC is 1881-1913 for the Ottoman Empire, 1876-1913 for Egypt, 1898-1913 for Greece and 1895-1913 for Serbia. To eliminate double counting I only account for new issues and exclude bond conversions. Population estimates are from Maddison averages of same periods. Bond yields are average values before and after IFC, starting with the first date of borrowing, excluding episodes of defaults and ending in December 1913.


30
Table 2 IFCs in comparison: the administrative structure and reforms
Egypt (Caisse)
Ottoman Empire (Council)
Serbia (Administration)
Greece (Commission)
Period 1876-1914 1882-1914 1895-1914 1898-1914
Managing council
Bondholder Bondholder Bondholder/gover nment
Diplomatic
Composition of the management
Germany, Great Britain, AustriaHungary, Russia, France and Italy
Britain, France, Netherlands, Germany, Italy and AustriaHungary bondholders, and a representative of the Ottoman government.
France and Germany bondholders, director and four representatives of Serbian government.
Diplomatic representatives of Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and Russia
Revenue administration
Direct collection and legislative power
Direct collection Supervision and direct collection
Supervision
Acting as a trustee
Yes Yes Yes No
Monetary reform
Extensive Limited Limited Extensive
Resistance Contraband/armed Contraband/armed Political Political
Source: Tuncer (2015)