Working Papers No. 165/12
Monetary sovereignty during the classical gold standard
era: the Ottoman Empire and Europe, 1880-1913
.
Coşkun Tunçer
© Coşkun Tunçer
July 2012


2
Department of Economic History
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
Tel: +44 (0) 20 7955 7860
Fax: +44 (0) 20 7955 7730


3
Monetary sovereignty during the classical gold standard era: the Ottoman Empire and Europe, 1880-1913*
Coşkun Tunçer**
ABSTRACT
The classical gold standard, which prevailed from the 1870s to the First World
War, was characterised by fixed exchange rates, free convertibility and perfect capital
mobility and was considered the dominant international monetary system of the time.
As trilemma hypothesis suggests, the Ottoman Empire enjoyed fixed exchange rates and
foreign capital flows under the golden rule, but lost its monetary sovereignty. However,
the extent of this loss was far more apparent than in other core and peripheral
countries. As a result, the gold standard in the Ottoman Empire was characterised by a
set of “anomalies” such as the existence of competing monetary authorities, persistence
of territorial exchange rates and monetary zones and widely circulating multiple
standard and sub-standard coins. This paper analyses these unique features as changing
degrees of monetary sovereignty under the golden rule and revisits the evidence. By
relying on a new dataset, it compares the Ottoman case with major core and peripheral
countries of Europe in 1880-1913. It explores the hypothesis that ability of the gold
standard countries to determine the composition and size of the monetary base was not
homogenous. The paper suggests that the differences in monetary sovereignty for the
period can best be explained by differences in monetary institutions regulating the
relationship between governments and central issue banks. This in return offers a
framework explaining the wide variations across peripheries.
* This paper is an extension of the second chapter of my PhD thesis submitted to LSE, Economic History Department in 2011. I gratefully acknowledge the valuable comments of my examiners Larry Neal and Şevket Pamuk and my supervisors Colin Lewis and Max-Stephan Schulze during the preparation of this paper. All mistakes, of course, remain mine. ** PhD, Economic History. Contact: a.c.tuncer@lse.ac.uk


4
Anomaly appears only against the background provided by the paradigm. T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 1962.
This study explores the question of whether membership to a fixed-exchange rate club
implies differences in monetary sovereignty, which has once again raised extensive debate
among economists and policy-makers in light of the recent crisis. The literature has often
underlined the well-known advantages of being a member of a fixed-exchange rate club or a
monetary union (i.e. the extreme case of fixed-exchange rate systems). However, each
member’s inability to determine the size and composition of its monetary base in response to
macroeconomic imbalances and other shocks (i.e. its monetary sovereignty) remain a recurrent
disadvantage. This reflects the macroeconomic trilemma hypothesis that a nation can maintain
no more than two of three conditions: fixed exchange rate; free capital flows (i.e. unlimited
convertibility of its currency and foreign currencies); and monetary sovereignty. This argument
has been studied extensively in pre-1914 gold standard context, where free capital mobility and
fixed exchange rates prevailed but monetary sovereignty had to be sacrificed.1
Although many have written case studies on the gold standard experiences of major
core and peripheral countries of the time, few are concerned with the way in which the pre
1914 gold standard functioned in the Ottoman Empire. The following sections aim to fill this
gap by bringing together wide-ranging quantitative and qualitative evidence on Ottoman
monetary activities. This scrutiny of the way that the monetary system in the Ottoman Empire
worked is relevant not only because of its important role in the region’s economy but also as
one of the biggest capital importers of the time, which makes it interesting to explore in terms
of trilemma hypothesis.2 More importantly, the “anomalies” of the Ottoman gold standard may
help us to revise our understanding of European gold standard. Therefore, the second
contribution of the paper is the quantitative analysis, with a new dataset, of the monetary
activities of major European countries and the Ottoman Empire, which broadens our
understanding of differing degrees of monetary sovereignty before the First World War.
1 M. Obstfeld et al., “The trilemma in history: trade-offs among exchange rates, monetary policies and capital mobility”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, No. 3, 2005, pp.423-438. 2 The Ottoman Empire contracted its first foreign loan in 1854 and declared a moratorium in 1876 on an outstanding debt of £200 million. As a result, in 1881, the government had to abandon a significant portion of its revenues to an international financial commission administered by foreign creditors. Therefore an analysis of the Ottoman gold standard is also helpful for revisiting the argument that the gold standard facilitated the access of peripheral countries to international capital markets. This question is explored in detail in A.C. Tuncer, Fiscal autonomy, monetary regime and sovereign risk: foreign borrowing and international financial control in the Ottoman Empire, Greece and Egypt during the classical gold standard era, PhD thesis, LSE, 2011.


5
The paper is organised as follows. The first section briefly reviews the broader literature
on the pre-1914 gold standard. More specifically, it discusses conventional and revisionist
perspectives on the “rules of the game” with reference to monetary sovereignty. Section 2
provides a brief monetary history of the Ottoman Empire during the classical gold standard
period, moving from the orthodox classifications of the Ottoman Empire as a “gold standard”
country to the “unique” features of its monetary institutions. Section 3 puts the Ottoman case
into the European context by introducing a new time series-cross section (TSCS) dataset on
monetary activities in the major core and peripheral countries of the time. The purpose of the
quantitative analysis is to determine and explain the varying degrees of monetary sovereignty
between 1880 and 1913 across countries with a panel corrected standard errors (PCSE) model.
Finally, section 4 summarises the main argument and identifies the broader implications of the
findings.
1. Gold standard, peripheries and monetary sovereignty
Standard interpretations of the pre-1914 gold standard suggest that major countries on
gold committed themselves to follow the “rules of the game”, enabling the system to work
“automatically” and ensuring the stability of prices and balance in international payments.3
However, this stereotype of the gold standard’s functioning is questioned in the literature. For
instance, as early as the 1960s, Bloomfield emphasised that the “structure of the pre-1914 gold
standard was far from simple” and showed significant differences in the institutions and
working of the system between countries.4 To address these differences, given the relative ease
of finding parallels in such core countries as Britain, Germany and France, revisionist writers
prefer the ex-post term “periphery” for remaining/outlier countries, where different
combinations of limping standard, gold-exchange standard, bimetallism, convertible and
inconvertible paper standards and even silver standard prevailed in the period. Such writers
underline the asymmetry of the adjustment in core and periphery and its tendency to work pro
cyclically. Moreover, core and periphery took different routes to the gold standard, put different
policy instruments at the disposal of monetary authorities and were not equally able to apply (or
violate) the rules of the game. Other characteristics, such as credibility and easy access to
3 The origin of this account can be extended back to David Hume, “Of the balance of trade” in The Gold Standard in Theory and History, ed.by B. Eichengreen and M. Flandreau (New York, 1997). B. Eichengreen, Golden Fetters – The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 1919-1939 (New York, 1992).
4 A. I. Bloomfield, Short-Term Capital Movements under the Pre-1914 Gold Standard (Princeton, N.J., 1963), p.10 and see also A. I. Bloomfield, Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard: 18801914 (New York, 1959).


6
international capital markets are also noted as distinguishing factors.5
Although core-periphery framework proved useful for indicating asymmetries in the pre
1914 monetary order, increasing numbers of case studies also point out that the periphery of
the gold standard showed marked variation in their linkages with the core of the system, their
openness and accessibility to international capital markets and other monetary aspects. In
response to this increasing empirical counter-evidence, some studies underline the importance
of transcending such frameworks. Eichengreen and Flandreau explain distinct transition routes
to the gold standard before the First World War, where several cores –London, Paris and Berlin
correspond to several peripheries.6 Cohen, however, seeking to construct the “monetary
geography” from a political economy perspective, suggests that currency domains are defined
by the extent of their effectiveness. His analysis shifts the focus from political units of analysis
(i.e. countries) to monetary borders and supply-demand behaviours by global actors.7 Similarly,
Flandreau and Jobst have recently proposed variation in the international circulation of national
currencies as a criterion in mapping the geography of the international monetary order before
1914.8
This paper emphasises another dimension of peripheries by drawing on the anomalies of
the Ottoman case and the trilemma hypothesis. Although it is generally accepted that the pre
1914 gold standard implied losing monetary sovereignty because of free capital flows and fixed
exchange rates, few studies analyse the extent of this loss. Moreover, one may argue that the
varying degrees of monetary sovereignty under the gold standard regime indicate differences
among peripheries and in the hierarchy of the international monetary order.
The question then is what may best indicate the varying degrees of monetary
sovereignty across countries. In this paper, the commodity-fiat currency composition of money
stock is a suggested measure for quantifying this relationship, assuming that a faster transition
5 P. M. Aceña and J. Reis, Monetary Standards in the Periphery – Paper, Silver and Gold 1854-1933 (New York, 2000); B. J. Eichengreen and M. Flandreau, The Gold Standard in Theory and History, (New York, 1997); L. Catao and S. Solomou, “Exchange rates in the periphery and international adjustment under the gold standard”, IMF Working Paper, WP/03/41, 2003; M. Morys, “Adjustment under the classical gold standard (1870s-1914): how costly did the external constraint come to the European periphery?”, Oxford University, Department of Economics Discussion Paper Series, No. 353, 2007. B. Eichengreen and M. Flandreau, “The geography of the gold standard”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 1050, 1994, p.2. Aceña and Reis, 2000; R. P. Esteves, J. Reis and F. Ferramosca “Market Integration in the Golden Periphery. The Lisbon/London Exchange, 1854-1891”, Explorations in Economic History 46, no. 3 (2009), pp. 324-345. M. Flandreau and J. Komlos “Core or Periphery? The Credibility of the Austro-Hungarian Currency 1867-1913”, Journal of European Economic History 31, no. 2 (2002), pp. 293-320. 6 Eichengreen and Flandreau, 1994, p.12. 7 B. J. Cohen, The Geography of Money (New York, 1998), p.21-22. 8 M. Flandreau and C. Jobst, “The Ties That Divide: A Network Analysis of the International Monetary System, 1890-1910” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 65, No. 4 (Dec., 2005), pp. 977-1007.


7
to “fiat money”9 gave governments more flexibility to manipulate money supply; contrastingly,
in countries dominated by commodity money, the money supply was driven more by the money
demand of economic actors. Earlier writers were also more inclined to emphasise that
differences amongst peripheries were closely linked with the different types of currency in
circulation. Triffin argued that the central banks of issue in peripheral countries suffered extra
pressure because much of the domestic monetary circulation was itself in the form of
commodity money and not credit money.10 Expansionary monetary policies were thus
accompanied by outflows of gold and silver from banks’ reserves to internal circulation. This
movement of specie to internal circulation was all the more pronounced, because the lowest
denomination of paper currency was usually much too high –often several times greater than a
month’s wages –to be usable in household and wage payments. Note expansion was therefore
limited not only by foreign deficits and gold losses, but also by internal gold and silver losses,
given that banks of issue did not have access to gold or silver “lenders of resort”.11
Therefore the pre-1914 gold standard can be interpreted as the emergence of fiat
money and declining importance of commodity monies, which did not take place to the same
extent across core and peripheries. Besides macroeconomic conditions, the ability of a country
to introduce fiat money and its “forced circulation”12 (cours forcé) was also determined by its
monetary institutions regulating the relationship between governments and central banks of
issue.13 Some states relied exclusively on private banks of issue, while others monopolised this
power. Some issue banks were state organisations and others were private banks. For some
private banks, issuing notes was a minor activity, whereas others were designed primarily to do
so. In many countries state notes and private bank notes circulated together. The following
sections, inter alia, therefore, aim to quantify and explain the varying degrees of commodity-fiat
money across the major European gold standard countries. However, to begin the discussion
first, we first introduce the Ottoman case in detail.
9 By “fiat/credit money” we mean bank notes or state notes either backed or unbacked by the issuing authority.
10 R. Triffin, The Evolution of the International Monetary System: Historical Reappraisal and Future Perspectives (Princeton, N.J., 1964). 11 “One might well wonder, indeed, whether the unprecedented stability of major currencies in terms of gold –and exchange rates- in the nineteenth century was not due to the spectacular growth of bank money or “credit money” –in the form of paper currency and bank deposits –rather than to the residual and fast declining, role of gold and silver commodity money”. Triffin, 1964, p.14. 12 Here we rely on the conceptual difference between legal tender (cours légal) and forced tender (cours forcé) as suggested by the contemporary literature. The former refers to the legal receivability of a currency for taxes and public dues, the latter to the forced circulation of irredeemable paper money. M. Rollins, Money and Investment (London, 1907). 13 In the paper, the terms “central bank”, “central bank of issue” and “the bank of issue” are used interchangeably. These terms refer the monopoly power of a private bank to issue notes and are not linked to the modern meaning of the term “central bank”.


8
2. The Ottoman monetary system and institutions, 1880-1913
In many ways the nineteenth-century evolution of Ottoman monetary institutions
broadly followed that of the international monetary system, although the implementation of
international rules and practices occurred in a relatively distinct way. As early as 1844, the
Ottoman Empire established a new bimetallic system and abandoned debasements (see Table
1).14 During this period, although no private banks of issue existed, the government started
experimenting with paper currency. In 1863, British and French capital founded the Imperial
Ottoman Bank (IOB) to which the government granted the privilege of issuing paper currency.
During the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-8, this privilege was suspended and the government
issued its own unbacked state notes. In 1880, the privileges of the IOB were restored, and state
notes were withdrawn from circulation. Moreover, the government recognized the gold lira as
legal tender and limited the minting of silver coinage, thus adopting the “limping standard”.15
Below, we look more closely at these major turning-points in nineteenth century Ottoman
monetary history from the perspective of evolving monetary institutions or more specifically of
currency-issuing authorities.
2.1. Commodity money: from bimetallism to limping standard
Starting with “coinage adjustment” reform (tashih-i sikke) of 1844, the Ottoman
government formally declared bimetallism with a fixed gold-silver ratio and abandoned raising
fiscal revenue through debasements. However, from 1876 onwards, as the depreciation of silver
in the world markets accelerated, it became increasingly difficult to sustain this gold-silver ratio,
and the government, like many other European governments, moved away from bimetallism.
According to the new regulation, from March 1880, the empire’s monetary standard was to be
the gold lira of 100 kuruş. However, unlike a “full” gold standard country, the mint steadfastly
accepted the silver at reduced rates. The mint ratio, with a 5 per cent increase over the previous
bimetallic ratio of 15.09, now stood at 15.88 (see Table 2).16 In other words, the Ottoman
government moved towards a limping standard by maintaining a gold-silver ratio. As in the
other limping standard countries, this led to a duality: the Ottoman economy continued to rely
heavily on silver for most daily domestic transactions and gold was mostly used for international
14 Ş. Pamuk, A Monetary History of the Ottoman Empire (Cambridge, 2000).
15 Ş. Pamuk, “From bimetallism to the ‘limping standard’: the Ottoman monetary system in the nineteenth century”, in P. L. Cotrell (ed.) East Meets West – Banking, Commerce and Investment in the Ottoman Empire, 2008; K. Dimitrova, L. Fantacci and A. C. Tunçer, “Monetary policy in Southeast Europe in transition from bimetallism to limping gold standard”, paper presented at the 5th Conference of SEEMHN (Istanbul, 2010) 16 H. A. Kuyucak, Para ve Banka, (Istanbul, 1947); G. Young, Corps De Droit Ottoman, Vol. 5 (Oxford, 1905); J. Schneider, O. Schwarzer and F. Zellfelder, Wahrungen der Welt 8 – Afrikanische und Levantinische Devisenkurse im 19. Und 20. Jahrhundert, (Stuttgart, 1994).


9
transactions.17 In Istanbul, the financial and commercial centre of the empire, the value of the
British pound generally fluctuated between 1.09 and 1.11 liras and the exchange rates of most
other major currencies remained stable until 1914. Similarly, the gold-silver price ratio hovered
around the official rate, despite the heavy depreciation of silver in international markets.18
However, in its stability the capital city was an exception rather than the rule, unlike
conditions elsewhere in the empire. Table 3 summarises the average market exchange rate
between silver kuruş and gold lira in selected years from 1883 to 1914 for major Ottoman
provinces. It could be argued that the premium for gold over silver usually increased with the
distance from Istanbul, depending on transportation costs.19 However, there were also extreme
exchange rate differences between and within provinces, which are hard to explain by distance
alone.20 The Ottoman government and local authorities were aware of these extreme
differences. For instance, specifically for Baghdad in 1888, the Ottoman government to give an
impetus to the import trade devalued the coins in circulation by about one-third. In August
1889, the Porte proposed a similar devaluation to the local administration of Basra. However,
Basra refused to comply to avoid negative impact on local trade. The Porte generally admitted
such exceptions to satisfy the local authorities, given that international trade opportunities and
linkages varied across provinces. Finally, the common media of exchange differed widely
between provinces. Gold coins were not circulated in Beirut and Izmir, where silver mecidiye
dominated. In Syria and Palestine, the coins in widest circulation were the undervalued silver
beşlik and altılık; in Basra, the Persian keran was the principal coin in use; in Hejaz and Yemen,
Austrian thaler (Maria Theresa thaler); in Trabzon, Russian roubles; while in Jerusalem, Antalya,
Inebolu and Zonguldak, French francs and British pounds had replaced Ottoman currency.21
These different territorial currency zones and exchange rate idiosyncrasies were the
“anomalies” of the Ottoman gold standard. They survived for several reasons. To start with,
widespread counterfeiting, beyond government control, affected the differences in exchange
rates.22 Moreover, the scarcity of fractional coins and small change determined local demand for
standard and sub-standard silver coins. This shortage made low-denomination silver coins
circulate at a premium, regardless of the international price of silver. This was why the
17 H. P. Willis, A History of the Latin Monetary Union, (Chicago, 1901); L. Einaudi, Money and Politics European Monetary Unification and the International Gold Standard (1865-1873), (Oxford, 2001). 18 Tuncer, 2011; Dimitrova, Fantacci and Tuncer, 2010. 19 Pamuk 2008, p.21. 20 For instance, in Izmir the value of the Ottoman lira varied between 102 and 178 kuruş, depending on the type of transaction. For the payment of taxes, salaries and other operations of the administration 1 lira accounted for 102 kuruş, whereas for bills of exchange it was 125 kuruş and finally in the spot market it was rated at 178 kuruş. Young, 1905, p.2.
21 V. Eldem, Osmanlı İmparatorluğunun İktisadi Şartları Hakkında Bir Tetkik, Türkiye İş Bankası Kültür Yayınları (1970, Istanbul); Kuyucak, 1947, p.202; Tuncer 2011; Young, 1905. 22 Pamuk, 2008.


10
government increased the amount of low-denomination silver coinage, in particular after 1895
(see Chart 1).
Moreover, the broad transactional network also determined the demand for a specific
currency. As in Beirut, the region’s international trade conditions conditioned the choice of
currency and exchange rate disparity. In Yemen and Hejaz the predominance of the Maria
Theresa thaler can be explained by the path dependency of currency usage. This currency had
been pre-eminent so long that even government efforts could not dislodge it.23 Finally, as seen
in more detail below, the failure to establish fiat money as a medium of exchange reinforced
the dominance of diverse silver currencies throughout Ottoman lands.
2.2. Fiat money: from state notes to bank notes
So far the discussion has covered only the coinage system and policy. However, the
extent of commodity money cannot be assessed without considering fiat money. After the
monetary reform of 1844 had ruled out debasements, the government unprecedentedly issued
a state note (kaime). The earliest examples of these notes were handwritten documents issued
in denominations of 500 kuruş (circa £4.5). As they carried an interest rate and had a maturity
term, they were not “fiat currency” in the strict sense. However, the government declared
repeatedly that the kaime was issued only in order to facilitate commerce and that it should be
accepted as legal tender, exactly like gold and silver coins. It also announced that these notes
would be accepted by tax collectors in the provinces and by the Treasury in Istanbul. Later,
smaller denominations followed so as to increase their use in daily transactions and, with their
limited volume, these notes performed reasonably well until 1852.24 From 1853 to 1862,
however, government issued large quantities of non-interest bearing and unbacked notes to
finance extraordinary state expenditures, which eventually led to heavy depreciation and
inflation.25 In order to solve the problem in 1863 the government decided to withdraw all the
23 In 1888 a commission was assembled to consider a method of freeing Yemen of Maria Theresa thalers and supplanting them with silver mecidiyes. However, in practice it was not possible to refuse the MariaTheresa thalers in payment of taxes, since the local population had been accustomed for many years to employ these coins as their only medium of exchange. As a contemporary observer puts it, “the head of Maria Theresa impressed on the coin represents some sacred and mystic sign, conferring special value on the silver stamped with it” (Tuncer 2011, p.103). For detailed discussions of the case of Maria Theresa thaler, see A. Kuroda, “The Maria Theresa Dollar in the Early Twentieth-Century Red Sea Region: A Complementary Interface between Multiple Markets”, Financial History Review 14, no. 01 (2007); A. E. Tschoegl, “Maria Theresa's Thaler: A Case of International Money”, Eastern Economic Journal 27, no. 4 (2001).
24 A. Akyıldız, Osmanlı finans sisteminde dönüm noktası - Kağıt para ve sosyo-ekonomik etkileri (Istanbul, 1996) and Pamuk, 2000, p.209-210. 25 In the meantime, in 1854, the Ottoman government contracted its first foreign loan. This development reduced the dependency on domestic markets for financing its expenditures. Therefore, it was no coincidence that the government took the “paper money” experience to the next level.


11
current kaimes in circulation with the help of short-term loans from the Imperial Ottoman Bank
(IOB).
This was the beginning of a new era in the history of credit money in the Ottoman
Empire. Henceforward, the IOB would act as the “central bank of issue” in addition to its
commercial operations.26 It handled most of the transactions of the state treasury and had to
provide short-term advances to the state. In return, the IOB had the exclusive privilege of issuing
gold-convertible banknotes; and the government promised to maintain this exclusivity and not
to issue state notes. The decree foresaw that the payment for the IOB notes would be
demandable only in Istanbul, the place of issue. It also imposed a one-third reserve requirement
on their issue.27
Once all state notes were withdrawn from circulation, however, the IOB could not
easily increase its circulation. Before 1876, the total notes issued did not exceed 350,000 liras
and the cover ratio never fell below 100 per cent. One reason for the low level of circulation
was previous unsuccessful kaime experiments, which discouraged people from holding fiat
money. Moreover, in transferring the monopoly of issue to a foreign commercial bank, the
government found it harder to implement “forced circulation”. Given that the IOB was the
major intermediary between international capital markets and the Ottoman government, the
government’s unilateral suspension of privileges could have led to disruptions in foreign capital
flows.
The financial crisis of 1873 was a watershed, after which overseas lending declined. In
consequence, the Ottoman government, together with a few other heavily indebted peripheral
countries, declared in 1876 a moratorium on their outstanding debt. Meanwhile, with the
sudden collapse of Ottoman credit in the European financial markets and the effect of war with
Russia, the government abolished its previous engagement with the IOB on the issuing of its
own notes. The new silver-backed state notes bore the seals of both the Treasury and the IOB
and could thus be easily differentiated from the gold-backed notes of the IOB.28 Being already in
default and on the point of war with Russia, the government could more easily take the risk of
suspending the privileges of the IOB and issuing its own notes. From August 1876 to May 1878,
the state notes in circulation reached a nominal value of 16 million liras and lost much value
against all other exchanges. In February 1879, the government started negotiating a foreign
26 It should be noted that, unlike many other members of the core and peripheries of the time, there were no other private issue banks in the empire before (or even after) the foundation of the IOB. 27 E. Eldem, A History of the Ottoman Bank, (Istanbul, 1999), p.463-466; A. Autheman, The Imperial Ottoman Bank (Istanbul, 2002); The Concession: ‘Reglement’ and Statutes of the Imperial Ottoman Bank, 1875, Guildhall Library, MS-23963; Eldem, 1999, pp.463-466. 28 Akyıldız, 1996, pp.96-98; Eldem, 1999, p.465.


12
loan to allow its notes to be withdrawn and promised to redeem them at 1 gold lira for 400
kuruş kaime – as opposed to the initial rate of 1 gold lira for 100 kuruş kaime.
After the monetary reform of 1880, the IOB resumed its monopoly on issuing gold
backed banknotes. Until 1914, IOB notes remained the only legal tender fiat money, circulating
together with the gold and silver coins. After the reform, the amount of IOB notes in circulation
increased steadily. Although the cover ratio was still much above the required rate of 30 per
cent, in 1893 the government imposed an upper limit on the banknote issue of 1,5 million liras.
The following year the bank gradually increased the circulation of its notes, which reached 1.4
million liras by 1905. In 1908, following lengthy negotiations with the government, the IOB was
finally authorised to increase the issue limit to 2 million liras. However, the total in circulation
stabilised at around 1 million liras until August 1914. Perhaps more remarkably, throughout the
period the cover ratio remained much above the officially required rate, suggesting that the
bank could not increase the circulation of its notes even if it met all the legal requirements (see
Chart 2).
2.3. The Ottoman monetary system from 1880 to 1914
From 1880 to 1914, the Ottoman Empire successfully adopted the gold standard and
the monetary authority sustained the full convertibility of its gold-backed banknotes. However,
closer scrutiny of the prevailing monetary activities and regulations reveals peculiarities in the
functioning of this monetary standard.
Regarding commodity money, the domestic circulation of gold coins was considerably
limited. In fact, although the mint output of gold was fairly high, according to contemporaries,
gold was never circulated. Any gold brought into the country, or struck by the mint, would
“rapidly disappear”.29 In accordance with “Gresham’s law”, this resulted from past reductions
in the legal value of the currencies to their intrinsic value and the government’s refusal to
recognise its own paper money. As a result, gold was considered the only medium of exchange
that still maintained its reputation as a store of value. In Istanbul, exchange rates were stable
between the Ottoman currency and the currencies of other gold standard countries, but in the
provinces of the empire, territorial exchange rates and currency zones survived throughout the
period. Since domestic transactions used many different types of silver coins, the state in its
operations had still to accept unlimited amounts of silver. Most of the silver in circulation carried
29 Quinquennial report of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration, (1882-1887), 1888, London, pp.33.


13
high nominal value, which in the end led the fractional coinage to circulate at par, despite
heavy depreciation in the international price of silver.30
Regarding fiat money, the most distinguishing characteristic of the Ottoman monetary
system was the limited circulation of gold-convertible banknotes. A closer look at the
composition of the empire’s money stock for the period reveals that on average the share of
gold-backed banknotes issued by the IOB was below 3 per cent of the total. In this respect, the
Ottoman Empire was clearly an outlier compared to the other European gold standard countries
(see Chart 3). Besides the legal restrictions on issuing banknotes, other factors explain their
limited circulation. First and most important, the IOB was not a “national” but a commercial
bank established by foreign capital and privileged to issue bank notes. This fact alone prevented
the IOB (and the government) from implementing “forced circulation”; instead, all banknotes
circulated on a “voluntary” basis and their volume was determined by demand. Second, the IOB
started its operations inauspiciously. The previous fiat money issued by the government had
already lost credibility, for the public preferred coins to notes. Another limitation was the policy
of the IOB to redeem and convert its notes into gold only in Istanbul. In the provinces, the
holders of these banknotes would use them like bills of exchange and send to Istanbul to
convert them, which increased transaction costs. Moreover, the high denominations of the
banknotes contributed to their limited circulation. Although a small volume of 2 lira banknotes
were circulated in 1869, most of the IOB notes were nominally for 5 liras (around £4.5) making
them inconvenient be used widely except for large transactions. Thus, because of both the
unique characteristics of Ottoman monetary institutions and the reasons cited above, the notes
circulated mostly in Istanbul, forming only a fraction of the total money stock.
Overall, as the monetary base of the country continued to rely on silver rather than gold
or gold convertible bank notes, the silver currency may fairly be said to have served as fiduciary
money, with only a limited connection to its intrinsic value. From the government’s perspective,
this monetary system, despite enforcement problems and defects in the monetary legislation,
can be characterised by flexibility and pragmatism. As one contemporary observer puts it, the
Ottoman monetary regime represented “an object-lesson of a silver-using country on a gold
basis”.31 Indeed, from 1873 to 1881 when the Ottoman government faced insolvency, the
minting of silver relative to gold soon increased, but this reversed after 1881 with conditions in
international financial markets favouring the Ottoman government.32 Hence, the duality of the
30 This phenomenon is in line with the arguments of T. J. Sargent and F. R. Velde The Big Problem of Small Change, (Princeton, 2003).
31 Annual Report of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration, 1894, London, No. 12, pp.62-65.
32 These favourable conditions were mostly due to surrendering certain tax revenues to creditors, i.e. establishing the Ottoman Public Debt Administration. See Tuncer, 2011.


14
Ottoman monetary system (i.e. silver for domestic transactions and gold for international
transactions) and its accessibility to international financial markets were major determinants of
commodity money’s dominance throughout the period.
To conclude, the extraordinary aspects of the monetary system had important
implications for monetary sovereignty. Unlike most of the major gold standard countries, the
Ottoman Empire did not enjoy the “contingency clause” of the gold standard, which, by
suspending gold convertibility and issuing notes, would have given the government some
flexibility in financing budget deficits in cases of emergency, such as war.33 In this regard, its
privileges gave the IOB independence in reaching decisions and the government gave up its
access to a major monetary policy instrument. In the next section the consistency and
applicability of these findings are checked in the European context.
3. Measuring monetary sovereignty: data and analysis
In this section we go beyond single-country analysis and compare the Ottoman Empire
with the major players in the European gold standard. The main purpose is to see whether
monetary sovereignty between countries differed and whether the Ottoman Empire was
exceptional in this regard. First, a TSCS dataset consisting of 16 European countries over the
period 1880-1913 is introduced, with hypotheses. In the second section, we move to
econometric analysis based on a PCSE model and discuss the findings.
3.1. Data and hypotheses
In order to establish changing levels of monetary sovereignty and its determinants across
Europe, a large new data set for 16 countries from 1880-1913 is gathered. In compiling it we
relied on various primary and secondary sources. First, estimates of commodity money stocks
and annual gross/net coinages of major European mints for relevant period were constructed by
using annual mint, currency and treasury reports published by the UK and US. This primary
dataset is combined with the Ottoman and Greek macroeconomic and monetary statistics in
33 M.D. Bordo and F. E. Kydland “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in Exploration”, Exploration in Economic History, v.32, (1995) p.423-464, M.D. Bordo and Schwartz, A. J. “The Specie Standard as a Contingent Rule: Some Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990”, NBER Working Papers (1997). M.D. Bordo, M. D. and Rockoff, H. “The Gold Standard as a 'Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval'”, The Journal of Economic History 56, no. 02 (1996), pp. 389-428.


15
Tuncer (2011) and with those for other European countries published in Flandreau and Zumer
(2004) and Banks (2011).34
The country sample consists of Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany,
Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, the Ottoman Empire, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland and the UK. The choice of countries is largely determined by two factors: the
research question and the data availability. Regarding the latter, it would be ideal to include
more peripheral countries in order to draw parallels with the Ottoman case. However, given
data quality, this exclusion does not lead to a major problem, since European countries provide
a more intuitive and contrasting framework for understanding the Ottoman gold standard and
its anomalies.
The commodity-fiat currency composition of the money stock is used as the main
indicator of changing degrees of monetary sovereignty, assuming that a higher share of fiat
currency represents greater flexibility for the government in determining the size and
composition of the total money stock. This interpretation accords with the extensive literature
on the determinants of seigniorage and competitive seigniorage within monetary unions, where
monetary sovereignty is usually approximated by the ability of a government to change the size
and composition of its monetary base.35 Therefore, in the data analysis, the share of fiat money
in the total money stock becomes a dependent variable, i.e. a measure of varying degrees of
monetary sovereignty. In estimating the total commodity money stock, first total annual net
coinages for each country are calculated and then these figures are combined with existing
estimates of total commodity money stock figures for gold, silver and notes issued by monetary
authorities across Europe (see Charts 4a and 4b).
34 Unless otherwise indicated any data regarding the Ottoman Empire and Greece are from Tuncer (2011). For the remaining countries gold and silver stock is calculated by using the UK Annual Report of the Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Mint (1880-1914), London; US Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances (1880-1914), Washington; and Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency (1880-1914), Washington. All other indicators are from M. Flandreau and F. Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880–1913 (Paris, 2004) see http://eh.net/databases/Finance/ (accessed on 25/05/2012) Banks, Arthur S. 2011. Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive, Databanks International, Jerusalem, Israel; see http://www.databanksinternational.com (accessed on 25/05/2012). 35 S. Fischer, (1982) “Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money,” Journal of Political Economy 90, 295-313; R. Click, “Seigniorage in a Cross-Section of Countries”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (1998), pp. 154-171; M. Bordo and A. Redish, “Maximizing Seigniorage Revenue during Temporary Suspensions of Convertibility: A Note” Oxford Economic Papers, New Series, Vol. 45, No. 1 (Jan., 1993), pp. 157-168; M. Bordo and L. Jonung, “The Future of Emu: What Does the History of Monetary Unions Tell Us?”, NBER Working Papers (1999); R. A. Mundell “Monetary Unions and the Problem of Sovereignty”. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 579, no. 1 (2002), pp. 123-152; N. G. Mankiw, “The Optimal Collection of Seigniorage: Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Monetary Economics 20, no. 2 (1987), pp. 327-341.


16
Regarding the control variables, the first point to explore is the effect of macroeconomic
indicators, more specifically of central government’s ability to tax, the fiscal burden of foreign
public debt, volume of international trade and bank reserves and finally gold and silver
production. As the preceding section shows, for the Ottoman Empire the monetary system
featured the use of fiat and commodity monies in different sectors. Therefore one of the
hypotheses to test is the impact of international trade volume on the share of notes in
circulation. We expect the coefficient of this variable to be positive as an indication of increasing
money demand, thus leading to a positive change in the share of notes. The inclusion of central
government revenue and public debt service into the model is justified by a parallel literature on
fiscal dominance, i.e. whether or not the budget deficits condition the relative share of notes in
total circulation.36 Although our analysis does not directly address questions from this literature,
by controlling for government revenue and the important component of government
expenditure, it is expected to take into account the fiscal pressure on note issue. In addition to
fiscal indicators, we also include the reserves of the central issue bank as a positive determinant
of bank note issue. Production figures of gold and silver are included in order to control for
countries with extensive mining industries. It is expected that increased gold production for a
specific country will have a positive impact on note circulation, due to cover restrictions.
However, silver, in line with our arguments in the Ottoman case where silver became a fiduciary
currency under the conditions of limited note circulation, is expected to have a negative
relationship as long as the country is on the gold standard.37 Finally, in order to eliminate any
omitted variable bias and collinearity, all above-mentioned macroeconomic variables enter the
model in log-transformed per capita and British pounds terms.
In addition to these macroeconomic indicators, an important factor to control is the
difference between monetary institutions, more specifically the rules, which regulate the
relationship between governments and issue banks. In Section 3 this is underlined as a major
point in explaining the limited circulation of bank notes in the Ottoman Empire, where the
relatively “independent” status of the Imperial Ottoman Bank from government eliminated the
pressure on the bank, thus restricting the note issue. However, it is problematic to test this
hypothesis for 16 different countries by simply including institutional dummy variables into our
econometric model, given that the government control over issue banks varied across countries
and involved different components. Therefore, a score-based measure of de jure control of each
36 M. Fratianni, “Fiscal Dominance and Money Growth in Italy: The Long Record”, Explorations in Economic History 38, no. 2 (2001), pp. 252-272; M. D. Gadea and et al., “Beating Fiscal Dominance. The Case of Spain, 1874-1998”, University of Zaragoza Working Paper (2008). O. J. Blanchard “Fiscal Dominance and Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Brazil”, NBER Working Paper, 2004. 37 R. H. Ridgway, “Summarized Data of Gold Production”, US Department of Commerce Bureau of Mines Economic Paper, No.6, 1929; and C. W. Merrill, “Summarized Data of Silver Production”, US Department of Commerce Bureau of Mines Economic Paper, No.8, 1930.


17
government over issue banks is calculated, ranging from 0 to 1, where higher values indicate
stronger government control over the issue bank. This index, inspired by Flandreau et al (1998),
incorporates a set of regulatory indicators including the legal status of the issue bank,
government’s control over the appointment of its head and managing council, the bank’s
obligations to provide statutory advances to the government or statutory issues on government
securities, ownership of the bank’s profits, existence of a monopoly on issue and finally the role
of the bank as a state’s treasurer.38 For a given country, each of these components is assigned a
stepwise score between 0 and 1, which then are averaged to reach the final number. Moreover,
any change in these indicators throughout the period is taken into account; however, with a
few exceptions, the “issue bank independence index” (hereafter BANK index) does not show
variation for a given country between 1880 and 1913. Evidently, quantifying a complex political
economy relationship between governments and issue banks is not straightforward and cannot
be reduced to a single number, but the results summarized in Chart 5 represent convenient
averages for the econometric analysis and do not contradict the prevailing understanding of
issue banks of the time. With the dataset and main hypotheses in place, the next section
presents the econometric model and its findings.
3.2. Analysis and results
A TSCS dataset with these characteristics presents challenges for modelling the research
question. The time period in question is long enough to show unit-root, trending and
autoregressive characteristics, but is not long enough to implement a comprehensive time series
analysis. Moreover, it would be against the nature of the research questions of this paper to
implement 16 different time series analyses and compare the results in pursuit of an answer. As
regards the panel data methods, having a relatively small number of units (countries) makes it
hard to employ conventional analytical methods. A panel data regression with country fixed
effects would pose problems since major explanatory variables such as BANK index and annual
mining figures show little variation across time but greater variation across countries. Finally,
besides these methodological issues, in purely econometric terms a simple random effects
model shows serial and contemporaneous correlation of errors (errors in country i at time t
being correlated with errors in country j at time t) and groupwise heteroskedasticity, according
38 M. Flandreau et al., “Stability without a Pact? Lessons from the European Gold Standard, 1880-1914”, Economic Policy 13, no. 26 (1998), pp. 117-162. For information on individual issue banks, see G. François Les Banques D’Emission (Paris, 1896); E. Servais Banques D’Emission – Banques Etrangères, Banque de France, Banques Coloniales (Paris, 1911); R. G. Levy, Banques D’Emission et Tresors Publics (Paris, 1911); C. Conant, A History of the Modern Banks of Issue (New York, 1927). For the Ottoman Empire and Greece, we rely on Tuncer (2011).


18
to the results of a Wooldridge test, Breusch-Pagan test and modified Wald test in turn, thus
violating the basic assumptions of an OLS regression.39
Therefore, following the convention in the literature, in the analysis below, to address
these characteristics of our TSCS dataset, we use a Prais-Winsten regression with a panel
specific autoregressive disturbance structure of AR(1).40 This approach, also known as the panel
corrected standard errors (PCSE) model, retains OLS parameter estimators, but replaces OLS
standard errors by panel-corrected standard errors (PCSEs), which take into account the
contemporaneous correlation of the errors and groupwise heteroskedasticity, though not serial
correlation. Given that the Wooldridge test against the null hypothesis of no serial correlation
indicates that the data have first-order autocorrelation, we must consider alternative solutions
to this problem. One way of tackling it is to include lagged dependent variable in the right
hand side of the equation, but the literature suggests that this method, despite its superiority in
terms of consistency, may absorb large parts of the trend and may be biased upwards, while
the coefficients of the other independent variables are likely to be biased downwards. If a
lagged dependent variable is not included, however, the serial correlation of the residuals
increases with less weight on the autoregressive process and OLS estimates become inefficient.
To address this problem and eliminate the serial correlation of errors, we combine panel
corrected standard errors with a Prais-Winsten regression of AR(1) process for each unit. Finally,
it is still essential to question the need to include time and/or unit dummies. Given that the
question and hypotheses of the paper primarily address variation across countries for a given
39 N. Beck and J. Katz, “What to do (and not to do) with time series cross-section data”, American Political Science Review 89(3): 634–647, 1995; N. Beck and J. Katz, “Nuisance versus substance: Specifying and estimating time-series cross-section models”, Political Analysis 6(1): 1–36, 1996; N. Beck, “Time-series cross-section data: What have we learned in the past few years?”, Annual Review of Political Science 4: 271–293, 2001. 40 Beck 2001; T. Plümper et al. “Panel Data Analysis in Comparative Politics: Linking Method to Theory”, European Journal of Political Research 44, no. 2 (2005), pp. 327-354; B. Kittel and H. Winner, “How Reliable Is Pooled Analysis in Political Economy? The Globalization & Welfare State Nexus Revisited”, European Journal of Political Research 44, no. 2 (2005), pp. 269-293; J. Wooldridge (2010) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data”, MIT Press Books (2010). In order to address these characteristics of our data set, we also considered employing a fixed effect vector decomposition model. However, given the on-going discussion on the reliability of this approach in the case of time invariant variables, we preferred not to include the results here. See T. Plümper and V. E. Troeger, “Efficient Estimation of Time-Invariant and Rarely Changing Variables in Finite Sample Panel Analyses with Unit Fixed Effects”, Political Analysis 15, no. 2 (2007), pp. 124-139. W. Greene “Fixed Effects Vector Decomposition: A Magical Solution to the Problem of Time-Invariant Variables in Fixed Effects Models?”, Political Analysis 19, no. 2 (2011), pp. 135-146. T. Breusch, M. B. Ward, H. T. M. Nguyen and T. Kompas, “On the Fixed-Effects Vector Decomposition”, Political Analysis 19, no. 2 (2011), pp. 123-134. N. Beck, “Of Fixed-Effects and Time-Invariant Variables”, Political Analysis 19, no. 2 (2011), pp. 119-122.


19
period and not variation over time for a given country, we also run our model with time fixed
effects.41
The results of these regressions are presented in Table 4, where we run our baseline
PCSE-AR (1) regression in standardized beta coefficients with time fixed effects (model 1-3) and
without (model 4-6). The inclusion of these effects, however, does not seem to improve the
results significantly. Overall, perhaps the most striking finding is the highly significant and
relatively high coefficient of the BANK index, which suggests that the differences in monetary
sovereignty and the extent of notes in circulation in the total stock of money are largely
determined by regulations related to the issue banks in any given country.
In addition to institutional factors, trade volume and reserves are positively linked with
the dependent variable, suggesting that countries with higher reserves enjoyed greater flexibility
in introducing fiat money. Moreover, any increase in trade volume on average meant an
increase in the share of total fiat money in circulation. As far as the fiscal indicators go, state
revenues and debt service have correct signs and significance. These results suggest that central
governments which were able to extract on average more tax per capita did not apply forced
circulation, whereas higher burdens of interest service on public debt meant greater upward
pressure on bank note issue. Finally, although the coefficients of gold and silver production
seem to have the correct signs, they do not seem to be significant. This may be explained by the
fact that no country in our sample was a major producer of gold and silver to the extent of
noticeable differences in circulation levels. Overall results are useful for putting the major
anomalies of the Ottoman gold standard into the European context, suggesting that the extent
of fiat money in circulation was largely determined by government control over issue banks.
The final section discusses the implications of these finding.
4. Conclusion
The main emphasis of this study is that the transition to fiat currency did not take place
in all Europe similarly. Some countries relied relatively more heavily on commodity money and
others more on fiat money. It has been suggested that under a fixed exchange rate regime and
free capital flows, these differences in the components of monetary stock could imply changing
degrees of monetary sovereignty, i.e. the ability to determine the size and composition of
monetary stock in response to shocks and imbalances.
41 However, including country fixed effects would make the whole exercise redundant, as it would be impossible to test the significance of the institutional independent variable BANK index, which does not vary across time.


20
In pursuing this argument, our methodology was to move from a case study which
challenges our conventional interpretation of the gold standard, to a broader set of countries.
We showed that in the Ottoman Empire the domestic circulation of gold coins and bank notes
were severely limited despite being on the gold standard. We also argued that the reasons
behind the limited circulation of bank notes were mostly institutional, preventing the
government from implementing “forced circulation”. Consequently, unlike most of the gold
standard countries, the Ottoman Empire did not enjoy the “contingency clause” of the gold
standard, which would have given the government some flexibility to finance budget deficits in
an emergency, say, war, by suspending gold convertibility and issuing fiat currency. As a result,
a multitude of silver coins circulating with limited connection to their intrinsic value, leading
territorial exchange rates and currency zones replaced the absent fiat currency.
The econometric analysis strengthens these results by suggesting that institutional
framework, strong reserve position and trade volume may be important determinants of the
extent of reliance on fiat money. Moreover, a strong central government, which can collect
higher per capita tax revenue, faced less fiscal pressure to increase its share of notes in total
circulation. Conversely, governments with heavy debts to service were more inclined to apply
note issue. Thus, monetary sovereignty or extensive issuance of fiat money in the context of the
gold standard could indicate both macroeconomic weakness and strength. Central
governments facing less fiscal pressure did not have to apply “forced circulation”. However,
increased money demand could result in a “voluntary” increase in note circulation. Besides
these macroeconomic factors, perhaps the greatest determinant of differences between
countries in monetary sovereignty was the institutions regulating the relationship between issue
banks and governments.
Overall in this paper the focus has been on explaining the reasons behind the variation
in monetary sovereignty rather than discussing its consequences, which may be the subject of
future research. By relying on the existing literature, however, it would not be wrong to
speculate that those countries, which relied on notes more extensively, enjoyed greater
flexibility in dealing with budgetary difficulties -leaving aside the negative consequences. Yet
being unable to issue notes helped to reduce the credit risk but also access to capital markets,
thus increasing foreign debt levels, as in the case of the Ottoman Empire.


21
Bibliography
Primary sources
Annual Report of the Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Mint (1880-1914), London.
Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances (1880-1914), Washington, US.
Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency (1880-1914), Washington, US.
Annual and Quinquennial Reports of the Council of Ottoman Public Debt Administration (18821914), London.
Annual Series of Diplomatic and Consular Reports of Turkey, Foreign Office, (1876-1914) London.
The Balance Sheets and Reports of the Ottoman Bank, No.23977, (1863-1914), Guildhall Library Manuscripts Section, London.
The Concession: ‘Règlement’ and Statutes of the Imperial Ottoman Bank, No. 23963, 1875, Guildhall Library Manuscripts Section, London.
Secondary sources
Aceña, P. M. and REIS, J. (2000) Monetary Standards in the Periphery – Paper, Silver and Gold 1854–1933, St. Martin’s Press: New York.
Akyildiz, A. (1996) Osmanlı finans sisteminde dönüm noktası - Kağıt para ve sosyo-ekonomik etkileri, Istanbul.
Autheman, A. (2002) The Imperial Ottoman Bank, Ottoman Bank Archives and Research Centre, Istanbul.
Banks, A. S. (2011) Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive, Databanks International, Jerusalem, Israel, url: http://www.databanksinternational.com.
Beck, N. and J. Katz (1995) “What to do (and not to do) with time series cross-section data” American Political Science Review, 89(3): 634–647.
Beck, N. and J. KATZ (1996) “Nuisance versus substance: Specifying and estimating time-series cross-section models” Political Analysis, 6(1): 1–36.
Beck, N. (2001) “Time-series cross-section data: What have we learned in the past few years?” Annual Review of Political Science, 4: 271–293.
Beck, N. (2011) “Of Fixed-Effects and Time-Invariant Variables”, Political Analysis 19, no. 2 (2011), pp. 119-122.
Blanchard, O. J. (2004) “Fiscal Dominance and Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Brazil”, NBER Working Paper, No.10389.
Bloomfield, A. I. (1959) Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard: 1880-1914, New York.


22
Bloomfield, A. I. (1963) Short-Term Capital Movements under the Pre-1914 Gold Standard, Princeton, N.J.
Bordo, M. D. and F. E. Kydland (1995) “The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in Exploration”, Explorations in Economic History, v.32, p.423-464
Bordo, M. D. and L. Jonung (1999) “The Future of Emu: What Does the History of Monetary Unions Tell Us?”, NBER Working Papers.
Bordo, M. D. and A. Redish (1993) “Maximizing Seigniorage Revenue during Temporary Suspensions of Convertibility: A Note” Oxford Economic Papers, New Series, Vol. 45, No. 1 (Jan., 1993), pp. 157-168.
Bordo, M. D. and H. Rockoff (1996) “The gold standard as a ‘good housekeeping seal of approval’”, Journal of Economic History, Vol. 56, No. 2, pp.389–428.
Bordo, M. D. and A. J. Schwartz (1997) “The Specie Standard as a Contingent Rule: Some Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990” NBER Working Papers.
Breusch, T., Ward, M. B., Nguyen, H. T. M. and Kompas, T. (2011) “On the Fixed-Effects Vector Decomposition”, Political Analysis 19, no. 2 (2011), pp. 123-134.
Catao, L. and Solomou, S. (2003) “Exchange rates in the periphery and international adjustment under the gold standard”, IMF Working Paper, WP/03/41.
Click, R. W. (1998) “Seigniorage in a Cross-Section of Countries”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, pp. 154-171.
Cohen, B. J. (1998) The Geography of Money, Cornell University Press: New York.
Conant, C. (1927) A History of the Modern Banks of Issue, New York.
Dimitrova, K., Fantacci, L. and Tunçer, C. (2010) “Monetary policy in Southeast Europe in transition from bimetallism to limping gold standard”, paper presented at the 5th Conference of SEEMHN, Istanbul.
Eichengreen, B. (1992) Golden Fetters – The Gold Standard and the Great Depression 19191939, Oxford University Press: New York.
Eichengreen, B. and Flandreau, M. (1994) “The geography of the gold standard”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 1050.
Eichengreen, B. and Flandreau, M. (1997) The Gold Standard in Theory and History, Routledge: New York.
Einaudi, L. (2001) Money and Politics – European Monetary Unification and the International Gold Standard (1865-1873), Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Eldem, E. (1999) A History of the Ottoman Bank, Ottoman Bank Historical Research Centre: Istanbul.
Eldem, V. (1970) Osmanlı İmparatorluğunun İktisadi Şartları Hakkında Bir Tetkik, Türkiye İş Bankası Kültür Yayınları: Istanbul.
Esteves, R. P., J. Reis and F. Ferramosca (2009) “Market Integration in the Golden Periphery. The Lisbon/London Exchange, 1854-1891”, Explorations in Economic History 46, no. 3, pp. 324-345.


23
Ferid, H. (1914) Osmanlıda Para ve Finansal Kredi. Başbakanlık Hazine Müsteşarlığı ve Darphane Genel Müdürlüğü, Istanbul.
Fischer, S. (1982) “Seigniorage and the Case for a National Money,” Journal of Political Economy 90, 295-313.
Flandreau, M. and C. Jobst (2005) “The ties that divide: a network analysis of international monetary system, 1890-1910” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 65, No. 4.
Flandreau, M. and J. Komlos (2002) “Core or Periphery? The Credibility of the AustroHungarian Currency 1867-1913”, Journal of European Economic History 31, no. 2, pp. 293-320
Flandreau, M. and Zumer R. (2004) The Making of Global Finance, 1880–1913, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development: Paris.
Flandreau, M. and et al (1998) “Stability without a Pact? Lessons from the European Gold Standard, 1880-1914”, Economic Policy 13, no. 26, pp. 117-162.
Françoıs, G. (1896) Les Banques D’Emission, Paris.
Fratianni, M. (2001) “Fiscal Dominance and Money Growth in Italy: The Long Record”, Explorations in Economic History 38, no. 2, pp. 252-272.
Gadea, M. D. and et al (2008) “Beating Fiscal Dominance. The Case of Spain, 1874-1998”, University of Zaragoza Working Paper.
Greene, W. (2011) “Fixed Effects Vector Decomposition: A Magical Solution to the Problem of Time-Invariant Variables in Fixed Effects Models?”, Political Analysis 19, no. 2 (2011), pp. 135-146.
Kittel, B. and H. Winner, H. (2005) “How Reliable Is Pooled Analysis in Political Economy? The Globalization & Welfare State Nexus Revisited”, European Journal of Political Research 44, no. 2, pp. 269-293.
Kuroda, A. (2007) “The Maria Theresa Dollar in the Early Twentieth-Century Red Sea Region: A Complementary Interface between Multiple Markets”, Financial History Review 14, no. 01, pp. 89-110;
Kuyucak, H. A. (1947) Para ve Banka, Istanbul.
Levy, R. G. (1911) Banques D’Emission et Trésors Publics, Paris.
Mankiw, N. G. (1987) “The Optimal Collection of Seigniorage: Theory and Evidence”, Journal of Monetary Economics 20, no. 2, pp. 327-341.
Merrill, C. W. (1930) “Summarized Data of Silver Production”, US Department of Commerce Bureau of Mines Economic Paper, No.8.
Morys, M. (2007) “Adjustment under the classical gold standard (1870s–1914): how costly did the external constraint come to the European periphery?”, Oxford University, Department of Economics Discussion Paper Series, No. 353.
Mundell, R. A. (2002) “Monetary Unions and the Problem of Sovereignty”, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 579, no. 1, pp. 123-152.


24
Obstfeld, M. Shambaugh, J. C. and Taylor, A. M. (2005) “The trilemma in history: tradeoffs among exchange rates, monetary policies and capital mobility”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87, No. 3, pp.423–438.
Pamuk, Ş. (1998) “From bimetallism to the ‘limping standard’: the Ottoman monetary system in the nineteenth century”, in COTRELL, P. L. (ed.) (2008) East Meets West – Banking, Commerce and Investment in the Ottoman Empire, Ashgate: Burlington.
Pamuk, Ş. (2000) A Monetary History of the Ottoman Empire, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Plümper T., V. E. Troeger and P. Manow (2005) “Panel Data Analysis in Comparative Politics: Linking Method to Theory”, European Journal of Political Research 44, no. 2 (2005), pp. 327-354.
Plümper T. and V. E. Troeger (2007) “Efficient Estimation of Time-Invariant and Rarely Changing Variables in Finite Sample Panel Analyses with Unit Fixed Effects”, Political Analysis 15, pp. 124-139.
Ridgway, R. H. (1929) “Summarized Data of Gold Production”, US Department of Commerce Bureau of Mines Economic Paper, No.6.
Rollins, M. (1907) Money and Investment, London.
Sargent, T. J. and F. R. Velde (2003) The Big Problem of Small Change, Princeton University Press.
Schneider, J., Schwarzer, O. and Zellfelder, F. (1994) Wahrungen der Welt 8 – Afrikanische und Levantinische Devisenkurse im 19. Und 20. Jahrhundert, Stuttgart.
Servais, E. (1911) Banques D’Emission – Banques Etrangères, Banque de France, Banques Coloniales, Paris.
Triffin, R. (1964) The Evolution of the International Monetary System: Historical Reappraisal and Future Perspectives; Princeton, N.J.
Tschoegl, A. E. (2001) “Maria Theresa's Thaler: A Case of International Money”, Eastern Economic Journal 27, no. 4 (2001), pp. 443-462.
Tunçer, A. C. (2011) Fiscal autonomy, monetary regime and sovereign risk: foreign borrowing and international financial control in the Ottoman Empire, Greece and Egypt during the classical gold standard era, PhD thesis, LSE.
Willis, H. P. (1901) A History of the Latin Monetary Union, Chicago
Wooldridge, J. (2010) Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press Books.
Young, G. (1905) Corps De Droit Ottoman, Clarendon Press: Oxford.


25
Chart 1: Coins struck at the Ottoman Mint
Sources: H. Ferid, Osmanlıda Para ve Finansal Kredi. Başbakanlık Hazine Müsteşarlığı ve Darphane Genel Müdürlüğü, (Istanbul, 1914).


26
Chart 2: Bank notes in circulation and cover ratio
Sources: The Balance Sheets and Reports of the Ottoman Bank (1863-1914); E. Eldem, A History of the Ottoman Bank, (Istanbul, 1999).


27
Chart 3: Money stock and its components 1880-1913
Average stock of gold, silver and notes for 1880-1913. For a detailed description of the sources see Footnote 36.


28
Chart 4a: Total coinage and note issue
Sources and notes: The re-coinages are eliminated from the gross coinage figures. During this period, mints of the core countries also provided the service of minting for various other peripheral countries, which are also eliminated from these figures. See Footnote 36 for references.


29
Chart 4b: Note circulation as a % of total money stock 18801913
Sources: See Footnote 36.


30
Chart 5: Government legal control over issue bank 1880-1913
Sources: See Footnote 40.


31
Table 1: Summary of monetary systems and currency in circulation, 1844-1914
Year Monetary system Type of currency in circulation
Monetary authorities 1844 Bimetallism Gold coins Silver coins State notes
Mint Treasury
1863 Bimetallism Gold coins Silver coins Bank notes
Mint IOB
1876 Bimetallism Gold coins Silver coins State notes Bank notes
Mint Treasury IOB
1880 Limping standard Gold coins Silver coins Bank notes
Mint IOB
1914 Paper standard Gold coins Silver coins State notes
Mint Treasury


32
Table 2: Coins struck: 1844-1914
Year Weight (gr.) Fineness (%) Metallic Content (gr.) Mint Ratio
1844 15.09
Silver kuruş 1.2027 83 0.998
Gold lira 7.216 91.67 6.614
1880 15.88
Silver kuruş 1.2027 83 0.998
Gold lira 7.216 91.67 6.614
1909 16.30
Silver kuruş 1.2027 83 0.998
Gold lira 7.216 91.67 6.614
Sources: Tuncer, 2011; Kuyucak, 1947; Young, 1905; Eldem, 1999; Schneider, 1994.


33
Table 3: Exchange rates of lira and kuruş in several provinces, 1883-1914
Province 1883 1888 1889 1893 1905 1907 1914
Adana 124
Aleppo 125 127
Beirut 123 124 124.6 124.6
Baghdad 103.5 103
Basra 148 153
Damascus 130.8
Edirne 123
Homs 123
Istanbul 108.3 109.1 109 108.6 108.4 108.2 108.7
Izmir 178 125-178
Jaffa 142
Salonika 124 102.5
Sidon 125
Tripoli 124
Sources: Tuncer, 2011; Schneider et al., 1994.


34
Table 4. Results: Prais-Winsten regressions, correlated PCSEs with panel-specific AR(1)
Notes: In all cases the dependent variable is note circulation as a percentage of total money stock. All variables are log-transformed and the results are reported in standardised coefficients. Issue bank reserves (RES.PC), government revenue (REV.PC), interest service (IS.PC), trade volume (exports plus imports) (TRADE.PC) value of gold production (GOLD.PC) and value of silver production (SILVER.PC) are per capita figures in British pounds. Models (1) to (3) include time-fixed effects. Multicollinearity among the independent variables is checked by VIFs (variance inflation factors), which were less than 7 in all cases. Sources: see section 3.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
BANK 0.279*** 0.335*** 0.283*** 0.218*** 0.219*** 0.272*** (0.0411) (0.0433) (0.0396) (0.0320) (0.0354) (0.0383) RES.PC 0.157*** 0.170*** 0.130*** 0.169*** 0.131*** 0.159*** (0.0304) (0.0320) (0.0304) (0.0291) (0.0284) (0.0301) TRADE.PC 0.157*** 0.192*** 0.179*** 0.127*** 0.143*** 0.167*** (0.0433) (0.0456) (0.0410) (0.0381) (0.0430) (0.0341) REV.PC -0.0541** -0.0621*** -0.0388* -0.0455** -0.0566*** -0.0560*** (0.0225) (0.0234) (0.0231) (0.0205) (0.0200) (0.0211) IS.PC 0.0443 0.0974** 0.0984*** 0.0314 0.0992*** 0.148*** (0.0347) (0.0385) (0.0351) (0.0337) (0.0318) (0.0369) GOLD.PC 0.00777 -0.0160 -0.0212 (0.0296) (0.0282) (0.0271) SILVER.PC -0.000112 -0.0233 -0.0374 (0.0476) (0.0395) (0.0454)
D.YEAR Y Y Y N N N
Constant -0.343*** -0.416*** -0.334*** -0.0433 0.0361 -0.0720* (0.0488) (0.0489) (0.0458) (0.0356) (0.0375) (0.0398)
Observations 530 530 530 530 530 530 R-squared 0.249 0.307 0.281 0.160 0.160 0.222 Number of countries 16 16 16 16 16 16 N 530 530 530 530 530 530 Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


35
LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS
ECONOMIC HISTORY DEPARTMENT WORKING PAPERS
(from 2009 onwards) For a full list of titles visit our webpage at http://www.lse.ac.uk/
2009
WP114 War and Wealth: Economic Opportunity Before and After the Civil War, 1850-1870
Taylor Jaworski
WP115 Business Cycles and Economic Policy, 1914-1945: A Survey Albrecht Ritschl and Tobias Straumann
WP116 The Impact of School Provision on Pupil Attendance: Evidence From the Early 20th Century
Mary MacKinnon and Chris Minns
WP117 Why Easter Island Collapsed: An Answer for an Enduring Question Barzin Pakandam
WP118 Rules and Reality: Quantifying the Practice of Apprenticeship in Early Modern Europe
Chris Minns and Patrick Wallis
WP119 Time and Productivity Growth in Services: How Motion Pictures Industrialized Entertainment Gerben Bakker
WP120 The Pattern of Trade in Seventeenth-Century Mughal India: Towards An Economic Explanation Jagjeet Lally
WP121 Bairoch Revisited. Tariff Structure and Growth in the Late 19th Century Antonio Tena-Junguito
WP122 Evolution of Living Standards and Human Capital in China in 18-20th Centuries: Evidences from Real Wage and Anthropometrics Joerg Baten, Debin Ma, Stephen Morgan and Qing Wang
WP123 Wages, Prices, and Living Standards in China, 1738-1925: in Comparison with Europe, Japan, and India
Robert C. Allen, Jean-Pascal Bassino, Debin Ma, Christine Moll-Murata, Jan Luiten van Zanden


36
WP124 Law and Economic Change in Traditional China: A Comparative Perspective Debin Ma
WP125 Leaving Home and Entering Service: The Age of Apprenticeship in Early Modern London
Patrick Wallis, Cliff Webb and Chris Minns
WP126 After the Great Debasement, 1544-51: Did Gresham’s Law Apply? Ling-Fan Li
WP127 Did Globalization Aid Industrial Development in Colonial India? A Study of Knowledge Transfer in the Iron Industry Tirthankar Roy
WP128 The Education and Training of Gentry Sons in Early-Modern England Patrick Wallis and Cliff Webb
WP129 Does Trade Explain Europe’s Rise? Geography, Market Size and Economic Development Roman Studer
WP130 Depression Econometrics: A FAVAR Model of Monetary Policy During the Great Depression
Pooyan Amir Ahmadi and Albrecht Ritschl
WP131 The Economic Legacies of the ‘Thin White Line’: Indirect Rule and the Comparative Development of Sub-Saharan Africa Peter Richens
WP132 Money, States and Empire: Financial Integration Cycles and Institutional Change in Central Europe, 1400-1520 David Chilosi and Oliver Volckart
WP133 Regional Market Integration in Italy During the Unification (1832-1882) Anna Missiaia
2010
WP134 Total Factor Productivity for the Royal Navy from Victory at Texal (1653) to Triumph at Trafalgar (1805)
Patrick Karl O’Brien FBA and Xavier Duran
WP135 From Sickness to Death: The Financial Viability of the English Friendly Societies and Coming of the Old Age Pensions Act, 1875-1908 Nicholas Broten


37
WP136 Pirates, Polities and Companies: Global Politics on the Konkan Littoral, c. 1690-1756
Derek L. Elliott
WP137 Were British Railway Companies Well-Managed in the Early Twentieth Century?
Nicholas Crafts, Timothy Leunig and Abay Mulatu
WP138 Merchant Networks, the Baltic and the Expansion of European LongDistance Trade: Re-evaluating the Role of Voluntary Organisations Esther Sahle
WP139 The Amazing Synchronicity of the Global Development (the 1300s-1450s). An Institutional Approach to the Globalization of the Late Middle Ages Lucy Badalian and Victor Krivorotov
WP140 Good or Bad Money? Debasement, Society and the State in the Late Middle Ages
David Chilosi and Oliver Volckart
WP141 Becoming a London Goldsmith in the Seventeenth Century: Social Capital and Mobility of Apprentices and Masters of the Guild Raphaelle Schwarzberg
WP142 Rethinking the Origins of British India: State Formation and Military-Fiscal Undertakings in an Eighteenth Century World Region Tirthankar Roy
WP143 Exotic Drugs and English Medicine: England’s Drug Trade, c.1550-c.1800 Patrick Wallis
WP144 Books or Bullion? Printing, Mining and Financial Integration in Central Europe from the 1460s
David Chilosi and Oliver Volckart
WP145 ‘Deep’ Integration of 19th Century Grain Markets: Coordination and Standardisation in a Global Value Chain Aashish Velkar
WP146 The Utility of a Common Coinage: Currency Unions and the Integration of Money Markets in Late Medieval Central Europe Lars Boerner and Oliver Volckart
WP147 The Cost of Living in London, 1740-1837 Ralph Turvey


38
WP148 Labour Market Dynamics in Canada, 1891-1911: A First Look From New Census Samples
Kris Inwood, Mary MacKinnon and Chris Minns
WP149 Economic Effects of Vertical Disintegration: The American Motion Picture Industry, 1945 to 1955 Gregory Mead Silver
2011
WP150 The Contributions of Warfare with Revolutionary and Napoleonic France to the Consolidation and Progress of the British Industrial Revolution Patrick Karl O’Brien
WP151 From a “Normal Recession” to the “Great Depression”: Finding the Turning Point in Chicago Bank Portfolios, 1923-1933 Natacha Postel-Vinay
WP152 Rock, Scissors, Paper: the Problem of Incentives and Information in Traditional Chinese State and the Origin of Great Divergence Debin Ma
WP153 The Finances of the East India Company in India, c.1766-1859 John F. Richards
WP154 Labour, law and training in early modern London: apprenticeship and the city’s institutions Patrick Wallis
WP155 Why did (pre‐industrial) firms train? Premiums and apprenticeship contracts in 18th century England Chris Minns, Patrick Wallis
WP156 Merchantilist institutions for a first but precocious industrial revolution; The Bank of England, the Treasury and the money supply, 1694-1797 Patrick O’Brien
2012
WP157 Hand Looms, Power Looms, and Changing Production Organizations: The Case of the Kiryu Weaving District in the Early 20th Century Japan Tomoko Hashino, Keijuro Otsuka


39
WP158 From Divergence to Convergence: Re-evaluating the History Behind China’s Economic Boom
Loren Brandt, Debin Ma, Thomas G. Rawski
WP159 Money and Monetary System in China in the 19th-20th Century: An Overview
Debin Ma
WP160 Contesting the Indigenous Development of"Chinese Double-entry
Bookkeeping" and its Significance in China's Economic Institutions and
Business Organization before c.1850
Keith Hoskin, Richard Macve
WP161 Steel, Style and Status: The Economics of the Cantilever Chair, 1929
1936
Tobias Vogelgsang
WP162 The Seven Mechanisms for Achieving Sovereign Debt Sustainability
Garrick Hileman
WP163 Reparations, Deficits, and Debt Default: The Great Depression in Germany
Albrecht Ritschl
WP164 Bounded Leviathan: or why North and Weingast are only right on the
right half
Alejandra Irigoin, Regina Grafe